                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            BARGAINING OVER BABIES:
                   THEORY, EVIDENCE, AND POLICY IMPLICATIONS

                                        Matthias Doepke
                                       Fabian Kindermann

                                      Working Paper 22072
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22072


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                          March 2016, Revised November 2018




We thank Luigi Pistaferri (the editor), the referees, Andy Atkeson, Roland Bénabou, Erik Hurst,
Christos Koulovatianos, Robert Pollak, Alice Schoonbroodt, David Weil, Randy Wright, Fabrizio
Zilibotti, and participants at many university seminar and conference presentations for comments
that helped to substantially improve the paper. Financial support from the National Science
Foundation (grant SES-1260961) and the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (grant KI1757/1-1)
is gratefully acknowledged. Veronika Selezneva and Ashley Wong provided excellent research
assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Matthias Doepke and Fabian Kindermann. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Bargaining over Babies: Theory, Evidence, and Policy Implications
Matthias Doepke and Fabian Kindermann
NBER Working Paper No. 22072
March 2016, Revised November 2018
JEL No. J13

                                         ABSTRACT

It takes a woman and a man to make a baby. This fact suggests that for a birth to take place, the
parents should first agree on wanting a child. Using newly available data on fertility preferences
and outcomes, we show that indeed, babies are likely to arrive only if both parents desire one. In
addition, there are many couples who disagree on having babies, and in low-fertility countries
women are much more likely than men to be opposed to having another child. We account for
this evidence with a quantitative model of household bargaining in which the distribution of the
burden of child care between mothers and fathers is a key determinant of fertility. The model
implies that fertility is highly responsive to targeted policies that lower the child care burden
specifically for mothers.


Matthias Doepke
Northwestern University
Department of Economics
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
doepke@northwestern.edu

Fabian Kindermann
University of Regensburg
Department of Economics
93040 Regensburg
Germany
fabian.kindermann@ur.de
1       Introduction
A basic fact about babies is that it takes both a woman and a man to make one. Implied
in this fact is that some form of agreement between mother and father is required before
a birth can take place.1 In this paper, we introduce this need for agreement into the
economic theory of fertility choice. In particular, we provide empirical evidence that
agreement (or lack thereof) between potential parents is a crucial determinant of fertility;
we develop a bargaining model of fertility that can account for the empirical facts; and
we argue that the need for agreement between parents has important consequences for
how policy interventions affect childbearing.

Even if one accepts that agreement between the parents is important for fertility in prin-
ciple, it may still be the case that most couples happen to agree on fertility in practice
(i.e., either both want a child, or neither wants one). Hence, the first step in our analysis
is to document empirically the extent of disagreement on childbearing within couples.
We draw on evidence from the Generations and Gender Programme (GGP), a longi-
tudinal data set covering 19 countries2 that includes detailed information on fertility
preferences and fertility outcomes. For each couple in the data set, there are separate
questions on whether each partner would like to have “a/another baby now.” Thus, we
observe agreement or disagreement on having a first/next child for each couple.3 The
data reveal that there is much disagreement about having babies. Moreover, disagree-
ment increases with the existing number of children. For couples who have at least two
children already, in all countries in our data set we observe more couples who disagree
(i.e., one partner wants to have another baby, and the other does not) than couples who
both want another child. Moreover, women are generally more likely to be opposed to
having another child than are men, particularly so in countries with a very low fertility
rate.
    1
      Exceptions from this rule are possible (such as cases of rape, deception, and accidental pregnancy),
but they do not account for a large fraction of births and will not be considered here. Also, while all babies
start with an egg and a sperm, not all start from a mutual decision of a mother and father, for example
in the case of same-sex couples and more generally whenever sperm donation or surrogacy are involved.
Data limitations make it difficult to study these issues, but they raise interesting questions which we will
discuss at the end of the paper.
    2
      The countries covered are Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia, France,
Georgia, Germany, Hungary, Italy, Japan, Lithuania, Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Romania, the Russian
Federation, and Sweden.
    3
      Data on fertility intentions have not previously been available at this level of detail; existing data
generally have been limited to the desired total number of children, which is less informative for the
bargaining process for having another child.



                                                      1
The second step in our analysis is to show that reported preferences for having babies
actually matter for fertility outcomes. The GGP survey has a panel structure, so that
stated fertility preferences can be linked to subsequent births. The data confirm the
intuition that agreement between the potential parents is essential for having a child.
We compare the fertility of couples where at least one partner desires a child to that of
couples who agree not to want a baby (some of whom end up with a baby anyway).
Relative to this baseline, the male partner alone wishing to have a child, with the female
partner being opposed, has a very low impact on the probability of a baby’s arrival
(indistinguishable from zero once we condition on the existing number of children). If
the female partner wants a child but the male partner does not, subsequent fertility
is significantly higher compared to the baseline, but the effect on the probability of a
birth is quantitatively small. Only couples who agree and both want a baby have a
high probability of actually getting one. Overall, while women turn out to have some
independent control over their fertility, the main finding is most of the time each partner
has veto power, so that agreement between parents on wanting a baby is essential for
babies to be born.

Our ultimate interest is what this need for agreement between parents implies for the
economics of fertility more broadly. Specifically, we would like to know how the pos-
sibility of disagreement between mothers and fathers affects the economywide fertility
rate, and how it matters for the impact of policy interventions (such as child subsidies
or publicly provided child care) on fertility. To this end, we develop a bargaining model
of fertility decisions. The woman and the man in a given relationship have separate
preferences and bargain over household decisions, including fertility and the alloca-
tion of consumption. For a birth to take place, agreement is essential: both partners
have to prefer an additional child over the status quo. Disagreement over having babies
is possible in equilibrium, because the partners have a limited ability to compensate
each other for having a baby. In particular, our household bargaining model features
lack of commitment. While bargaining is efficient within the period, the partners can-
not commit to specific transfers or other actions in the future.4 Instead, the allocation
of resources within the household is determined period-by-period through cooperative
Nash bargaining with period-specific outside options, which are given by a state of non-
cooperation in a continuing relationship along the lines of the separate-spheres bargain-
    4
      We also consider an extension in which partial commitment is possible, and allow for partial commit-
ment in the model used for quantitative analysis. See Gobbi (2018) for a related analysis of the role of lack
of commitment for investments in child quality.


                                                     2
ing model of Lundberg and Pollak (1993). This matters for fertility, because having a
child affects future outside options. In particular, if in the non-cooperative allocation
one partner would be stuck with most of the burden of child care, this partner would
lose future bargaining power if a birth were to take place, and thus may be less willing
to agree to having a child.

The key novel implication of this setup is that not just the overall costs and benefits of
children matter for fertility (which is the focus of models that abstract from bargaining),
but also the distribution of costs and benefits within the household. Specifically, in a
society where the burden of raising children is borne primarily by mothers, women
will be more likely than men to disagree with having another child, and ceteris paribus
the fertility rate will be lower compared to a society with a more equitable distribution
of the costs and benefits of having children. This prediction can be verified directly
in the GGP data. The data set includes questions on the allocation of child care tasks
within the household, i.e., whether it is the mother or the father who usually puts the
children to bed, dresses them, helps them with homework, and so on. Based on the
answers we construct an index of fathers’ and mothers’ shares in raising children. In
all countries in our data set women do the majority of the child rearing work, but there
is also substantial variation across countries. As predicted by the theory, it is precisely
in the countries where men do the least amount of work where the fertility rate is the
lowest, and where women are especially likely to be opposed to having another child.

In the final part of our analysis, we examine the efficacy of policies that aim to in-
crease the fertility rate. We focus on such policies because recently many industrialized
countries have experienced historically unprecedented low fertility rates. In Japan, Ger-
many, Spain, Austria, and many Eastern European countries, the total fertility rate has
remained below 1.5 for more than two decades.5 Such fertility rates, if sustained, im-
ply rapid population aging and declining population levels in the future, creating big
challenges for economic and social policy. The population of Germany, for instance, is
projected to decrease by about 13 million from the current level of 80 million by 2060.6
Hence, even though the optimal level of fertility is not obvious from a theoretical per-
spective,7 the current fertility rate in these countries is widely perceived to constitute
   5
     The replacement level of the total fertility rate (at which the population would remain constant in the
long run) is about 2.1.
   6
     Source: “Bevölkerung Deutschlands bis 2060,” German Statistical Office, April 2015. Decline of 13
million is for forecast assuming relatively low net migration; for high net migration the projected popula-
tion decrease is 7 million.
   7
     Decisions on optimal population size involve judgements on the value of children that are never born;

                                                     3
a demographic crisis, one that has so far proved resistant to many attempted interven-
tions.

With the focus on the European fertility crisis in mind, we parameterize a dynamic,
quantitative extension of our model to match fertility intentions and outcomes in the
GGP data for countries with a total fertility rate of below 1.5. This model features time
and goods costs of children, a market for child care services, a labor-market participation
decision for mothers, and the possibility of partial commitment. A crucial aspect of the
procedure for estimating model parameters is to match the evolution of couples’ fertility
intentions over time. Doing so is important to capture whether disagreement within
couples is predominantly about the timing of births, or also about the total number of
children a couple will have. We use the estimated model to compare the effectiveness
of alternative policies aimed at increasing fertility. We show that policies that lower
the child care burden specifically for mothers (e.g., by providing public child care that
substitutes time costs that were previously borne mostly by mothers) can be more than
twice as effective than policies that provide general subsidies for childbearing. This
is primarily because mothers are much more likely to be opposed to having another
child than are fathers. Notably, the countries in our sample that have relatively high
fertility rates close to the replacement level (France, Belgium, and Norway) already have
such policies in place. Other countries that highly subsidize childbearing, but in a less
targeted manner (such as Germany), have much lower fertility rates.

Our work builds on different strands of the literature. Existing empirical evidence on
fertility preferences has usually relied on surveys in which participants are asked about
their desired total number of children. In many surveys this information is only avail-
able for women. Data sets that record responses for both women and men show that
disagreement about fertility is commonplace. For example, Westoff (2010) reports that
in 17 out of 18 surveyed African countries men desire more children than women do,
with an average gap in desired family size of 1.5 and a maximum of 5.6 in Chad.8

There are a few studies in the demography literature that document how disagreement
over desired future fertility correlates with actual fertility. Studies using recent data
from industrialized countries find results broadly consistent with ours, namely, couples
who disagree on fertility are relatively unlikely to have a birth. This is consistent with
see Golosov, Jones, and Tertilt (2007).
   8
     One reason why gaps in desired fertility are especially large in developing countries may be maternal
mortality risk; see Ashraf et al. (2018).


                                                    4
the notion of veto power for each partner.9 Studies that use data from developing coun-
tries display different patterns. There is generally little evidence of veto power, that is,
couples where only one partner reports a wish for an additional child have substantially
higher fertility rates than couples where both don’t want a child (Coombs and Chang
1981; Tan and Tey 1994; Gipson and Hindin 2009). Moreover, whereas in industrialized
countries women usually have at least as much say over fertility as men do, in some
developing-country studies men’s preferences matter more.10 Compared to these stud-
ies, one advantage of the data used here is that we have information on the specific
intention of having a/another baby at the time of the survey, which can be matched
more directly into a bargaining model of fertility than a general question on future fer-
tility intentions. Moreover, unlike in most existing studies our sample is not restricted
to married couples, which is important given currently high rates of nonmarital child-
bearing. Finally, we are able to use comparable data for a number of countries, which
makes it possible to assess county-level determinants of disagreement and its impact on
realized fertility.

In terms of the application of our theory to the European fertility crisis, there is exist-
ing empirical work that has already pointed to a link between low fertility and a high
child care burden on women (Feyrer, Sacerdote, and Stern 2008, de Laat and Sevilla-
Sanz 2011). Relative to this literature, the contribution of our paper is to show explicitly
how the large child care burden on women is reflected in high rates of women being
opposed to having another child, and to develop a bargaining model of fertility that can
account for the data and is useful for policy analysis. Relative to the existing literature
on the response of fertility to financial incentives (e.g., Cohen, Dehejia, and Romanov
2013, Laroque and Salanié 2014, and Raute 2018), our contribution is to consider the
differential impact of policies targeted at mothers versus fathers.11

The existing theoretical literature on fertility choice has relied mostly on unitary models
of household decision making.12 In a unitary model a common objective function for the
   9
      Testa, Cavalli, and Rosina (2014) use recent Italian data and find that disagreement has a particularly
strong negative effect on fertility at higher parities, i.e., decisions on additional children after the first child
is already born. Thomson (1997) (US data), Thomson and Hoem (1998) (Swedish data) and Hener (2014)
(German data) find similar results, although in these studies the survey questions on fertility preferences
are less informative. In studies using US data for earlier time periods (between the 1950s and 1970s)
disagreement has a smaller effect on fertility (Beckman 1984; Thomson, McDonald, and Bumpass 1990).
   10
      See for example Bankole (1995) using data from Nigeria. See also Doepke and Tertilt (2018) for a
recent discussion that links the developing-country evidence to the mechanism developed here.
   11
      We relate our policy findings to the empiricial literature in more detail in Section 6.
   12
      See, for example, Becker and Barro (1988) and Barro and Becker (1989).


                                                         5
entire household is assumed to exist, and hence there is no conflict of interest between
partners and no scope for disagreement. Such models do not speak to the issues dis-
cussed in this paper. Within the small existing literature that does take bargaining over
fertility into account, our paper builds most directly on Rasul (2008). Rasul develops a
two-period model in which there is a possibility of lack of commitment, and where the
threat point is characterized by mothers bearing the entire cost of child rearing.13 Using
household data from the Malaysian Family Life Survey, he finds evidence in favor of the
limited commitment model. In terms of emphasizing the importance of bargaining and
lack of commitment, our overall approach is similar to Rasul (2008). However, there are
also key differences. Most importantly, in Rasul’s setting the mother decides unilater-
ally on fertility (while taking the impact on future bargaining into account), whereas our
point of departure is that both parents have to agree for a child to be born. To the best of
our knowledge, our paper is the first in the fertility literature to take this perspective.14
Moreover, we consider a dynamic model with multiple periods of childbearing, which
allows us to distinguish disagreement over the timing of fertility from disagreement
over the total number of children, and we match a rich quantitative model to data from
low-fertility countries to allow for policy evaluation.

In the next section, we start our analysis by documenting the prevalence of disagreement
over fertility among couples surveyed by the Generations and Gender Programme. We
also show that agreement between partners is important for a birth to take place, and
that across countries disagreement over fertility is closely related to the distribution of
the burden of child care. In Section 3, we introduce our bargaining approach to fertility
in a static setting, and in Section 4 the full quantitative model is developed. In Section 5
  13
      A similar, more recent contribution is Kemnitz and Thum (2014). Dynamic models of fertility that also
consider the marriage market have been developed by Greenwood, Guner, and Knowles (2003), Caucutt,
Guner, and Knowles (2002), and Guner and Knowles (2009). Endogenous bargaining also arises in Basu
(2006) and Iyigun and Walsh (2007), although not in the context of fertility. The potential inefficiency
of household decision making due to the impact of current decisions on future bargaining power was
pointed out by Lundberg and Pollak (2003), and the extent of commitment within households is analyzed
more generally by Mazzocco (2007). Empirical studies of the link between female bargaining power and
fertility include Ashraf, Field, and Lee (2014), who suggest that more female bargaining power leads to
lower fertility rates in a developing-country context.
   14
      Brown, Flinn, and Mullins (2015) develop a model of marriage where both partners have to contribute
for a child to be born, but the analysis is not focused on fertility and does not consider fertility intentions.
The need for agreement also distinguishes our work from bargaining models where household decisions
can be expressed as the maximization of a weighted sum of the utility of the partners, such as Blundell,
Chiappori, and Meghir (2005) and Cherchye, De Rock, and Vermeulen (2012). Eswaran (2002) considers a
model where different fertility preferences between mothers and fathers (which in other studies are taken
as primitives) arise endogenously.



                                                       6
we match the model to the GGP data. Policy simulations are described in Section 6, and
Section 7 concludes. Proofs for propositions and additional theoretical and empirical
findings are contained in the online appendix.


2        Evidence from the Generations and Gender Programme
We use data from the “Generations and Gender Programme” (GGP) to evaluate the
importance of agreement on fertility decisions.15 The GGP is a longitudinal survey of
adults in 19 mostly European countries that focuses on relationships within households,
in particular between partners and between parents and children. Topics that are cov-
ered include fertility, partnership, labor force participation, and child care duties.

In this section, we use the GGP data to document a set of facts regarding agreement
and disagreement over having babies. The GGP provides more detailed information on
fertility intentions than do earlier data sets. The questions we use to determine fertility
preferences and agreement or disagreement among partners are:

          Q1: “Do you yourself want to have a/another baby now?”

for the respondent, and:

          Q2: “Couples do not always have the same feelings about the number or
          timing of children. Does your partner/spouse want to have a/another baby
          now?”

for the respondent’s partner or spouse.16 Our sample includes all respondents who
answer these two questions in Wave 1 of the survey (at most two waves are available to
date) and where the female partner is of childbearing age. Given that these questions
are asked of all respondents who indicate that they are in a relationship, the sample
includes married and non-married couples, and both cohabitating couples and those
who have separate residences. Data for these questions are available for 11 countries
in Wave 1 of the survey (which was carried out between 2003 and 2009), with a total of
    15
    The data are available for research use at https://www.ggp-i.org/.
    16
    There is only one respondent per couple. This raises the question how reliable the answer regarding
the fertility intention of the non-responding partner is. While there may be some misreporting, we find
that the patterns of disagreement reported by female and male respondents (which each account for about
half of the sample) are essentially identical, which speaks against a substantial bias.


                                                  7
33,479 responses from couples where the woman is between the ages of 20 and 45 (i.e.,
childbearing age). The included countries are Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, the Czech
Republic, France, Germany, Lithuania, Norway, Poland, Romania, and Russia. Table 1
reports summary statistics of the Wave 1 sample. The average age of the respondents is
in the mid thirties, about 70 percent of couples are married, and close to 90 percent are
cohabitating. The table provides a first glimpse of disagreement over having children:
In more than 27 percent of couples at least one partner desires a baby, but in less than 17
percent of couples both partners do.

                      Table 1: Summary statistics of the Wave 1 sample

               Variable                                                   Mean

               Age of female partner                                       33.81
               Age of male partner                                         36.62
               Respondent female (in %)                                    49.85
               Married couple (in %)                                       68.74
               Cohabiting (in %)                                           87.62
               Number of existing children                                  1.45
               Women wanting a baby (in %)                                 22.27
               Men wanting a baby (in %)                                   22.99
               Couples where at least one partner wants a baby (in %)      27.50
               Couples who both partners want a baby (in %)                16.76
               Notes: 33,479 observations. Included countries are Austria, Bel-
               gium, Bulgaria, Czech Republic, France, Germany, Lithuania, Nor-
               way, Poland, Romania, and Russia.



The participants in the study are surveyed again in Wave 2, which takes place three years
after the initial interview. So far, Wave 2 data on fertility outcomes are available for seven
countries (Austria, Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, France, and Germany, Lithuania and
Russia), with more to become available in the coming years. The availability of data on
fertility outcomes makes it possible to study the link between gender-specific fertility
intentions and outcomes. The sample size for each country in each wave is given in
Tables 9 and 11 in Appendix E. This appendix also provides a detailed description of
the data set.
Here we focus on basic facts regarding fertility intentions, fertility outcomes, and the
division of child care tasks between the partners within the household. These are the

                                               8
key variables with which to evaluate the predictions of our theory. We document three
facts that inform our economic model, namely:

  1. Many couples disagree on whether to have a (or another) baby.

  2. Without agreement, few births take place.

  3. In countries where men do little child care work, women are more likely to be
     opposed to having more children.

The data set contains a great deal of other information. In Appendix E we provide
some additional empirical analysis to show how other characteristics of individuals and
couples relate to fertility intentions, agreement on fertility, and fertility outcomes. We
now turn to the three main facts to be documented.

2.1   Many Couples Disagree on Whether to Have a Baby

To document the extent of disagreement over having babies, we focus on the number
of couples who disagree as a fraction of all couples where at least one of the partners
wants to have a baby. We condition on at least one partner wishing to have a child,
because in the entire sample most couples either haven’t yet started to have children
or have already completed their fertility. Hence, both partners not wanting a/another
baby at the present time is the most common state. In contrast, we are interested in
disagreement over having babies as an obstacle to fertility among couples where there
is at least some desire for having a child.

Based on the answers to questions Q1 and Q2, a couple can be in one of four states. Let
AGREE denote a couple where both partners desire a baby; SHE YES/HE NO denotes
the case where the woman desires a baby, but the man does not; and SHE NO/HE YES
means that he desires a baby, but she does not. The remaining possibility is that neither
partner wants to have a baby. Let ν(·) denote the fraction of couples in a given country
in one of these states. We now compute the following disagreement shares:

                                       ν(SHE YES/HE NO)
        DISAGREE MALE =                                                ,
                        ν(AGREE) + ν(SHE YES/HE NO) + ν(SHE NO/HE YES)
                                       ν(SHE NO/HE YES)
      DISAGREE FEMALE =                                               .
                        ν(AGREE) + ν(SHE NO/HE NO) + ν(SHE NO/HE YES)




                                            9
 Figure 1 displays the extent of disagreement over fertility across countries, where the
total fertility rate for each country is shown in parentheses.17 In this graph, if all couples
in a country were in agreement on fertility (either both want one or both do not), we
would get a point at the origin. In a country that is on the 45-degree line, women and
men are equally likely to be opposed to having a baby.

                         Figure 1: Disagreement over having a baby across countries

                                        All couples                                                        Couples Without Children
        .6




                                                                                       .6
            .4




                                                                                           .4
 Disagree Male




                                                                                Disagree Male
                                     BEL (1.76)
                                   NOR (1.87)
 .2




                                                                                .2
                                    GER (1.36)                                                               FRA (1.95)
                               FRA (1.95)
                                        CZE (1.32)
                                                AUT (1.39)
                                                                                                           GER     CZE
                                                                                                               (1.36)   AUT
                                                                                                                        (1.32)(1.39)
                                                      RUS (1.36)                                             BEL
                                                                                                           NOR   (1.76)
                                                                                                               (1.87)
                                                                                                               LTU  (1.35)
                                       POL (1.31)
                                                LTU (1.35)
                              ROUBUL
                                  (1.40)
                                      (1.38)                                                                  RUS (1.36)

                                                                                                    ROU POL (1.31)
                                                                                                     BUL(1.40)
                                                                                                          (1.38)
        0




                                                                                       0


                 0               .2                              .4   .6                        0              .2                             .4                         .6
                                      Disagree Female                                                                Disagree Female

                             Couples With One Child                                                 Couples With Two or More Children
        .6




                                                                                       .6
            .4




                                                                                           .4
 Disagree Male




                                                                                Disagree Male




                                                                                                                                       NOR(1.76)
                                                                                                                                       BEL (1.87)

                                                                                                                                                GER (1.36)
                                                                                                                                           CZE (1.32) AUT (1.39)
                                                                                                                             FRA (1.95)
                                                                                                                                                 BUL (1.38)POL (1.31)
                                                                                                                                                                RUS (1.36)
 .2




                                                                                .2




                               BEL (1.76)                                                                                                   ROU (1.40)      LTU (1.35)
                                 GER  (1.36)
                             NOR (1.87)
                                ROU
                                  POL(1.40)
                                        (1.31)      RUS (1.36)
                                 CZE  (1.32)
                     FRA (1.95) BUL (1.38)AUT (1.39)
                                                LTU (1.35)
        0




                                                                                       0




                 0               .2                              .4   .6                        0              .2                             .4                         .6
                                      Disagree Female                                                                Disagree Female




Notes: Data from Generations and Gender Programme. Each dot is a country, total fertility rate displayed
in parentheses. “Disagree Female” is the number of couples where the woman does not want a child but
the man does, as a fraction of all couples where at least one partner wants a child. “Disagree Male” is the
analogous fraction of couples where the man does not want a child but the woman does.


The main facts displayed in the first panel of Figure 1 (which shows results for all cou-
ples) can be summarized as follows. First, there is a lot of disagreement; in 25 to 50
percent of couples where at least one partner desires a baby, one of the partners does not
    17
    We obtained the total fertility rates for each country from the 2014 World Bank Development Indica-
tors and use a simple average between the years 2000 and 2010.

                                                                           10
(the total disagreement is the sum of the values on the x and y axes). Second, women
are more often in disagreement with their partner’s desire for a baby than the other way
around (i.e., most countries lie to the right of the 45 degree line). Third, the tilt towards
more female disagreement is especially pronounced in countries with low total fertil-
ity rates, whereas disagreement is nearly balanced by gender in the countries with a
relatively high fertility rate (France, Norway, and Belgium).

The picture as such does not allow conclusions about whether disagreement affects the
total number of children a couple ends up with. It is possible that the disagreement
is about the timing of fertility, rather than about how many children to have overall.
This issue will be addressed in the quantitative analysis below by exploiting repeated
information on child preferences for couples who took part in both waves of the survey.
As a first pass, it is indicative to consider disagreement as a function of the existing
number of children. The total fertility rate of a country is more likely to be affected
by disagreement over higher-order children; e.g., if a couple has at least two children
already, it is more likely that the potential baby to be born is the marginal child (so that
the total number of children would be affected). The remaining panels of Figure 1 break
down the data by the number of children already in the family. The main observations
here are that among couples who have at least two children, the extent of disagreement
is even larger (50 to 70 percent), and the tilt towards female disagreement in low-fertility
countries is even more pronounced.

2.2   Without Agreement, Few Births Take Place

Next, we document that disagreement is an important obstacle to fertility. The basic
facts can be established through simple regressions of fertility outcomes on intentions
of the following form:

      BIRTHi = β0 + βf · SHE YES/HE NOi + βm · SHE NO/HE YESi + βa · AGREEi + i .

 Here BIRTHi is a binary indicator which takes a value of one if couple i has a baby in
the three years after stating fertility intentions (as observed in Wave 2 of the survey).
The right-hand side variables denote the fertility intentions of couple i in Wave 1. The
constant β0 captures the baseline fertility rate of couples in which both partners state not
to want a baby. The parameters βf , βm , and βa measure the increase in the probability
of having a baby compared to the baseline for couples in each of the three other states.
In a world where women decide on fertility on their own, we would expect to find

                                             11
βf = βa > 0 and βm = 0. If each partner’s intention had an independent influence on the
probability of having a baby, we would observe βf > 0, βm > 0, and βa = βf +βm . Finally,
if a birth can take place only if the partners agree on having a baby (i.e., each partner
has veto power), we expect to find βf = βm = 0 and βa > 0. Least squares estimates for
this regression, using pooled data for all available countries as well as samples split by
the number of existing children, are shown in Table 2.

                    Table 2: Impact of fertility intentions on probability of birth

                                              Whole sample                 By number of children

                                                                       n=0           n=1        n≥2

        SHE YES/HE NO                               0.100               0.019        0.130      0.062
                                                   (0.020)             (0.038)      (0.040)    (0.024)
        SHE NO/HE YES                               0.044               0.052      −0.035       0.034
                                                   (0.013)             (0.034)      (0.019)    (0.018)
        AGREE                                       0.319               0.239        0.276      0.299
                                                   (0.013)             (0.024)      (0.020)    (0.031)
        Constant                                    0.077               0.173        0.124      0.039
                                                   (0.003)             (0.013)      (0.009)    (0.003)

        Number of Cases                            10,974               2,122        3,024      5,828
        R-Square                                    0.123               0.063        0.100      0.079
        Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. Each column is a linear regression of a binary
        variable indicating whether a child was born between Wave 1 and Wave 2 (i.e., within three
        years after Wave 1) on stated fertility intentions in Wave 1. Countries included (i.e., all coun-
        tries where data from both waves are available) are Austria, Bulgaria, Czech Republic, France,
        Germany, Lithuania, and Russia. Sample restricted to couples where the woman is between 20
        and 45 years old (i.e., of childbearing age) and the man is between 20 and 55 years old during
        the Wave 1 interview (when intentions are recorded).



We find that all coefficients are statistically significant at the one percent level for the
pooled sample, but the agreement term βa is the largest in size, and more than twice as
large as the sum of βf and βm .18 A couple that agrees has a more than three times higher
incremental likelihood of having a baby than does a couple where the man disagrees,
and a more than seven times higher likelihood than does a couple where the woman
  18
       βa is statistically different from βm + βf at the 1 percent level in all regressions.

                                                         12
disagrees.

Next, we break down the regressions by parity, i.e., the number of children the couple
already has. The need for agreement is most pronounced for couples with no children.
For these couples, the probability of having a child when only one partner desires one is
not significantly different from the probability of couples that agree not to want a child.
Perhaps not surprisingly, for higher-order children, the woman’s intention turns out to
be more important than the man’s. In fact, if the woman disagrees, the man’s desire
for a child has no statistically significant impact on the likelihood of a birth (at the five
percent level). But even for a woman, having her partner agree greatly increases the
probability of having a child.

In summary, the data show that agreement between the potential parents is essential for
babies to be born. While women have some independent control over their fertility, only
couples who agree on the plan to have a baby are likely to end up with one.

2.3   When Men Do Little Child Care Work, Women Are More Likely to Be Opposed
      to Having More Children

In the theory articulated below, disagreement between partners regarding fertility can
arise because couples cannot commit to a specific allocation of child care duties in ad-
vance. To show that the distribution of child care between mothers and fathers matters
in the GGP data, here we calculate the average share of men in caring for children at a
national level by coding the answers to the following questions:

      “I am going to read out various tasks that have to be done when one lives
      together with children. Please tell me, who in your household does these
      tasks?

        1. Dressing the children or seeing that the children are properly dressed;
        2. Putting the children to bed and/or seeing that they go to bed;
        3. Staying at home with the children when they are ill;
        4. Playing with the children and/or taking part in leisure activities with
           them;
        5. Helping the children with homework;
        6. Taking the children to/from school, day care centre, babysitter or leisure
           activities.”

                                             13
The possible answers to these questions are “always the respondent,” “usually the re-
spondent,” “about equal shares,” “usually the partner,” and “always the partner.” We
code these answers as 0, 0.15, 0.5, 0.95, and 1 if the respondent is female and 1, 0.85, 0.5,
0.15, and 0 if the respondent is male. We aggregate the answers by forming a simple
mean per couple (on the sample of couples with at least one child under the age of 15)
and calculating the average for every country. This gives us a proxy for the share of
men in child care for every country.19 In all countries in the data set, women carry out
the majority of these tasks, but there is also considerable variation across countries. The
countries with the highest fertility rates (Belgium, France, and Norway) also have the
highest participation of men in child care. Men do the most child care work in Norway
with a share of just above 40 percent, whereas Russian men do the least with a share of
less than 25 percent.

       Figure 2: Disagreement over fertility and men’s share in caring for children
                                 .3




                                                                                                  Correlation = −0.733
                 Disagree Female − Disagree Male




                                                            LTU (1.35)
                                          .2




                                                          RUS (1.36)
                                                                    AUT (1.39)

                                                                       POL (1.31)
                                .1




                                                          BUL (1.38)
                                                                ROU(1.32)
                                                               CZE  (1.40)

                                                                             GER (1.36)

                                                                                    FRA (1.95)
                        0




                                                                                                              NOR (1.87)
                                                                                          BEL (1.76)
                                 −.1




                                                   .2   .25           .3         .35          .4                       .45
                                                              Share of men caring for childen



Notes: Data from Generations and Gender Programme. Each dot is a country, total fertility rate displayed
in parentheses. Sample restricted to couples who have at least one child under age 15.


To examine how the allocation of child care duties is related to fertility intentions, we
plot the male share in child care against the difference between female disagreement and
  19
    In Appendix E.6, we show that our measure of the distribution of the burden of child care lines up
well with time use data from other sources.


                                                                             14
male disagreement with having another child (the difference between the DISAGREE
FEMALE and DISAGREE MALE variable computed on couples with at least one child
under the age of 15). This yields Figure 2 (which also includes a regression line). The
figure shows that in countries where women do most of the work in raising children,
women are more likely to be opposed to having more children, and fertility is low.

                                         Figure 3: Disagreement over fertility and mother’s labor market behavior
                 .3




                                                                                                                                    .3
                                                                                 Correlation = −0.600                                                                                              Correlation = −0.602
 Disagree Female − Disagree Male




                                                                                                                    Disagree Female − Disagree Male
                                                                LTU (1.35)                                                                                                        LTU (1.35)
                                                          RUS (1.36)                                                                                                         RUS (1.36)
                                                             AUT (1.39)                                                                                                       AUT (1.39)
                      .15




                                                                                                                                         .15
                                                                             POL (1.31)                                                                                                        POL (1.31)

                                                               BUL (1.38)                                                                                                       BUL (1.38)
                                            CZE (1.32)                    ROU (1.40)                                                                            CZE (1.32)                  ROU (1.40)
                                                                          GER (1.36)                                                                                                       GER (1.36)

                                                                                         FRA (1.95)                                                                                                           FRA (1.95)
          0




                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                   NOR (1.87)                                                                                                           NOR (1.87)
                                                                                                  BEL (1.76)                                                                                                          BEL (1.76)
                 −.15




                                                                                                                                    −.15

                                   −.8        −.6         −.4           −.2           0                                                               −35   −30    −25    −20   −15     −10     −5     0                           5
                                           Gap in LFP Women with Children Below Age 3                                                                        Gap in Hours Women with Children Below Age 3




Notes: Data from Generations and Gender Programme. Each dot is a country, total fertility rate displayed
in parentheses. Horizontal axis of left panel displays gap in labor force participation rate between mothers
with a child up to age 3 and all other women in the sample (which is restricted to women of ages 20 to 45).
Horizontal axis of right panel displays gap in weekly hours of labor supply between the same groups.

One important factor that determines the distribution of the burden of child care is the
labor market impact of child birth. In some countries, many mothers drop out of the
labor force for an extended period to care for young children, while in others most fam-
ilies use market-based child care and career interruptions are short. Figure 3 relates the
labor market impact of having a young child to disagreement over fertility. On the ver-
tical axis we display the difference between female and male disagreement with having
another child, as in Figure 2. On the horizontal axes, we display two measures of the
labor market impact of having a young child. For the left panel, we use the difference
in the labor force participation rate between mothers with a young child (up to 3 years)
and all other women in our sample (which is restricted to women of childbearing age).
For the right panel, we use the difference in weekly hours worked between the same
groups. The figure shows that in countries where women reduce their labor supply a
lot and are likely to drop out of the labor force when having a child, women are also
relatively more likely to disagree with having another child. This observation suggests

                                                                                                               15
that differences in the ease of combining children and careers for mothers may be an
important driver of variation across countries in both the distribution of the burden of
child care and in disagreement over having children.

While the empirical connections between the burden of child care, mothers’ labor sup-
ply decisions, disagreement over fertility, and fertility outcomes described in this section
make intuitive sense, they are not suggestive of a simple causal interpretation where
variation in a single exogenous variable is responsible for the variation in all the oth-
ers. Instead, economic reasoning would suggest that these variables are all mutually
connected, as they all emerge from the same household decision process. We therefore
would like to develop a model of household decision making that can account for all the
empirical findings. For this task, a baseline model of fertility choice based on the uni-
tary model of the family is not going to work, because in such models there is no scope
for disagreement between partners. Instead, a bargaining model is required where dis-
agreement may arise. In addition, the empirical link between disagreement and realized
fertility suggests that individuals with a high fertility preference are not always able to
compensate their partners for their child care duties in order to get them to agree to
having a baby. We take the perspective that this is due to lack of commitment within the
household. Next, we describe the theoretical framework that spells out this mechanism
and that can account for all the facts documented above.


3   A Bargaining Model of Fertility
In this section, we develop a bargaining model of fertility choice. We consider the de-
cision problem of a household composed of a woman and a man. Initially the couple
does not have children. To have a child, the two have to act jointly, and hence a child is
created only if both partners find it in their interest to participate. Without agreement,
the status quo prevails. In this section, we outline the main mechanism for the case
of a one-time choice of a single child. We contrast the cases of commitment and lack
of commitment, and argue that the distribution of the child care burden between the
partners is an important determinant of the total fertility rate. The model analyzed here
is deliberately stylized to bring out the implications of lack of commitment in a sharp
way. In Section 4, we expand the analysis by introducing dynamics, a richer structure
for the cost of children, and the possibility of partial commitment in order to develop a
quantitative model that can be matched to the data and used for policy analysis.



                                            16
3.1    Setup and Solution under Commitment

Consider an initially childless couple consisting of a woman f and a man m. The couple
has to decide on whether to have a child. The market wages for the woman and the
man are wf and wm . The total cost of a child in terms of consumption is given by φ (time
costs are introduced in the quantitative model in Section 4). Utility ug (cg , b) of partner
g ∈ {f, m} is given by:
                                   ug (cg , b) = cg + bvg ,                              (1)

where cg ≥ 0 is consumption, b ∈ {0, 1} indicates whether a child is born, and vg is the
additional utility partner g receives from having a child compared to the childless status
quo.20

In addition to the opportunity to have children, an added benefit of being in a relation-
ship is returns to scale in consumption, for example through the joint use of an apart-
ment, cooking together, and so on. Specifically, if a couple cooperates, their effective
income increases by a factor of α > 0 (or, equivalently, the effective cost of consumption
decreases by a factor of 1/(1 + α)). For a cooperating couple, the budget constraint is
then given by:
                             cf + cm = (1 + α) (wf + wm − φb) .                         (2)

The household reaches decisions through Nash bargaining. The timing is such that the
household first needs to decide on whether to have a child, and then consumption takes
place after the birth outcome b ∈ {0, 1} has been realized. The timing implies that bar-
gaining will depend on the extent of commitment. Consider first the case of full com-
mitment, in which the partners can commit to a future consumption allocation before
having a child. This case amounts to choosing consumption and fertility simultaneously
subject to a single outside option. The outside option is not to cooperate, in which case
the couple does not have a child and forgoes the returns to scale from joint consumption.
Utilities ūg (0) in the outside option are therefore given by:

                                ūf (0) = wf    and    ūm (0) = wm .                              (3)

We denote the ex-post utility of woman and man (i.e., taking wages, costs of children,
and the bargaining outcome into account) as ug (0) when no child is born and ug (1) when
  20
    Linear utility in consumption has the advantage that utility is transferable between the partners,
which facilitates bargaining. Non-transferable utility would introduce additional frictions and amplify
the commitment problem that we introduce explicitly below.


                                                  17
a child is born, where g ∈ {f, m}. We assume equal bargaining weights throughout.21
The following proposition characterizes the bargaining outcome under commitment.
Proposition 1 (Fertility Choice under Commitment). Under commitment, the couple decides
to have a child if the condition:
                                   vf + vm ≥ φ(1 + α)                               (4)

is met. Moreover, when (4) holds, we also have:

                                   uf (1) ≥ uf (0)     and um (1) ≥ um (0).

That is, each partner is individually better off when the child is born. Conversely,

                                             vf + vm < φ(1 + α)

implies
                                   uf (1) < uf (0)     and um (1) < um (0),

i.e., if the couple decides not to have a child, each partner individually is better off without the
child. Taking together, the conditions imply that under commitment the couple always agrees
about the fertility choice, and this choice is efficient.

The proof for the proposition is contained in Appendix A.
The implication of perfect agreement on fertility among the partners conflicts with our
empirical observation of many couples who disagree on having a child. The main reason
for why the model is at odds with the data is the assumption of full commitment. To
see why this assumption might be problematic, consider a case where the benefits of
having a baby are distributed unequally between the partners, say, the man derives
high utility vm > φ(1 + α) from a child (i.e., his utility alone exceeds the cost of having
a child), whereas the woman does not, vf = 0. Under commitment, this couple will
decide to have the child, and the bargaining outcome is such that the total utility benefit
is equally shared. But given that only the man derives direct utility from the child, the
way utility is shared is by the woman getting a much larger share of consumption than
the man, so that the woman’s extra utility from consumption balances the man’s extra
utility from the baby. In other words, when deciding on whether to have a child, the
man is implicitly promising a large future transfer to the woman if she agrees to have
the child.
  21
       All results can be generalized to arbitrary weights.

                                                       18
The problem is that the woman may not find this promise of a future transfer credible.
What stops the man from reneging on the promise and renegotiating the consumption
allocation after the baby is born? This possibility suggests an alternative setup with a
lack of commitment. As we will see, this setting can account for disagreement between
partners on fertility.

3.2      Setup and Solution under Lack of Commitment

Under lack of commitment, partners are not able to commit to future transfers when
deciding on whether to have a baby. Hence, bargaining proceeds in two stages. In the
first stage, the partners decide whether to have a child. In the second stage, resources
are allocated to consumption, given the outside option after the fertility decision is sunk.
Hence, for each partner there are two different outside options, one for the case where
the couple has a child and one for the case where it doesn’t. This setup captures lack of
commitment, in the sense that the partners are not able to make binding commitments
for transfers in the second stage during the first-stage bargaining over fertility.
The outside options conditional on not having a child are still given by (3). To formulate
the outside options when there is a child, we have to take a stand on who bears the
cost of raising the child in the non-cooperation state. We assume that the cost shares of
woman and man are given by fixed parameters χf and χm with χf + χm = 1. The new
outside options therefore are:

                                         ūf (1) = wf + vf − χf φ,                                        (5)
                                         ūm (1) = wm + vm − χm φ.                                        (6)

Notice that in the outside option, the partners still derive utility from the presence of
the child. We interpret the outside option as non-cooperation within a continuing re-
lationship, as in Lundberg and Pollak (1993). That is, the couple is still together and
both partners still derive utility from the child, but bargaining regarding the allocation
of consumption breaks down, the division of child care duties reverts to the defaults
given by χf and χm , and the couple no longer benefits from returns to scale in joint con-
sumption. We do not take an explicit stand on how the default cost shares χf and χm are
determined. We can imagine that traditional gender roles within a country are relevant
(as emphasized by Lundberg and Pollak 1993), but government policies determining
the availability of market-based child care should also matter.22 Another possibility is
  22
       The role of country-specific social norms regarding the division of labor in the household for outcomes

                                                       19
that the defaults for cost shares are in part controlled by the couple. For example, cost
shares may depend on the couple’s decision of where to live (say, close to grandparents
who would be willing to help with child care) and on whether one of the parents drops
out of the labor force to care for the child. Endogenous cost shares result in a model
with partial commitment, which we consider as an extension in Appendix D and which
forms the basis of the quantitative model in Section 4.

We now characterize the fertility choice under lack of commitment.

Proposition 2 (Fertility Choice under Lack of Commitment). Under lack of commitment,
we have uf (1) ≥ uf (0) (the woman would like to have a child) if and only if the condition
                                                 α
                                        vf ≥ χf +    φ                                          (7)
                                                  2

is satisfied. We have um (1) ≥ um (0) (the man would like to have a child) if and only if the
condition                                              α
                                         vm ≥ χm +         φ                                     (8)
                                                        2
is satisfied. The right-hand sides of (7) and (8) are constants. Hence, depending on vf and vm , it
is possible that neither condition, both conditions, or just one condition is satisfied. Since child
birth requires agreement, a child is born only if (7) and (8) are both met simultaneously.

The proof for the proposition is contained in Appendix A.

The reason why disagreement is possible is that after the child is born, the outside op-
tions of the two partners shift away from the outside options in the full commitment
model. Figure 4 illustrates this issue for the case in which the woman bears a larger
share of the burden of child care than the man does.

The figure displays the utility of the woman on the horizontal axis and the utility of the
man on the vertical axis. Under commitment, the outside option is given by (wf , wm ).
The line b = 0 shows the utility possibility frontier for the case in which the couple
does not have a baby, and the line b = 1 shows the frontier for the case of having one.
In the depicted situation, having a baby yields a higher sum of utilities for the couple.
Under commitment, the utility allocation between the woman and the man is given
by the intersection between the utility possibility frontier and a 45-degree line starting
from the initial outside option (the 45-degree slope arises because of equal bargaining
such as marriage and fertility have been empirically documented by Fernández and Fogli (2009) and
Sevilla-Sanz (2010), among others.

                                                  20
          Figure 4: Bargaining under commitment versus lack of commitment

                 U"




                                                       no commitment , b=1
                                                       (blocked by wife)

                                                              commitment

                                                                no commitment , b=0
                                                                (equilibrium outcome)
                                 45°
       w" + v" – φχ"
                                                                             utility-possibility
                                            45°                              frontier
                 w"




                                                                    b=0           b=1


                       w! + v! – φχ!   w!                                                          U!


weights). Note that under commitment, for each partner the utility level of having a
child is higher than the utility level of not having a child, so that the partners agree and
will act jointly to have a child. More generally, under commitment the partners will
agree to have a child if and only if the utility possibility frontier for b = 1 is higher than
the frontier for b = 0, and they will agree not to have a child otherwise. Since along the
45-degree line from the outside option (or, more generally, any line with positive slope
corresponding to a set of bargaining weights) the woman’s and the man’s utility move
in the same direction, there cannot be disagreement, i.e., a situation where only one of
the partners wishes to have a child.

In the case of lack of commitment, there are two outside options, the one without a
child and the one with a child. The outside option without a child is identical to the
outside option under commitment. Because she bears a large fraction of the burden of
child care, the woman’s outside option if a child is born wf + vf − φχf is lower than the
initial outside option, whereas the man’s outside option when a child is born wm + vm −
φχm is higher. Again, the solution to the bargaining problem is the intersection of the

                                                  21
utility possibility frontier and the 45-degree line starting at the relevant outside option.
However, because the outside option now depends on the fertility decision, there is a
possibility of disagreement over fertility, which is the case drawn here. Because she
bears a large share of the child cost and hence loses bargaining power if a child is born,
the woman will have a lower utility level with a child compared to without. Hence, she
will not agree to a birth and the couple will remain childless, even though they could
both be better off with a child if they were able to commit.

3.3   Towards a Quantitative Model

We would like to explore the ability of the lack of commitment mechanism to quanti-
tatively account for the evidence discussed in Section 2, and then go on to examine the
implications of this mechanism for how various policy interventions affect fertility. Do-
ing this requires us to extend the simple one-shot model discussed here in a number of
directions. First, to account for the distribution in fertility and fertility intentions in the
data, we introduce heterogeneity across couples in terms of preferences and wages. Sec-
ond, there is an important distinction between partners’ disagreement about the total
number of children they want to have, and disagreement about when to have them. In
the extreme, one can envision a setting in which all couples agree on how many children
they ultimately want to have, and the only source of conflict is whether to have them
early or late. In this case, an intervention that reshuffles the child care burden between
the partners may affect when people have children, but it would not affect the ultimate
outcome in terms of the total number of children per couple. To allow us to separate
disagreement over the timing of fertility versus over the total number of children, we
extend the model to a dynamic setting where child preferences evolve over time. Third,
the one period model assumes a complete lack of commitment regarding the burden
of child care, and the distribution of the burden of child care in the outside option is a
reduced form parameter. In reality, there are ways for couples to achieve at least some
commitment, and the burden of child care is linked at least in part to factors such as the
cost of market-based child care and female labor supply. In the full model, we therefore
introduce labor supply and child care decisions and an element of partial commitment.

To clarify how these extensions affect the basic mechanics of the model, in the appendix
we work out the implications of each of these extensions in isolation in the context of
the one period model described above. In particular, in Appendix B we introduce a
distribution of fertility preferences into the model, and show how the total fertility rate


                                              22
depends on the distribution of the burden of child care between mothers and fathers.
The key insight here (which carries over to the full model) is that the impact of a pol-
icy that changes the distribution of the burden of child care depends on disagreement
shares and on the density of the distribution of fertility preferences. The density matters
because the fertility decision is at the extensive margin: in a given period, a couple either
has a child or not. If there is, say, a decrease in the burden of child care for mothers, the
number of of women who now switch from not wanting a child to wanting one depends
on the density of the distribution of fertility preferences at the threshold of indifference.
Second, disagreement shares also matter: if a potential mother switches towards want-
ing a child, this increases fertility only if her partner already wants a child, i.e., if the
mother’s intention is pivotal for the decision. We will describe below in the full model
how these factors underlie our main findings about the effects of policies designed to
increase fertility rates.

In Appendix C, we focus on the role of timing of fertility by considering a two-period
setting, and show that depending on the persistence of fertility preferences, disagree-
ment in fertility intentions may or may not affect overall fertility. We describe below
how we use evidence on the persistence of fertility intentions to pin down this aspect in
the full model.

In Appendix D, we introduce partial commitment by allowing the couple to bargain
over the distribution of the burden of child care in an initial stage, before deciding on
fertility. We show that as long as there are limits to how much commitment is possible,
this model yields qualitatively the same results as the simpler model described above.
However, the degree of commitment matters for quantitative results, which is why we
include an element of partial commitment in the full model below.


4   A Quantitative Model of Bargaining over Fertility under Partial Com-
    mitment
We now describe the quantitative model that we match to the evidence from the GGP
data. The main additional elements compared to the simple setup described above
are dynamic decision making with fertility preferences that evolve over time; a richer
structure of child rearing costs including time and goods components; heterogeneity in
wages; endogenous labor supply that is linked to child care decisions; and the possibil-
ity of partial commitment.


                                             23
We model couples that are fertile from period 1 to period T = 8. Each model period
corresponds to three years of calendar time. The first period corresponds to ages 20–22,
the second to 23–25, and so on up to period 8 (ages 41–43). Parents raise their children for
H = 6 periods (corresponding to 18 years). Hence, after completing fertility, the couple
continues to raise its children until all children have reached adulthood by period T +H.
Couples start out with zero children and can have up to three children.23 We denote by
b the fertility outcome in a given period, where b = 1 if child is born in the period
and b = 0 otherwise. Also, n denotes the total number of children of a couple, where
0 ≤ n ≤ 3.

There is heterogeneity across couples in the woman’s wage wf . We abstract from het-
erogeneity in the man’s wage wm , because it does not affect the fertility decision in our
setting.24 To generate wage heterogeneity, we distinguish between women who have
college education co and those with less-than-college education nc. Education is de-
noted by e ∈ {nc, co}. College-educated women have higher average wages, but there
is also wage heterogeneity conditional on education. Specifically, wages are distributed
according to log-normal distributions with education specific means and variances. A
woman’s wage is constant over the life cycle.25 There is also a fixed cost of participation
pc that has to be paid if a woman is in the labor force, which allows us to match the
observation that some women do not work even before having children. To simplify
the exposition below, we write the model in terms of the wage net of the participation
cost. Specifically, women draw a potential wage w̃f from the log normal distribution,
and then work if w̃f > pc , with the net wage given by wf = max{0, w̃f − pc }.

In a given period, a person of gender g ∈ {f, m} derives utility from consumption cg
and fertility b ∈ {0, 1}, and there is also a disutility of child care dg . The utility vg that
a person derives from the arrival of a child is stochastic and evolves over time (to be
described below). The individual utility of a household member of gender g ∈ {m, f } at
age t is given by the value function:

                                                                                                                0
       Vgt (e, wf , a1 , a2 , a3 , vf , vm ) = E u(cg , dg , vg , b) + βVgt+1 (e, wf , a01 , a02 , a03 , vf0 , vm
                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                  ) .   (9)
  23
      There are only few couples with more than three children in our data for low-fertility countries.
  24
      This is because in the model fathers do not reduce labor supply to care for children and because utility
is linear in consumption.
   25
      Allowing for wage dynamics would generate additional predictions for the timing of fertility, but
here the role of wage heterogeneity is simply to allow us to match broad differences across women with
different labor market opportunities in terms of fertility intentions and outcomes.



                                                            24
Here wf is the woman’s wage, a1 , a2 and a3 denote the ages of the children at the be-
ginning of the period, vf and vm are the child preferences of the two partners, and β is
a discount factor that satisfies 0 < β < 1. In writing the value function this way, it is
understood that cg and b are potentially stochastic functions of the state variables that
are determined through bargaining between the partners. We have ai = 0 for a potential
child that has not yet been born. The ai evolve according to:
                                                                           
                    a01
                               I(a1 > 0)(a1 + 1) + I(a1 = 0)b               
                                                                           
                  a0  =  I(a > 0)(a + 1) + I(a > 0)I(a = 0)b               ,
                  2         2       2            1        2                
                                                                           
                   a03      I(a3 > 0)(a3 + 1) + I(a2 > 0)I(a3 = 0)b

where I(·) is the indicator function. Since in the model no decisions affecting fertility are
made after all children are grown, we assume that parents die at that point and hence
VgT +H+1 = 0.

As in Section 3 above, utility is linear in consumption and additively separable in felicity
derived from the presence of children, and the disutility of child care dg enters linearly
also. Instantaneous utility is given by:

                                u(cg , dg , vg , b) = cg − dg + vg · b.

Notice that the couple derives utility from a child only in the period when the child is
born. However, this is without loss of generality, since only the present value of the
added utility of a child matters for the fertility decision.

Children are costly as long as they live with their parents. For each child, there is a fixed
monetary cost φc and a fixed utility cost φu . We think of the utility cost as a time cost
that accrues outside of typical work hours, such as the time spent caring for school-age
children on nights or weekends.26 Hence, this cost is not denominated by the market
wage, but directly enters utility through the term dg .

There is an additional time cost of taking care of children during work hours, which
accrues until the child is three years old (i.e., for one model period). There are two
options for how this cost can be covered. One option is for the mother of the young
child to stay at home instead of working. This choice is denoted by h = 1. In this case,
  26
    See Schoonbroodt (2018) for an analysis that points out the importance of distinguishing between
child care that competes with work hours versus child care that does not.


                                                  25
the opportunity cost of caring for the young child is given by the woman’s wage wf . The
alternative is for the woman to keep working, h = 0, and buy child care on the market
(e.g., use a daycare center) at price wy . The child care decision is discrete, h ∈ {0, 1}, i.e.,
we abstract from the possibility of working part time, and also from the option of the
father staying at home with the child.27

Given the age distribution of children ai , we can calculate the total number of children
living in the household as:

                                              1(0 < ai < H) + b,
                                          X
                                   nh =
                                          i


where H is the duration of childhood. The total monetary cost of raising children is
nh φc + b(1 − h)wy , the forgone wage if the mother cares for a young child is bhwf , and
the total utility cost is nh φu .

Couples bargain over fertility, child care, and consumption under partial commitment.
The sense in which there is partial commitment is that the distribution of the burden
of child care between mother and father is not entirely exogenous (as in the model in
Section 3), but instead depends in part on earlier decisions by the couple. Specifically,
we assume that the couple can decide ahead of time whether, if a baby arrives, the
mother will stay home to take care of the child for the first period (h = 1), or whether
they will use market child care instead (h = 0). The couple can commit to this decision.
In contrast, it is not possible to pre-commit to a specific distribution of the other child
costs φc and φu . Given that commitment is possible for only a part of the child rearing
cost, the lack of commitment mechanism outlined in Section 3 is still operative, which
is essential for the model to be able to match disagreement between partners on having
children.

The motivation for allowing commitment with regards to the child care arrangement
h ∈ {0, 1} is twofold. First, how to arrange child care is a major decision that is subject to
switching costs and requires advance planning; it is not unheard of to apply for daycare
slots long before a child is born. Moreover, the child care decision interacts with other
major choices that also have the characteristics of being lumpy and persistent, such as
in which city or neighborhood to live (which may differ in the availability of child care).
  27
    Allowing for this possibility would be straightforward and would not change the main results. How-
ever, it would also complicate notation, and given that in the GGP data very few men stay at home as
primary care givers for children, we abstract from this option here.


                                                 26
Arguably, it should be easier to commit to such decisions compared to other aspects of
child care that can be easily changed on an everyday basis. Second, because the child
care decision for young children interacts with the mother’s labor market opportuni-
ties, allowing for partial commitment in this particular dimension generates empirical
implications that we can take to the data.

Building on the partial commitment framework outlined in Appendix D, the bargaining
process between the partners in every period proceeds in three stages. In the first stage,
the couple decides on the child care arrangement h ∈ {0, 1} conditional on a child being
born in that period. The default choice is the one that minimizes the total cost of child
care, that is, h = 1 if wf < wy and h = 0 otherwise. However, the partners can change
the default if both of them agree. This may be attractive because of the repercussions of
the choice of h on the decision to have a baby.

As an example, consider a couple where the woman’s wage wf is slightly lower than the
cost of market based child care wy , so that the default is for the woman to stay home if
a child is born, h = 1. However, staying at home lowers the woman’s outside option,
so that if h = 1 she may not agree to have the child. If the husband wants to have
a child, the partners may agree that they would both be better off by committing to
h = 0, i.e., the woman keeps working and the couple uses market child care. Relative to
the default of h = 1, the woman would gain through a better outside option and hence
more bargaining power, and the man would gain through a higher probability of getting
a child. The reverse scenario is also possible: a woman with a relatively high wage may
offer to stay home with the child if she really wants one and her partner is opposed,
because the woman staying home increases the man’s relative bargaining power and,
hence, his incentive to agree to having a child.

The second stage of bargaining concerns the fertility choice b ∈ {0, 1}. However, it is
useful to first consider the third stage of bargaining over the allocation of consumption,
where the outside options come into play. As in the model of Section 3, the outside
option is a temporary state of non-cooperation in which each partner consumes her
or his own earnings (if any) and provides her or his share of the burden of child care
for one period. Future utility is the same in the outside option as on the equilibrium
path, and given that the consumption allocation within a period does not affect state
variables, we can treat the consumption decision as a static bargaining problem. In terms
of the distribution of the burden of child care in the outside option, we aim to capture
the intuition that the man (who often has higher earnings) is relatively more likely to

                                           27
contribute to monetary costs compared to non-monetary costs. Hence, we assume that
in the outside option monetary expenses (the child cost φc and, potentially, the cost of
market child care wy ) are paid in equal shares by woman and man. In contrast, the utility
cost φu (which captures child care outside of market hours) is divided according to the
cost shares χf and χm , where χf + χm = 1. The utility cost of raising children for gender
g ∈ {f, m} is then given by df = χg nh φu . The cost shares χf and χm , which may reflect
comparative advantage but which we interpret as primarily being due to social norms,
will later be matched to data on the actual distribution of child care between parents.
The within-period outside option for the wife, analogous to (5), is then given by:28

                                                  1
       ūf (wf , vf , h, nh , b) = (1 − bh)wf −     (φc nh + (1 − h)wy b) − χf φu nh + vf · b,       (10)
                                                  2

and for the husband we have, analogous to (6):

                                               1
            ūm (wm , vm , h, nh , b) = wm −     (φc nh + (1 − h)wy b) − χm φu nh + vm · b.          (11)
                                               2

Given these outside options, the couple negotiates how to divide consumption given
the budget constraint. The couple’s budget constraint in the case of cooperation reads:

                   cf + cm = (1 + α) [(1 − bh)wf + wm − φc nh − (1 − h)wy b] ,                       (12)

that is, total consumption is equal to total income minus the goods cost of raising chil-
dren, scaled up by the increasing returns from cooperation α. With equal bargaining
weights, the Nash bargaining outcome is the solution of the maximization problem:
                                            i
         h             1                        0.5
  max cf − (1 − bh)wf − (φc nh + (1 − h)wy b)
  cf ,cm               2
                                                                         i
                                        h           1                       0.5
                                          cm − wm − (φc nh + (1 − h)wy b)
                                                    2

subject to the above budget constraint. Notice that the utility derived from children and
the direct utility cost of children drop out here, because they enter equilibrium utility
and the outside option equally.29 Similarly, future utility does not enter because the
  28
      Notice that we do no impose a non-negativity constraint on consumption, which does not cause
problems because utility is linear in consumption. Alternatively, one could add additional endowments
to ensure that consumption is possible even in the outside option. For our analysis, the only feature that
is crucial is that the outside option depends on whether the couple decides to have a child.
   29
      We assume that the allocation of the utility costs dg is the same in equilibrium and outside option.


                                                     28
evolution of the state variables is unaffected by the current consumption allocation: the
bargaining problem regarding consumption is static. Analogous to (15) and (16) in the
proof of Proposition 2, the solution to the maximization problem is:
                          α               α                   1
            cf (nh ) = 1 +    (1 − bh)wf + wm −                   (1 + α) (φc nh + (1 − h)wy b) ,
                           2                2                   2
                      α                 α                     1
           cm (nh ) = (1 − bh)wf + 1 +        wm −                (1 + α) (φc nh + (1 − h)wy b) .
                       2                  2                     2

As before, each partner receives its outside option plus a fixed share of the surplus gen-
erated by cooperation.

We now go back to the second stage of bargaining, when fertility is decided on. In this
stage, the partners form their intentions for having a child during the period, taking
as given the child care decision h ∈ {0, 1} taken at the beginning of the period, and
anticipating how having a child b ∈ {0, 1} would affect the bargaining outcome over
consumption at the end of the period and the continuation utility in future periods. Let
ig ∈ {0, 1} denote the intention of partner g, where ig = 1 denotes that the partner would
like to have a baby. Formally, ig is determined as follows:
        
  ig = I u(cg , dg , vg , 1) + βE Vgt+1 (e, wf , a01 , a02 , a03 , vf0 , vm
                                                                          0
                                                                                  
                                                                            )|b = 1
                                                                                                     
                                                                      0    0    0    0    0
                                                         t+1                                      
                              ≥ u(cg , dg , vg , 0) + βE Vg (e, wf , a1 , a2 , a3 , vf , vm )|b = 0 , (13)


where I(·) is the indicator function and it is understood that consumption and child
care costs depend on b. Equation (13) expresses that a partner intends to have a child if
having a child increases expected utility. In Section 3, we assumed that having a baby
requires agreement, i.e., a child was born (b = 1) if and only if if = 1 and im = 1. In the
GGP data explored in Section 2, we found that although agreement between the partners
greatly increases the likelihood of having a baby, some births occur nevertheless without
perfect agreement. We therefore allow for a general mapping of fertility intentions to
outcomes that also depend on the existing number of children. Given fertility intentions
and the existing number of children n, the probability of having a baby in a given period
is given by a function γ(if , im , e, n). Later on, we will choose this function to match the
observed birth probability for each combination of intention and existing number of
This is without loss of generality, since utility only depends on the sum cg + dg . A different allocation
of the utility cost in equilibrium would result in an exactly offsetting change in consumption and leave
overall utility and fertility decisions unchanged.


                                                        29
children in the GGP data, separately for women with college education and less-than-
college education. We take this function as exogenous; some factors that are likely to
play a role in reality are natural fecundity (births are not guaranteed even if the partners
agree), imperfect birth control, and change over time in fertility intentions.

Regarding child preferences, we show in Appendix C that the persistence of child prefer-
ences over time determines the extent to which disagreement over having babies matters
for the timing of fertility versus total lifetime fertility. Specifically, transitory disagree-
ment (i.e., couples who disagree today are likely to agree in the future) primarily delays
fertility, whereas persistent disagreement lowers the total number of children a couple
will have. To be able to match the degree of persistence to the data, we model child
preferences as follows. In every period, a couple draws potential fertility preferences ṽf ,
ṽm from a joint uniform distribution30 that depends on the existing number of children
n:
                                                                
                         ṽ         µ                  σf2
                                                        ρσf σm
                         f  ∼ U  f,e,n  ,                ,.
                                                           2
                         ṽm        µm,e,n       ρσf σm  σm

The means µg,e,n of the distribution are gender-specific and also depend on the woman’s
education e and the existing number of children n. The dependence of fertility prefer-
ences on the number of existing children captures the possibility of declining marginal
utility from additional children. The variances σg2 are also gender specific, and the corre-
lation between the partners’ preference draws is given by a parameter ρ. In the first pe-
riod, actual preferences vf , vm are equal to potential preferences, vg = ṽg for g ∈ {f, m}.
In subsequent periods, if no child is born (b = 0), with probability π the couple’s fertility
preferences are unchanged in the next period. With probability 1 − π, the couple draws
new fertility preferences from the same distribution. When a birth takes place (b = 1),
the couple always draws new fertility preferences. Formally, this implies that the couple
retains the existing preference draw with probability π(1 − b), and adopts a new draw
  30
    Empirically, we do not have information on the global shape of child preferences away from the
thresholds of indifference, because we observe only a binary variable on child preferences. We there-
fore use uniform distributions in the quantitative implementation of our model, while noting that the
measured policy effects should be considered to be locally valid.




                                                 30
with probability 1 − π(1 − b):
                          
                          vf 
                         
                         
                                    with probability π(1 − b)
                          vm
                         
                     vf0
                         
                     =  
                      0
                     vm  
                           ṽ
                            f
                         
                                        with probability 1 − π(1 − b).
                         
                         
                         
                         
                          ṽ
                                  m


Here vg0 denotes fertility preferences in the following period. By matching the evolution
of fertility preferences to the GGP data (where fertility preferences for the same couple
are observed in repeated waves), we can ensure that the model reproduces the proper
mapping from current fertility preferences to long-run fertility outcomes.


5   Matching the Model to Data from the Generations and Gender Pro-
    gramme
We now describe the procedure for matching the dynamic model to the GGP data. Our
quantitative exercise has two objectives: to show that the partial commitment frame-
work is able to account for the evidence described in Section 2, and to use the model to
compare the performance of alternative policies intended to raise fertility in low-fertility
countries. We interpret the data from the various countries in our data set as driven by
the same structural model, with differences across countries in the distribution of the
child care burden and the cost of market child care. We use all available data to estimate
model parameters that are assumed identical across countries (such as the mapping of
fertility intentions into outcomes). The remaining parameters are chosen to match ev-
idence from the countries in our data set with a total fertility rate below 1.5 (Austria,
Bulgaria, Czech Republic, Germany, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, and Russia). Accord-
ingly, our policy experiments in the following section should be interpreted as being
valid for the initial conditions of a low-fertility country.

We choose the model parameters in two steps. First, we pin down a number of param-
eters individually, either by setting them to standard values or by estimating them di-
rectly from the data. Second, we jointly estimate the remaining parameters, concerning
the distribution of child preferences, the evolution of preferences over time, the female
labor market, and the cost of child care, to match data from the low fertility countries.



                                            31
5.1    Preset and Individually Estimated Parameters

Two parameters that are less central to our analysis are set to standard values: we set the
discount factor to β = 0.95, which corresponds to an annual interest rate of about two
percent, and we set the economies of scale in the family to α = 0.4, as in Greenwood,
Guner, and Knowles (2003).

Next, we turn to parameters that we estimate directly from the data. The parameter χm
determines the distribution of the non-monetary burden of child care between mother
and father. We pin down this parameter using our data on the distribution of the burden
of child care in the GGP data (see Section 2, Figure 2). However, note that the parameter
is specifically about the distribution of child care outside of working hours, and hence
we do not want to capture that women do a larger share of the work simply because
they are more likely to be stay-at-home parents. Accordingly, we pin down χm using
the distribution of child care in the GGP data among those couples in the low-fertility
countries where the woman is in the labor force.31 The resulting estimate is χm = 0.307,
that is, the male share in child care outside working hours is about 30 percent, leaving
the remaining 70 percent to the mothers.

A number of parameters are estimated separately for two groups of couples, namely
those where the woman has a college education (or above), and those where she does
not.32 The fraction of college-educated women in the low-fertility countries in our GGP
sample is 25.3 percent, and hence we impose the same percentage in the model. We
normalize the mean wage of women with less-than-college education to 1.0, and then
set the mean of the wage distribution for college-educated women to 1.5, i.e., the college
wage premium is 50 percent, which is the the average premium for European countries
documented by Strauss and de la Maisonneuve (2009).33

We also use the GGP data to estimate the probabilities of having a child within three
years conditional on the intentions of the male and the female partner, the woman’s ed-
ucation, and the existing number of children. We assume that these parameters do not
vary across countries, and hence we construct them from the whole sample of countries
for which we have two waves of data (Austria, Bulgaria, Czech Republic, France, Ger-
  31
     In addition to the woman being in the labor force, we also require that the couple has at least one
child under the age of 14 and that we observe the fertility intention for both partners.
  32
     Given that only women bear a time cost of children during working hours, in our setting the man’s
wage does not affect decisions, and hence we do not consider variation in men’s education or wages.
However, the male wage does matter when we introduce taxation policies below.
  33
     See Table 2 in Strauss and de la Maisonneuve (2009), column “Multi-period average.”

                                                  32
many, Lithuania, and Russia), allowing us to link intentions and outcomes.34 We choose
γ(if , im , e, n) to match regression results as reported in Table 2, but separately by educa-
tion. From these regression results, we derive the numbers shown in Table 3. We use a
value of zero where the coefficients are not significantly different from zero. Using the
point estimates instead does not substantially alter our findings.

Table 3: Fertility rates in GGP data by fertility intention (percent of couples with each
combination of female intent, male intent, and existing number of children that will
have a baby within three years)

                                                     High school

       Existing children          n=0                    n=1                   n=2
                            He no     He yes        He no    He yes       He no    He yes

       She no                17.89     17.89        13.06     13.06         4.28      4.28
       She yes               17.89     40.21        23.60     39.84       12.21     36.15

                                                        College

       Existing children          n=0                    n=1                   n=2
                            He no     He yes        He no    He yes       He no    He yes

       She no                17.03     17.03        11.42     11.42         2.48      2.48
       She yes               17.03     43.78        26.67     42.48         2.48    30.91



To calibrate the monetary cost of children φc , we focus on data from Germany, the largest
of the low-fertility countries. The statistical office of Germany estimates the consump-
tion expenditure of couples with children to average at e38,000 in 2011. The OECD con-
sumption equivalence scale quantifies the consumption cost of a child to be around 0.3
times the consumption of an adult, and Adda, Dustmann, and Stevens (2017) estimate
this equivalence scale to be 0.4. Using the OECD equivalence scale for a couple with
two children together with the average expenditures of German couples with children,
we arrive at an annual expenditure of around e5,000 per year. Given that we normalize
the mean wage of women without college education to one, we scale this estimate by
the average annual earnings of women without college education in Germany, which
  34
    We use all available data because the number of data in each cell would become too small if we
estimated the regressions separately by country.



                                               33
we estimate to be e30,000.35 Hence, we set φc = 5, 000/30, 000 = 16 .

There are also two time costs for children. The time cost of caring for young children
(if no market-based child care is used) is equivalent to full-time labor supply, which we
normalize to one (i.e., time is measured relative to full-time labor supply). In addition,
there is the utility cost φu that is interpreted as child care outside of typical work hours,
i.e., child care during mornings, nights, and weekends. If there are 16 non-sleep hours
per day and full-time work corresponds to 40 hours per week, in principle there are al-
most twice as many hours of child care needed outside work hours compared to during
work hours. However, children (especially older ones) do not need to be monitored all
the time and it is also possible to combine watching children with other activities. We
therefore assume that the two types of time costs are of the same magnitude and set
φu = 1.36

5.2    Jointly Estimated Parameters

The remaining parameters to be determined concern the distribution of female and male
child preferences, the persistence of child preferences over time, the dispersion of wages,
the cost of market-based child care, and participation costs in the labor market. We cal-
ibrate these parameters jointly by matching a set of target moments. While all param-
eters affect all target moments to some extent, for each set of parameters there is a set
of directly related moments. For the distribution of female and male child preferences,
these moments are the reported fertility intentions conditional on the number of exist-
ing children and on the education of the female partner. Given that fertility can be at
most three in the model, for fertility intentions given n = 2 we group all couples with
two or more children. We generate this data from a pooled sample of the low fertility
countries in the GGP data. To pool the sample, we calculate the country-specific cross
tables of fertility intentions of men and women, using the sample weights. We then take
the non-weighted average across countries to derive the pooled intention tables. The
results are shown in the first part of Table 4. These 24 data moments are the primary
drivers of 13 model parameters, namely 12 mean parameters for child preferences and
the correlation parameter.
  35
     Finke (2010) puts the average hourly wage of German women with high school education at e15,
which corresponds to e30,000 annually for a full-time worker with 2,000 hours of labor supply per year.
  36
     In practice, making different choices for the basic costs of children φc and φu has little impact on
our overall results. If we choose higher costs, the estimation procedure for child preferences delivers a
proportionally higher utility derived from children, so as to match target moments on fertility intentions.



                                                    34
            Table 4: Distribution of fertility intentions in GGP data and model

                                                   High school

                                 n=0                  n=1                  n=2
                            He no   He yes        He no   He yes     He no    He yes

     Data     She no        56.36     6.92        66.05     7.55      90.25       4.39
              She yes        5.55    31.16         4.29   22.10        2.31       3.05

    Model     She no        55.67     5.51        68.37     7.25      85.62       6.35
              She yes        4.74    34.08         3.14   21.23        3.40       4.64

                                                     College

                                 n=0                  n=1                  n=2
                            He no   He yes        He no   He yes     He no    He yes

     Data     She no        49.09     7.04        56.56     9.92      86.34       5.78
              She yes        6.37    37.50         5.08   28.45        3.29       4.58

    Model     She no        50.20     5.55        59.76     8.66      84.84       6.92
              She yes        4.84    39.40         2.41   29.18        3.23       5.01



In order to calibrate the preference persistence parameter π, we use data from all low
fertility countries for which we have two waves, namely Austria, Bulgaria, Czech Re-
public, Germany, Lithuania, and Russia. In these countries we select couples that didn’t
have a baby in between Waves 1 and 2. We drop couples in which the female partner is
beyond the age of 35 in the first wave. We look at these couples’ combinations of fertility
preferences in Wave 1 and calculate the share that reports to have the same preferences
in Wave 2. These statistics should tell us how persistent certain combinations of child
preferences are over time. The result is shown in Table 5. The four data moments in the
table pin down the persistence parameter π.

Next, we turn to female labor force participation. Table 6 displays the labor force partic-
ipation rates of women in our sample broken down by education and by the presence
of young children (under age 3). Participation is lower for women with young chil-
dren, consistent with the assumption of a larger time cost for raising young children
in the model. We also observe that labor force participation is higher for women with


                                             35
Table 5: Share of couples with same fertility intentions in both waves in GGP data (pop-
ulation 35 and under) and in the model

                                       Data                Model

                                 He no      He yes     He no     He yes

                    She no        79.89     25.42      69.17     32.77
                    She yes       22.63     65.24      29.91     52.63



more education, consistent with the notion of a higher opportunity cost of time for these
women. These four target moments help pin down the dispersion of women’s wages
σw,e , the labor market participation cost pc , and the cost of market based child care wy .

          Table 6: Women’s labor force participation in GGP data and model

                                          Data                 Model

                                    Child under 3:       Child under 3:
                                     No      Yes          No      Yes

                  High school       62.60      22.14     62.60     21.98
                  College           80.50      43.17     80.50     43.19



The last two parameters to set are the standard deviations of child preferences σf and σm .
These standard deviations determine how strongly men and women react to changes in
the cost of children. Intuitively, if the standard deviation is small, the density of pref-
erences around the cutoff between wanting and not wanting a child is high. A small
change in child costs will then change the fertility intentions of many individuals, lead-
ing to a large change in the fertility rate. The standard deviations therefore are important
determinants of the effectiveness of policies aimed at raising fertility. We cannot identify
the standard deviations from the distribution of child preferences in Table 4 alone; intu-
itively, the table provides information on the total number of people with child prefer-
ences above and below a certain threshold, but not on the density close to the threshold
(this is analogous to the reason why standard deviations are fixed in a probit model).
Instead, we make use of the cross country variation in disagreement shares in our sam-
ple of low-fertility countries. We interpret this variation as being driven by variation in


                                              36
the share of men in caring for children, as captured by Figure 2, and by variation in the
availability of market child care. Intuitively speaking, if across countries the female dis-
agreement share varies a lot but the male disagreement share varies little, this indicates
that women’s preferences react more strongly to changes in the relative child care bur-
den, and hence suggests that women’s fertility preferences are more concentrated than
men’s (σf < σm ).

             Figure 5: Fertility intentions across countries, GGP data and model
            (a) Couples with one child                           (b) Couples with two or more children
40                                                      60
         Data                                                      Data
35       Model                                                     Model
                                                        50
30
                                                        40
25

20                                                      30                                  GER
                           GER                                                           CZE    AUT

15                        ROU                                                               BUL   POLRUS
                            POL
                           CZE               RUS        20                               ROU       LTU
10                        BUL     AUT
                                        LTU
                                                        10
 5

 0                                                       0
     0           10        20           30         40        0       10     20     30     40      50       60




Formally, we measure the relative variation of female and male disagreement by run-
ning cross-country regressions of the form:

                      DISAGREE MALEi = β0 + β1 · DISAGREE FEMALEi + i ,

with i denoting the country index, separately for couples with one child and couples
with two or more children.37 Figure 5 displays the data and the resulting regression
lines. The target moments used to pin down the standard deviations σf and σm are the
left and right endpoints of the regression lines (i.e., evaluated at the lowest and highest
value for the “Disagree Female” variable in the sample). To compute the corresponding
regressions in the model, we need to take a stand on what drives the variation in male
and female disagreement across countries. The male cost share χm is one candidate, but
  37
   We focus on couples who already have children because preferences for the marginal (last) child are
what matters for predictions for overall fertility rates.


                                                    37
the cost of market-based child care wy also matters. To capture the relationship between
these variables, we regress the female labor force participation rate of women with small
children on χm among the low-fertility countries. Then, we take the extremes of the dis-
tribution of χm among the low fertility countries, which are 0.28 and 0.34 (recall that χm
is measured by the average male share in child care among couples who are both work-
ing full time). We choose corresponding child care costs wy for these two extremes to
exactly match the predicted female labor force participation rates for mothers with small
children from the regression, which are 21.5 and 34.7 percent, respectively. This gives
us two parameter combinations of χm and wy . We then compute the model-generated
disagreement shares in the two hypothetical countries, and use these to compute the
model-generated regression line. The relationships generated by the estimated model
are displayed in Figure 5 as solid lines. By matching the target moments, we ensure that
the estimated model generates an empirically plausible response in male and female
fertility intentions to variations in cost shares and child care costs.

5.3   Parameter Choices and Model Fit

Let Y denote the 32 target moments we describe above, i.e. the 24 values for the distri-
bution of fertility intentions, the four values for the persistence of child preferences, the
four values for labor force participation, and the four end points of the regression lines
in Figure 5. Let θ denote the vector of the 20 parameter choices, namely the mean child
preferences µg,e,n depending on gender, education, and the existing number of children
(12 parameters), the dispersions σg of child preferences by gender (2 parameters), the
correlation ρ and persistence π of child preferences (2 parameters), the child care cost wy
and participation cost pc (2 parameters), and the dispersions of women’s wages σw,e by
education (2 parameters). Let Ŷ (θ) denote the model simulated counterparts for a set of
parameters θ. To pin down the parameters, we numerically solve the problem
                                    h          i0 h         i
                             min     Ŷ (θ) − Y · Ŷ (θ) − Y ,
                               θ


i.e., we minimize a simple residual sum of squares. The solution is computed using a
parallelized simulated annealing method. The resulting set of parameters is shown in
Table 7. The model-predicted distributions of fertility intentions, the predictions about
the persistence of child preferences, and the predictions for female labor force participa-
tion are shown in Tables 4, 5, and 6. The cross-country predictions for fertility intentions
are shown as solid lines in Figure 5.

                                             38
                           Table 7: Jointly calibrated parameters

           Description                    Parameter               Value
                                                       High school          College

                                Child preference parameters

           Mean women first child            µf,e,1        5.07              5.78
           Mean women second child           µf,e,2        1.79              3.06
           Mean women third child            µf,e,3      −0.15               0.05
           Std. dev. women                    σf                    3.07
           Mean men first child              µm,e,1        3.64              4.85
           Mean men second child             µm,e,2      −6.44               0.00
           Mean men third child              µm,e,3     −15.54             −14.63
           Std. dev. men                      σm                  12.72
           Correlation                           ρ                  0.93
           Persistence                           π                  0.29

                         Child care and labor market parameters

           Child care cost                    wy                    0.58
           Participation cost                 pc                    0.36
           Std. dev. female wages            σw,e          0.89              0.94



The calibrated model provides a good fit for the data on fertility intentions and the
persistence of child preferences over time, especially for couples in which at least one
of the partners wants to have a baby. For us these couples are the most important ones,
since they will be most prone to changing their fertility intentions in reaction to policy.
The model also does well at fitting the slope of the relationship between male and female
disagreement across countries in Figure 5, and particularly so for couples that have two
or more children.

The estimated parameters suggest steeply declining marginal utility from having chil-
dren, especially for men. From the second child onwards, women are estimated to have
stronger child preferences than men. Intuitively, this arises because the estimated cost
share implies that women carry most of the child care burden, yet there are still at least
some women who desire a second or third child. The estimation rationalizes this pat-

                                            39
tern by assigning a stronger child preference to women. In fact, from the second child
onwards, mean child preferences for men are estimated to be negative. This occurs be-
cause most couples agree on not currently wanting a child, so that the couples desiring
one are in the upper tail of the distribution of child preferences. Moreover, men benefit
from having children not just in terms of direct utility, but also through an improved
bargaining position.

Child preferences turn out not to be highly persistent but strongly correlated within
couples. As argued above, the persistence of preferences is important for shaping how
disagreement versus agreement on children translates into lifetime fertility rates. The
high correlation may appear surprising, given that we document substantial disagree-
ment among couples about having children. However, at all parities the majority of
couples agree that they don’t want to have a child, which the model accounts for with
highly correlated preferences. The less-than-perfect correlation leaves enough room for
disagreement to arise for a substantial portion of couples.

               Table 8: Demographic statistics generated by estimated model

                   Total fertility rate                                         1.56

                   Fraction of couples without children                         0.12
                   Fraction of couples with one child                           0.39
                   Fraction of couples with two children                        0.43
                   Fraction of couples with more than two children              0.06



Overall, the quantitative exercise shows that the partial commitment model does an
excellent job at accounting for the facts described in Section 2. We can further evaluate
the performance of the model by considering non-targeted moments. Table 8 reports
some basic demographic statistics for the model. The model predicts a total fertility rate
of the low fertility countries of 1.56, which is a little higher than the average in these
countries of 1.36.38 Some of the gap is due to the fact that our calibration is to a data set
consisting of couples, whereas the actual fertility rate is pulled down to some extent by
women who are not in a relationship and do not have children. With this adjustment
in mind and given that the fertility rate was not targeted, the close fit suggests that the
  38
   This is the average total fertility rate for our low-fertility countries for the years 2000–2010, from
World Development Indicators.


                                                   40
measured fertility intentions translate into overall outcomes in an accurate manner. The
model also predicts that after having completed the fertile period, i.e. at the age of 45,
most couples have one or two children, which is also true in the data. Only a small
fraction has three children, and 12 percent of couples are childless.39 For comparison,
the German Statistical Office reports that in 2008, about 19 percent of women between
the ages 40 and 49 had no children. Some of these women presumably will go on to
have children later, and the group also contains single women and women unable to
have children who are not part of our analysis.


6        Policy Experiments: The Effectiveness of Targeted Child Subsidies
We now turn to the policy implications of our analysis. In many countries, historically
low fertility rates are considered a major challenge for future economic prospects, be-
cause it is difficult to sustain economic growth with a shrinking population and to main-
tain social insurance systems with an aging population. Already, child bearing is subsi-
dized and publicly supported in various ways in many countries, but there are doubts
about how effective such policies are. Here, we study the effect of policies that aim to
promote fertility within our quantitative model.

Our analysis suggests that the effectiveness of policy interventions will depend on their
separate effect on women’s and men’s incentives for having children. It therefore mat-
ters how effectively a policy can lower the burden of child care specifically for, say,
mothers as opposed to fathers. We consider two scenarios. We start with the polar case
in which interventions can be precisely targeted. Specifically, we consider child sub-
sidies that are paid to either the mother or the father and increase the outside option
of this parent one-for-one, without an effect on the outside option of the other parent
(similar to the interpretation of Lundberg, Pollak, and Wales 1997). This scenario gives
sharp results on the desirability of subsidizing either mothers’ or fathers’ desire for chil-
dren. However, it is not obvious whether such polar policies are feasible, because how
a given subsidy is used ultimately depends on how this subsidy enters intra-household
bargaining. Hence, we also consider “real world” policies modeled to be comparable
to specific policies that we can observe in the data, such as parental leave policies or
subsidized daycare.

We evaluate the effectiveness of policies by measuring the cost of increasing the total
    39
    See Baudin, de la Croix, and Gobbi (2015) for a discussion of the economics of childlessness and
related empirical evidence.

                                                41
fertility rate by 0.1, i.e., from 1.56 to 1.66. This is a sizeable increase, although still well
short of moving fertility to the replacement level. We first consider the case of child sub-
sidies targeted at either mothers or fathers. Formally, let sg (nh ) denote the total subsidy
paid to the partner g for the nh children currently living in the household. The joint
budget constraint (12) then becomes:

        cf + cm = (1 + α) [(1 − bh)wf + wm − φc nh − (1 − h)wy b + sf (nh ) + sm (nh )] ,

and the outside options (10) and (11) are changed to:

                                                1
     ūf (wf , h, nh , b, vf ) = (1 − bh)wf −     (φc nh + (1 − h)wy b) − χf φu nh + vf · b + sf (nh ),
                                                2
                                       1
    ūm (wm , h, nh , b, vf ) = wm −     (φc nh + (1 − h)wy b) − χm φu nh + vm · b + sm (nh ).
                                       2

In addition to targeting subsidies to either mothers or fathers, we also consider the pos-
sibility of subsidies that are only paid for higher-order children, i.e., from the second or
the third child onwards. We focus on the steady-state cost of policies that are in place
over the entire life course of couples.

Figure 6: Relative cost of targeted subsidies needed to raise the total fertility rate by 0.1

              Subsidy per Child per Year
8                                                                           Total Cost per Couple
        to women                                             3
                                                                                                      to women
7       to men
                                                                                                      to men
                                                         2.5
6

5                                                            2

4                                                        1.5

3
                                                             1
2
                                                         0.5
1

0                                                            0
      all children   from 2nd child    from 3rd child            all children   from 2nd child   from 3rd child




Notes: Bars display the cost of child subsidies paid to either mothers and fathers needed to raise the total
fertility rate by 0.1, relative to a subsidy paid to mothers for all children.


Figure 6 shows the relative cost of these subsidies (each of which raise fertility by 0.1),

                                                        42
both in terms of the cost per subsidized child and the total cost per couple (over their
whole life course). When comparing along the margin of paying subsidies for all or
only higher-order children, the subsidy amount necessarily increases when fewer chil-
dren are eligible for the subsidy (left panel). However, the total cost of the subsidies
declines when only higher-order births are subsidized, especially so when the subsidy
is only paid for third children. This is because most couples would have had one or
two children even without the subsidy (see the distribution of completed fertility in Ta-
ble 8). When all births are subsidized, this results in high sunk costs for inframarginal
births that make the policy costly in the aggregate. Targeting subsidies to higher-order
children is more cost effective, since the program is better targeted towards marginal
children.

Next, consider the margin of paying the subsidy either to mothers or fathers. Here, the
key finding is that it is much more effective to target subsidies towards women than
towards men. Specifically, the subsidy needs to be 2.2 to 3.1 times larger when targeted
towards men than towards women. This finding is novel to our analysis and would not
arise in a model that abstracts from bargaining. There are three features of our anal-
ysis that can create a gap between the effectiveness of child subsidies paid to women
versus men, and it turns out that all three push in the direction of favoring subsidies to
women. First, as displayed in Figure 1, in the low fertility countries that we calibrate to,
many more women than men are opposed to having another child. Thus, women are
more likely to be pivotal in the household decision (see Proposition 3 in the appendix),
which means that subsidies directed to women are more effective. The second reason for
our finding is related to the distribution of fertility preferences. Looking at the estima-
tion results in Table 7, we can see that the women’s child preferences are less dispersed
than those of men, indicating that there are relatively more women close to the prefer-
ence threshold at which they switch to wanting a baby. Consequently, a given subsidy
can incentivize more women than men to switch their opinion towards having another
baby. Third, even with symmetric fertility intentions and child preferences, women’s
and men’s preferences may also have a differential direct effect on fertility. Indeed, we
can see in the fertility regressions in Table 2 that women have a larger impact on the
fertility decision in the household than men. These three reasons combined imply that
subsidies that are targeted towards women are much more likely to succeed in raising
the total fertility rate.

In absolute terms, the present value of the per-couple subsidy needed to increase fertil-


                                            43
      Figure 7: Relative cost of real-life policies raising the total fertility rate by 0.1

                                       Total Cost per Couple
                                                                        Tax Credit
                  1                                                     Child Care
                                                                        Parental Leave

                0.8


                0.6


                0.4


                0.2


                  0
                          all children         from 2nd child         from 3rd child



Notes: “Tax credit” is a per-child subsidy that is proportional to each partner’s labor income. “Child care”
is a subsidy to the cost of market-based child care. “Parental leave” is a subsidy paid to mothers who take
care of a young child at home. Cost is displayed relative to a tax credit for all children.


ity by 0.1 ranges from about 15,000 euros in the best-case scenario (subsidizing mothers
from the third child onwards) to more than 130,000 euros in the worst case (subsidizing
fathers from the first child onwards).40 As a comparison, estimates based on a recent
reform of child benefits in Germany by Raute (2018) imply a cost of about 25,000 eu-
ros per couple for achieving the same increase in fertility. The reform provides benefits
from the first child onward and is targeted primarily to women. In the model, for the
same scenario the cost would be about 45,000 euros. Hence, while fertility is somewhat
less responsive to financial incentives in the model compared to the estimate by Raute
(2018), the required subsidies have the same order of magnitude. Moreover, our experi-
ment measures the long-run impact whereas Raute (2018) focuses on the first five years
  40
     The mean unskilled wage for women is normalized to one in the calibration. To compute the absolute
subsidy, we assume that this wage corresponds to 30,000 euros per year, which approximates the annual
earnings of women with a high school degree in Germany.


                                                    44
after the reform, and other empirical findings suggests that the long-run impact on fer-
tility is usually smaller than the short-run impact (e.g. Adda, Dustmann, and Stevens
2017). Hence, the impact of financial incentives in our model is broadly consistent with
independent empirical estimates.

The results in Figure 6 rely on the notion that subsidies paid to either mother or father
affect the outside option of this partner one-for-one. However, it is not obvious how out-
side options will respond. At the other extreme, we can envision a case where partners
consider a subsidy, no matter to whom it is paid, as joint income that enters their outside
options in a parallel way, so that it does not make a difference to whom the subsidy is
paid. Even then, it is possible to design policies that affect mothers and fathers in dif-
ferent ways, because of mothers’ specific role in child care. To evaluate this possibility,
we next consider policies under the alternative assumption that cash subsidies cannot
be arbitrarily targeted, and instead the impact on outside options depends on the details
of the policy design. We compare the cost of three policies. The first is a “tax credit,”
that is, a per-child subsidy that is proportional to each parent’s labor income. Given
that men have higher average wages, this policy benefits fathers relatively more.41 The
second policy is a child care subsidy that subsidizes the use of market-based child care.
The benefit itself shifts up both parents’ outside options in a parallel way. However,
the policy also incentives women to work rather than stay at home to care for young
children (so that they are eligible for the subsidy), and working increases mothers’ out-
side option. The third policy is a parental leave benefit that pays a subsidy to women
who do not work while home with a young child. In this policy scenario, the benefit
increases the outside option of mothers who stay at home, but it also provides incen-
tives for dropping out of the labor force for mothers who without the policy would be
working, which lowers the outside option.

Figure 7 compares the cost of these policies, again broken down by whether the policy
applies to all or only higher-order children. The costs are expressed relative to the cost
of increasing fertility by 0.1 through a tax credit paid for all children. As before, costs
are lower when only higher-order births are incentivized. Comparing across policies,
the most effective way to raise fertility is to provide child care benefits. The intuition
follows from Figure 6: ideally the government would like to subsidize mothers, and by
subsidizing child care (a component of the burden of children that otherwise would be
  41
   We assume an average gender wage gap of 25 percent. In addition, partners of college-educated
women are assumed to have proportionally higher wages, but there is no additional variation in male
wages conditional on the woman’s education.

                                                45
primarily borne by mothers) the policy can be targeted more effectively compared to the
other policies. More precisely, for couples who otherwise would not have used market-
based child care but switch to using child care because of the policy, the higher earnings
of the mother directly improve her outside option (10), whereas the cost of child care
is borne by both partners. Endogenous labor supply is crucial for the ranking of the
policies. This is apparent from the fact that parental leave benefits are less effective than
the child care subsidy: under the parental leave policy mothers are directly subsidized,
but they are also given incentives not to work, which lowers the outside option and
increases bargaining frictions.

The cost differences in Figure 7 are smaller compared to Figure 6 because targeting is
less precise, but the results still suggest that the design of real-life policies matters. In
absolute terms, the present value of the per-couple cost of the policies varies from about
18,000 to about 95,000 euros. The cheapest policy, namely child care benefits from the
third child onwards, is only 3,000 euros more expensive than the (potentially infeasible)
policy of targeting subsidies entirely to mothers, suggesting that this policy does rather
well at incentivizing mothers. Overall, accounting for the pattern of agreement and
disagreement on having babies makes a big difference for policy effectiveness.

In summary, our results suggest that, in a low fertility environment, policies that focus
on making childbearing and working compatible for mothers of young children (such
as subsidies for market-based child care) are likely to be the most effective. It is inter-
esting to compare these predictions to empirical studies of the effect of different types
of policy interventions on fertility. Our findings are consistent with the observation that
across countries, there is a close empirical link between low fertility and a high child care
burden on women (Feyrer, Sacerdote, and Stern 2008, de Laat and Sevilla-Sanz 2011). At
the micro level, while there is a sizeable literature on the role of financial incentives for
fertility (e.g., Cohen, Dehejia, and Romanov 2013, Laroque and Salanié 2014, and Raute
2018), most papers do not compare alternative policies, and the estimated effects vary
too much across settings to yield a straightforward meta-analysis for comparing differ-
ent types of policies. One exception is Goldstein et al. (2018), who compare the cost
effectiveness of child allowances and daycare subsidies for raising fertility, and find,
consistent with our results, that daycare subsidies are more effective. However, one
limitation of the study is that it is based on vignette-survey experiments that provide in-
formation on desired rather than actual fertility. Regarding the specific role of access to
child care, D’Albis, Gobbi, and Greulich (2017) provide cross-country evidence showing


                                             46
that differences in fertility across Europe result from fewer women having two children
in low-fertility countries, and that child care services are crucial for the transition to
a second child to occur. For the case of Germany, Bauernschuster, Hener, and Rainer
(2016) find that a large expansion of public child care for young children in Germany
substantially increased fertility.42 A historical example of a transformation that specifi-
cally lowered the cost of childbearing for mothers is the introduction of infant formula,
which reduced mother’s need to breastfeed and hence greatly enhanced their flexibility
in dealing with the needs of young children. Albanesi and Olivetti (2016) argue that the
introduction of infant formula contributed to the simultaneous rise in female employ-
ment and fertility observed in the United States between the 1930s and 1960s. Regarding
parental leave benefits, Dahl et al. (2016) find that expansions of paid maternity leave
in Norway increased mothers’ time out of the labor market after a birth, but did not
increase fertility. All these findings are consistent with our results.

Perhaps the strongest indication that policy design matters comes from the study by
Olivetti and Petrongolo (2016) of the effects of various family policies (such as the length
of parental leave for mothers and fathers, the pay rate during parental leave, and public
spending on early childhood care and education) on household decisions and outcomes
across high-income countries. They find that public support for early childhood care
is the only policy that has a positive and significant association with fertility. These
results are confirmed by a regression analysis with time and country fixed effects, where
once again public spending on early childhood education and care is the only policy
having a positive and substantial impact on fertility. While these results are not sufficient
to establish causality, they line up well with our finding that policies that specifically
support mothers (such as public daycare for young children) are the most effective at
raising fertility.


7        Conclusions
In this paper, we have examined the demographic and economic implications of the
simple fact that it takes agreement between a woman and a man to make a baby. Using
newly available data from the Generations and Gender Programme, we have shown that
    42
    A 10 percentage point increase in child care coverage is estimated to increase the incidence of second
and third births by 4 and 7 percent. However, Bick (2016) comes to a different conclusion and argues
(based on a quantitative model that abstracts from bargaining) that providing more subsidized child care
would do little to raise fertility in Germany, as it would mostly crowd out private child care arrangements
within the extended family.


                                                    47
disagreement between partners about having babies is not just a theoretical possibility,
but a commonplace occurrence: for higher-parity births, there are more couples who
disagree about having a baby than couples who agree on wanting one. We have also
shown that disagreement matters for outcomes, in the sense that a baby is unlikely to
be born unless both parents desire one. We interpret the data using a model of marital
bargaining under partial commitment, and show that our calibrated model provides a
close match for the data on fertility intentions and outcomes.

Our findings have both positive and normative implications for the economics of fertil-
ity choice. On the positive side, our theory suggests a novel determinant of a country’s
average fertility rate, namely the distribution of the child care burden between moth-
ers and fathers. If one gender carries most of the burden, we would expect to observe
a lopsided distribution of fertility intentions, and the fertility rate can be low even if
childbearing is highly subsidized overall. Indeed, in the sample of European countries
in the GGP data, we find that all low fertility countries are characterized by many more
women than men being opposed to having another child.

In terms of normative implications, the analysis suggests that policies that aim at rais-
ing the fertility rate will be more effective if they specifically target the gender more
likely to disagree with having another child. In our quantitative model calibrated to the
European low fertility countries, we find that a child subsidy that specifically lowers
women’s child care burden is, dollar for dollar, up to three times as effective at raising
fertility than is a subsidy targeted at fathers. In many industrialized countries, today’s
extremely low fertility rates are projected to cause major problems for the sustainability
of social insurance systems in the future. Examining policies from the perspective of
their effect on agreement and disagreement within couples on fertility will play an im-
portant role in designing an effective response to this policy challenge. One immediate
implication is that optimal policy will be country specific, because patterns of disagree-
ment over fertility vary widely across countries. In the GGP sample, it is notable that the
high fertility countries (Belgium, France, and Norway) already have broadly balanced
fertility intentions between women and men, so that there is less need for targeted poli-
cies.

Our analysis suggests a number of promising directions for future research. First, the
paper points to a close link between mothers’ labor market opportunities and disagree-
ment over child care and fertility between parents. In our model, women’s labor market
opportunities are modeled in a simple way through a fixed wage that provides earning

                                            48
opportunities that are not directly affected by having children. It would be interesting
to combine our analysis with a richer model of the accumulation of work experience
and career choices, where having children may have more profound repercussions (see
for example Adda, Dustmann, and Stevens 2017 and Gallen 2018). Such a model would
also yield richer implications for the effects of the distribution of the burden of child
care on the timing and spacing of births, which would make it possible to address the
difference between high- and low-fertility countries in more dimensions.

Second, our analysis has focused on contemporary fertility choices in high-income coun-
tries. A natural next step is to consider how the mechanisms explored here also con-
tributed to the historical changes throughout the fertility transition and its aftermath.
Given that the opportunity cost of mothers’ time plays a central role in our analysis,
it is interesting to ask what the model predicts if there is a secular change in women’s
labor market opportunities over time. The novel feature of our model is that a rise in
women’s wages affects both the total cost of children and the how the burden of this
cost is distributed between the parents. As an example, consider a version of our model
in which the only cost of children is the time cost of caring for young children during
work hours. In this setting, a rise in women’s wages will gradually increase the oppor-
tunity cost of children, until the level is reached where market-based child care is used,
after which the cost of children is constant. In terms of the distribution of the burden of
child care, at low wages the entire burden falls on women, who experience a decrease
in their outside option as they drop out of the labor force to care for children. How-
ever, once the female wage is sufficiently high for market-based child care to be used,
the time cost is transformed into a monetary cost, and the burden of child care is shared
between mother and father. This feature implies that close to the threshold where mar-
ket child care is used, women’s utility from having children is actually increasing in the
female wage, and hence fertility will be increasing in the wage also if women are pivotal
in the fertility decision. Combining these features, the model can generate a U-shaped
evolution of fertility as women’s wages and female labor-force participation rise. This
rhymes well with the empirical observation that during the early phase of the demo-
graphic transition, there is a negative relationship between fertility and female labor
force participation, whereas the relationship is positive across countries in recent data.43
  43
    See Feyrer, Sacerdote, and Stern (2008) and Doepke and Tertilt (2016) on the empirical pattern, and
Da Rocha and Fuster (2006), de Laat and Sevilla-Sanz (2011), Hazan and Zoabi (2015), Siegel (2017) and
Bar et al. (2018) on potential channels that can account for some of the changing relationships between
women’s education, labor supply, and fertility.



                                                  49
Third, the analysis could be applied to understand fertility choices in low-income coun-
tries. As documented in Doepke and Tertilt (2018), there is evidence that in develop-
ing countries there is even more disagreement over fertility compared to high-income
countries. There is only little research to date on how this disagreement affects fertility
outcomes. A key question when applying a bargaining model of fertility to developing
countries is how much power women and men have within the family. Our results for
rich countries point to a veto model, where each partner has enough power to block
the decision to have an additional child. If the distribution of power within the house-
hold is more lopsided, outcomes may be quite different. In addition, if there is an shift
in relative power within households over time (specifically, through improvements in
women’s rights), this may have substantial effects on fertility outcomes even if gender-
specific fertility preferences are unchanged.

Fourth and last, while our analysis goes beyond the unitary model of the household, it
is still based on the “standard” case of a baby born as the result of a mutual decision of
a mother and father. This is a limitation, because it excludes same-sex couples having
babies using sperm donors or surrogacy, single women using a sperm donor, or any
type of family using an adoption agency. At this time, these family types still account
for a relatively small fraction of children and are difficult to study with survey data.
Nevertheless, other family types in general and same-sex parenting more specifically
are phenomena that grow in importance over time. While much of our analysis should
extend to same-sex couples (as the burden of child care still needs to be shared in some
way, leading to the same commitment issues as in our analysis), there are also important
differences, for example concerning the impact of traditional role models. Another in-
creasingly important trend is the development of technologies such as egg freezing and
in vitro fertilization that give women a lot more control on when to have babies and who
to have them with. As these trends grow in importance and more data becomes avail-
able, it will be interesting to study how the bargaining perspective on fertility choice can
be applied more widely.


References
 Adda, Jérôme, Christian Dustmann, and Katrien Stevens. 2017. “The Career Costs of
   Children.” Journal of Political Economy 125 (2): 293–337.
 Albanesi, Stefania, and Claudia Olivetti. 2016. “Gender Roles and Medical Progress.”
    Journal of Political Economy 124 (3): 650–695.

                                            50
Ashraf, Nava, Erica Field, and Jean Lee. 2014. “Household Bargaining and Excess
  Fertility: An Experimental Study in Zambia.” American Economic Review 104 (7):
  2210–2237.
Ashraf, Nava, Erica Field, Alessandra Voena, and Roberta Ziparo. 2018. “Maternal
  Mortality Risk and the Gender Gap in Desired Fertility.” Unpublished Manuscript,
  University of Chicago.
Bankole, Akinrinola. 1995. “Desired Fertility and Fertility Behaviour among the Yoruba
   of Nigeria: A Study of Couple Preferences and Subsequent Fertility.” Population
   Studies 49 (2): 317–328.
Bar, Michael, Moshe Hazan, Oksana Leukhina, David Weiss, and Hosny Zoabi. 2018.
   “Why did Rich Families Increase their Fertility? Inequality and the Marketization
   of Child Care.” Forthcoming, Journal of Economic Growth.
Barro, Robert J., and Gary S. Becker. 1989. “Fertility Choice in a Model of Economic
   Growth.” Econometrica 57 (2): 481–501.
Basu, Kaushik. 2006. “Gender and Say: A Model of Household Behavior with Endoge-
   nously Determined Balance of Power.” Economic Journal 116 (511): 558–580.
Baudin, Thomas, David de la Croix, and Paula E. Gobbi. 2015. “Fertility and Childless-
   ness in the United States.” American Economic Review 105 (6): 1852–1882.
Bauernschuster, Stefan, Timo Hener, and Helmut Rainer. 2016. “Children of a (Policy)
   Revolution: The Introduction of Universal Child Care and its Effect on Fertility.”
   Journal of the European Economic Association 14 (4): 975–1005.
Becker, Gary S., and Robert J. Barro. 1988. “A Reformulation of the Economic Theory
   of Fertility.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 103 (1): 1–25.
Beckman, Linda J. 1984. “Husbands’ and Wives’ relative Influence on Fertility Deci-
   sions and Outcomes.” Population and Environment 7 (3): 182–197.
Bick, Alexander. 2016. “The Quantitative Role of Child Care for Female Labor Force
   Participation and Fertility.” Journal of the European Economic Association 14 (3): 639–
   668.
Blundell, Richard, Pierre-André Chiappori, and Costas Meghir. 2005. “Collective Labor
   Supply with Children.” Journal of Political Economy 113 (6): 1277–1306.
Brown, Meta, Christopher J. Flinn, and Joseph Mullins. 2015. “Family Law Effects on
   Divorce, Fertility and Child Investment.” Unpublished Manuscript, NYU.

                                           51
Caucutt, Elizabeth M., Nezih Guner, and John Knowles. 2002. “Why Do Women Wait?
  Matching, Wage Inequality, and the Incentives for Fertility Delay.” Review of Eco-
  nomic Dynamics 5 (4): 815–855.
Cherchye, Laurens, Bram De Rock, and Frederic Vermeulen. 2012. “Married with Chil-
  dren: A Colective Labor Supply Model with Detailed Time Use and Intrahousehold
  Expenditure Information.” American Economic Review 102 (7): 3377–3405.
Cohen, Alma, Rajeev Dehejia, and Dmitri Romanov. 2013. “Financial Incentives and
  Fertility.” Review of Economics and Statistics 95 (1): 1–20.
Coombs, Lolagene C., and Ming-Cheng Chang. 1981. “Do Husbands and Wives Agree?
  Fertility Attitudes and Later Behavior.” Population and Environment 4 (2): 109–127.
Dahl, Gordon B., Katrine V. Loken, Magne Mogstad, and Kari V. Salvanes. 2016. “What
  is the Case for Paid Maternity Leave?” Review of Economics and Statistics 98 (4): 655–
  670.
D’Albis, Hippolyte, Paula E. Gobbi, and Angela Greulich. 2017. “Having a Secon
   Child and Access to Childcare: Evidence from European Countries.” Journal of De-
   mographic Economics 83:177–210.
Da Rocha, José Marı́a, and Luisa Fuster. 2006. “Why are Fertility Rates and Female
   Employment Ratios Positively Correlated Across OECD Countries?” International
   Economic Review 47 (4): 1187–222.
de Laat, Joost, and Almudena Sevilla-Sanz. 2011. “The Fertility and Women’s Labor
   Force Participation Puzzle in OECD Countries: The Role of Men’s Home Produc-
   tion.” Feminist Economics 17 (2): 87–119.
Doepke, Matthias, and Michèle Tertilt. 2016. “Families in Macroeconomics.” Chap-
  ter 23 of Handbook of Macroeconomics, Vol. 2, edited by John Taylor and Harald Uhlig.
  North Holland.
      . 2018. “Women’s Empowerment, the Gender Gap in Desired Fertility, and
   Fertility Outcomes in Developing Countries.” AEA Papers and Proceedings 108:358–
   362.
Eswaran, Mukesh. 2002. “The Empowerment of Women, Fertility, and Child Mortality:
   Towards a Theoretical Analysis.” Journal of Population Economics 15 (2): 433–454.
Fernández, Raquel, and Alessandra Fogli. 2009. “Culture: An Empirical Investigation



                                          52
   of Beliefs, Work, and Fertility.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 1 (1):
   146–177.
Feyrer, James, Bruce Sacerdote, and Ariel Dora Stern. 2008. “Will the Stork Return to
   Europe and Japan? Understanding Fertility within Developed Nations.” The Journal
   of Economic Perspectives 22 (3): 3–22.
Finke, Claudia. 2010. Verdienstunterschiede zwischen Männern und Frauen 2006. Wies-
   baden: Statistisches Bundesamt.
Gallen, Yana. 2018. “Motherhood and the Gender Productivity Gap.” Unpublished
   Manuscript, University of Chicago.
Gipson, Jessica D., and Michelle J. Hindin. 2009. “The Effect of Husbands and Wives
   Fertility Preferences on the Likelihood of a Subsequent Pregnancy, Bangladesh
   1998-2003.” Population Studies 63 (2): 135–146.
Gobbi, Paula E. 2018. “Childcare and Commitment within Households.” Journal of
  Economic Theory 176:503–551.
Goldstein, Joshua R., Christos Koulovatianos, Jian Li, and Carsten Schröder. 2018.
   “Evaluating How Child Allowances and Daycare Subsidies Affect Fertility.” Un-
   published Manuscript, UC Berkeley.
Golosov, Mikhail, Larry E. Jones, and Michèle Tertilt. 2007. “Efficiency with Endoge-
   nous Population Growth.” Econometrica 75 (4): 1039–71.
Greenwood, Jeremy, Nezih Guner, and John Knowles. 2003. “More on Mariage, Fertil-
   ity, and the Distribution of Income.” International Economic Review 44 (3): 827–862.
Guner, Nezih, and John Knowles. 2009. “Why is the Rate of Single-Parenthood Lower
  in Canada than in the U.S.? A Dynamic Equilibrium Analysis of Welfare Policies.”
  Canadian Journal of Economics 42 (1): 56–89.
Hazan, Moshe, and Hosny Zoabi. 2015. “Do Highly Educated Women Choose Smaller
  Families?” The Economic Journal 125 (587): 1191–1226.
Hener, Timo. 2014. “Do Couples Bargain over Fertility?” Annals of Economics and
  Statistics, no. 117–118:211–231.
Iyigun, Murat, and Randall P. Walsh. 2007. “Endogenous Gender Power, Household
    Labor Supply and the Demographic Transition.” Journal of Development Economics
    82 (1): 138–155.



                                         53
Kemnitz, Alexander, and Marcel Thum. 2014. “Gender Power, Fertility, and Family
  Policy.” Scandinavian Journal of Economics 117 (1): 220–247.
Laroque, Guy, and Bernard Salanié. 2014. “Identifying the Response of Fertility to
   Financial Incentives.” Journal of Applied Econometrics 29 (2): 314–332.
Lundberg, Shelly, and Robert A. Pollak. 1993. “Separate Spheres Bargaining and the
  Marriage Market.” Journal of Political Economy 101 (6): 988–1010.
      . 2003. “Efficiency in Marriage.” Review of Economics of the Household 1 (3): 153–
   167.
Lundberg, Shelly J., Robert A. Pollak, and Terence J. Wales. 1997. “Do Husbands and
  Wives Pool Their Resources? Evidence from the United Kingdom Child Benefit.”
  Journal of Human Resources 32 (3): 463–480.
Mazzocco, Maurizio. 2007. “Household Intertemporal Behavior: A Collective Charac-
  terization and a Test of Commitment.” Review of Economic Studies 74 (3): 857–895.
Olivetti, Claudia, and Barbara Petrongolo. 2016. “The Economic Consequences of
   Family Policies: Lessons from a Century of Legislation in High-Income Countries.”
   Journal of Economic Perspectives 31 (1): 205–230.
Rasul, Imran. 2008. “Household Bargaining over Fertility: Theory and Evidence from
   Malaysia.” Journal of Development Economics 86 (2): 215–241.
Raute, Anna. 2018. “Can Financial Incentives Reduce the Baby Gap? Evidence from a
  Reform in Maternity Leave Benefits.” Forthcoming, Journal of Public Economics.
Schoonbroodt, Alice. 2018. “Parental Childcare During and Outside of Typical Work
   Hours.” Review of Economics of the Household 16 (2): 453–476.
Sevilla-Sanz, Almudena. 2010. “Household Division of Labor and Cross-Country Dif-
   ferences in Household Formation Rates.” Journal of Population Economics 23 (1): 225–
   249.
Siegel, Christian. 2017. “Female Relative Wages, Household Specialization and Fertil-
   ity.” Review of Economic Dynamics 24:152–174.
Strauss, Hubert, and Christine de la Maisonneuve. 2009. “The Wage Premium on Ter-
   tiary Education: New Estimates for 21 OECD Countries.” OECD Journal: Economic
   Studies 2009 (1): 1–29.




                                          54
Tan, Poo Chang, and Nai Peng Tey. 1994. “Do Fertility Intentions Predict Subsequent
   Behavior? Evidence from Peninsular Malaysia.” Studies in Family Planning 25 (4):
   222–231.
Testa, Maria Rita, Laura Cavalli, and Alessandro Rosina. 2014. “The Effect of Couple
   Disagreement about Child-Timing Intentions: A Parity-Specific Approach.” Popu-
   lation and Development Review 40 (1): 31–53.
Thomson, Elizabeth. 1997. “Couple Childbearing Desires, Intentions, and Births.”
   Demography 34 (3): 343–354.
Thomson, Elizabeth, and Jan M. Hoem. 1998. “Couple Childbearing Plans and Births
   in Sweden.” Demography 35 (3): 315–322.
Thomson, Elizabeth, Elaine McDonald, and Larry L. Bumpass. 1990. “Fertility Desires
   and Fertility: Hers, His, and Theirs.” Demography 27 (4): 579–588.
Westoff, Charles F. 2010. “Desired Number of Children: 2000-2008.” DHS Comparative
  Reports No. 25.




                                        55
                  Bargaining over Babies: Theory,
                 Evidence, and Policy Implications
                             Appendix for Online Publication


                 Matthias Doepke and Fabian Kindermann



A     Proofs for Propositions in Main Text
Proof of Proposition 1: The bargaining problem can be solved via backward induction, i.e., we
first solve for the ex-post allocation for a given fertility choice, and then consider the optimal
fertility choice in the first stage.

If the couple decides not to have a child (b = 0), then resource allocation is determined by the
maximization problem:

                 max      [cf − wf ]0.5 [cm − wm ]0.5    s.t.    cf + cm = (1 + α) [wf + wm ] .
                 cf ,cm


Here α is an efficiency scale factor that defines the surplus of a joint household. Individual
consumption in this case is given by:

                                     α                                          α
                     cf (0) = wf +     [wf + wm ]       and     cm (0) = wm +     [wf + wm ] ,
                                     2                                          2

and utilities are:

                                     α                                          α
                     uf (0) = wf +     [wf + wm ]       and     um (0) = wm +     [wf + wm ] .
                                     2                                          2

If the partners do decide to have a child (b = 1), the resource allocation solves the maximization
problem:

        max      [cf + vf − wf ]0.5 [cm + vm − wm ]0.5          s.t. cf + cm = (1 + α) [wf + wm − φ]
        cf ,cm


The first-order conditions give:

                                       cf + vf − wf = cm + vm − wm ,



                                                         56
and plugging this into the budget constraint yields:

                                          α                1
                         cf (1) = wf − vf + [wf + wm − φ] + [vm + vf − φ]
                                          2                2
                                           α                1
                        cm (1) = wm − vm + [wf + wm − φ] + [vm + vf − φ] .
                                           2                2

Utilities are then:

                                        α                1
                           uf (1) = wf +  [wf + wm − φ] + [vm + vf − φ] ,
                                        2                2
                                        α                 1
                           um (1) = wm + [wf + wm − φ] + [vm + vf − φ] .
                                        2                 2

Consequently, the partners equally share the monetary surplus from cooperation as well as the
surplus from having children. Given the utilities for a given fertility choice, we can now consider
whether the couple will choose to have a child. The female partner prefers to have a child if:

                                uf (1) ≥ uf (0)     ⇔        vf + vm ≥ φ(1 + α)

The same condition applies to the male partner. Consequently, there is no disagreement, i.e.
either both partners want to have a child, or both prefer to remain childless.                              2

Proof of Proposition 2: We once again characterize the outcome by backward induction. In the
case without children, the resource allocation of the couple solves the maximization problem:

               max       [cf − wf ]0.5 [cm − wm ]0.5    s.t. cf + cm = (1 + α) [wf + wm ] ,
               cf ,cm


which is the same as under the commitment case. Consequently,

                                     α                                        α
                     cf (0) = wf +     [wf + wm ]      and    cm (0) = wm +     [wf + wm ] ,
                                     2                                        2

and utilities are:

                                     α                                        α
                     uf (0) = wf +     [wf + wm ]      and    um (0) = wm +     [wf + wm ] .            (14)
                                     2                                        2

In the case with children, the maximization problem to determine the resource allocation is now
different, because bargaining takes place ex post, with the new outside options given the pres-
ence of a child:

   max      [cf − (wf − χf φ)]0.5 [cm − (wm − χm φ)]0.5          s.t.   cf + cm = (1 + α) [wf + wm − φ] .
   cf ,cm




                                                        57
First-order conditions now give us:

                                 cf − (wf − χf φ) = cm − (wm − χm φ),

and plugging this into the budget constraint yields:

                                          α
                         cf (1) = wf − vf + [wf + wm − φ] + [vf − χf φ] ,                         (15)
                                          2
                                           α
                        cm (1) = wm − vm + [wf + wm − φ] + [vm − χm φ] .                          (16)
                                           2

Utilities then are:

                                      α
                         uf (1) = wf +  [wf + wm − φ] + [vf − χf φ] and                           (17)
                                      2
                                      α
                         um (1) = wm + [wf + wm − φ] + [vm − χm φ] .                              (18)
                                      2

Couples again share the monetary surplus from cooperation, but now the utility surplus from
fertility is purely private. We can now move to the first stage and characterize the fertility pref-
erences of the two partners. The woman wants to have a child if:
                                                                 α
                                uf (1) ≥ uf (0)   ⇔    v f ≥ χf +    φ,
                                                                  2

and the male partner would like to have a child if:
                                                                  α
                               um (1) ≥ um (0)    ⇔    vm   ≥ χm +    φ.
                                                                   2

In these inequalities, the term χg φ represents the direct cost of having the child to partner g. Since
bargaining is ex post, having a child lowers the outside option, so that (unlike in the commitment
solution) the partner bearing the greater child care burden is not compensated. The second term
(α/2)φ represents the loss in marital surplus due to the cost of a child. This part of the cost of
childbearing is shared equally between the partners.

Depending on vf and vm , it is possible that neither, both, or just one of the partners would like to
have a child. Hence, in the case of lack of commitment disagreement between the two partners
about fertility is possible.                                                                         2


B    The Distribution of the Burden of Child Care and the Fertility Rate
In this section, we examine how in an economy with many couples who are heterogeneous in
child preferences the average fertility rate depends on the distribution of the child care burden.

Consider an economy with a continuum of couples. The cost shares χf and χm = 1 − χf are

                                                  58
identical across couples. In contrast, child preferences are heterogeneous in the population, with
a joint cumulative distribution function of F (vf , vm ). For a child to be born, both (7) and (8) have
to be satisfied. For ease of notation, we denote the threshold values for the woman’s and man’s
child preference above which they would like to have a child by ṽf and ṽm :

                               ṽf = (χf + α/2) φ,                                                (19)
                               ṽm = (χm + α/2) φ = (1 − χf + α/2) φ.                             (20)

The expected number of children E(b) (i.e., the fraction of couples who decide to have a child) is
given by:
                          E(b) = 1 − F (ṽf , ∞) − F (∞, ṽm ) + F (ṽf , ṽm ) .                 (21)

That is, the couples who don’t have a child are those where either the woman’s or the man’s
fertility preference is below the threshold; the last term is to prevent double-counting couples
where both partners are opposed to having a child.

We interpret the cost parameters χf and χm as driven partly by government policy, and partly
by social norms. For example, there may be a social norm that women do most of the work in
raising children, especially in the case of non-cooperation between the couples (which is where
the distribution of the burden matters). The extent to which this norm will affect bargaining will
depend also on the availability of public child care. If public child care is available, the man will
be more likely to bear a substantial share of the cost of raising children (i.e., by contributing to
the cost of daycare) compared to the case where the default is that children are cared for at home
by the mother. In Section 4, we explicitly consider the interaction of market-based child care with
the parents’ cost shares in raising children, and consider policies that can shift the cost shares.
Here, we simply take the breakdown of the cost as given, and consider how fertility intentions
and outcomes depend on this breakdown.

To gain intuition for how fertility depends on the distribution of child costs, it is useful to con-
sider the case of independent distributions Ff (vf ) and Fm (vm ) for female and male child prefer-
ences, so that F (vf , vm ) = Ff (vf )Fm (vm ). Expected fertility can then be written as:

                         E(b) = 1 − Ff (ṽf ) − Fm (ṽm ) + Ff (ṽf ) Fm (ṽm ) .                 (22)

Now consider, for a constant total cost of children φ, the effect of a marginal increase in the female
cost share χf and a corresponding decrease in the male share χm = 1 − χf . If the distribution
functions are differentiable at ṽf and ṽm , the marginal impact of a such a shift in the distribution
of the burden of child care is:

                     ∂E(b)     0
                           = φFm (ṽm ) [1 − Ff (ṽf )] − φFf0 (ṽf ) [1 − Fm (ṽm )] .           (23)
                      ∂χf

                                                    59
The first (positive) term represents the increase in the number of men who agree to have a child
if the female cost share χf increases (and hence the male cost share declines), and the second
(negative) term is the decline in agreement on the part of women. The first term has two com-
          0 (ṽ ) is the density of the distribution of male child preferences at the cutoff, which
ponents: Fm    m
tells us how many men switch from disagreeing to agreeing with having a child as χf rises. The
second component 1 − Ff (ṽf ) is the fraction of women who agree to have children. This term
appears because the man switching from disagreeing to agreeing only results in a birth if the
woman also agrees. If most women are opposed to having a child, an increase in male agree-
ment has only a small effect on fertility. In the same way, the negative impact of a decline in
female agreement on fertility, measured by Ff0 (ṽf ), is weighted by the share of men agreeing to
have a child [1 − Fm (ṽm )].

The terms for the existing fractions of women and men agreeing to have a child in (23) introduce
a force that leads to high fertility if agreement on having children is balanced between the gen-
ders. In the extreme, if all women were opposed to having a baby but at least some men wanted
one, the only way to raise fertility would be to lower the female cost share (and vice versa if
all men were opposed). Given that we observe that in low-fertility countries women are more
likely to be opposed to having another child compared to men, this suggests that fertility could
be raised by lowering women’s cost share. However, the overall distribution of child preferences
is also important, because fertility reacts strongly only if many women are close to the threshold
of wanting to have children.

The overall relationships between cost shares, agreement rates, and fertility can be fully charac-
                                                                                  0 (ṽ ) are con-
terized when child preferences are uniform, so that the densities Ff0 (ṽf ) and Fm    m
stant. In particular, if female and male fertility preferences have the same uniform densities
(but potentially different means), fertility is maximized when equal fractions of women and
men agree to having a child. If one gender has more concentrated fertility preferences (higher
density), fertility is maximized at a point where the rate of agreement in this gender is propor-
tionately higher also. To formally establish this result, we first focus on the case of independent
uniform distributions.

Proposition 3 (Effect of Distribution of Child Cost on Fertility Rate). Assume that the female and
male child preferences follow independent uniform distributions with means µg and densities dg for g ∈
{f, m}. Then expected fertility E(b) is a concave function of the female cost share χf , and fertility is
maximized at:                                                  
                                        1  1            1 dm − df
                     χ̂f = min 1, max 0, +    µf − µm +               .                               (24)
                                        2 2φ            2 df dm
Hence, if women and men have the same preferences (µf = µm , df = dm ), fertility is maximized when
the child care burden is shared equally. Moreover, if the distributions of female and male preferences have
the same density (df = dm ), equal shares of men and women agree to having a child at the maximum

                                                    60
fertility rate, even if µf 6= µm (provided that χ̂f is interior). If df 6= dm , at χ̂f more individuals of
the gender with the more concentrated distribution of preferences (higher dg ) agree to having a child than
individuals of the gender with more dispersed preferences. Specifically, fertility is maximized when the
ratio of agreement shares (1 − Ff (ṽf ))/(1 − Fm (ṽm )) is equal to the ratio of densities df /dg .


Proof of Proposition 3: Fertility preferences for gender g ∈ {f, m} have independent uniform
density on µg − (dg )−1 /2, µg + (dg )−1 /2. The distribution function is given by (in the relevant
range):                                                      
                                             1                  1
                   F (vf , vm ) = vf − µf −       df vm − µm −        dm ,
                                            2df                2dm
and the fraction of couples who have a child is given by:
                                              
                         1                        1
  E(b) = 1 − ṽf − µf −        df − ṽm − µm −         dm
                        2df                     2dm
                                                                 
                                                1                   1
                                  + ṽf − µf −       df ṽm − µm −        dm . (25)
                                               2df                 2dm

Given (19) and (20), the average fertility rate is a quadratic and concave function of the female
cost share χf (i.e., the quadratic term has a negative sign). The derivative of average fertility
with respect to χf is:
                                         
  ∂E(b)                                 1
        = φdm 1 − (χf + α/2) φ − µf −        df
   ∂χf                                 2df
                                                                    
                                                                   1
                                − φdf 1 − (1 − χf + α/2) φ − µm −       dm , (26)
                                                                  2dm

which simplifies to:
                                                                         
              ∂E(b)                                                1 1   1
                    = φ(dm − df ) + φdf dm (1 − 2χf )φ + µf − µm +     −      .
               ∂χf                                                 2 dm df

Equating the right-hand side to zero gives the cost share χ̂f at which fertility is maximized (as-
suming that the solution is interior):
                                                                 
                                       1  1             1 dm − df
                                  χ̂f = +     µf − µm +             .                                   (27)
                                       2 2φ             2 df dm

Taking corner solutions into account, the fertility maximizing cost share is given by expression
(24) in the statement of the proposition. Moreover, starting with (26), if there is an interior maxi-




                                                       61
mum we have:
                                       
                                      1
  φdm       1 − (χ̂f + α/2) φ − µf −       df
                                     2df
                                                                                   
                                                                                  1
                                              = φdf 1 − (1 − χ̂f + α/2) φ − µm −       dm ,
                                                                                 2dm

and hence:                                               
                   df        1 − (χ̂f + α/2) φ − µf − 2d1f    df      1 − Ff (ṽf )
                        =                                       =               .
                   dm     1 − (1 − χ̂f + α/2) φ − µm − 2dm 1
                                                                 dm   1 − Fm (ṽm )

Thus, as stated in the last part of the proposition, if the distributions of female and male child
preferences have different densities, fertility is maximized if the ratio of densities is equal to the
fraction of individuals agreeing to have a child for each gender.                                           2

The result suggests that if the distribution of the child care burden is not at the fertility-maximizing
level, the fertility rate could be raised by policies that shift these responsibilities in a particular
direction. Likewise, subsidies for childbearing would be more or less effective depending on
whether they specifically target one of the partners (say, by providing publicly financed alterna-
tives for tasks that previously fell predominantly on one partner). For a concrete policy analysis,
we need to add more structure to the analysis. We do this in Section 4 in a more elaborate quanti-
tative version of our theory. When matched to the GGP data, that model indeed predicts that the
effectiveness of policies designed to promote childbearing crucially depends on how the policies
are targeted.

For non-uniform distributions of child preferences, the same intuitions regarding the effects of
a change in cost shares that arise from Proposition 3 still apply locally. In particular, given (23),
the local effect of a change in cost shares is driven by the density of the child preferences of
each gender and by the existing shares of agreement and disagreement by gender. Global results
can be obtained only by placing at least some restrictions on the overall shape of preferences.44
Empirically, we do not have information on the global shape of child preferences away from
the cutoffs, because we observe only a binary variable on child preferences. We therefore use
uniform distributions in the quantitative implementation of the dynamic model, while noting
that the measured effects should be considered to be locally valid.

In the quantitative model, we also allow for correlation in child preferences within households.
  44
    One can even construct cases (albeit unrealistic ones) where fertility is maximized when one gender
bears the entire child care burden. For example, consider a preference distribution (identical between men
and women) where 50 percent of each gender want to have a child even if they have to bear the entire
child cost, whereas the other 50 percent agree to having a child only if they bear none of the cost. In this
case, 50 percent of couples have a child if one partner bears all the cost, whereas only 25 percent of couples
have a child if both partners make a contribution.


                                                     62
We now show that results similar to those in Proposition 3 (which was established for the case
of independent child preferences) also go through when we allow for correlation in child prefer-
ences between the partners.

Proposition 4 (Effect of Distribution of Child Cost with Correlated Preferences). Assume that
the female and male child preferences follow uniform distributions with means µg and densities dg for
g ∈ {f, m}. With probability η > 0, the draw of a given woman and man are perfectly correlated in the
sense that:
                                               dm
                                        vf =      (vm − µm ) + µf .
                                               df
With probability 1−η, woman and man have independent draws from the their distributions. This implies
that η is the correlation between the woman’s and the man’s child preference. Then expected fertility E(b)
is a concave function of the female cost share χf , and fertility is maximized at:

                                  χ̂f = min {1, χ̂f 1 , max {0, χ̄f , χ̂f 2 }} ,                        (28)

where

                                    dm + α2 (dm − df ) φ + µf df − µm dm
                                                      
                             χ̄f =                                       ,
                                                 φ(df + dm )
                                                             1+η
                                           "                           !#
                                   1   1                1 1−η dm − df
                            χ̂f 1 = +        µf − µm +                     ,
                                   2 2φ                 2       df dm
                                                                   1+η
                                           "                           !#
                                   1   1                1 dm − 1−η df
                            χ̂f 2 = +        µf − µm +                     .
                                   2 2φ                 2       df dm

Hence, if women and men have the same preferences (µf = µm , df = dm ), fertility is maximized when
the child care burden is equally shared, χ̂f = 0.5. Moreover, if the distributions of female and male
preferences have the same density (df = dm ), equal shares of men and women agree to having a child at
the maximum fertility rate, even if µf 6= µm (provided that χ̂f is interior). If df 6= dm and χ̂f 6= χ̄f , at
χ̂f more individuals of the gender with the more concentrated distribution of preferences (higher dg ) agree
to having a child than individuals of the gender with more dispersed preferences.


Proof of Proposition 4: Fertility preferences for gender g ∈ {f, m} have uniform density on
µg − (dg )−1 /2, µg + (dg )−1 /2. With probability η, the draws are perfectly correlated in the sense
that we have:
                                               dm
                                        vf =      (vm − µm ) + µf ,
                                               df
and with probability 1 − η the draws are independent. The distribution function is given by (in




                                                       63
the relevant range):
                                                              
                                           1                     1
  F (vf , vm ) = η min         vf − µ f −        df , vm − µm −       dm
                                          2df                   2dm
                                                                              
                                                             1                   1
                                        + (1 − η) vf − µf −        df vm − µm −        dm .
                                                            2df                 2dm

The fraction of couples who have a child is given by:
                          
                                                           
                                   1                         1
  E(b) = 1 − η max    ṽf − µf −         df , ṽm − µm −           dm
                                  2df                      2dm
                                                                
                                        1                           1
               − (1 − η)   ṽf − µf −          df + ṽm − µm −          dm
                                       2df                        2dm
                                                                           
                                                        1                     1
                                + (1 − η) ṽf − µf −           df ṽm − µm −        dm .
                                                       2df                   2dm

Given (19) and (20), the average fertility rate as a function of the female cost share χf has a kink at
the point where the two elements inside the max operator are equal, and is a quadratic and con-
cave function of χf away from the kink. The kink is at the cost share that equates disagreement
between men and women, given by:

                                       dm + α2 (dm − df ) φ + µf df − µm dm
                                                         
                                 χ̄f =                                      .
                                                   φ(df + dm )

For χf < χ̄f , the derivative of fertility with respect to χf is given by:
                                                                      
   ∂E(b)                                                             1
                      = ηφdm + (1 − η)φdm 1 − (χf + α/2) φ − µf −         df
    ∂χf     χf <χ̄f                                                 2df
                                                                               
                                                                              1
                                  − (1 − η)φdf 1 − (1 − χf + α/2) φ − µm −         dm , (29)
                                                                             2dm

which simplifies to:
                                                                                         
  ∂E(b)                                                                            1 1   1
                      = φ(dm − (1 − η)df ) + (1 − η)φdf dm (1 − 2χf )φ + µf − µm +     −      .
   ∂χf     χf <χ̄f                                                                 2 dm df

Equating the right-hand side to zero gives the cost share χ̂f 1 would be maximized fertility is
maximized if the solution is interior and if we have χ̂f 1 < χ̄f :

                                                              1+η
                                             "                                !#
                                        1  1             1    1−η dm   − df
                               χ̂f 1   = +     µf − µm +                           .
                                        2 2φ             2       df dm




                                                      64
In the alternative case of χf > χ̄f , the derivative of fertility with respect to χf is given by:
                                                                       
   ∂E(b)                                                              1
                      = −ηφdf + (1 − η)φdm 1 − (χf + α/2) φ − µf −         df
    ∂χf     χf >χ̄f                                                  2df
                                                                              
                                                                              1
                                  − (1 − η)φdf 1 − (1 − χf + α/2) φ − µm −        dm , (30)
                                                                            2dm

which simplifies to:
                                                                                         
  ∂E(b)                                                                            1 1   1
                      = φ((1 − η)dm − df ) + (1 − η)φdf dm (1 − 2χf )φ + µf − µm +     −      .
   ∂χf     χf >χ̄f                                                                 2 dm df

Equating the right-hand side to zero gives the cost share χ̂f 2 would be maximized fertility is
maximized if the solution is interior and if we have χ̂f 2 > χ̄f :

                                                                               1+η
                                            "                                           !#
                                       1  1             1              dm −    1−η df
                              χ̂f 2   = +     µf − µm +                                      .
                                       2 2φ             2                  df dm

We have χ̂f 1 > χ̂f 2 . Three cases are possible. If χ̂f 2 ≤ χ̄f ≤ χ̂f 1 , fertility is maximized at the
kink χ̄f , and equal numbers of men and women agree to have a child. If χ̂f 1 < χ̄f , fertility is
maximized at χ̂f 1 , and if χ̂f 2 > χ̄f , fertility is maximized at χ̂f 2 . Taking also the possible corners
at 0 and 1 into account, the fertility maximizing cost share χ̂f can be written as:

                                       χ̂f = min {1, χ̂f 1 , max {0, χ̄f , χ̂f 2 }} ,

as stated in expression (28) in the proposition.

With identical preferences, we have χ̂f 2 < χ̄f = 0.5 < χ̂f 1 , so that χ̂f = 0.5. When df = dm , we
still have χ̂f 2 < χ̄f < χ̂f 1 , so that in an interior solution χ̂f = χ̄f implying (by the construction
of χ̄f ) that equal frictions of men and women agree to have a child. As the final case, consider
the situation when dm > df (the case dm < df is parallel and omitted). We want to show that at
the fertility maximizing cost share χ̂f , at least as many men agree to having a child as women
do. Because equal fractions agree at χf = χ̄f , we need to show that χ̂f ≥ χ̄. To construct a
contradiction argument, assume to the contrary that χ̂f < χ̄. If there is an interior maximum in
this region it is given by χ̂f 1 . The first order condition corresponding to this case gives:

                         (1 − η)φdf [1 − F (ṽm )] = ηφdm + (1 − η)φdm [1 − F (ṽf )] ,

which implies:
                                                      df   1 − F (ṽf )
                                               1>        >              .
                                                      dm   1 − F (ṽm )


                                                             65
Thus, fewer women than men would agree to having a child; however, this is a contradiction
because χ̂f < χ̄ implies that more women than men agree to have a child. Hence, when dm > df
we must have χ̂f ≥ χ̄f , which establishes the last claim in the proposition.                         2


C    The Timing of Births
In this appendix we illustrate the role of the persistence of fertility preferences for determining
the overall fertility rate. A limitation of the static model used in the theoretical part of the paper
is that it does not distinguish between the timing of births and the total number of births. In
a dynamic setting, there is an important distinction between partners’ disagreement about the
total number of children they want to have, and disagreement about when to have them. In
the extreme, one can envision a setting in which all couples agree on how many children they
ultimately want to have, and the only source of conflict is whether to have them early or late. In
this case, an intervention that reshuffles the child care burden between the partners may affect
when people have children, but it would not affect the ultimate outcome in terms of the total
number of children per couple. If the policy aim is to raise fertility rates, understanding whether
policy affects total fertility or only the timing of fertility is clearly important.

We now extend the theoretical analysis to a two-period setting in order to clarify how this is-
sue relates to the persistence of child preferences between periods. In the quantitative model
introduced in Section 4 in the main text, we use repeated observations of the child preferences
of a given couple from multiple waves of the GGP survey to pin down this critical aspect of the
analysis.

In the setting considered here, there is a continuum of couples, and the wages wf and wm , the
child cost φ, and the cost shares χf and χm = 1 − χf are identical across couples and over the
two periods t = 1, 2. The child cost accrues only in the period when a child is born (to be relaxed
in Section 4). Preferences are as in (1), but extending over two periods with discount factor β,
where 0 < β ≤ 1. Child preferences in the second period may depend on the fertility outcome
in the first period. First-period child preferences are denoted as vf,1 , vm,1 , and second-period
preferences are given by vf,2 and vm,2 . Hence, the expected utility function is:

                   E [ug (cg,1 , b1 , cg,2 , b2 )] = cg,1 + b1 vg,1 + βE [cg,2 + b2 vg,2 | b1 ] .   (31)

The expectations operator appears because we allow for the possibility that child preferences
in the second period are realized only after decisions are made in the first period. As before,
we focus on the case of lack of commitment. In each period, the partners bargain ex post over
consumption after the fertility decision has been made; in addition, the partners are unable to
commit to a specific second-period consumption allocation during the first period. There is no


                                                        66
savings technology, so that (in the case of cooperation) the per-period budget constraints are as
in (2) above. In addition, the outside option of non-cooperation affects only a single period. That
is, a non-cooperating couple in the first period returns to cooperation in the second period.

The second period of the two-period model is formally identical to the static model, and Propo-
sitions 2 and 3 apply. For a given couple with a given preference draw, let EVf,2 (0) and EVm,2 (0)
denote equilibrium second-period expected utilities conditional on no child being born in the
first period, and EVf,2 (1) and EVm,2 (1) denote expected utilities if there is a first-period birth.
Here the dependence of second-period utility on first-period fertility is solely due to preferences
in the second period being allowed to depend on the fertility outcome in the first period. We
start by characterizing the conditions for births to take place.

Proposition 5 (Conditions for Child Birth in Two-Period Model). In the second period, a birth takes
place (b2 = 1) if and only if the following conditions are satisfied:
                                                         α
                                              vf,2 ≥ χf +    φ ≡ ṽf,2 ,                                  (32)
                                                          2 
                                                         α
                                             vm,2 ≥ χm +      φ ≡ ṽm,2 .                                 (33)
                                                          2

In the first period, a birth takes place (b1 = 1) if and only if the following conditions are met:
                                       α
                            vf,1 ≥ χf +    φ + β (EVf,2 (0) − EVf,2 (1)) ≡ ṽf,1 ,                        (34)
                                        2 
                                       α
                           vm,1 ≥ χm +      φ + β (EVm,2 (0) − EVm,2 (1)) ≡ ṽm,1 .                       (35)
                                        2

Proof of Proposition 5: The second period of the two-period model is formally identical to the
static model analyzed in Proposition 2, and hence conditions (7) and (8) are applicable, which
gives (32) and (33). The expected utilities in period 2 as a function of first-period utility are then
given by:
               Z      Z    
                                α
  Vg (b1 ) =                wg + (wf + wm )
               vf,2   vm,2      2
                                                                        
                                                                 α 
                   + I(vf,2 ≥ ṽf,2 , vm,2   ≥ ṽm,2 ) vg,2 − χg +   φ f (vf,2 , vm,2 |b1 ) dvf,2 dvm,2 , (36)
                                                                   2

where f (vf,2 , vm,2 |b1 ) is the joint density of fertility preferences in the second period given b1 .
Given these utilities, the terms EVg (1) − EVg (0) then represent the change in second period
expected utility as a function of the initial fertility choice. From the perspective of deciding on
fertility in the first period, these terms act like a constant that adds to (or subtract from) the
benefit of children. Applying Proposition 2, the conditions for having a baby in the first period



                                                          67
are then:

                                                                  α
                                                                  
                              vf,1 + β (EVf (1) − EVf (0)) ≥ χf +    φ,
                                                                  2 
                                                                 α
                             vm,1 + β (EVm (1) − EVm (0)) ≥ χm +      φ,
                                                                  2

which gives (34) and (35).                                                                            2

Hence, the main change compared to the static case is that when deciding on fertility in the first
period, the partners also take into account how having a child affects their utility in the second
period. Depending on how preferences evolve, this effect could go in either direction. If future
preferences are uncertain, there can be an option value of waiting, i.e., a couple may delay having
a child in the hope of a more favorable future preference realization.

We now illustrate how the evolution of child preferences determines whether shifts in the dis-
tribution of the child care burden (say, induced by targeted policies) affect the total number of
children (denoted by n = b1 +b2 ) or just the timing of fertility. We do so by considering two polar
cases. The first one is where first-period fertility does not affect preferences in the second period;
instead, fertility preferences are drawn repeatedly from the same distribution. In this scenario,
shifts in the cost share affect only total fertility, but not the timing of fertility.

Proposition 6 (Level and Timing of Fertility with Independent Draws). Assume that in both peri-
ods, the female and male child preferences follow independent uniform distributions with identical means
µg and densities dg for g ∈ {f, m}. Then expected fertility E(b1 ) and E(b2 ) in the two periods depends
on the female cost share χf as described in Proposition 3. For any χf , we also have E(b1 ) = E(b2 ), so
that total expected lifetime fertility E(n) = E(b1 ) + E(b2 ) satisfies:

                                         E(n) = 2E(b1 ) = 2E(b2 ).

The timing of fertility, as measured by the ratio E(b1 )/E(b2 ), is independent of χf .

Proof of Proposition 6: Given that fertility preferences in the second period do not depend on
the fertility realization in the first period, we have EVf (0) = EVf (1) and EVm (0) = EVm (1).
Hence, given Proposition 5 the conditions for fertility in each period are the same as those for
the single period model characterized in Proposition 2. We therefore obtain the same fertility
rate in both periods, E(b1 ) = E(b2 ), and Proposition 3 applies to each period separately.           2

Next, we consider an opposite polar case where having a child in the first period removes the
desire for additional children.

Proposition 7 (Level and Timing of Fertility with Fixed Desire for Children). Assume that in the
first period, the female and male child preferences follow independent uniform distributions with means

                                                      68
µg and densities dg for g ∈ {f, m}. In the second period, preferences depend on first-period fertility: if
b1 = 1, we have vf,2 = vm,2 = 0, and if b1 = 0, we have vg,2 = (χg + α) φ. Then the total fertility rate
is constant for all χf ∈ [0, 1]:
                                         E(n) = E(b1 ) + E(b2 ) = 1.                                 (37)

Fertility in the first period depends on χf as described in Proposition 3 for the transformed parameter
α̃ = (1 + β)α. Given that E(n) is constant and:

                                             E(b1 )     E(b1 )
                                                    =            ,                                   (38)
                                             E(b2 )   1 − E(b1 )

the cost share χf affects only the timing, but not the level of fertility.


Proof of Proposition 7: We proceed by backward induction. If b1 = 1, we have vf,2 = vm,2 = 0.
Given (32) and (33), this guarantees that no additional child will be born in the second period,
and second-period utilities are (given Nash bargaining):

                                                     α
                                       EVf (1) = wf +  (wf + wm ),
                                                     2
                                                     α
                                       EVm (1) = wm + (wf + wm ).
                                                     2

Conversely, if we have b1 = 0, the preference realizations vg,2 = (χg + α)φ guarantees that the
conditions (32) and (33) are satisfied, so that b2 = 1 for sure. We therefore have b2 = 1 − b1 and,
in expectation:
                                             E(b2 ) = 1 − E(b1 ),

which gives (37) and (38). Continuing, the resulting second-period utilities conditional on b1 = 0
are:

                                             α
                         EVf (0) = wf − χf φ + (wf + wm − φ) + (χf + α) φ,
                                             2
                                              α
                        EVm (0) = wm − χm φ + (wf + wm − φ) + (χm + α) φ,
                                              2

which can be simplified to:

                                                  α
                                     EVf (0) = wf + (wf + wm + φ),
                                                  2
                                                  α
                                    EVm (0) = wm + (wf + wm + φ).
                                                  2




                                                       69
Given these utilities, the impact of having a child in the first period on continuation utility is:

                                                         α
                                       EVf (0) − EVf (1) = φ,
                                                         2
                                                         α
                                      EVm (0) − EVf (1) = φ.
                                                         2

We now move to the fertility decision in the first period. The conditions (34) and (35) are:
                                                α       α
                                     vf,1 ≥ χf +    φ + β φ,
                                                 2        2
                                                   α       α
                                    vm,1 ≥ 1 − χf +     φ + β φ.
                                                    2        2

which can be rewritten as
                                                        α
                                     vf,1 ≥ χf + (1 + β)    φ,
                                                         2
                                                           α
                                    vm,1 ≥ 1 − χf + (1 + β)    φ.
                                                            2

With the change of variables

                                              α̃ = (1 + β)α,

the conditions can be written as:
                                                             
                                                         α̃
                                       vf,1 ≥       χf + φ,
                                                         2
                                                           
                                                         α̃
                                       vm,1   ≥ 1 − χf +      φ.
                                                         2

The conditions therefore are of the form (7) and (8), so that the results in Proposition 3 apply
with the transformed parameter α̃.                                                                    2

The proposition captures an extreme case where all individuals eventually want to end up with
exactly one child, and the only disagreement is over when that child should be born. But the
intuition from this example carries over to the general case where a birth leads to at least some
downward shift in future fertility preferences. This is a plausible scenario, because as long as
the marginal utility derived from children is diminishing, some such downward shift will be
present. If this effect is strong, policies that aim to shift the distribution of the child care burden
may have little impact on the overall fertility rate, even when the data in a given cross section
suggest a lot of disagreement over fertility.

To deal with this issue and to allow for a meaningful policy analysis, we need to capture how
a given couple’s child preferences shift over time, and how this depends on child birth. Doing


                                                     70
this in a quantitatively plausible manner requires a more elaborate model, which we develop in
Section 4 in the main text.


D     Fertility Choice with Partial Commitment
In this appendix, we consider an extension of the basic setup that allows for partial commit-
ment. The partial-commitment setup also forms the basis for the quantitative model developed
in Section 4 in the main text. In this version of the model, the cost shares χf and χm are not
parameters, but choice variables. Before deciding on fertility, but after learning about their child
preferences, the partners can take an action that changes the ex-post distribution of the child
care burden. Formally, the cost share χf is selected from a given feasible interval [χf,min , χf,max ],
with χm = 1 − χf . There is also a default cost share χf,0 ∈ [χf,min , χf,max ]. Intuitively, what
we have in mind is that couples can commit to some long-term decisions that affect the ex-post
child care burden. Examples include a choice of location that affects the availability of child care
(i.e., close to grandparents or a daycare facility), and buying durable goods (such as household
appliances or minivans) that facilitate taking care of children. Such decisions would lower the
expected time cost of having children and turn those into monetary expenses, which implicitly
lowers the child care burden on the partner who ex post will be responsible for the majority of
the time costs of raising children. We show that as long as the ex-post cost shares can be moved
only within a limited range, the partial commitment model has the same qualitative implications
as the setup with fixed cost shares considered above.

The time line of events and decisions is as follows.

    1. The potential utilities from having a child vf and vm are realized.

    2. The woman can offer to increase her child care burden χf above the default within the
       feasible range, χf,0 < χf ≤ χf,max .

    3. The man can offer to increase his child care burden 1 − χf above the default within the
       feasible range, χf,min ≤ χf < χf,0 .

    4. Given the final χf arising from the previous stage, the couple decides on whether to have
       a child as before.

    5. Given the decisions in the previous rounds, the couple decides on the consumption allo-
       cation as before.

Consistent with our treatment of fertility choice, we assume that agreement is necessary to move
cost shares; the partners can make voluntary offers to do more work, but they cannot unilater-
ally force the other partner to do more. We can solve for the equilibrium by backward induc-
tion. Stages 4 and 5 are identical to the existing model; hence, we only need to characterize the

                                                  71
decisions in Stages 2 and 3 of potentially altering ex-post child care arrangements, and hence
bargaining power.

Proposition 8 (Fertility Choice under Partial Commitment). Under partial of commitment, a birth
takes place if and only if the conditions:

                                      vf + vm ≥ (1 + α)φ,                                                   (39)
                                                         α
                                           vf ≥ χf,min +     φ,                                             (40)
                                                          2
                                                             α
                                           vm ≥ 1 − χf,max +     φ.                                         (41)
                                                              2

are all satisfied. The first condition states that having a baby extends the utility possibility frontier for the
couple, and the remaining conditions state that there is a χf in the feasible range such that both partners
benefit from having the baby. In terms of predictions for fertility, partial commitment nests the cases of
lack of commitment when χf,min = χf,max , and full commitment when the conditions:

                                                  min(vf ) α
                                         χf,min ≤          − ,                                              (42)
                                                     φ      2
                                                      min(vm ) α
                                        χf,max   ≥1−          +                                             (43)
                                                          φ     2

are satisfied.

Proof of Proposition 8: For a given χf ∈ [χf,min , χf,max ] that is negotiated in Stages 1–3, the
outcome of the last two stages is as in the lack of commitment model analyzed in Proposition 2.
Hence, the utilities ug (b, χf ) that each partner attains are given by (14), (17), and (18):

                                          α
                         uf (0, χf ) = wf +  [wf + wm ] ,                                                   (44)
                                          2
                                          α
                        um (0, χf ) = wm + [wf + wm ] ,                                                     (45)
                                           2
                                          α
                        uf (1, χf ) = wf + [wf + wm − φ] + [vf − χf φ] and                                  (46)
                                          2
                                          α
                        um (1, χf ) = wm + [wf + wm − φ] + [vm − χm φ] .                                    (47)
                                           2

A child is born whenever both partners agree, i.e. as soon as
                                     α                                  α
                            vf ≥ χf +    φ          and     v m ≥ 1 − χf +    φ.                            (48)
                                      2                                    2

We first show that (39) to (41) are necessary for a birth to take place. Summing the two inequali-
ties in (48) yields (39); hence, (39) is necessary for a child to be born. Intuitively, (39) states that a
baby can be born only if having a baby expands the couple’s utility possibility frontier. Next, if
(40) is violated, we have uf (1, χf,min ) < uf (0, χf,min ). Hence, the woman will be opposed to hav-

                                                       72
ing a child even at her lowest possible cost share, and a fortiori for all other feasible cost shares
as well. Hence, (40) is necessary for the woman to agree to having a child. The same argument
implies that (41) is necessary for the man to agree to having a child.

Next, we want to show that (39) to (41) are sufficient for a birth to take place. Consider first the
case where (39) is satisfied and we also have:
                                                  α
                                       vf ≥ χf,0 +     φ                                           (49)
                                                   2
                                                      α
                                       vm ≥ 1 − χf,0 +    φ,                                       (50)
                                                       2

i.e., (7) and (8) are satisfied at the default cost share χf,0 (this implies that (40) and (41) are also
satisfied). Then, given Proposition 2, if neither partner offers to bear higher cost, the couple will
have the child, and both partners will be better off compared to not having a child. Moreover,
given (46) and (47), a partner offering to bear higher cost could only lower her or his utility. Thus,
the equilibrium outcome is that neither partner offers to bear higher cost, and a birth takes place.

Now consider the case where (39) to (41) are satisfied, but we have:
                                                    α
                                         vf < χf,0 +    φ.                                         (51)
                                                     2

Subtracting both sides of this equation from (39) gives:
                                                      α
                                       vm > 1 − χf,0 +    φ,
                                                       2

that is, (39) and (51) imply that (50) holds with strict inequality. If neither partner offers to bear
a higher than the default cost share, the couple will not have a baby because of (51) (i.e., the
woman will not agree). Also, the woman has no incentive to offer to bear higher cost share,
because then she would want a baby even less, hence the outcome would be unchanged. Hence,
to prove that in this situation a baby will be born as claimed in the proposition, we have to show
that the man will offer to bear a sufficiently high cost for the woman to agree to having the baby.
Hence, consider the decision of the man to bear a higher than the default cost share. Conditional
on having the child, given (47) the man’s utility is strictly decreasing in his cost share. Hence,
the only possibilities are that the man does not make an offer, in which case no birth takes place
and the man gets utility (45), or the man offers to bear just enough cost to make the woman
indifferent between having the baby and not having the baby. The required cost share satisfies
                                                   α
                                          vf = χf +    φ
                                                    2




                                                  73
and is therefore given by:
                                                   vf  α
                                            χf =      − .
                                                   φ   2
Given that (40) holds, this is a feasible offer, i.e., χf ≥ χf,min . We still need to show that offering
this cost share and having the baby makes the man weakly better off compared to not making
an offer. The man’s utility with cost share χf and a baby being born is:

                                                   α
                   um (1, χf ) = wm − (1 − χf )φ + [wf + wm − φ] + vm
                                                   2
                                            vf    α       α
                               = wm − 1 −      +       φ + [wf + wm − φ] + vm
                                            φ     2       2
                                                  α
                               = wm − (1 + α)φ + [wf + wm ] + vf + vm .
                                                  2

We therefore have um (1, χf ) ≥ um (0, χf ) if the following condition is met:

                                     α                            α
                  wm − (1 + α)φ +      [wf + wm ] + vf + vm ≥ wm + [wf + wm ]
                                     2                            2

or:
                                         vf + vm ≥ (1 + α)φ,

which is (39) and therefore satisfied. Hence, it is in the interest of the man to make the offer, and
a birth will take place. The outcome for the remaining case where (39) to (41) are satisfied, but
we have:                                              α
                                       vm < 1 − χf,0 +    φ
                                                       2
(the man does not want the child given the default cost share) is parallel: the woman will offer to
bear just enough cost for the birth to take place. Hence, (39) to (41) are also sufficient for a birth
to take place, which completes the proof.

Regarding the last part of the proposition, if (42) and (43) are satisfied, (40) and (41) are never
binding. Hence, (39) is the only condition for a birth to take place, which is also the condition
that characterizes fertility under commitment in Proposition 1.                                       2

Let us now consider, parallel to the analysis in Section B, how the distribution of the child care
burden affects fertility under partial commitment. We consider an economy with a continuum
of couples, with wages and cost shares identical across couples. Child preferences are heteroge-
neous in the population. We focus on the case of independent distributions Ff (vf ) and Fm (vm )
for female and male child preferences. Define ṽf and ṽm in the partial commitment case as:
                                                     α
                                       ṽf = χf,min +    φ,
                                                      2
                                                         α
                                      ṽm = 1 − χf,max +     φ.
                                                          2

                                                   74
Given Proposition 8, the fertility rate for the economy will be given by:

      E(b) = Prob (vf ≥ ṽf ∧ vm ≥ ṽm ∧ vf + vm ≥ (1 + α)φ)
          = Prob (vf ≥ ṽf ∧ vm ≥ ṽm ) − Prob (vf ≥ ṽf ∧ vm ≥ ṽm ∧ vf + vm < (1 + α)φ) .

Writing this out in terms of the distribution functions gives:


  E(b) = 1 − Ff (ṽf ) − Fm (ṽm ) + Ff (ṽf ) Fm (ṽm )
                                          Z ∞
                                       −            max {Ff ((1 + α)φ − vm ) − Ff (ṽf ), 0} dFm (vm ).
                                             vm =ṽm

Here the first line is analogous to (22) in the case without commitment, and the second line
subtracts the probability that having a baby lowers the utility possibility frontier, i.e., (39) is
violated, even though both individual conditions (40) and (41) are satisfied.

We now would like to assess how a change in the distribution of the child care burden affects
fertility under partial commitment. Consider the case where parents are able to move away
from the default cost share χf,0 up to a maximum change of ξ > 0, so that χf,min = χf,0 − ξ,
χf,min = χf,0 + ξ. If the distribution functions are differentiable at ṽf and ṽm , the marginal effect
of a change in the default female cost share χf,0 on fertility in the case of partial commitment is:

  ∂E(b)     0
        = φFm (ṽm ) [1 − Ff (ṽf )] − φFf0 (ṽf ) [1 − Fm (ṽm )]
   ∂χf
             0
         − φFm (ṽm ) (Ff ((1 + α)φ − ṽm ) − Ff (ṽf )) + φFf0 (ṽf ) (Fm ((1 + α)φ − ṽf ) − Fm (ṽm )) .

or:
          ∂E(b)     0
                = φFm (ṽm ) [1 − Ff ((1 + α)φ − ṽm )] − φFf0 (ṽf ) [1 − Fm ((1 + α)φ − ṽf )] .       (52)
           ∂χf
The first (positive) term represents the increase in the number of men who agree to have a child
if the default female cost share χf increases (and hence the male cost share declines), and the
second (negative) term is the decline in agreement on the part of women. The first term has two
             0 (ṽ ) is the density of the distribution of male child preferences at the cutoff,
components: Fm    m
which tells us how many men switch from disagreeing to agreeing with having a child as χf
rises. The second component 1 − Ff ((1 + α)φ − ṽm ) is the probability that the woman will also
agree, conditional on the man being just at the cutoff. In the same way, the negative impact of
a decline in female agreement on fertility, measured by Ff0 (ṽf ), is weighted by the share of men
agreeing to have a child conditional on the woman being at the cutoff, 1 − Fm ((1 + α)φ − ṽf ).

Comparing the expression under partial commitment (52) with the corresponding condition un-
der no commitment (23), we see that the impact of shifts in the burden of child care on fertility


                                                       75
has the same form, except that under partial commitment the relevant agreement shares are con-
ditional on the other partner being just at the indifference threshold. As long the gender that is
more likely to be opposed to having a baby in general is also more likely to be opposed on the
margin (which is not guaranteed for arbitrary distributions of child preferences, but is true un-
der intuitive regularity conditions), the general intuition from the no commitment case (namely,
that fertility can be raised by favoring the gender more likely to be opposed to a baby and with
a more dense distribution of fertility preferences) carries over to the partial commitment case.


E         Data Description and Further Analysis
The “Generations and Gender Programme” is a panel survey conducted in 19 countries (Wave
1), namely Australia, Austria, Belarus, Belgium, Bulgaria, Czech Republic, Estonia, France, Geor-
gia, Germany, Hungary, Italy, Lithuania, Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Romania, Russian Fed-
eration, and Sweden. The survey can be connected to an associated survey conducted in Japan.
As already mentioned above, we are interested in the answers to question a611 that asks


           “Do you yourself want to have a/another baby now?”


and question a615 that asks


           “Couples do not always have the same feelings about the number or timing of chil-
           dren. Does your partner/spouse want to have a/another baby now?”


For those respondents who didn’t give an answer to question a611, we recover their intention
towards having a baby from question a622, which asks the respondents about their plans to
have a child within the next three years.45 We only use the answer to this question if the female
household member is not currently pregnant.

E.1       Sample Selection for Intention Data

We select Wave 1 of our sample as follows. We use only those respondents who gave a clear
answer to both questions a61146 and a615, meaning that they responded either yes or no, and
we also exclude couples who report that it is physically impossible for them to have a baby.
In addition, we select couples in which the female partner is between the ages of 20 and 45
and the male partner between the ages of 20 and 55. These selection criteria naturally rule out
single households. However, we do not restrict the sample to married couples, i.e. we include
    45
         This time span corresponds to the interval between two waves of the survey.
    46
         Including those with recovered answers.


                                                      76
couples that are in any form of relationship.47 We also do not require partners to live in the same
household. As we will see below, being married and living in the same household can impact
our variables of interest. These selection criteria give us the sample sizes reported in Table 9.

                  Table 9: Wave 1 sample with questions about fertility preferences

                             Country                  No. of Respondents
                                                 female     male      Total

                             Austria              1,930      1,170    3,100
                             Belgium              1,060       956     2,016
                             Bulgaria             2,575      1,676    4,251
                             Czech Republic       1,163      1,086    2,249
                             France               1,505      1,185    2,690
                             Germany              1,445      1,151    2,596
                             Lithuania                990    1,143    2,133
                             Norway               2,231      2,175    4,406
                             Poland               2,212      1,654    3,866
                             Romania              1,474      1,791    3,265
                             Russia               1,530      1,378    2,908

                             Total               18,115     15,364   33,479



Table 10 reports additional descriptive statistics for the Wave 1 sample (see also Table 1). We
define individual skill levels using the ISCED classification standard and assume that a person
is high-skilled if her highest education level is of type 5 or 6, meaning that she has completed
some tertiary education. According to this definition, almost 30 percent of the female partners in
the sample are high skilled, whereas for men it is only 26 percent. 67 percent of the female part-
ners are working, where working is defined as either being officially employed, self-employed,
or helping a family member in a family business or a farm. On the other hand, 87 percent of
the male partners are working. 37 percent of couples in which the respondent has at least one
biological child report to regularly use some institutional or paid child care arrangement. 42
percent regularly get help with child care from someone for whom caring for children is not a
job. We interpret this as family based child care arrangements.
  47
       There are no same sex couples in our sample.




                                                      77
                 Table 10: Additional descriptive statistics of the sample (Wave 1)

                                                                   Mean

                          Female partner high skilled (in %)        29.87
                          Male partner high skilled (in %)          26.14
                          Female partner working (in %)             67.01
                          Male partner working (in %)               87.13
                          Use institutional child care (in %)       37.23
                          Use family child care (in %)              42.06
                          Notes: 34,479 observations. Included countries are
                          Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Czech Republic, France,
                          Germany, Lithuania, Norway, Poland, Romania, and
                          Russia. Child care questions only asked of couples
                          with at least one child.




E.2     Sample Selection for Birth Data

When combining the first wave with data from Wave 2, we apply one additional selection cri-
terion, namely that respondents are present in both waves. This selection gives us the sample
size reported in Table 11. Note that the second wave is only available for a smaller number of
countries. However, we find that the composition of the sample with respect to the variables
reported in Table 10 is remarkably similar.

      Table 11: Wave 2 sample with questions about fertility preferences and observed fertility

                             Country              No. of Respondents
                                               female     male      Total

                             Austria            1,509        954    2,463
                             Bulgaria           1,821     1,163     2,984
                             Czech Republic       358        250     608
                             France             1,003        757    1,760
                             Germany              511        313     824
                             Lithuania            258        257     515
                             Russia             1,005        815    1,820

                             Total              6,465     4,509    10,974




                                                  78
When a respondent is present in both waves, we can compute whether they had (at least one)
child in the time span between Waves 1 and 2.48 We do this using the difference in the number
of biological children of the respondent, where biological children can be either with the current
or a former partner. We therefore abstract from both adoption and fostering. We find that in
roughly 15 percent of couples in our sample at least one child is born between Waves 1 and
2. We can also check how stable partnerships are in our sample. In fact, 89 percent of couples
are still in a relationship with the same partner in Wave 2. Only 4 percent of respondents have
changed the partner and about 7 percent have split up and live on their own.

To check how important child birth to single women is in the data, we construct a comparison
group of female respondents who in Wave 1 report not to have a partner. For this group, we find
that around 8 percent of respondents are having a child in between the two waves. This number
may suggest that being in a partnership is not a prerequisite for having a baby. However, a
further investigation of the partnership status of the respondents in Wave 2 reveals that the vast
majority of children in this sample is born to women who have found a partner in the three years
between the two waves. The number of children born to women who are single in both waves is
very small.

E.3    Determinants of Fertility Intentions

Next, we provide some further investigation of the variables we are using to pin down param-
eters of our quantitative model. Specifically, we want to study what are covariates of fertility
intentions, the degree of agreement, as well as the male share in child care activities in the sam-
ple. We therefore use our fertility intention data from Wave 1 and run a OLS regressions of
intentions on regressors that may be related to our variables of interest. For all the regressions
we use country fixed effects to account for different social and institutional environments. In
Tables 12 and 13, we regress the female and the male fertility intention on all the variables re-
ported in the descriptive statistics Tables 1 and 10, including a squared term for the age of the
female partner and a variable for the age difference between the man and the woman. We use
dummy variables for marriage, cohabitation, high skills (education), and so on. We run these
regressions separately for couples with no children, one child, and two or more children. Note
that we can only include dummies for the use of child care for couples that already have at least
one child. In addition, we include a dummy variable for the gender of the first child. We also
run two separate regressions with either marriage or cohabitation as a regressor, since the two
tend to be highly collinear.

We find that the coefficients for both female and male fertility intentions are very similar in terms
  48
    For 74.40 percent of our sample the time span was at most 40 months, and for 97.94 the time span was
at most 50 months.


                                                  79
           Table 12: What covaries with women’s intention to have a baby?

                         without children                with 1 child           with 2+ children

                          (1)         (2)               (1)         (2)           (1)         (2)

Age woman               0.1528∗∗∗    0.1490∗∗∗        0.0744∗∗∗    0.0768∗∗∗   −0.0224∗∗∗ −0.0247∗∗∗
                       (0.0091)     (0.0091)          (0.0102)    (0.0102)     (0.0070)     (0.0070)
Age squared/100       −0.2508∗∗∗ −0.2405∗∗∗       −0.1476∗∗∗ −0.1506∗∗∗         0.0178∗      0.0206∗∗
                       (0.0143)     (0.0143)          (0.0154)    (0.0154)     (0.0096)     (0.0096)
Age difference          0.0017       0.0027∗      −0.0060∗∗∗ −0.0058∗∗∗        −0.0002      −0.0005
                       (0.0016)     (0.0016)          (0.0015)    (0.0015)     (0.0008)     (0.0008)
Married                 0.2215∗∗∗                     0.0709∗∗∗                −0.0377∗∗∗
                       (0.0157)                       (0.0160)                 (0.0099)
Cohabiting                           0.1483∗∗∗                     0.0880∗∗                 −0.0618∗
                                    (0.0150)                      (0.0446)                  (0.0319)
Educ. woman           −0.0191       −0.0176           0.0500∗∗∗    0.0531∗∗∗    0.0156∗∗     0.0146∗
                       (0.0158)     (0.0160)          (0.0155)    (0.0154)     (0.0076)     (0.0076)
Educ. man             −0.0512∗∗∗ −0.0499∗∗∗           0.0637∗∗∗    0.0677∗∗∗    0.0241∗∗∗    0.0229∗∗∗
                       (0.0149)     (0.0152)          (0.0159)    (0.0158)     (0.0079)     (0.0079)
Working woman           0.0545∗∗∗    0.0488∗∗∗        0.0113       0.0130       0.0043       0.0034
                       (0.0147)     (0.0149)          (0.0145)    (0.0146)     (0.0062)     (0.0062)
Working man             0.0414∗∗     0.0391∗∗     −0.0002          0.0020      −0.0108      −0.0143
                       (0.0172)     (0.0175)          (0.0222)    (0.0224)     (0.0092)     (0.0093)
Inst. child care                                      0.0540∗∗∗    0.0534∗∗∗    0.0147∗∗     0.0148∗∗
                                                      (0.0146)    (0.0146)     (0.0065)     (0.0065)
Family child care                                 −0.0020         −0.0034      −0.0077      −0.0069
                                                      (0.0133)    (0.0133)     (0.0064)     (0.0064)
First kid male                                        0.0156       0.0157       0.0052       0.0054
                                                      (0.0123)    (0.0124)     (0.0054)     (0.0054)
Respondent female     −0.0126       −0.0172           0.0204       0.0198      −0.0323∗∗∗ −0.0326∗∗∗
                       (0.0128)     (0.0129)          (0.0126)    (0.0127)     (0.0056)     (0.0056)

Number of Cases          5744         5760             6239         6245        12358        12378
R-Square                0.557        0.548             0.461       0.461        0.140        0.138
Robust standard errors in parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




                                                 80
             Table 13: What covaries with men’s intention to have a baby?

                         without children                with 1 child          with 2+ children

                          (1)         (2)               (1)         (2)          (1)          (2)

Age woman               0.1355∗∗∗    0.1320∗∗∗        0.0472∗∗∗   0.0502∗∗∗   −0.0169∗∗ −0.0192∗∗∗
                       (0.0093)     (0.0094)          (0.0107)    (0.0106)    (0.0073)     (0.0073)
Age squared/100       −0.2270∗∗∗ −0.2171∗∗∗       −0.1067∗∗∗ −0.1104∗∗∗        0.0086       0.0115
                       (0.0146)     (0.0147)          (0.0161)    (0.0161)    (0.0101)     (0.0101)
Age difference          0.0004       0.0013       −0.0061∗∗∗ −0.0059∗∗∗       −0.0025∗∗∗ −0.0028∗∗∗
                       (0.0016)     (0.0017)          (0.0016)    (0.0016)    (0.0008)     (0.0008)
Married                 0.2250∗∗∗                     0.0846∗∗∗               −0.0367∗∗∗
                       (0.0157)                       (0.0162)                (0.0105)
Cohabiting                           0.1494∗∗∗                    0.1025∗∗                 −0.0937∗∗
                                    (0.0155)                      (0.0420)                 (0.0393)
Educ. woman           −0.0199       −0.0178           0.0414∗∗∗   0.0448∗∗∗    0.0060       0.0046
                       (0.0161)     (0.0163)          (0.0161)    (0.0161)    (0.0080)     (0.0080)
Educ. man             −0.0306∗∗ −0.0287∗              0.0731∗∗∗   0.0774∗∗∗    0.0324∗∗∗    0.0313∗∗∗
                       (0.0152)     (0.0154)          (0.0162)    (0.0162)    (0.0083)     (0.0083)
Working woman           0.0495∗∗∗    0.0444∗∗∗        0.0223      0.0244∗      0.0015       0.0006
                       (0.0151)     (0.0153)          (0.0147)    (0.0147)    (0.0067)     (0.0067)
Working man             0.0779∗∗∗    0.0759∗∗∗        0.0107      0.0135      −0.0241∗∗ −0.0274∗∗∗
                       (0.0173)     (0.0175)          (0.0227)    (0.0228)    (0.0106)     (0.0106)
Inst. child care                                      0.0668∗∗∗   0.0656∗∗∗   −0.0051      −0.0047
                                                      (0.0148)    (0.0148)    (0.0068)     (0.0068)
Family child care                                     0.0092      0.0069      −0.0018      −0.0015
                                                      (0.0135)    (0.0136)    (0.0068)     (0.0068)
First kid male                                        0.0068      0.0066      −0.0124∗∗ −0.0121∗∗
                                                      (0.0126)    (0.0126)    (0.0058)     (0.0058)
Respondent female       0.0644∗∗∗    0.0604∗∗∗        0.0383∗∗∗   0.0373∗∗∗    0.0249∗∗∗    0.0245∗∗∗
                       (0.0131)     (0.0132)          (0.0130)    (0.0130)    (0.0059)     (0.0059)

Number of Cases          5744         5760             6239        6245        12358        12378
R-Square                0.555        0.547             0.483       0.481       0.152        0.151
Robust standard errors in parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




                                                 81
  of signs, magnitude, and significance. The results show a clear hump-shaped pattern of fertility
  intentions by age for both men and women. Figure 8 visualizes this pattern for couples without
  children and those with one child, where we evaluate all other variables at their sample means.
  We find that men would agree on having a child a little earlier than women. The age difference
  between partners, although statistically significant, plays a quantitatively small role.

                             Figure 8: Life cycle profiles of fertility intentions and agreement


                        Age profiles without children                                          Age profiles one child
             100                                                               100
                    Intention woman                                                   Intention woman
                    Intention man                                                     Intention man
             80                                                                80
Precentage




                                                                  Precentage
             60                                                                60


             40                                                                40


             20                                                                20


              0                                                                 0
               20      25         30        35          40   45                  20      25         30        35          40   45
                            Age of the female partner                                         Age of the female partner



  The security of living in a marriage or cohabitation with a partner are major determinants for
  wanting children at all. For couples without children, the coefficients of the respective dummies
  are positive, large, and highly significant. For second or higher-order children the effects are
  much less pronounced, and even turn negative for couples with two or more children. Tertiary
  education (especially that of men) seems to have adverse effects fertility intentions. This suggests
  that there is a lot of dispersion in the desire for children of the highly educated workforce. While
  there are more couples with high skills who want no children at all, those who do get children
  want more of them than their less educated counterparts. Finally, having a job and therefore a
  secure source of income is an important covariate for the decision whether to have children at
  all. The coefficients are positive and significant for employment of both partners on fertility in-
  tentions of both men and women. For couples that already have one child, the use (and therefore
  the availability) of institutional or paid child care comes with a larger intention to have another
  child. The use of family child care arrangements, on the other hand, hardly covaries with fertility
  intentions. A reason for this may be that institutional child care usually takes care of children
  throughout the day so that parents can go to work. Help with child care from the family can also
  include bringing the children to the grandparents one day on the weekend. The gender of the
  first child has hardly any impact on fertility intentions. If anything, women’s intention to have a

                                                                  82
second child are slightly larger when the first child is a boy. Finally, the gender of the respondent
plays almost no role in the reported fertility intention of women. In contrast, women tend to
slightly overestimate the desire for fertility of their male partners.

E.4   Determinants of Agreement

In Table 14 we regress our dummy for agreement of the partners (AGREE) on the same covari-
ates as in the previous tables. We find a hump shaped pattern of agreement with regards to the
age of the woman. This suggests that at least part of the conflict between men and women on
whether to have a baby is due to differences in desired timing. Marriage and cohabitation come
along with a significantly higher level of agreement, where cohabitation tends to play a larger
role at least for the second child. This observation suggests, as emphasized by our theoretical
analysis, that the ability to commit is a major determinant of agreement and disagreement. With
respect to education and having a job, we find similar patterns as in the previous two regres-
sions. Again, for both men and women having a job comes along with a significantly higher
degree of agreement on having children at all. Interestingly, the use or availability of institu-
tional child care doesn’t impact agreement much, while the use of family child care comes along
with a significantly lower level of agreement. Finally, there is a discrepancy between reported
agreement between men and women who already have two or more children.

E.5   Determinants of Men’s Participation in Child Care

In Table 15 we study covariates of the man’s share in caring for the child/children. We exclude
age variables from this table, as none of our age covariates turned out significant. Being married
is not a strong predictor of men’s share in child care, but cohabitation is. When partners have
a child and live in one household, not surprisingly, the male partner will take a larger share in
child rearing. Men who are educated or whose partners are educated tend to spend more time
with the children. Regarding employment, we find that when the mother works, the father has
to take a larger share in caring for the children, and vice versa. The use of institutional child care
also leads the father to look after the children more. This is consistent with the interpretation
underlying our policy analysis, namely that institutional child care tends to substitute child care
that is (usually) provided by the mother. Last but not least, men tend to overestimate (or women
underestimate) how much time they spend on child rearing.

E.6   Computing Men’s Share in Caring for Children with Time Use Data

In our analysis, we measure the distribution of the burden of child care within the household
using a number of questions in the GGP data set on which parent usually performs a number of
specific child care activities. A limitation of this data is that it is qualitative and does not allow

                                                 83
             Table 14: What covaries with agreement on wanting a baby?

                         without children                with 1 child           with 2+ children

                          (1)         (2)               (1)         (2)           (1)        (2)

Age woman               0.0976∗∗∗    0.0880∗∗∗        0.0719∗∗∗    0.0777∗∗∗    0.0184      0.0184
                       (0.0160)     (0.0162)          (0.0197)    (0.0194)     (0.0266)    (0.0265)
Age squared/100       −0.1496∗∗∗ −0.1321∗∗∗       −0.1401∗∗∗ −0.1484∗∗∗        −0.0572     −0.0573
                       (0.0260)     (0.0263)          (0.0316)    (0.0312)     (0.0392)    (0.0391)
Age difference        −0.0001        0.0006       −0.0049∗∗ −0.0047∗            0.0029      0.0027
                       (0.0022)     (0.0023)          (0.0025)    (0.0025)     (0.0031)    (0.0031)
Married                 0.1993∗∗∗                     0.1242∗∗∗                −0.0182
                       (0.0192)                       (0.0238)                 (0.0341)
Cohabiting                           0.2191∗∗∗                     0.3551∗∗∗               −0.1232
                                    (0.0249)                      (0.0620)                 (0.0855)
Educ. woman           −0.0370∗      −0.0300           0.0282       0.0293       0.0265      0.0236
                       (0.0218)     (0.0217)          (0.0225)    (0.0224)     (0.0321)    (0.0319)
Educ. man             −0.0287       −0.0219           0.0480∗∗     0.0531∗∗     0.0722∗∗    0.0721∗∗
                       (0.0214)     (0.0214)          (0.0221)    (0.0218)     (0.0315)    (0.0314)
Working woman           0.0825∗∗∗    0.0690∗∗∗        0.0197       0.0233       0.0090      0.0060
                       (0.0226)     (0.0228)          (0.0215)    (0.0214)     (0.0282)    (0.0282)
Working man             0.0895∗∗∗    0.0740∗∗     −0.0078         −0.0057       0.0220      0.0179
                       (0.0291)     (0.0292)          (0.0314)    (0.0317)     (0.0418)    (0.0416)
Inst. child care                                      0.0046       0.0087      −0.0099     −0.0095
                                                      (0.0202)    (0.0201)     (0.0279)    (0.0278)
Family child care                                 −0.0469∗∗ −0.0525∗∗∗         −0.0770∗∗∗ −0.0766∗∗∗
                                                      (0.0188)    (0.0188)     (0.0278)    (0.0277)
First kid male                                    −0.0099         −0.0107      −0.0272     −0.0250
                                                      (0.0178)    (0.0178)     (0.0255)    (0.0255)
Respondent female       0.0238       0.0179           0.0137       0.0160      −0.0596∗∗ −0.0636∗∗
                       (0.0185)     (0.0184)          (0.0186)    (0.0185)     (0.0257)    (0.0258)

Number of Cases          2948         2963             2887         2892         1575        1579
R-Square                0.742        0.742             0.721       0.721        0.408       0.409
Robust standard errors in parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




                                                 84
Table 15: What covaries with male participation in child care?

                             with 1 child            with 2+ children

                           (1)            (2)          (1)         (2)

Married                  0.0113∗                     0.0067
                        (0.0058)                    (0.0046)
Cohabiting                              0.1506∗∗∗                 0.1618∗∗∗
                                        (0.0202)                 (0.0207)
Educ. woman              0.0172∗∗∗      0.0165∗∗∗    0.0178∗∗∗    0.0177∗∗∗
                        (0.0055)        (0.0054)    (0.0040)     (0.0040)
Educ. man                0.0180∗∗∗      0.0191∗∗∗    0.0197∗∗∗    0.0198∗∗∗
                        (0.0054)        (0.0053)    (0.0039)     (0.0039)
Working woman            0.0833∗∗∗      0.0850∗∗∗    0.0786∗∗∗    0.0794∗∗∗
                        (0.0051)        (0.0051)    (0.0034)     (0.0034)
Working man            −0.0714∗∗∗ −0.0722∗∗∗        −0.0669∗∗∗ −0.0667∗∗∗
                        (0.0091)        (0.0091)    (0.0062)     (0.0062)
Inst. child care         0.0204∗∗∗      0.0209∗∗∗    0.0127∗∗∗    0.0125∗∗∗
                        (0.0050)        (0.0049)    (0.0033)     (0.0033)
Family child care        0.0079∗        0.0081∗      0.0021       0.0027
                        (0.0046)        (0.0045)    (0.0033)     (0.0033)
First kid male           0.0023         0.0028      −0.0004      −0.0002
                        (0.0043)        (0.0042)    (0.0030)     (0.0030)
Respondent female      −0.0738∗∗∗ −0.0698∗∗∗        −0.0670∗∗∗ −0.0655∗∗∗
                        (0.0044)        (0.0045)    (0.0030)     (0.0030)

Number of Cases           6172           6178        12208        12228
R-Square                  0.790          0.793       0.805        0.806
Robust standard errors in parentheses.
* p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




                                   85
us to pin down exactly how much time mothers versus fathers spend on child care. To address
this limitation, here we compare our results on the distribution of the burden of child care to a
similar computation based on international time use data.

Figure 9: Disagreement over fertility and men’s share in caring for children, measured with
time use data
                                 .3

                                                                                                      Correlation = −0.810
                 Disagree Female − Disagree Male




                                                                                   LTU (1.35)
                                         .2




                                                                      RUS (1.36)

                                                                AUT (1.39)

                                                                                      POL (1.31)
                               .1




                                                                   BUL (1.38)
                                                                                        CZE (1.32)

                                                                                         GER (1.36)

                                                                                                                    FRA (1.95)
                      0




                                                                                                               NOR (1.87)
                                                                                                         BEL (1.76)
                                 −.1




                                                   .2           .25          .3         .35            .4        .45
                                                        Male share of total mean hours caring for family members



Notes: Time use data from International Social Survey Program. The data set used is “Family and Chang-
ing Gender Roles IV 2012.” Distribution of child care computed based on self-reported child care by
women and men in households with both partners present at least one child under the age of 5.


We use time use data from the most recent available Family and Changing Roles (2012) module
of the International Social Survey Programme (ISSP).49 The ISSP provides representative sur-
vey data from almost 50 member countries, including ten of the eleven countries in our GGP
sample (no data is available for Russia). The Family and Changing Roles module contains de-
tailed information on attitudes towards gender roles within the family, and, importantly, time
use information for the respondent and their partner. The ISSP interviews one adult in each
household. Each respondent reports for how many hours she or he spends looking after family
members and how many hours the partners spends. We utilize this measure as a proxy for child
care time. We restrict the sample to individuals living with a partner and at least one child up to
the age of 5. We compute the female and male share in child care using only self-reported time
  49
    Citation: ISSP Research Group (2016): International Social Survey Programme: Family and Chang-
ing Gender Roles IV - ISSP 2012. GESIS Data Archive, Cologne. ZA5900 Data file Version 4.0.0, doi:
10.4232/1.12661


                                                                                      86
use (i.e., we do not use the report for the partner’s time use), although using both reports yields
similar patterns.

Figure 9 uses this data to display a version of Figure 2 based on the time use data instead of
the GGP data. We see that despite the different data source, the basic pattern is essentially the
same. The level and distribution of the implied male share of time cost is very similar in the GGP
data and in the time use data, and the male contribution to child care contributes to be highly
correlated with disagreement between women and men about fertility. The result suggest that
our measure of the distribution of the burden of child care provides a good approximation to
measures based on time use.




                                                87
