NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE DESIGN OF TRADE AGREEMENTS
Kyle Bagwell
Robert W. Staiger
Working Paper 22087
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22087

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2016

This paper will appear as Chapter 8 of the forthcoming Handbook of Commercial Policy
(Elsevier, Kyle Bagwell and Robert W. Staiger, Editors). We thank Emily Blanchard and
Giovanni Maggi as our discussants and for detailed comments on an earlier draft, and participants
at the Handbook of Commercial Policy Conference held at Dartmouth College June 4-June 6
2015 for helpful discussion. Bagwell thanks the Center for Advanced Studies in the Behavioral
Sciences for support and hospitality. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w22087.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Kyle Bagwell and Robert W. Staiger. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The Design of Trade Agreements
Kyle Bagwell and Robert W. Staiger
NBER Working Paper No. 22087
March 2016
JEL No. F02,F13
ABSTRACT
What does economics have to say about the design of international trade agreements? We review
a literature on this question, providing detailed coverage on three key design features of the
GATT/WTO: reciprocity, nondiscrimination as embodied in the MFN principle, and tariff
bindings and binding "overhang." Each of these features is central to the design of the GATT/
WTO, and we argue that an economic perspective can go a long way toward revealing a
consistent logic to the inclusion of these design features in trade agreements.

Kyle Bagwell
Department of Economics
Stanford University
Landau Economics Building
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER
kbagwell@stanford.edu
Robert W. Staiger
Department of Economics
Dartmouth College
319 Silsby
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
rstaiger@dartmouth.edu

An Online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w22087

1

Introduction

What does economics have to say about the design of international trade agreements? In this
chapter, we review a literature related to this question. We provide detailed coverage on three
key design features of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) and its successor the
World Trade Organization (WTO).1 The three design features on which we focus are reciprocity,
nondiscrimination as embodied in the most-favored-nation (MFN) principle, and tariff bindings
and binding “overhang.” Each of these features is central to the design of GATT/WTO.
We adopt the view that design reflects purpose. We thus discuss the purpose of a trade agreement as a tool to set the stage for our discussion of design.2 That is, we seek first to catalog the
“problems” that a trade agreement may “solve” in the various formal models of trade agreements,
where the problems lead to inefficiencies whose solutions can then generate increases in joint surplus that make a mutually beneficial trade agreement possible. With the problems identified and
the inefficiencies characterized, we are then better able to assess whether according to these formal
models the trade agreement is well-designed to facilitate mutual gains for member governments.
We now provide the narrative for the organization of our chapter. At the broadest level, trade
agreements could be designed following either of two standard traditions in economics for addressing
inefficiencies (see Hoekman and Kostecki, 1995, pp. 59-60). A “top down” approach would create a
supranational authority that sets trade policies for each member country. A “bottom up” approach
would entail Coasean bargaining among governments, and a critical element to ensure efficiency
would be the existence of secure property rights over the objects on which bargaining was to occur.
In practice international trade agreements are typically designed according to the second approach:
each government has property rights over its own policy instruments, but further rules may be
needed to secure the relevant property rights (e.g., to “market access”); governments negotiate first
over the rules (multilaterally); and they then bargain over actual policies within rules (bilaterally,
typically, though not always). The agreement must be self-enforcing.
From here, we can imagine how negotiators would start by agreeing that they should use
policy instruments that are transparent, so that they know what is agreed upon and can monitor
compliance. As we discuss below, if the diagnosis of the problem is a terms-of-trade problem at
any rate, they would also focus on reciprocal liberalization. They would then need to confront
the problem of third-party externalities, leading to consideration of non-discrimination. Next, a
basic question would be whether they are negotiating exact tariffs or bounds. At this point, they
might have various “what-if” questions, concerning upward flexibility to shocks, opportunistic use
of non-border measures, the rules for settling disputes when unanticipated issues arise, export
policy instruments, and the like. We refer to other Handbook chapters for full treatments of these
important topics, and only briefly touch on them here. As indicated, our focus here is on evaluating
1
Other design features are briefly mentioned in a concluding section and are treated in detail in other chapters of
this Handbook.
2
Our discussion of the purpose of trade agreements is thus narrow in scope. The broad literature on the purpose
of trade agreements is considered by Grossman (forthcoming).

1

and interpreting the design features of reciprocity, MFN and tariff bindings and overhang.
A natural question at this point is whether there is really any consistent logic to the design
of trade agreements at all. Do the design features of these agreements appear to be sufficiently
“purposeful” and deliberate to support the view that they can be usefully analyzed from an economic perspective? We argue in this chapter that the answer is yes.3 To develop this argument,
we present formal models that speak to the purpose and essential design of the GATT/WTO, and
we also relate the implications of these models to legal and historical writings that concern the
purpose and design of trade agreements.
The rest of the chapter proceeds as follows. In Section 2 we present a sequence of models and
diagnose the problem that a trade agreement might solve. Building on our findings from Section
2, Section 3 then covers reciprocity, Section 4 covers MFN, and Section 5 covers bindings and
overhang. Finally, Section 6 touches briefly on other important design features and concludes.

2

Diagnosis of the Problem

In this section, we present a sequence of two-country models and diagnose the problem that a
trade agreement might solve. We describe each model in detail, and organize our discussion around
three questions. First, is the Nash equilibrium inefficient? In effect, this question asks whether
there is a problem for governments that a trade agreement might solve. Second, if the Nash
equilibrium is inefficient, then is reciprocal trade liberalization a necessary design feature for a
mutually advantageous trade agreement among governments? By asking this question, we address
an initial and basic design feature while postponing consideration of other design features until later
sections. Finally, if governments were not motivated by the terms-of-trade implications of their
trade policies, would the resulting non-cooperative tariffs be efficient? This question acknowledges
the central role played by the terms-of-trade externality in the trade-agreement literature and
provides a means of categorizing models based upon whether this externality alone explains the
purpose of a trade agreement.
Before proceeding, we pause to remark on the value of characterizing the purpose of a trade
agreement. Why should we bother to identify the problem that a trade agreement solves? For
our purposes in this chapter, the reason is this: by identifying the problem that a trade agreement
may solve, we are better able to assess whether the trade agreement is well-designed for facilitating
mutual gains for member governments. Our discussion here thus serves as a foundation for later
sections, where we consider trade-agreement design in greater detail.
We conclude the section by approaching issues of purpose and design from a different angle.
Given the prominence played by the terms-of-trade externality in the formal literature on trade
agreements, it is important to ask whether there is meaningful contact between the problems
emphasized by this literature and those emphasized by economists and others who were directly
involved in GATT’s design. Drawing on an early GATT document, we describe some suggestive
3

See Krugman (1997) for an early dissenting view.

2

evidence consistent with a central role for terms-of-trade externalities.

2.1

Competitive General-Equilibrium Model of Trade Agreements

We begin with the standard perfectly competitive general-equilibrium model of trade agreements.
This model provides a general framework in which to understand the basic terms-of-trade-driven
Prisoners’ Dilemma problem that a trade agreement may solve.
2.1.1

The Model

We consider a standard general-equilibrium model of trade between two countries in two goods.
Each good is a normal good in consumption, and production is determined in perfectly competitive
markets under conditions of increasing opportunity costs. The home country imports good x and
exports good y, while the foreign country imports good y and exports good x. The local relative
price facing domestic producers and consumers is denoted as p ≡ px /py , and similarly the local
relative price in the foreign country is represented as p∗ ≡ p∗x /p∗y , where here and throughout we
use an “*” to denote foreign-country variables. The government of each country has available an
ad valorem import tariff, and we assume that governments set tariffs at non-prohibitive levels.
Let t denote the ad valorem import tariff selection of the home government, with t∗ representing
the corresponding selection by the foreign government. It is convenient to define τ ≡ 1 + t and
τ ∗ ≡ 1 + t∗ . We further define the relative world (i.e., offshore or untaxed) price as pw ≡ p∗x /py . The
world price is thus the relative price of the foreign country’s export good to its import good on the
“world” market and as such is the foreign country’s “terms of trade.” The home country’s terms of
trade is then 1/pw . With these definitions in place, we may now observe the following relationships:
p = τ pw ≡ p(τ , pw ) and p∗ = pw /τ ∗ ≡ p∗ (τ ∗ , pw ).
Once a country’s local price and terms of trade are determined, its production, consumption
and tariff revenue are implied. In each country, the production of good i, where i = x, y, is
determined by the point on the concave production possibilities frontier at which the marginal
rate of transformation between x and y equals the local relative price. We may thus represent
the domestic and foreign production functions as Qi (p) and Q∗i (p∗ ), respectively. Consumption in
each country is determined by the local and world prices: Ci (p, pw ) and Ci∗ (p∗ , pw ). Intuitively, the
local price determines the relative price faced by consumers and also the level and distribution of
factor income, while tariff revenue is distributed lump sum to consumers and can be expressed as a
function of the local and world prices.4 We may now define import demand and export supply for
the home country as M (p, pw ) ≡ Cx (p, pw ) − Qx (p) and E(p, pw ) ≡ Qy (p) − Cy (p, pw ), respectively.
Similarly, we may represent the foreign country’s import demand and export supply functions,
respectively, as M ∗ (p∗ , pw ) ≡ Cy∗ (p∗ , pw ) − Q∗y (p∗ ) and E ∗ (p∗ , pw ) ≡ Q∗x (p∗ ) − Cx∗ (p∗ , pw ).
For any local and world prices, each country must satisfy budget or “trade balance” constraints.
4

For further details, see Bagwell and Staiger (2002, pages 14-5).

3

For the home country, the trade balance constraint is
pw M (p, pw ) = E(p, pw ).

(1)

The foreign country trade balance is similarly represented as
M ∗ (p∗ , pw ) = pw E ∗ (p∗ , pw ).

(2)

We may think of these relationships as constraints that are embedded in the construction of the
import demand and export supply functions.
The final ingredient in our model is a market-clearing requirement. Given τ and τ ∗ , we require
that the world price is set so as to achieve market clearing in good x :
M (p(τ , pw ), pw ) = E ∗ (p∗ (τ ∗ , pw ), pw ).

(3)

For given τ and τ ∗ , we notice that (3) describes one equation in a single unknown variable, pw .
Let pew (τ , τ ∗ ) denote the market-clearing world price that satisfies (3). It is now straightforward to

confirm that conditions (1), (2) and (3) ensure that market-clearing is achieved in good y as well.
In this general fashion, for any specification of τ and τ ∗ , we may determine the equilibrium world
price and the associated local prices. All equilibrium quantities (production, consumption, tariff
revenue, imports, exports) are then implied in turn.
The only assumption that we place upon the general-equilibrium model is that prices respond
to tariffs in the “regular” way.5 Specifically, we make the following assumptions:
dp(τ , pew (τ , τ ∗ ))
dτ
dp∗ (τ ∗ , pew (τ , τ ∗ ))
dτ ∗

∂ pew (τ , τ ∗ )
∂τ
∂ pew (τ , τ ∗ )
< 0<
.
∂τ ∗
> 0>

(4)

In short, when a country’s tariff is increased, the relative price of its import good increases in
the local market and falls in the world market. The latter (world-price) effect amounts to an
assumption that the country is “large” and can exercise monopsony power by raising its tariff. It
also means that a country can improve its terms of trade - and thus cause a deterioration in its
trading partner’s terms of trade - by raising its tariff.
With the basic general-equilibrium model of trade described, we now consider the preferences
of governments. In the traditional approach to trade agreements, governments are assumed to
maximize national economic welfare. This is the approach explored by Dixit (1987), Johnson (195354), Kennan and Reizman (1988) and Mayer (1981), for example. Following Bagwell and Staiger
(1999, 2002), we adopt a political-economic approach which includes the traditional approach as a
special case but allows as well that governments may have political or distributional concerns. We
thus represent the preferences of a government as a general function of its country’s local price and
5

Put differently, we assume that the model does not exhibit the Metzler or Lerner paradox.

4

terms of trade. Formally, the home and foreign government preferences, respectively, are represented
as W (p, pew ) and W ∗ (p∗ , pew ), where all prices are evaluated henceforth at market-clearing levels.
We note that each government’s welfare is ultimately a function of the underlying tariff choices,

since under market clearing we have that p = p(τ , pew ), p∗ = p∗ (τ ∗ , pew ) and pew = pew (τ , τ ∗ ). It
is nevertheless convenient to represent government welfare functions in terms of local and world

prices, as we are thereby able to identify the channel through which one government’s tariff selection
imposes an externality on the welfare of the other government.
Following Bagwell and Staiger (1999, 2002), the only assumption we make on government
preferences is as follows: a government benefits from a terms-of-trade improvement, when the local
price in its country is held fixed. Formally, our assumption may be stated as follows:
Wpew (p, pew ) < 0 < Wpe∗w (p∗ , pew ).

(5)

Notice that no assumption is made as to the manner in which welfare varies with the local price, and
so a wide variety of political and distributional motivations can be accommodated. It is important
to reflect on the meaning of the preference assumption captured in (5). Imagine that the home
government raises its tariff, τ , and that the foreign government cuts its tariff, τ ∗ . Under (4), this
adjustment in tariffs results in a lower value for pew and thus an improvement in the home country’s

terms of trade. Further, the tariff changes can be made in such a way as to maintain the local price,
p, in the home country.6 Such a change in tariffs does not alter the local price faced by producers

and consumers in the home country; instead, it amounts to a transfer of tariff revenue from the
foreign country to the home country. The meaning of the preference assumption in (5) is simply
that a government benefits from being the recipient of such a transfer.
As Bagwell and Staiger (1999, 2002) discuss, assumption (5) is satisfied under the traditional
approach where governments maximize national economic welfare. The assumption is also satisfied
in the leading models that adopt the political-economic approach, including the lobbying models of
Grossman and Helpman (1994, 1995) and the median-voter model of Mayer (1984).7 As discussed
below, the model presented here does not include, however, models in which governments face
a “commitment problem” and have time-inconsistent preferences, since such models allow that
government preferences may change over time.
2.1.2

Prisoners’ Dilemma

We show next that the general-equilibrium model generates a terms-of-trade-driven Prisoners’
Dilemma problem between governments. To begin, let us consider a simultaneous-move game
6

Under (4), the increase in τ raises p and the decrease in τ ∗ further lowers pew and thus decreases p.
As noted above, work in the traditional approach includes Dixit (1987), Johnson (1953-54), Kennan and Riezman
(1988) and Mayer (1981). Work in which government preferences correspond to the preferences of the median voter
includes Dhingra (2014), Dutt and Mitra (2002) and Mayer (1984), while work in which government preferences reflect
the interests of lobbies includes Baldwin (1987), Brock and Magee (1978), Caves (1976), Feenstra and Bhagwati (1982),
Findlay and Wellisz (1982), Grossman and Helpman (1994, 1995), Hillman (1982) and Olson (1965). The preference
assumption in (5) is satisfied in all of these approaches.
7

5

in which governments select import tariffs. Assuming that a unique, interior Nash equilibrium exists, we represent the non-cooperative or Nash tariffs as a pair, (τ N , τ ∗N ), satisfying the following
first-order conditions:8
dW (p, pew )
dτ
dW ∗ (p∗ , pew )
dτ ∗

∂ pew
dp
+ Wpew
=0
dτ
∂τ
dp∗
∂ pew
= Wp∗∗ ∗ + Wpe∗w ∗ = 0.
dτ
∂τ
= Wp

(6)

The first condition in (6) defines the “optimal tariff” or the best-response tariff for the home
government, while the second condition defines the analogous tariff for the foreign government.9
Using (4) and (5), we may immediately observe that Wp < 0 when the home government selects
its optimal tariff. Intuitively, the home government would welcome the lower local price and
corresponding greater trade volume that a tariff reduction would induce; yet, the home government
refrains from unilaterally lowering its tariff from the optimal level, since a lower tariff would worsen
its terms of trade. Similarly, for the foreign government, (4) and (5) imply that Wp∗∗ > 0 at the
optimal tariff, where a higher value for p∗ would result from a lower foreign tariff.
A trade agreement is an agreement between governments. To understand the rationale for a
trade agreement, we thus consider whether a trade agreement could generate greater government
welfare than governments enjoy under non-cooperative tariff setting (i.e., in the Nash equilibrium).
We are thus motivated to consider Pareto efficient tariff pairs, where efficiency is measured relative
to government welfare. An efficient pair of tariffs is defined by a tangency condition for government
indifference curves:

dτ
dτ
|dW =0 = ∗ |dW ∗ =0 .
dτ ∗
dτ

(7)

This tangency condition that defines an efficient pair of tariffs can be re-written as
∗

w

dp
pe
Wp dτ
+ Wpew ∂∂τ

=

w

dp
∗ ∂ pe
Wp∗∗ dτ
∗ + Wp
ew ∂τ ∗

w

[τ Wp + Wpew ] ∂∂τpe∗

w

pe
[ τ1∗ Wp∗∗ + Wpe∗w ] ∂∂τ

.

(8)

Notice that, in assuming that a trade agreement may deliver an efficient tariff pair, we are putting
enforcement issues to the side for now.
Under the traditional approach, the optimal import tariff for each government is positive, and
so τ N > 1 and τ ∗N > 1. This finding dates back to Torrens (1844) and Mill (1844) and was
formalized by Johnson (1953-54). It implies that free trade is not the optimal unilateral tariff
for a government that maximizes national economic welfare and presides over a large country. As
Mayer (1981) showed, the efficiency frontier under the traditional approach is defined by the locus
τ = 1/τ ∗ . This tariff locus ensures that local prices are equalized across countries (i.e., p = p∗ ) and
8

As Dixit (1987) establishes for a setting in which governments maximize national economic welfare, Nash equilibria
with autarky also exist. The equilibrium upon which we focus here, by contrast, has positive trade volume and is in
this sense “interior.”
9
Throughout, we assume that all second-order conditions are globally satisfied and that all partial derivatives of
W and W ∗ are continuous and finite.

6

includes global free trade (τ = τ ∗ = 1) as a special case. As we raise the home country tariff and
lower the foreign country tariff while moving along the locus of efficient tariffs, the home (foreign)
country experiences a terms of trade gain (loss). Hence, the world price and thus the distribution
of income across countries varies along the efficiency frontier.
The traditional approach thus indicates that governments of large countries face a Prisoners’
Dilemma problem. The Nash tariffs are too high, and governments could achieve a Pareto gain
by forming an agreement in which tariffs are reduced in an appropriate reciprocal manner. If governments are symmetric, then Nash and efficient tariffs lie along the 45-degree line. In this case,
governments can achieve efficiency and both gain relative to the Nash equilibrium by moving to
global free trade. As Johnson (1953-54), Kennan and Reizman (1988) and Mayer (1981) argue,
however, if countries are sufficiently asymmetric, then a large country may prefer the Nash equilibrium to global free trade. Thus, reciprocal tariff reductions that lead to an efficient outcome do
not always generate Pareto gains relative to the Nash equilibrium.
Adopting the more general political-economic approach, Bagwell and Staiger (1999, 2002) establish the following three findings. First, and as may be easily verified, the Nash equilibrium tariffs
defined by (6) do not satisfy (8) and are thus inefficient. This finding is not entirely surprising,
since a higher tariff from one country imposes a negative international externality in the form of a
terms-of-trade loss on the other country. The second finding is that, starting at the Nash equilibrium tariffs (τ N , τ ∗N ), governments can mutually gain from moving to a new pair of tariffs (τ , τ ∗ )
only if the new tariffs entail reciprocal trade liberalization: τ < τ N and τ ∗ < τ ∗N . A general form
of reciprocity is thus necessary if governments are to achieve mutual gains from a trade agreement.
The second finding follows easily once it is established that a government experiences a strict
welfare reduction along its best-response curve as its trading partner’s tariff is increased. To
establish this point, we focus on the home country and define its best-response function, τ = τ R (τ ∗ ),
as the solution to the first equation in (6). Following Bagwell and Staiger (1999, 2002), we may
now use (6) to find that
dW (p, pew )
∂ pew
w
=
[(W
τ
+
W
)
|
]| R ∗
R
∗
p
pe
τ =τ (τ )
dτ ∗
∂τ ∗ τ =τ (τ )
∂ pew
= [(1 − τ λ)Wpew ∗ ]|τ =τ R (τ ∗ )
∂τ
< 0,
where λ ≡

∂ pew dp
∂τ / dτ

(9)

< 0 by (4). To complete the argument, we suppose that a trade agreement

generates mutual gains and specifies a tariff pair (τ , τ ∗ ) for which τ ∗ > τ ∗N . Starting at this tariff
pair, we may reposition the home tariff to the home best-response level, τ R (τ ∗ ), and then reduce
the foreign tariff from τ ∗ to τ ∗N while adjusting the home tariff along the home best-response curve.
It then follows from (9) that the home government experiences strictly higher welfare at the Nash
tariffs than at the tariff pair specified by the agreement, which contradicts the supposition that the
agreement generate mutual gains. A similar argument applies when the trade agreement specifies
a pair (τ , τ ∗ ) where τ > τ N .
7

The third finding concerns the reason that the Nash tariffs are inefficient. To identify the source
of the problem, Bagwell and Staiger (1999, 2002) define politically optimal tariffs as the tariff pair,
(τ P O , τ ∗P O ), that satisfies
Wp = 0 = Wp∗∗ .

(10)

We may understand the politically optimal tariffs to be the tariffs that governments would choose if,
hypothetically, they were not motivated by the terms-of-trade implications of their tariff selections
(i.e., if, hypothetically, they acted as if Wpew = 0 = Wpe∗w ). The third finding, which follows easily
from (8) and (10), is that the politically optimal tariffs are efficient. Bagwell and Staiger (1999,
2002) interpret this finding as establishing that the terms-of-trade externality is the sole rationale for
a trade agreement, even when governments have political-economic preferences. They note further
that the politically optimal tariffs correspond to global free trade when governments maximize
national economic welfare.
The three findings are captured in Figure 1 (adopted from Figure 2 of Bagwell and Staiger,
1999). As this figure illustrates, Nash tariffs are inefficient and too high. Further, reciprocal tariff
liberalization (i.e., τ < τ N and τ ∗ < τ ∗N ) is necessary but not sufficient for mutual gains for
governments relative to the Nash equilibrium. Finally, politically optimal tariffs are efficient. As
depicted, when the home and foreign countries are sufficiently symmetric, the politically optimal
tariffs reside on the contract curve (i.e., they are efficient and generate greater-than-Nash welfares
for both governments). The politically optimal tariffs may fall outside the contract curve, though,
if countries are sufficiently asymmetric.

2.2

Competitive Partial-Equilibrium Model of Trade Agreements

In the preceding discussion, we use a competitive general-equilibrium model and show that the
purpose of the GATT/WTO is to provide a means of escape from a terms-of-trade driven Prisoners’ Dilemma problem. As we discuss further in later sections, however, some design features
of the GATT/WTO are most easily captured in the context of a simple partial-equilibrium model
which includes specific parameters relating to political ingredients in governments’ preferences. We
thus now prepare for this analysis by presenting a simple partial-equilibrium model of trade. An
additional and important benefit of our partial-equilibrium analysis is that it provides a concrete
framework within which to understand and further explore the purpose of trade agreements. In
particular, and as we show below, this analysis leads to new insights regarding the existence of international externalities that do not travel through the terms of trade when the set of trade-policy
instruments is incomplete.
2.2.1

Partial-Equilibrium Model

We now present a two-country partial-equilibrium model of trade. The home country imports good
x from the foreign country and exports good y to the foreign country. A numeraire good, n, is also

8

traded between the two countries.10
Consumers in each country share a common utility function, which is quasilinear and additively
separable across goods. The numeraire good enters the utility function in a linear way. Within any
country, the demand for good i, where i = x, y, thus depends on the local price of good i relative
to that of the numeraire good. Each good is supplied under conditions of perfect competition;
hence, within a given country, the supply of good i, i = x, y, is also a function of the local price of
good i relative to that of the numeraire good. As is standard, the numeraire good is produced in
each country under constant returns to scale and is sufficiently abundant in each country that it is
consumed in positive quantities. The numeraire good is also freely traded across countries so as to
ensure that trade balance is achieved. We may normalize the price of the numeraire good to unity.11
With the general-equilibrium trade-balance requirement achieved through trade in the numeraire
good, whose price is fixed, a convenient feature of this model is that the market outcomes for good
x are independent of those for good y. The model is thus partial equilibrium in nature.
We assume that consumers possess symmetric preferences across goods x and y. For i = x, y,
each good i is then demanded in each country according to a symmetric demand function, D.
Letting px and py denote the home-country local prices of goods x and y, respectively, we may
represent the home-country demand function for good i as D(pi ).12 We may represent foreign
demand functions similarly in terms of foreign local prices, p∗x and p∗y . To establish a basis for
trade, we assume that the countries have different supply functions. The domestic supply functions
are represented as Qx (px ) and Qy (py ), while the foreign supply functions are denoted as Q∗x (p∗x ) and
Q∗y (p∗y ). For prices that are associated with strictly positive volumes, we assume that the demand
function is strictly decreasing and the supply functions are increasing.13 In line with our assumption
that the home country imports good x, we assume that Qx (p) = Q∗y (p) < Qy (p) = Q∗x (p) for any
p such that Qy (p) > 0. The associated competitive profit functions are represented by the strictly
increasing functions, Πx (px ), Πy (py ), Π∗x (p∗x ) and Π∗y (p∗y ).
We assume that each country has a specific (i.e., per-unit) trade-policy instrument with which
to affect the volume of trade for each good i, i = x, y. In particular, the home country has an
import tariff, τ x , that is applied to imports of good x and an export subsidy, τ y , that is applied to
exports of good y. An import subsidy is used if τ x < 0, while an export tax is applied when τ y < 0.
The foreign country similarly has an import tariff, τ ∗y , and an export subsidy, τ ∗x . The “net tariff”
for good x is then τ x − τ ∗x , and similarly the net tariff for good y is captured as τ ∗y − τ y .
We may now determine local prices as functions of tariffs. Provided that the net tariff is not
so high as to prohibit trade, local prices in each country must obey the following arbitrage and
10

For further details regarding the specific model presented here, see Bagwell and Staiger (2001a).
The model can be further specified with a description of the underlying factor market. Assume that the numeraire
good is produced from labor alone, with one unit of labor generating one unit of the numeraire good. Suppose further
that, in each country, the supply of labor is perfectly elastic at a unitary wage. A unitary wage is then implied. In
each country, good i, i = x, y, is produced from labor alone subject to diminishing returns.
12
Let the utility of the representative consumer take the form u(Cx ) + u(Cy ) + Cn , where Ci and Cn respectively
represent consumption levels of good i, i = x, y, and the numeraire good n. The demand for good i is implicitly
defined by the consumption level that satisfies the first-order condition: u′ (Ci ) = pi .
13
We allow that supply functions may be constant in order to include the possibility of endowment economies.
11

9

market-clearing conditions:
pi = p∗i + τ i − τ ∗i

(11)

Qi (pi ) + Q∗i (p∗i ) = D(pi ) + D(p∗i ) for i = x, y.

(12)

For each good i, conditions (11) and (12) constitute two requirements on two prices; thus, we may
solve these equations to determine the market-clearing local prices as functions of the associated
net tariffs: px (τ x − τ ∗x ), p∗x (τ x − τ ∗x ), p∗y (τ ∗y − τ y ) and py (τ ∗y − τ y ). Under our assumptions, and
provided that trade is not prohibited, it is direct to confirm that an increase in the net tariff for a
given good strictly increases (decreases) the local price in the importing (exporting) country. We
∗
′
∗′ ∗
∗
thus have that p′x (τ x − τ ∗x ) > 0 > p∗′
x (τ x − τ x ) and py (τ y − τ y ) > 0 > py (τ y − τ y ).
w
We next consider the world (i.e., offshore) prices. Let pw
x and py denote the world prices for

goods x and y, respectively. The world prices are defined as follows: pi ≡ pw
i + τ i for i = x, y.
For a given good, we may thus think of the world price as the price that prevails after the export
policy is applied but before the import policy is imposed.14 Given that we have already solved for
the market-clearing local prices, we may use the definition of world prices to represent the market∗
w
∗
clearing world prices as functions of tariffs: pw
x (τ x , τ x ) and py (τ y , τ y ). Under our assumptions, if

tariffs are not so high as to prohibit trade on a given good, then the world price is strictly decreasing
in each argument: the world price strictly falls when the import tariff increases and when the
export subsidy increases. In what follows, it is convenient to express market-clearing local prices in
a country as explicit functions of the world prices and the country’s own trade policy. For i = x, y,
∗
w
∗
we thus define the market-clearing local price functions as pbi (τ i , pw
i (τ i , τ i )) ≡ pi (τ i , τ i ) + τ i and
∗
w
∗
∗
pb∗i (τ ∗i , pw
i (τ i , τ i )) ≡ pi (τ i , τ i ) + τ i .

It is instructive to consider the price implications of trade policies in more detail. Consider the

home-country import good. An increase in the home-country import tariff causes the local price of
the import good to rise in the home country; however, this price increase is less than one-for-one,
since an increase in the import tariff reduces the world price and thereby the price that foreign
exporters receive. When the home country raises its import tariff, it thereby shifts some of the
cost of the tariff hike onto foreign exporters, who receive a lower price for their good and thus earn
lower profits. For the partial-equilibrium model, the terms-of-trade externality that is associated
with an import tariff increase thus admits a simple interpretation and corresponds to a reduction
in the world price of the import good. Notice further than an increase in the foreign export subsidy
causes the world price of the home import good to fall as well. Thus, an increase in an export
subsidy generates a positive terms-of-trade externality for the importing country, by enabling this
country to import at a lower world price.
We next identify the trade volumes that are implied by tariffs in this model. For the home
country, we may define the import demand and export supply functions as M (b
px ) ≡ D(b
px )−Qx (b
px )
and E(b
py ) ≡ Qy (b
py )−D(b
py ), respectively. The foreign import demand and export supply functions
14

∗
∗
Thus, for good x, px ≡ pw
x + τ x . Similarly, for good y, we know from (11) that py = py + τ y − τ y . Using the
w
∗
w
∗
definition of py , it follows that py = py + τ y .

10

are respectively defined in an exactly analogous manner as M ∗ (b
p∗y ) ≡ D(b
p∗y ) − Q∗y (b
p∗y ) and E ∗ (b
p∗x ) ≡
Q∗x (b
p∗x ) − D(b
p∗x ). Of course, under (12), the import demand for any good must equal the export
supply for this good. Our assumptions also imply that, provided trade is not prohibited, the import
demand (export supply) functions are strictly decreasing (increasing).
We now define government welfare functions. As Baldwin (1987) observes, a wide range of
political-economy models are included under the assumption that governments maximize a weighted
sum of consumer surplus, producer surplus and tariff revenue.15 Let us use γ m ≥ 1 and γ e ≥ 1
to denote the weight that the domestic government attaches to the producer surplus earned by
its import-competing and exporting firms, respectively. The welfare functions that the domestic
government uses for its import and export goods, respectively, are then defined as follows:
Wx (b
p x , pw
x)

≡

Wy (b
py , pw
y) ≡

Z

p

pbx
p

Z

pby

D(px )dpx + γ m Πx (b
px ) + [b
px − pw
px )
x ]M (b
D(py )dpy + γ e Πy (b
py ) − [b
py − pw
py ),
y ]E(b

where p denotes the reservation price for the demand function, D.16 The home-government welfare
function is then the sum of its welfare functions for import and export goods:
w
W (b
px , pby , pw
px , p w
p y , pw
x , py ) ≡ Wx (b
x ) + Wy (b
y ).

Welfare functions for the foreign government may be defined in an exactly analogous way. For
given welfare weights γ ∗m and γ ∗e , the foreign-government import and export welfare functions are
p∗y , pw
Wy∗ (b
y)
Wx∗ (b
p∗x , pw
x)

≡

Z

p

pb∗y

≡

Z

p

pb∗x

∗ ∗
py )
p∗y − pw
p∗y ) + [b
D(p∗y )dp∗y + γ ∗m Π∗y (b
y ]M (b
∗ ∗
D(p∗x )dp∗x + γ ∗e Π∗x (b
p∗x ) − [b
p∗x − pw
px ).
x ]E (b

The foreign-government welfare function is thus
w
∗ ∗ w
W ∗ (b
p∗y , pb∗x , pw
py , py ) + Wx∗ (b
p∗x , pw
y , px ) ≡ Wy (b
x ).

For simplicity, in this section, we suppose further that the welfare weights are symmetric across
governments, so that γ m = γ ∗m ≥ 1 and γ e = γ ∗e ≥ 1.
2.2.2

Prisoners’ Dilemma

With the partial-equilibrium model now fully specified, we may briefly consider the basic Prisoners’
Dilemma that arises in this model. We do so by considering the Nash, efficient and politically
15

The lobbying models of Grossman and Helpman (1994, 1995) provide micro-foundations for such preferences.
In terms of the utility function detailed in footnote 12, we may understand that the tariff revenue term depicted
in the welfare functions corresponds to consumer surplus that arises from the consumption of the numeraire good.
16

11

optimal tariffs in this model.
To characterize Nash trade policies, we first must consider the best-response or optimal trade
policies for the domestic and foreign governments. The best-response policies are defined by
∂pw
db
py
db
px
∂pw
y
x
w
w
Home : Wpbx
+ Wpx
= 0 = Wpby
+ Wpy
dτ x
∂τ x
dτ y
∂τ y
db
p∗y
∂pw
db
p∗
∂pw
y
= 0 = Wpb∗∗x x∗ + Wp∗wx x∗ .
Foreign:
Wpb∗∗y ∗ + Wp∗wy
∗
dτ y
∂τ y
dτ x
∂τ x

(13)

Thus, when setting its best-response trade policies, each government considers the effects of its
policies on its country’s local prices and terms of trade. A higher import tariff, for example, raises
the local price of the import good. The local-price increase in turn implies a redistribution from
consumer surplus to producer surplus on domestically produced units, which is especially attractive
to the domestic government when γ m is large. A higher local price for the import good, however,
also leads to lower trade volume and an associated loss in tariff revenue. The terms-of-trade effect
of a change in trade policy encourages the use of import tariffs and discourages the use of export
subsidies. For example, a higher import tariff depresses the world price and thereby shifts foreign
surplus into domestic tariff revenue.
The home-government best-response trade policies satisfy the first set of equations in (13) and
∗
R ∗
may be represented as τ R
x (τ x ) and τ y (τ y ), and the best-response trade policies of the foreign
∗R
government satisfy the second set of equations in (13) and are represented as τ ∗R
y (τ y ) and τ x (τ x ).
∗N
∗N
N
An interior Nash equilibrium vector of tariffs, (τ N
x , τ y , τ y , τ x ), satisfies all of the requirements in

(13), so that each trade policy of each government is a best response. As Dixit (1987) observes, an
autarky Nash equilibrium also exists for tariff games. In the present model, as Bagwell and Staiger
(2001a) confirm, if for a given good the import tariff is sufficiently high and the export tariff is
also sufficiently high, then trade is prohibited and neither government has incentive to cut its tariff
sufficiently so as to induce positive trade volume.
To analyze efficient tariffs, we first observe that governments have adequate instruments in this
model to generate direct transfers. Let us suppose that the domestic government raises its import
tariff and that the foreign government raises its export subsidy by the same amount. The net tariff
on the home-country import good is then unaffected. This means that local prices and thus trade
volume are unaffected by the proposed change in trade policy. The change does, however, generate
a lower world price for the home-country import good. As is evident from the welfare functions
above, if pbx and pb∗x are unchanged and pw
x falls by, say, one unit, then the domestic government
enjoys a welfare gain in the amount of M (b
px ) and the foreign government suffers a welfare loss in

the amount E ∗ (b
p∗x ). Since the market-clearing condition (12) ensures that M (b
px ) = E ∗ (b
p∗x ), we

may conclude that governments can make lump-sum government-to-government transfers through
policy changes that preserve local prices and alter world prices.
This conclusion implies that a vector of tariffs is efficient if and only if it maximizes joint
∗ w w
∗ p∗ , p
w
government welfare, W (b
px , pby , pw
y bx , py , px ). Looking at the welfare functions defined
x , py )+W (b

12

above, we may also easily confirm that, at given local prices, joint government welfare is independent
of world prices. Since joint welfare depends only on local prices, while local prices in turn depend
only on net tariffs, we see that efficiency determines only the net tariff for each good. For example,
if γ m = γ x = 1 so that each government maximizes national economic welfare, then efficiency
requires that the net tariff is zero. For a given good, however, this requirement is met whenever
the import tariff equals the export subsidy. If we start at free-trade policies and then increase
the import tariff and export subsidy for this good in the same amount, then the outcome remains
efficient. The joint increase in the import tariff and export subsidy, however, lowers the world price
of the good and thus redistributes welfare from the exporting country to the importing country.
Given that joint government welfare depends only on net tariffs, we may fully characterize the
set of efficient tariff vectors for any good by finding the net tariff for that good that maximizes
joint government welfare. Furthermore, since the model is symmetric across goods, the efficient net
tariff is common across goods. We may therefore focus on good x. Assuming that joint government
welfare is strictly concave with respect to net tariffs, the associated first-order condition for an
efficient tariff vector is
Wpbx

db
px
db
p∗
+ Wpb∗∗x x = 0.
dτ x
dτ x

(14)

Thus, the set of efficient tariff vectors is the set of tariff vectors that deliver for each good the net
tariff that satisfies (14). For any good, different combinations of tariffs that deliver the same net
tariff vector simply indicate alternative international transfer patterns achieved through different
world prices.
We now turn to the three questions raised at the start of the section. First, we consider the
efficiency of Nash trade policies. We expect that Nash trade policies are inefficient, since governments are motivated by terms-of-trade considerations when setting Nash policies while efficiency
imposes requirements only on local prices and thus the net tariff. We find that, at Nash policies,
Wpbx

db
px
db
p∗
db
px
db
p∗
∂pw
∂pw
+ Wpb∗∗x x = Wpbx
− Wpb∗∗x x∗ = −Wpwx x + Wp∗wx x∗ < 0,
dτ x
dτ x
dτ x
dτ x
∂τ x
∂τ x

(15)

where the first equality follows since pb∗x ultimately depends on the net tariff, τ x − τ ∗x , the second

equality uses (13), and the inequality follows since Wp∗wx = −Wpwx > 0 and the world price is strictly
decreasing in each of its arguments. Given our assumption that the joint government welfare
function is strictly concave, (14) and (15) imply that the Nash net tariff is higher than efficient.
Second, we establish a general sense in which governments can achieve mutual gains relative
to Nash policies only through reciprocal liberalization. In particular, suppose that governments
start with Nash policies and then make mutual policy adjustments that change the net tariffs for
goods x and y in a symmetric way. Importantly, while the net tariff changes under consideration
are symmetric across goods, we are not assuming that the underlying policy adjustments are symmetric across governments. Since the net tariff under Nash policies is higher than efficient, total
government welfare rises - and thus mutual gains to government welfare are feasible - only if the net
tariff falls. Furthermore, given that each government selects its best-response policies at the Nash
13

equilibrium, mutual gains are possible only if each government makes adjustments to its policies
that contribute to some degree to the fall in net tariffs.
Finally, we confirm that terms-of-trade motivations provide the sole rationale for trade agreements in the partial-equilibrium model just as in the general-equilibrium model of the previous
section. For the partial-equilibrium model, we follow Bagwell and Staiger (2001a) and define the
politically optimal tariffs as the vector of tariffs satisfying
Wpbx = Wpby = 0 = Wpb∗∗y = Wpb∗∗x .

(16)

The four requirements in (16) determine values for all four trade-policy instruments. In the symmetric model considered here, a common net tariff is thereby determined for both goods. Using
(14) and (16), it is now clear that the net tariff is also efficient. In other words, the politically
optimal tariffs are efficient. Following Bagwell and Staiger (2001a), we may interpret this finding to mean that the terms-of-trade externality is the sole rationale for a trade agreement in the
partial-equilibrium model as well.
Bagwell and Staiger (2001a) also consider a “linear-quadratic” version of the above model in
which demand is linear with a reservation price of unity and supply functions are linear. Specifically,
they posit that D(p) = p − p, p = 1, Qy (p) = Q∗x (p) = p and Qx (p) = Q∗y (p) = p/2. The associated
profit functions are quadratic: Πy (p) = Π∗x (p) = p2 /2 and Πx (p) = Π∗y (p) = p2 /4.17 If the politicaleconomy weights are not too large, so that γ m ∈ [1, 3] and γ e ∈ [1, 3], then second-order conditions
hold and best-response trade-policy functions are strictly increasing. Intuitively, when the foreign
export subsidy increases, the home country imports a larger volume and domestic production falls.
The former effect magnifies the terms-of-trade benefit of raising the import tariff. The latter
effect, however, weakens the political-economy benefit of using a higher import tariff to raise the
local price, since the higher price would apply to a smaller volume of domestic production. The
finding that trade policies are strategic complements indicates that, in the linear model at least, the
magnification of the terms-of-trade effect dominates the weakening of the political-economy effect.
Under the maintained assumption that the political weight on the import-competing sector is
not too large relative to that on the export sector, in the specific sense that 5/8 + 9γ e /8 > γ m ,
Bagwell and Staiger (2001a) establish that the interior Nash equilibrium is unique and has positive
trade volume. The Nash import tariff is always positive; however, the sign of the export subsidy
is ambiguous.18 Intuitively, the Nash import tariff is strictly positive even for a government that
17

Under the assumption that labor supply is perfectly elastic at a unitary
supply and profit
p
√ wage, the domestic
functions can be derived from the following production functions: Qx = Lx and Qy = 2Ly , where Li units of
labor are used in the production of good i, i = x, y. Analogous remarks apply to the foreign functions. The demand
functions can be derived from a representative consumer with utility function U = Cn + (Cx − Cx2 /2) + (Cy − Cy2 /2),
where Cn and Ci denote consumption of the numeraire good and good i, i = x, y.
18
Grossman and Helpman (1995) present a related finding in a more sophisticated model in which political-economic
preferences are endogenously determined by lobbying of politically organized sectors. In their model, the ad valorem
import tariff is positive for a good with an organized import-competing industry, and the ad valorem export subsidy
is negative (i.e., an export tax is used) for a good in an export sector that is not organized. In other cases, the sign
of the optimal policy is ambiguous, since terms-of-trade and political considerations pull in opposite directions.

14

maximizes national economic welfare, since the government of a large country can use a positive
import tariff to improve its country’s terms of trade. If γ m > 1 so that the government receives
political benefits from raising the local price of the import good, then the case for a positive Nash
import tariff is reinforced. An export tax is likewise optimal for a government that maximizes
national economic welfare; however, the Nash export subsidy is positive when γ e is sufficiently
large, since the government then enjoys a large benefit from using an export subsidy to elevate the
local price of the export good. Bagwell and Staiger also report that the politically optimal import
tariff and export subsidy are non-negative and correspond to free trade when political economy
effects are absent.19 Finally, they confirm that joint government welfare is strictly concave in the
net tariff and that the Nash trade policies are too restrictive, as the trade volume in the interior
Nash equilibrium is strictly less than would be efficient for the governments.
The partial-equilibrium model presented here provides a simple and concrete framework with
which to understand and explore the terms-of-trade driven Prisoners’ Dilemma problem. Like the
general-equilibrium model presented above, the partial-equilibrium model indicates that a mutually
beneficial trade agreement between governments must entail reciprocal reductions in trade barriers. Thus, the partial- and general-equilibrium frameworks generate the same broad conclusions
regarding the purpose of trade agreements.
2.2.3

Missing Instruments in the Partial-Equilibrium Model

We now consider the purpose of trade agreements when the partial-equilibrium model is modified so
that some trade-policy instruments are “missing.” Recall that the politically optimal trade-policy
vector is a vector with four policies - an import tariff and an export subsidy for each country - such
that each country achieves its preferred local price on each good: Wpbx = Wpby = 0 = Wpb∗∗ = Wpb∗∗ .
y

x

Intuitively, if policies satisfy these requirements, then a small change in any one trade policy
cannot generate a Pareto improvement, since the first-order welfare effects of the resulting localprice changes are zero and since the resulting change in any world price constitutes a pure transfer
from one government to the other and thus cannot be a source of mutual gain.
Suppose now, however, that export policies are prohibited. In this restricted-instrument setting,
let us assume that each government selects its import tariff in a politically optimal fashion. The
resulting politically optimal import tariffs are those tariffs that deliver Wpbx = 0 and Wpb∗∗ = 0
y

when all export subsidies are set to zero. In general, the politically optimal import tariffs for
the restricted-instrument setting differ from the politically optimal import tariffs for the setting in
which both import and export instruments are available.20 When the politically optimal import
tariffs for the restricted-instrument setting are used, we may easily verify that Wpby > 0 and Wpb∗∗ > 0
x

when γ e > 1. Thus, when these import tariffs are used and γ e > 1, each government would prefer
19

The politically optimal import tariff and export subsidy are zero when γ m = 1 and γ e = 1, respectively.
When the foreign government provides an export subsidy at level τ ∗x , the import tariff for the home government
that satisfies Wpbx = 0 is given by τ x = 4(γ m − 1)(1 − τ ∗x )/(25 − 4γ m ). Thus, if γ m > 1, then the politically optimal
selection for the home import tariff differs depending on whether export subsidies are prohibited (τ ∗x = 0) or the
foreign export subsidy is set at its politically optimal level (τ ∗x > 0 when γ e > 1).
20

15

a higher local price for its export good. A government is unable to deliver such a price on its own,
however, when export subsidies are prohibited.
We now claim that the resulting four-tuple of policies, where import tariffs are politically optimal
in the restricted-instrument setting and export subsidies are zero, is inefficient. To establish this
claim, we need only note that each government would strictly gain if the governments were to
reciprocally and symmetrically exchange small import tariff cuts. A small import tariff cut by the
home government would change the local price of good x in the home country, but this has no
first-order effect on the welfare of the home government since Wpbx = 0. The tariff cut would also
raise the world price and thus the local price of the good in the foreign country; furthermore, when
γ e > 1, this local-price effect would generate a first-order welfare gain for the foreign government
since Wpb∗∗ > 0. Symmetrically, a small import tariff cut by the foreign government would change
x

the local prices of good y in a manner that would generate no first-order effect on the welfare of the
foreign government (since Wpb∗∗ = 0) and a first-order gain in the welfare of the domestic government
y

when γ e > 1 (since Wpby > 0). Finally, each tariff cut would induce a terms-of-trade loss for the
importing country and a terms-of-trade gain for the exporting country. In a symmetric setting, a
country imports as much as it exports, and the overall welfare effect for each government of the
resulting changes in world prices is zero.21 It follows that each government gains from a small and
symmetric exchange of reciprocal tariff cuts.
In the restricted-instrument setting, therefore, when governments are not motivated by the
terms-of-trade implications of their trade-policy selections, a problem may remain for a trade
agreement to solve. The problem is fundamentally a missing-instrument problem. When γ e > 1,
a domestic government that ignores the terms-of-trade implications of its policies would like to
subsidize its exports so as to achieve its preferred local price. Since the domestic government does
not have an instrument with which to perform this subsidization, the local price for its export good
may be lower than it prefers. A local-price externality then arises: an import tariff reduction by the
foreign government can generate a positive international externality for the domestic government
by raising the local price of the domestic export good. Interestingly, mutual improvements for
governments are again achieved in this setting through reciprocal reductions in import tariffs. It
is also interesting to note that the local-price externality arises in the competitive setting, even
though the domestic government then has no direct interest in the foreign local prices. As we argue
below, related findings occur in imperfect competition settings, although in that case the domestic
government also has a direct interest in foreign local prices.

2.3

Monopolistic Competition Model of Trade Agreements

Our discussion to this point diagnoses the purpose of a trade agreement from the perspective
of models that assume perfectly competitive markets. A large literature, however, suggests that
21
When export subsidies are set equal to zero, the local price of the export good is the same as the world price of
this good. It is nevertheless useful to break this price change into local- and world-price components, as captured for
general trade policies in the welfare functions above.

16

unilateral trade policies have novel implications in imperfectly competitive markets.22 We thus turn
our attention next to the possible implications of imperfectly competitive markets for the purpose
of trade agreements. To focus our discussion, we develop a variant of the monopolistic competition
model used by Venables (1987). The variant that we explore is also examined by Helpman and
Krugman (1989) and further developed by Bagwell and Staiger (2015).23 The model features
integrated markets, “iceberg” transport costs, monopolistically competitive firms which produce
differentiated varieties under increasing returns, CES preferences for differentiated products, free
entry in both the home and foreign countries, and a homogeneous “outside” good that is produced
under constant returns to scale. As before, we first develop the model and then consider the three
questions raised at the start of the section. We conclude with a brief discussion of related research
that uses other models of imperfect competition.
2.3.1

Monopolistic Competition Model

We again consider a two-country model. The utility functions for consumers in the home and
foreign countries are symmetric and are respectively given by
U
U∗

1
= (CD )θ ( ) + CY
θ
∗ θ 1
= (CD ) ( ) + CY∗ ,
θ

(17)

where θ ∈ (0, 1), CD is a home-country index of consumption of a bundle of differentiated goods,
∗ and C ∗ are defined
CY is home-country consumption of a homogeneous good Y , and where CD
Y
∗ as home and
analogously in the foreign country. At this point, we respectively treat CD and CD

foreign consumption of a single composite good, which we refer to as good D. We assume that
good Y is a numeraire good that is produced in each country from labor, where each unit of labor
produces a single unit of good Y. The home and foreign countries, respectively, are endowed with
large supplies of labor, L and L∗ . Each country then produces good Y , which is freely traded across
countries. Under these assumptions, we may fix the wage and thus the price of good Y in each
country at unity.
In each country, utility maximization establishes an equality between the ratio of marginal
utilities across goods D and Y and the ratio of prices between goods D and Y , where we recall
that the price of good Y is unity. Letting P and P ∗ respectively denote the price of good D in the
home and foreign countries, we thus have that
CD = P −ǫ
∗
CD

(18)

∗ −ǫ

= (P )

where in each country ǫ ≡ 1/(1 − θ) > 1 is the price elasticity of demand for good D. Letting I
22
23

See, e.g., Brander (1995) and Helpman and Krugman (1989).
Our presentation here is closely related to that found in Bagwell and Staiger (2015).

17

and I ∗ denote income in the home and foreign country, respectively, we may use (17) and (18) to
derive the home- and foreign-country indirect utility functions:
1
)+I
ǫθ
1
V ∗ (P ∗ , I ∗ ) = (P ∗ )−ǫθ ( ) + I ∗
ǫθ
V (P, I) = P −ǫθ (

(19)

where income is measured in terms of the numeraire good Y .
We assume now that CD is a consumption index that takes a CES form. Specifically, we assume
P
that CD = [ (ci )α ]1/α , where α ∈ (0, 1) and ci is the consumption level in the home country of
i
P
∗ = [ (c∗ )α ]1/α , where c∗ is the
variety i of the differentiated good. We may similarly represent CD
i
i
i

consumption level in the foreign country of variety i of the differentiated good. Letting pi and p∗i

denote the prices of variety i in the home and foreign countries, respectively, it can be shown (see
Dixit and Stiglitz, 1977) that
P

P
= [ (pi )α/(α−1) ](α−1)/α

(20)

i

P
P ∗ = [ (p∗i )α/(α−1) ](α−1)/α ,
i

are the associated home- and foreign-country price indices for good D.
Letting σ ≡ 1/(1 − α) > 1, we may now represent the demand for variety i in the home and
foreign countries, respectively, as
pi −σ
)
P
∗i
∗ p
= CD
( ∗ )−σ .
P

ci = CD (
c∗i

(21)

Combining (18) with (21) yields
ci = (pi )−σ P σ−ǫ ≡ ci (pi , P )

(22)

c∗i = (p∗i )−σ (P ∗ )σ−ǫ ≡ c∗i (p∗i , P ∗ ),
which completes the description of the demand side.
We now consider the costs confronted by firms. Production of any variety i entails a fixed cost
of labor, F > 0, and a constant marginal cost of labor, λ > 0. The positive fixed cost ensures
that no variety is produced by more than one firm; thus, if variety i is produced somewhere, then
exactly one firm in the world supplies this variety. In addition, firms confront trade costs. Let
φ > 0 denote the “iceberg” transport cost associated with international trade. An exporting firm
also faces trade costs in the form of ad valorem export and import tariffs. Let the home-country ad
valorem import and export tariffs respectively be denoted as τ h and τ ∗h , and let the foreign-country
ad valorem import and export tariffs similarly be denoted as τ ∗f and τ f , respectively. Notice that
18

an export subsidy by the home country, for example, is captured by a negative value for τ ∗h .
We assume that the markets are integrated and that tariffs are not prohibitive. It then follows
that price wedges across countries for any given variety are determined by the total trade costs.
Letting ι ≡ 1 + φ + τ h + τ f and ι∗ ≡ 1 + φ + τ ∗f + τ ∗h , we have that
p∗i
= ι∗ pih
h
pif

(23)

= ιp∗i
f ,

where pih and p∗i
h are the respective prices of home-produced variety i in the home and foreign
i
countries and where p∗i
f and pf are the respective prices of foreign-produced variety i in the foreign

and home countries.24
The profit for a home-country firm that produces variety i is now given by
∗
π i = (pih − λ)[ci (pih , P ) + (1 + φ)c∗i (p∗i
h , P )] − F,

(24)

where the number of varieties in each country enters profit only through the price indices.25 Each
firm selects its profit-maximizing price while taking as given the price indices, P and P ∗ . Using
(22), (23) and (24), the profit-maximizing prices for home-produced variety i are
σ
λ ≡ pb
1−σ
= ι∗ pb ≡ p∗h (ι∗ ).

pih =
p∗i
h

(25)

Similarly, the profit for a foreign-country firm that produces variety i is given by
∗i ∗i
∗
i i
π ∗i = (p∗i
f − λ)[c (pf , P ) + (1 + φ)c (pf , P )] − F,

(26)

and the profit-maximizing prices are
σ
λ ≡ pb
1−σ
= ιb
p ≡ pf (ι).

p∗i
=
f
pif

(27)

Our next step is to represent the price indices that result from profit-maximizing pricing. Using
(20), (25) and (27), we obtain
P

= [nh (b
p)α/(α−1) + nf (pf )α/(α−1) ](α−1)/α ≡ P (nh , nf , pf )

(28)

P ∗ = [nf (b
p)α/(α−1) + nh (p∗h )α/(α−1) ](α−1)/α ≡ P ∗ (nh , nf , p∗h ),
24

This formulation assumes that a foreign importer of variety i, for example, purchases at the home-country factory
gate at price pih and then pays the export tax, τ ∗h pih , import tax, τ ∗f pih , and transport cost, φpih .
25
This expression reflects the fact that a foreign importer must purchase 1 + φ units at the home-country factory
gate in order that 1 unit may be delivered for consumption in the foreign country. Our formulation assumes that
international shipping services are freely traded.

19

where nh and nf are the number of firms producing differentiated varieties in the home and foreign
countries, respectively, and where we suppress the dependence of pf on ι and of p∗h on ι∗ here and
henceforth. Using (28), we observe that, for given nh and nf , the price index in any one country is
rising in the total trade costs faced by exporters from the other country but is independent of the
total trade costs faced by its own exporters. It is also interesting to consider the implications of a
reallocation of firms across countries. Referring again to (28), if the total trade costs are positive
(i.e., ι > 1 and ι∗ > 1), then an increase in nh that is matched by a reduction in nf results in a fall
in the home-country price index P and a rise in the foreign-country price index P ∗ .
We are now prepared to determine nh and nf using free-entry conditions. The free-entry
conditions are defined as follows:
c(b
p, P (nh , nf , pf )) + (1 + φ)c∗ (p∗h , P ∗ (nh , nf , p∗h )) = F/(b
p − λ)
∗

c (b
p, P

∗

(nh , nf , p∗h ))

(29)

+ (1 + φ)c(pf , P (nh , nf , pf )) = F/(b
p − λ),

where we exploit the symmetry of the differentiated sector and now eliminate variety i superscripts.
The resulting values for nh and nf may be expressed as nh (pf , p∗h ) and nf (pf , p∗h ). After inserting
these expressions into (28), we may abuse notation somewhat and write the free-entry values for
the price indices as P (pf , p∗h ) and P ∗ (pf , p∗h ).
As first noted by Venables (1987), the monopolistic competition model exhibits an interesting
“firm-delocation effect” from trade protection. To illustrate the point, suppose that we begin at
global free trade and then introduce a small and positive import tariff in the home country (i.e.,
τ h > 0). We see from (25) and (27) that p∗h is unaltered while pf rises; thus, for given values
of nh and nf , it follows from (28) that P ∗ is unchanged and that P rises. This in turn implies
that c(b
p, P (nh , nf , pf )) and thus the LHS of the first expression in (29) rises. In addition, since it
can be confirmed that pf rises more than does P, it follows as well that c(pf , P (nh , nf , pf )) and
thus the LHS of the second expression in (29) falls. Therefore, for given values of nh and nf , the
introduction of a small and positive import tariff in the home country generates positive profits for
home firms and negative profits for foreign firms. The restoration of zero profits in each country
then requires an decrease in P and an increase in P ∗ .26 The final step is to note from (28) that
these changes in the price indices in turn require an increase in nh and a decrease in nf , that is,
a “delocation” of firms from the foreign to the home country. A related argument establishes that
the introduction of a small export subsidy in the foreign country (i.e., τ f < 0) leads to a rise in P
and a fall in P ∗ , which in turn require a decrease in nh and an increase in nf , that is, a “delocation”
of firms from the home to the foreign country.
More generally, the firm-delocation effect indicates that a slight increase in the home-country
import tariff “delocates” foreign firms to the home-country market, which benefits home-country
26

Intuitively, home and foreign profits can adjust in different directions only if the price indices also move in
different directions; furthermore, given the positive trade cost φ > 0 and the symmetry of the model, local sales
contribute relatively more to the profits of each country’s firms than do export sales. See Bagwell and Staiger (2015)
and Helpman and Krugman (1987) for additional discussion.

20

consumers who enjoy the lower price index that derives from reduced trade costs and harms foreigncountry consumers who experience increased trade costs and thus a higher price index. By a similar
logic, a slight increase in the foreign-country export subsidy “delocates” home firms to the foreigncountry market, which benefits foreign-country consumers while harming home-country consumers.
As our discussion above suggests, trade policy affects welfare through the firm-delocation effect
and the associated impact on price indices. But trade policy may also generate tariff revenue and
impact income and thus welfare through this channel as well. In the model that we consider here,
where profits are zero due to free entry, income in a given country is given by its labor force (which
receives a wage of unity) plus the country’s net trade tax revenue. To formally represent income,
we use M to denote the imports in the home country and E to represent exports from the home
country, where by market clearing home-country imports (exports) are equal to foreign-country
exports (imports). We have that
= nf (pf , p∗h )c(pf , P (pf , p∗h )) ≡ M (pf , p∗h )

M

(30)

E = nh (pf , p∗h )c∗ (p∗h , P ∗ (pf , p∗h )) ≡ E(pf , p∗h ),
and so income levels in the home and foreign countries are given as27
I = L + τ ∗h pbE(pf , p∗h ) + τ h pbM (pf , p∗h )

I

∗

∗

= L +

τ f pbM (pf , p∗h )

+

(31)

τ ∗f pbE(pf , p∗h ).

To express welfare as a function of local and world prices, we must first define world prices.
Consider first varieties that are exported from the home to the foreign country. We define the world
price for these varieties as
p∗w = (1 + τ ∗h )b
p ≡ p∗w (τ ∗h ),

(32)

from which it follows that τ ∗h pb = p∗w − pb. Using also that p∗h = ι∗ pb from (25), we then further have

that τ ∗f pb = p∗h − φb
p − p∗w . Consider now varieties that are exported from the foreign to the home
country. The world price for these varieties is defined as

pw = (1 + τ f )b
p ≡ pw (τ f ),

(33)

from which we see that τ f pb = pw − pb. We may use pf = ιb
p from (27) to further derive that
τ h pb = pf − φb
p − pw .

With these pricing relationships in hand, we may re-write the expressions for income in (31) as
I = L + [p∗w − pb]E(pf , p∗h ) + [pf − φb
p − pw ]M (pf , p∗h ) ≡ I(p∗h , pf , pw , p∗w )

(34)

I ∗ = L∗ + [pw − pb]M (pf , p∗h ) + [p∗h − φb
p − p∗w ]E(pf , p∗h ) ≡ I ∗ (p∗h , pf , pw , p∗w ).

It is instructive to compare the expressions for incomes given by (31) and (34). The advantage of
27

As indicated in footnote 25, we assume that international shipping services are freely traded and earn zero profit.

21

the expressions for incomes in (34) is that the price channels through which trade policies transmit
international externalities are directly identified.
With (34) in place, we may now refer to (19) and (with some abuse in notation) write each
country’s indirect utility function in terms of local and world prices:
1
) + I(p∗h , pf , pw , p∗w )
ǫθ
1
V ∗ (p∗h , pf , pw , p∗w ) = P ∗ (pf , p∗h )−ǫθ ( ) + I ∗ (p∗h , pf , pw , p∗w ),
ǫθ
V (p∗h , pf , pw , p∗w ) = P (pf , p∗h )−ǫθ (

(35)

where as noted above we may express price indices as functions of pf and p∗h . Since free entry
ensures that profits are zero in this model, an obvious role for political motivations does not arise.
We thus associate a country’s welfare with its indirect utility function.
The monopolistic competition model considered here admits an interesting pattern of international externalities. As Helpman and Krugman (1989) note, one special feature of the model is that
a country’s import tariff does not generate an international externality that travels through world
prices. For example, we may use (32) and (33) to confirm that the import tariff of the home country,
τ h , affects neither p∗w nor, more surprisingly, pw . As Helpman and Krugman (1989) discuss, this
feature arises because of CES preferences (which result in a constant markup) and the existence
of a freely traded outside good (which ensures that the marginal cost λ is constant). By contrast,
and as Bagwell and Staiger (2015) emphasize, these same features imply that a country’s export
tariff has an extreme impact on world prices, in that 100% of an export tariff is passed through
to consumers abroad. For instance, using (32) and (33), we see that the export tariff of the home
country, τ ∗h , has no effect on pw but is fully passed through in p∗w .
We note, too, that the pattern of international externalities is more complicated in the monopolistic competition model than in the perfectly competitive models considered above. In the
models with perfect competition, the welfare function of the home government, for example, is
determined by the local and world prices, where the relevant local prices are those that prevail in
the home country. In the model with monopolistic competition, however, and as (35) confirms, the
home-country welfare depends directly also on the price of home-produced varieties in the foreign
market (i.e., on p∗h = p∗h (ι∗ )). Thus, the monopolistic-competition model admits a richer set of
international externality channels. The key question for our purposes here, however, is whether
these new channels lead to new rationales for a trade agreement. This question is addressed below.
2.3.2

Prisoners’ Dilemma

We now briefly consider the basic Prisoners’ Dilemma that arises in the monopolistic competition
model. As with the models above, we characterize the Nash, efficient and politically optimal tariffs.
To characterize Nash trade policies, we begin by representing the best-response or optimal trade
policies for the home and foreign governments. We assume in this discussion that the relevant
second-order conditions hold. The home-country best-response import and export policies are then

22

determined by the following two first-order conditions:
dpf
dι
dp∗h
dp∗w
Vp∗h ∗ + Vp∗w
dι
dτ ∗h
Vpf

= 0

(36)

= 0,

where the home-country import tariff τ h affects pf via ι, the home-country export tariff affects
p∗h via ι∗ , and the indirect utility function V is given in (35). Similarly, the foreign-country bestresponse import and export policies satisfy the first-order conditions
dp∗h
h dι∗
dpf
dpw
Vp∗f
+ Vp∗w
dι
dτ f
Vp∗∗

= 0

(37)

= 0.

∗N
∗N
N
We may now define the Nash trade policies, (τ N
h , τ h , τ f , τ f ), as the tariffs that simultaneously

satisfy (36) and (37).
Consistent with our discussion above, we note that terms-of-trade effects are absent from the
conditions that determine the best-response import policies (the top expressions in (36) and (37))
but present in the conditions that determine the best-response export policies (the bottom expressions in (36) and (37)). As Bagwell and Staiger (2015) discuss further, the optimal export policy
for a given country thus represents a balance between the terms-of-trade gain that is associated
with an export tariff and the firm-delocation benefit that is associated with an export subsidy.
Our next goal is to characterize efficient trade policies. Since this model also has sufficient
trade-policy instruments with which to effect lump-sum transfers, efficient trade policies are those
which maximize V + V ∗ . Using (34), we observe that total income can be written as
I(·) + I ∗ (·) = L + L∗ + [pf − φb
p − pb]M (pf , p∗h ) + [p∗h − φb
p − pb]E(pf , p∗h ) ≡ T (pf , p∗h ).

(38)

Notice in particular that world prices do not affect total income, which is to say that we can express
total income as the function T (pf , p∗h ). Using (35) and (38), we can now also represent joint welfare
as a function J(pf , p∗h ) where
V (·) + V ∗ (·) = P (pf , p∗h )−ǫθ (

1
1
) + P ∗ (pf , p∗h )−ǫθ ( ) + T (pf , p∗h ) ≡ J(pf , p∗h ).
ǫθ
ǫθ

(39)

As this expression confirms, any trade-policy induced change in world prices corresponds simply to
pure international rent shifting and does not affect efficiency.
Efficient trade policies thus maximize the joint welfare function J(pf , p∗h ) given in (39). By
(25) and (27), respectively, we also know that p∗h = p∗h (ι∗ ) and pf = pf (ι); thus, joint welfare is a
function of the four tariffs only through ι and ι∗ . Assuming that the joint welfare function is strictly
concave when treated as a function of ι and ι∗ , the set of efficient tariffs is thus characterized by

23

the following two first-order conditions:
dp∗h
h dι∗
dpf
+ Vp∗f ]
dι

[Vp∗h + Vp∗∗ ]

= 0

[Vpf

= 0.

(40)

Bagwell and Staiger (2015) further explore the two conditions in (40) and show that efficiency
requires a net subsidy to trade along each trade channel (i.e., τ ∗f + τ ∗h < 0 and τ h + τ f < 0).28 The
intuition is that a net subsidy is desirable due to the positive markup in the differentiated sector.
We now turn again to the three questions raised at the start of the section. First, we consider
the efficiency of Nash trade policies. Once again, we expect that Nash trade policies are inefficient,
since governments are motivated by world-price considerations when setting Nash policies but not
when maximizing joint welfare. More formally, after adding the bottom Nash condition in (36) to
the top Nash condition in (37), and likewise adding the top Nash condition in (36) to the bottom
Nash condition in (37), we arrive at the following:
dp∗h
h dι∗
dpf
+ Vp∗f ]
dι

[Vp∗h + Vp∗∗ ]
[Vpf

dp∗w
<0
dτ ∗h
dpw
= −M
<0
dτ f

= −E

(41)

where we use (34) and (35) to obtain that Vp∗w = E and Vp∗w = M . Comparing (40) and (41), it is
now immediate that Nash trade policies are inefficient.
Given the assumed second-order conditions and the symmetry of the model, we know that
Nash and efficient tariffs are each such that the total tariffs satisfy ι = ι∗ . Starting at the Nash
equilibrium, if we were to undertake any change in underlying tariffs that delivered a symmetric
increase in ι = ι∗ , then the change in joint welfare would be given by the sum of the terms on the
N
∗N
∗N
∗N .
LHS of the equalities in (41), when evaluated at ιN ≡ 1 + φ + τ N
h + τf = 1 + φ + τf + τh ≡ ι

As is evident from (41), starting at the Nash equilibrium, a symmetric change in ι = ι∗ increases
joint welfare if and only if ι = ι∗ is decreased. It thus follows that the total trade cost, ι = ι∗ , is
strictly higher at Nash tariffs than at efficient tariffs.
We turn now to our second question and explore whether a mutually beneficial trade agreement
requires reciprocal trade liberalization. Our preceding discussion already establishes that a trade
agreement that delivers symmetric changes in total trade costs can generate greater joint welfare
if and only if total tariffs are reduced from Nash levels. Thus, at least in the context of trade
policy adjustments that maintain symmetric total trade costs, ι = ι∗ , mutual gains are possible
starting at Nash only if reciprocal trade liberalization occurs in the sense that τ h + τ f = τ ∗f + τ ∗h is
reduced. Just as in our discussion of the partial-equilibrium model with perfect competition, such
efficiency-enhancing paths may involve adjustments in underlying tariffs that are asymmetric across
countries. Mutual gains are again possible, however, only if each government makes adjustments
28

See Helpman and Krugman (1989) for related discussion.

24

to its policies that contribute to some degree to the fall in total tariffs.
Finally, we consider whether terms-of-trade motivations represent the sole rationale for trade
agreements in the monopolistic competition model. To explore this issue, we again define the
politically optimal tariffs to be those tariffs that hypothetically would be chosen by governments
unilaterally if they did not value the pure international rent-shifting associated with the termsof-trade movements induced by their unilateral tariff choices. For the monopolistic competition
model under consideration here, when making their respective politically optimal tariff selections,
the home-country government acts as if Vp∗w = 0 = Vpw while the foreign-country governments acts
as if Vp∗w = 0 = Vp∗∗w .29 Formally, and following Bagwell and Staiger (2015), we define the politically
optimal tariffs for the monopolistic competition model as the vector of tariffs satisfying
Vpf

dpf
dpf
dp∗
dp∗
= Vp∗h ∗h = 0 = Vp∗∗ ∗h = Vp∗f
.
h dι
dι
dι
dι

(42)

O , τ ∗P O , τ P O ).
The four equations in (42) determine the politically optimal tariff vector, (τ Ph O , τ ∗P
h
f
f

In the symmetric model considered here, a common total tariff is determined for each direction
O + τ ∗P O , so that the resulting total trade cost is also symmetric:
of trade, τ Ph O + τ Pf O = τ ∗P
f
h
O + τ ∗P O ≡ ι∗P O . Using (40) and (42), it is now immediate
ιP O ≡ 1 + φ + τ Ph O + τ Pf O = 1 + φ + τ ∗P
f
h

that the politically optimal tariffs are efficient. Thus, in the monopolistic competition model as
well, the terms-of-trade externality is the sole rationale for a trade agreement.
Intuitively, in the Nash equilibrium of the monopolistic competition model, each government
is mindful of the beneficial firm-delocation effect that import tariffs and export subsidies offer,
and each government is also attentive to the terms-of-trade gain that export tariffs provide. The
effects of trade policies on trade volumes and thereby tariff revenue are also considered. By contrast,
when governments select politically optimal policies, they ignore the terms-of-trade impacts of trade
(namely, export) policies and focus on the local-price implications of trade policies. The local prices
that can be influenced by trade policy in this model are the domestic prices of varieties produced
abroad, p∗h and pf , where these prices in turn are determined by total trade costs, ι = 1+φ+τ h +τ f
and ι∗ = 1 + φ + τ ∗f + τ ∗h . A key point is that, when a government selects its politically optimal
export policy, it does so to deliver its preferred local price abroad for its domestically produced
varieties, which in turn neutralizes the externality that travels from the trading partner’s import
tariff through this price. Likewise, a government’s politically optimal import tariff delivers its
preferred local price in the domestic market for varieties produced abroad, which in turn neutralizes
the externality that travels from the trading partner’s export policy through this price.
Thus, while the monopolistic competition model admits a rich set of local-price externalities
that complement the traditional terms-of-trade externality, the local-price externalities are “shut
down” when each government selects its politically optimal import and export policies, leaving
only the terms-of-trade externality, which by itself amounts simply to a lump-sum transfer between
29

As noted previously, in the monopolistic competition model considered here, a country cannot use its import
policy to change the world price of varieties produced abroad. For consistency, in our definition of politically optimal
tariffs, we nevertheless include the requirement that such a change would not be valued.

25

governments. In this sense, the terms-of-trade externality remains the sole rationale for a trade
agreement. From this perspective, it is also apparent that politically optimal trade policies would
not in general be efficient were governments to possess an incomplete set of trade-policy instruments.
For example, if export policies were unavailable, then a government would not be able to use its
export policy to deliver its preferred local price abroad for domestically produced varieties, and its
trading partner’s import tariff would then induce a local-price externality through this channel.30
As in the partial-equilibrium perfect competition model discussed above, the efficiency of politically
optimal policies relies deeply on the assumption that governments possess a complete set of tradepolicy instruments.31
The finding just described - that politically optimal policies are efficient in the monopolistic
competition model when governments have a complete set of trade-policy instruments - extends
to a range of other imperfect competition settings. For example, Bagwell and Staiger (2015) show
that this finding holds as well in the Cournot delocation model considered by Venables (1985),
wherein firms engage in Cournot competition and markets are segmented. In complementary work,
Bagwell and Staiger (2012a) show that the finding holds as well in various “profit-shifting” models,
where the number of firms is fixed and trade policy can shift profits from one country to another.
An important direction for future research concerns the extent to which this finding extends to
settings with multiple countries, domestic policies and other forms of imperfect competition.32
Another extension, which we discuss below, concerns whether this finding extends in “offshoring”
settings where prices may be determined through bilateral bargaining between sellers and buyers.
Finally, while the results summarized here indicate that the terms-of-trade externality remains
the sole rationale for a trade agreement in important imperfect-competition settings, non-termsof-trade externalities may nevertheless be important for understanding key features of actual trade
agreements. First, actual trade agreements may constrain the trade-policy instruments that are
available to governments, so that local-price externalities are not neutralized when politically op30

Indeed, in this model, import tariffs do not generate a terms-of-trade externality, and so the inefficiency that
emerges under Nash policies when export policies are unavailable clearly does not derive from this externality.
31
The argument here is distinct from standard arguments that governments may need a complete set of policy
instruments in order to achieve a first-best outcome in the presence of market imperfections. The argument here
instead concerns whether governments can achieve an efficient outcome while using politically optimal policies, when
efficiency and political optimality are defined relative to a fixed set of policy instruments.
32
In this regard, Campolmi, Fadinger and Forlati (2014) extend the study of trade agreements within a Venables
(1987) delocation-type model to include domestic policies as well as trade policies. They argue in this setting that
the choice of domestic policies introduces a novel motive for non-cooperative trade policy choices; and they further
claim that politically optimal policies are not efficient in this setting, implying the possibility of a trade agreement
whose purpose extends beyond the internalization of terms-of-trade externalities. However, the characterization of
politically optimal policies employed by Campolmi, Fadinger and Forlati does not conform to the definition of such
policies that we have described here — Campolmi, Fadinger and Forlati impose the restriction that governments act
as if their unilateral policy choices had no impact on world prices, while as described above (see also Bagwell and
Staiger, 2015) we impose the restriction that governments act as if they did not value the world price impacts of their
unilateral policy choices; and they evaluate their political optimum conditions at reciprocal free trade policies, which
do not correspond to the politically optimal policies in this setting according to our definition — and so we view the
purpose of trade agreements in this setting as still an open question. See also Costinot, Rodriguez-Clare and Werning
(2015), who consider a modeling framework that includes that of Campolmi, Fadinger and Fortali (2014) as a special
case, and who argue that the motives for policy intervention can indeed be understood to reflect only terms-of-trade
considerations in this setting.

26

timal policies are selected. As one important example, we note that the WTO prohibits export
subsidies. As Ossa (2011) argues and as we discuss further in a later section, in such a restrictedinstrument setting, novel externalities may influence trade-agreement purpose and design. Second,
and relatedly, models with imperfect competition may deliver novel interpretations of certain design features of trade agreements. For instance, as Bagwell and Staiger (2012b) show, the Cournot
delocation model can provide a novel interpretation of the WTO’s restrictions on export subsidies.33 Finally, our discussion here emphasizes international externalities that travel through prices.
Trade policies also may be associated with international non-pecuniary externalities, such as global
warming. The purpose and design of trade agreements in settings characterized by pecuniary and
non-pecuniary international externalities is a very important direction for future research.34

2.4

Offshoring Model of Trade Agreements

In all of the models that we describe above, prices are determined by market-clearing mechanisms. A growing volume of trade, however, involves intermediate inputs, with firms “offshoring”
production and frequently customizing inputs to reflect the needs of buyers. In the presence of
such “relationship-specific” investments, hold up is a natural concern. Since contracts involving
international transactions may be difficult to enforce, the resulting prices may be determined by
bilateral negotiations rather than market-clearing mechanisms: that is, while it is natural to think
that market clearing is still a feature of the equilibrium in settings where offshoring is prevalent,
the discipline that market clearing places on the determination of international prices is likely to
be diminished. An interesting issue is whether the rise of offshoring impacts in some fundamental
way the purpose and design of trade agreements. Antràs and Staiger (2012a,b) examine this issue
in detail. Here, we develop the basic model used by Antràs and Staiger (2012b), characterize the
Nash, efficient and politically optimal policies, and emphasize in particular their finding that the
politically optimal policies are not efficient when governments have political-economic motivations
and seek to use trade policies for the purposes of redistribution. The key implication of this finding is that the inefficiency associated with the terms-of-trade externality is not necessarily the only
problem for a trade agreement to solve when intermediate inputs are traded and the resulting prices
are determined by bilateral negotiations.
2.4.1

Offshoring Model

Following Antràs and Staiger (2012b), we consider two countries that are small in the market for
a final good, which is called good 1 and is traded on world markets at a price of unity. Consumers
in the home (H) and foreign (F ) countries share identical preferences, which take the quasi-linear
33

See also Bagwell and Lee (2015) for a recent effort that interprets these restrictions from the perspective of the
monopolistic competition model with heterogeneous firms developed by Melitz and Ottaviano (2008).
34
Related existing research that emphasizes the presence of international non-pecuniary externalities includes Limão
(2005) and Spagnola (1999a, 1999b). Related research on trade agreements in the presence of domestic non-pecuniary
externalities includes Ederington (2001) and Lee (2007, 2014).

27

form
U j = cj0 + u(cj1 ),

(43)

where cji is the consumption of good i ∈ {0, 1} in country j ∈ {H, F } and where u′ > 0 > u′′ .
As is standard, the numeraire good, which here is good 0, is costlessly traded and consumed in
positive quantities in both countries. With pj1 denoting the price of good 1 in country j, we let
D1 (pj1 ) ≡ u′−1 (pj1 ) indicate the demand for good 1 in country j. The corresponding consumer
surplus function is then represented as
CS(pj1 )

=

Z

p

pj1

D1 (p)dp,

(44)

where p is the choke price (if any).
Good 1 is produced by the home country using a customized input x sourced in the foreign country, where the good-1 production function y(x) satisfies y(0) = 0, y ′ (x) > 0 > y ′′ (x), limx→0 y ′ (x) =
∞ and limx→∞ y ′ (x) = 0.35 The marginal cost for a foreign input supplier is normalized to unity.
The home country H has a unit mass of producers of the final good 1, while the foreign country
F has a unit mass of suppliers of the intermediate input good x. Importantly, an input requires
customization for its intended final good producer and is thus specific to the particular supplierproducer relationship. A simplifying assumption is that a given input in fact has no outside value
to other suppliers. As well, Antràs and Staiger assume that contracts are infeasible so that the
price at which each supplier in F sells its inputs to a producer in H is determined ex post (after the
cost of producing x is sunk) according to the generalized Nash bargaining solution, where α ∈ (0, 1)
is the weight attached to the home producer and 1 − α ∈ (0, 1) is thus the weight attached to the
foreign supplier.
Before supplier-producer relationships are established, trade policies are determined. Let τ H
x
H
denote the specific trade tax imposed by H on imports of x from F , where τ H
x > 0 (τ x < 0)

indicates an import tariff (import subsidy). Similarly, τ Fx denotes the specific trade tax imposed
by F on exports of x to H, where τ Fx > 0 (τ Fx < 0) indicates an export tariff (export subsidy). It
F
is convenient also to define the total trade tax on the intermediate input x as τ x ≡ τ H
x + τ x . The

model allows that the home country H may import or export final good 1. Let the specific trade
H
H
tax imposed by H on the final good 1 be represented as τ H
1 , where τ 1 > 0 (τ 1 < 0) indicates an

import tariff or export subsidy (import subsidy or export tariff).36
Formally, Antràs and Staiger (2012b) consider a game with the following stages:
F
H
stage 0: Trade policies τ H
x , τ x and τ 1 are determined.

stage 1: Each supplier in F is randomly matched to a unique producer in H.
stage 2: Each supplier decides on an amount x of the customized input to produce.
stage 3: Each producer-supplier pair bargains over the price of the intermediate input.
35

An important implication of concavity is that y(x)/x > y ′ (x) for x > 0.
As Antràs and Staiger (2012b) argue, the foreign country F has no incentive to deviate from free trade in the
final good, and so for our discussion here we simply assume that F maintains free trade in the final good.
36

28

stage 4: Each producer imports x units and produces the final good, and payments and trade taxes
are settled.
To begin, let us consider the bargaining game in stage 3, at which point the trade policies are
fixed, the volume x is determined, and the associated production costs for x are sunk. The joint
surplus over which a producer-supplier pair bargains in stage 3 can be represented as
H
J(τ H
1 , τ x , x) = (1 + τ 1 )y(x) − τ x x,

(45)

H
F
H
H H
where pH
1 = 1 + τ 1 ≡ p1 (τ 1 ) is the price of final good 1 and we recall that τ x ≡ τ x + τ x is the

total trade tax on the intermediate good x. The producer in H and the supplier in F thus obtain
H
the respective bargaining payoffs of αJ(τ H
1 , τ x , x) and (1 − α)J(τ 1 , τ x , x).

Foreseeing this bargaining payoff, a supplier in F chooses the volume x in stage 2 so as to
maximize (1 − α)J(τ H
1 , τ x , x) − x, where we recall that the marginal production cost of x is unitary.
Let us denote the profit maximizing volume as x
b=x
b(τ H
1 , τ x ), where this volume is defined by the
first-order condition for profit maximization:

′
x) = (1 − α)τ x + 1.
(1 − α)(1 + τ H
1 )y (b

(46)

′′
Given the maintained assumptions that 1 + τ H
1 > 0 and y < 0, it is straightforward to verify that

∂b
x/∂τ H
x/∂τ x . Intuitively, a tariff change elicits a higher profit-maximizing value for x
1 > 0 > ∂b
when the tariff change results in a higher joint surplus for bargaining.
It is instructive to pause at this point and highlight the hold-up problem that is embedded in
the model. If the producer-supplier pair could contract over x with the objective of maximizing
the sum of their joint payoffs inclusive of the cost of producing x, then they would choose x to
maximize J(τ H
1 , τ x , x) − x. The associated first-order condition is
′
(1 + τ H
1 )y (x) = τ x + 1.

(47)

Comparing (47) with (46), we conclude that x
b is lower than the level that would be contracted

upon. The key point, of course, is that the cost that the foreign supplier incurs in producing the
intermediate input is treated as sunk once the Nash bargaining process commences in stage 3.
Continuing with our analysis of the Antràs-Staiger (2012b) game, we now roll back to stage 1
to determine payoffs for the home producer and foreign supplier. We define these payoffs as follows:
πH
πF

H H
= αJ(τ H
b(τ H
1 , τ x, x
1 , τ x )) ≡ π (τ 1 , τ x )

(48)

F H
= (1 − α)J(τ H
b(τ H
b(τ H
1 , τ x, x
1 , τ x )) − x
1 , τ x ) ≡ π (τ 1 , τ x ).

Our next step is to represent welfare functions for the governments of the home and foreign
countries. Letting γ j ≥ 1 denote the welfare weight that the government of country j attaches to
the payoffs enjoyed by its firms, the home- and foreign-country government welfare functions may
29

be respectively represented as follows:
H
F
H
H H H
H
H
W H (τ H
x(·))] + τ H
b(·) (49)
1 , τ x , τ x ) = CS(1 + τ 1 ) + γ π (τ 1 , τ x ) + τ 1 [D1 (1 + τ 1 ) − y(b
x x
H
F
F F H
F
b(·).
W F (τ H
1 , τ x , τ x ) = CS(1) + γ π (τ 1 , τ x ) + τ x x

where x
b(·) ≡ x
b(τ H
1 , τ x ). Notice that the foreign country imports final good 1 at the world price,

whereas the home-country government may be tempted to use its final-good tariff τ H
1 so as to
influence the joint bargaining surplus and thus the determination of x
b. The final two terms in the
top line of (49) and the final term in the bottom line of (49) are tariff-revenue terms.

We may now represent world welfare, W w , as the sum of W H and W F . Formally:
F
H
F H
F
H
W w = W H (τ H
1 , τ x , τ x ) + W (τ 1 , τ x , τ x )

(50)

F F H
H H H
= CS(1 + τ H
1 ) + CS(1) + γ π (τ 1 , τ x ) + γ π (τ 1 , τ x )
H
x(·))] + τ x x
b(·)
+τ H
1 [D1 (1 + τ 1 ) − y(b

≡ W w (τ H
1 , τ x ).

F
Observe that W w depends on τ H
x and τ x only through their sum, τ x .

Having described the basic model, we now show that the welfare functions can be written as
functions of local and world prices. As in the models described above, such a formulation is useful,
since it enables us to define politically optimal policies. We begin by defining the implied prices for
the offshoring model.
We may think of a supplier in F as delivering x
b units to a producer in H at the home-country

H
local price pH
x , where px is thus defined by

F
x ≡ π F (τ H
b − (1 + τ H
pH
1 , τ x ).
x + τ x )b
x x

(51)

Using (45) and (48), we may now re-write (51) equivalently as
pH
x =

(1 − α)(1 + τ H
x(·))
H
1 )y(b
+ ατ x ≡ pH
x (τ 1 , τ x ).
x
b(·)

(52)

Next, we let p∗x represent the international or world price for the intermediate good x. This is the
implied price that prevails prior to the application of H’s import policy:
H
p∗x = pH
x − τx =

(1 − α)(1 + τ H
x(·))
∗ H
H
F
1 )y(b
+ ατ Fx − (1 − α)τ H
x ≡ px (τ 1 , τ x , τ x ).
x
b(·)

(53)

Finally, we may define the foreign-country local price pFx as the implied price that prevails before
the application of F ’s export policy:
pFx = p∗x − τ Fx =

(1 − α)(1 + τ H
x(·))
1 )y(b
− (1 − α)τ x ≡ pFx (τ H
1 , τ x ).
x
b(·)
30

(54)

F
We now make a few observations. First, we observe from (53) and (54) that pH
x − px = τ x .
H
Second, we recall that pH
1 = 1 + τ 1 . Next, using these observations, we note that we may think of

x
b(τ H
1 , τ x ) as a function of local prices. Formally, we may define the function x as follows:
H
F
x(pH
b(τ H
1 , px − px ) = x
1 , τ x ).

(55)

Finally, with x defined in terms of prices as indicated in (55), we can likewise express firm payoffs
and tariff revenues in terms of prices. For instance, using (51) and replacing x
b with x as allowed via
F
H
F
F
H
H
F
(55) and τ H
x +τ x ≡ τ x with px −px , π can be expressed as a function of p1 , px and px . While firm

profit depends only on total tariffs, tariff revenue is also influenced by the world price. For example,
∗
H H
F
b, can be written as (pH
H’s tariff revenue on the intermediate good, τ H
x − px )x(p1 , px − px ).
x x

Proceeding in this general manner, we may now represent the home and foreign government

welfare functions, and thus the world welfare function, in terms of the local and world prices that
the underlying trade policies imply. We begin with the welfare function of H’s government:
WH

H H
H
H
H
H
∗
= CS(pH
1 ) + γ [p1 y(x(·)) − px x(·)] + (p1 − 1)[D(p1 ) − y(x(·))] + (px − px )x(·) (56)
H

H
H H
F H
∗ H
H
F
≡ W (pH
1 (τ 1 ), px (τ 1 , τ x ), px (τ 1 , τ x ), px (τ 1 , τ x , τ x )),
H
F
where x(·) ≡ x(pH
1 , px − px ). And next, the welfare function of F ’s government:

WF

= CS(1) + γ F [pFx − 1]x(·) + (p∗x − pFx )x(·)

(57)

F

H
H H
F H
∗ H
H
F
≡ W (pH
1 (τ 1 ), px (τ 1 , τ x ), px (τ 1 , τ x ), px (τ 1 , τ x , τ x )).

Finally, the world welfare function can now be defined as follows:
W

w

= W

H

+W

F

H H
H
H
H
= CS(pH
1 ) + γ [p1 y(x(·)) − px x(·)] + (p1 − 1)[D(p1 ) − y(x(·))] (58)

F
CS(1) + γ F [pFx − 1]x(·) + (pH
x − px )x(·)
w

H
H H
F H
≡ W (pH
1 (τ 1 ), px (τ 1 , τ x ), px (τ 1 , τ x )).

We note that the welfare functions of the governments of H and F each depend on the terms
of trade, p∗x . The government of H (F ) enjoys a terms-of-trade gain when p∗x is lower (higher):
H

F

W p∗x = −x(·) < 0 and W p∗x = x(·) > 0.

(59)

But the world welfare function is independent of the terms of trade: for given local prices, and thus
for a given value of x(·), a change in p∗x simply amounts to an international transfer.
2.4.2

Prisoners’ Dilemma

With the offshoring model developed and the welfare functions presented in terms of local and
world prices, we are prepared now to characterize the Nash, efficient and politically optimal trade

31

policies. To this end, we first present the associated first-order conditions and then describe the
main findings. For each optimization problem, we assume that the corresponding second-order
conditions are satisfied.
HN
FN
The Nash trade policies for the offshoring model, (τ HN
1 , τ x , τ x ), satisfy the following first-

order conditions:
H

H

W pH
+ W pH
x
1

F
∂p∗x
∂pH
H ∂px
x
+
−
W
x(·)
F
p
x
τH
τH
τH
1
1
1

F
∂p∗
∂pH
H ∂p
x
+ W pFx x − x(·) Hx
τx
τx
τx
H
F
∂p∗x
F ∂px
F ∂px
W pH
W
x(·)
+
+
F
px
x τ
τx
τ Fx
x
H

W pH
x

= 0

(60)

= 0
= 0,

H
H
F
where we use pH
1 = 1 + τ 1 , τ x = τ x + τ x and (59). Next, the efficient trade policies for the
E
offshoring model, (τ HE
1 , τ x ), satisfy the following first-order conditions:
w

w

W pH
+ W pH
x
1
w

W pH
x

F
∂pH
w ∂px
x
+
W
F
px
τH
τH
1
1

= 0

F
∂pH
w ∂p
x
+ W pFx x
τx
τx

= 0.

(61)

O , τ HP O , τ F P O ), satisfy
Finally, the politically optimal trade policies for the offshoring model, (τ HP
x
x
1

the following first-order conditions:
H

H

+ W pH
W pH
x
1

F
∂pH
H ∂px
x
+
W
F
p
x
τH
τH
1
1

F
∂pH
H ∂p
x
+ W pFx x
τx
τx
H
F
∂p
∂p
F
F
x
x
W pH
+
W
F
px
x τ
τ
x
x
H

W pH
x

= 0

(62)

= 0
= 0.

We now consider the efficiency of the Nash and politically optimal policies. Looking at (60)
and (61), it is natural to expect that the Nash trade policies are inefficient. After all, when setting
their Nash policies, governments are mindful of the impact of their policies on the terms of trade,
p∗x , even though for fixed local prices the terms of trade has no impact on world welfare. Antràs
and Staiger (2012b) show that the Nash policies are indeed inefficient, and thus that a problem
exists for a trade agreement to solve.
But is the terms-of-trade externality the only problem for a trade agreement to address in this
setting? Antràs and Staiger show that politically optimal trade policies are efficient when γ F = 1,
so that the foreign-country government maximizes national income; however, they find that, if
γ F > 1, then politically optimal trade policies are inefficient. Thus, in the offshoring model and
when governments have political-economic motivations and value redistribution, it follows that the
terms-of-trade externality is not the only problem for a trade agreement to address.
32

At a broad level, why might politically optimal policies be inefficient in the offshoring model?37
Notice that the bottom two conditions in (62) can be added to deliver the bottom condition in (61);
thus, the underlying source of the potential inefficiency of politically optimal policies is connected
to the top conditions in (61) and (62) and thus to the determination of H’s final-good trade tax,
H
τH
1 . Let us thus follow Antràs and Staiger (2012b) and contemplate a small increase in τ 1 that is
∗
coupled with a change in τ H
x that leaves the world price px fixed. This policy adjustment results in
F
F
a higher value for pH
x but leaves px fixed (since τ x is unaltered). Starting at the politically optimal
H
policies, Antràs and Staiger show that the resulting changes in pH
1 and px lead only to a second-

order loss for H’s government welfare but can generate a first-order effect for the government welfare
of F . Intuitively, F ’s government does not have an “offsetting” instrument with which to position
H
pH
1 = 1+ τ 1 at its preferred level and thereby “shut down” the associated local-price externality;

hence, F ’s government may experience a first-order welfare change at politically optimal policies
H 38 In fact, as Antràs and Staiger show, the described
when H’s government alters pH
1 by changing τ 1 .

policy adjustment generates a first-order gain for F ’s government welfare when γ F > 1. Politically
F
optimal policies are thus inefficient, since τ H
x and τ x can then be adjusted while holding τ x fixed

so as to effect a transfer (via the resulting world-price change) that compensates H’s government
for its second-order welfare loss while still delivering a first-order welfare gain to F ’s government.
Our discussion above provides answers to the first and third questions that motivate this section.
Specifically, for the offshoring model, Nash tariffs are inefficient, and if γ F > 1 an inefficiency
remains even when governments are not motivated by the terms-of-trade implications of their trade
policies. We have not addressed for this model the second motivating question about the role of
reciprocity. We postpone our discussion of reciprocity in the offshoring model until Section 3.3.

2.5

Summary

At this point, we have reviewed four models of trade agreements, and each model features a termsof-trade externality.39 We have also argued that the first three models can be interpreted as
indicating that the sole purpose of a trade agreement is to help governments escape from a termsof-trade driven Prisoners’ Dilemma, at least when governments possess a complete set of trade
policy instruments, in the particular sense that politically optimal policies are efficient in these
models. We may therefore regard these first three models as falling within the “class” of terms-of37

Antràs and Staiger (2012b) also provide a more detailed explanation that clarifies the role played by γ F > 1 in
the inefficiency of the political optimum in the offshoring model.
38
Antràs and Staiger (2012b) work within a benchmark model where the offshoring of inputs occurs between H
and F who are both small countries on world markets for the final good. It might be thought that this small country
assumption is responsible for the inefficiency of the political optimum in this setting, because it generates a “missing
instrument” problem for F ’s government with respect to the final good price in H’s market. However, in their
Online Appendix G Antràs and Staiger confirm the inefficiency of the political optimum in a three-large-country
extension of their benchmark model, while in their Online Appendix H they show that when international prices are
determined in their benchmark model by standard market clearing conditions rather than bilateral bargaining the
political optimum is indeed efficient. Together these results indicate that the missing-instrument problem described in
the text is associated with the nature of international price determination rather than the small-country assumption.
39
Below we will also discuss the commitment theory of trade agreements, which does not feature a terms-of-trade
externality. We do so in the context of our evaluation of reciprocity as a design feature of trade agreements.

33

trade theories of trade agreements.
Are there some general features of these models that can be used to identify models that fall
within the terms-of-trade class? Maggi (2014) makes some progress in providing an answer to this
question. He identifies three conditions that together are sufficient for efficiency of the political
optimum: (i) there are only two countries; (ii) there are no income effects; and (iii) governments
choose only (a complete set of) trade taxes. Indeed, each of the first three models we have reviewed
above satisfies the sufficient conditions that Maggi identifies.40 However it is important to realize
that this set of sufficient conditions is by no means necessary. On the contrary, the literature includes
a number of findings that the political optimum is efficient also when these sufficient conditions
are not met, and specifically in general equilibrium models with income effects (see for example
Bagwell and Staiger, 1999, and DeRemer, 2012, Appendix E), in models featuring domestic policy
instruments in addition to a complete set of trade policy instruments (see for example Bagwell and
Staiger, 2001b, 2002, Staiger and Sykes, 2011, and DeRemer, 2013), and in models with more than
two countries (see for example Bagwell and Staiger, 1999 and 2001a).
We emphasize two take-away points from our discussion just above. First, it is not a simple
matter to generate models of trade agreements that fall outside the terms-of-trade class (beyond
the commitment theory of trade agreements which we discuss below). We have described here
two ways that such models have been generated: missing instruments, and international prices
determined by bilateral bargaining.41 There may well be other possibilities, but thus far they have
not been identified in the literature. And second, while it is useful to identify sets of sufficient
conditions for models to fall within the terms-of-trade theory class, working through the details of
models that may satisfy these sufficient conditions is nevertheless illuminating for gaining a deeper
understanding of the features that ultimately dictate whether or not escape from a terms-of-trade
driven Prisoners’ Dilemma can be said to be the sole purpose of a trade agreement.

2.6

GATT’s Designers and the Terms-of-Trade Externality

As reflected in the previous subsections, the terms-of-trade theory provides an important benchmark
in the literature for interpreting and evaluating the design of trade agreements. And as we have
indicated, the design of a trade agreement is likely to reflect its purpose. In this light, it is important
to ask whether there is meaningful contact between the problems emphasized by this theory and
those emphasized by the designers of the institution it is supposed to illuminate. If the problems
to be addressed as perceived by those involved in the design of a trade agreement make little or
no substantive contact with the problems that the terms-of-trade theory suggests should be at the
forefront of their thinking, then findings that the design features of the agreement should work well
or poorly to solve the problems at the center of the theory are less meaningful, and the position
that the agreement’s successes or failings can be understood on these terms is less tenable.
40
And as Maggi (2014) emphasizes, surprisingly, politically optimal policies can be efficient even in models that
feature non-pecuniary international externalities as long as these sufficient conditions are satisfied.
41
A third way, which we discuss below, arises when there are many countries and MFN is not imposed.

34

Before moving on with our survey, we therefore pause here and ask: Did the designers of GATT,
or at least economists at the time including those directly involved in GATT’s design, emphasize
the terms-of-trade externality associated with commercial policy? And if so, did they view GATT
as a forum for addressing these terms-of-trade externalities?
Some suggestive evidence on these questions is contained in what became known as the Haberler
Report, commissioned by GATT and written by a Panel of Experts composed of Roberto de Oliveira
Campos, Gottfried Haberler, James Meade and Jan Tinbergen.42 The Panel’s terms of reference
were to investigate the prevalence of agricultural protectionism and “...the failure of the export
trade of the under-developed countries to expand at a rate commensurate with their growing import
needs.” (GATT, 1958, Foreword).
The Haberler Report provides a wide-ranging discussion of the economic issues of the day and
their impacts on the exports of developing countries, emphasizing business cycle fluctuations and
balance of payments constraints as well as commercial policy concerns. But when it comes to
commercial policy and the topic of agricultural protectionism, terms-of-trade externalities, albeit
expressed not in the simple two-country context that we have considered above but rather in the
context of a more complex multi-country setting along the lines that we introduce in a later section
of this chapter, appears to be at the center of the Report’s discussion:
The problem of the interests of different primary producing countries outside industrialized
Western Europe and North America is ... not only a question which of the other countries would
gain by a moderation of agricultural protectionism in these two great industrialized regions;
there are undoubtedly cases in which an increase in agricultural protectionism in these two
regions, while it would be to the disadvantage of some of the unindustrialized countries, would
actually be to the advantage of others. Two examples will serve to illustrate the point. An
increased stimulus to the production of wheat in any of the countries of North America or
of Western Europe by increasing the exportable surplus of North America and decreasing the
import requirements of Western Europe would depress the world market for wheat. This might
mean that a country like India or Japan would obtain cheaper imports of wheat (either because
of a fall in the world price or because of a development of special sales or gifts for the disposal
of surplus wheat by the United States), but a country like Australia or the Argentine which
competed in the world export market for wheat would be damaged. Another example of the
same principle would be provided by measures which stimulated the export of raw cotton from
the United States: this might increase the plenty and cheapness of raw cotton in world markets;
an importing country like Japan would gain but competing exporters like Egypt, the Sudan,
and Brazil would lose.
In general, if one considers any particular agricultural product, a protective stimulus to
its production in any one country by increasing supplies relatively to the demand for that
42

James Meade was a member of the British delegation to the London and Geneva conferences in 1946 and 1947
which produced the charter for the International Trade Organization and GATT. Along with Keynes, Meade was
widely regarded as a central figure in these conferences (see for example Penrose, 1953, pp. 89-90).

35

product will tend to depress the world market for that product. This will damage the interests
of other countries which are exporters of the product on the world market. But it will be
to the national interest of countries which import the product from world markets. Whether
the initial protective stimulus confers a net benefit or a net damage to all other countries
concerned depends, therefore, upon whether the country giving the protective stimulus to its
own production is an exporter or an importer of the product; if it is an exporter it is conferring
a benefit on the world by giving its supplies away at a cheap price; if it is an importer it is
damaging the rest of the world by refusing to take their supplies.
This general principle can be applied to a single country or to a whole region. It is because
Western Europe and North America in combination are net importers of agricultural produce
that we reach the general conclusion that a reduction of agricultural protectionism in these
areas will on balance benefit the rest of the world...(GATT, 1958, pp 93-94, original emphasis,
footnotes omitted).

In describing the impacts of agricultural protectionism in Western Europe and North America on
various countries in the rest of the world, the Report’s references to “depress the world market,”
“fall in the world price,” gains for other importing countries from “cheaper imports” and losses
for countries who are “competing exporters” hew quite closely to a terms-of-trade logic. And
the references to the protective policies of “any of the countries of North America or of Western
Europe,” “any one country” and “a single country” suggest that the Report’s authors did not find
implausible the notion that a single country’s protective choices could have world price impacts;
indeed, the general principle for signing the international externalities associated with commercial
policy intervention is couched in terms of “the country giving the protective stimulus.” Hence, in
these paragraphs the authors of the Haberler Report appear to be describing the terms-of-trade
externality that is at the heart of the terms-of-trade theory of trade agreements.
Moreover, the Haberler Report makes recommendations to GATT that are based on these termsof-trade externality patterns. For example, the following recommendation, taken from the Report’s
executive summary, reflects the application of the international externality signing principle as
articulated in the quoted excerpt above:
Since in North America and Western Europe as a whole net imports of agricultural products
represent the relatively narrow margin by which their large domestic consumption exceeds their
large, but not quite so large, domestic production, a relatively small restraint on domestic
production or stimulus to domestic consumption could lead to a large percentage increase in
their net imports. For this reason much could be achieved by some moderate change in the
direction of the agricultural policies of the highly industrialized countries. (GATT, 1958, p. 9).

There are many other such examples throughout the commercial policy portion of the Report.
It appears as well, then, that the authors of the Haberler Report viewed GATT as a forum for
addressing these terms-of-trade commercial policy externalities.

36

This, of course, does not establish that GATT is well-designed to solve the terms-of-trade driven
Prisoners’ Dilemma, or even necessarily that there is a terms-of-trade driven Prisoners’ Dilemma
to be solved: though implicit in its recommendations, the Haberler Report is silent on its position
about a key step in the terms-of-trade logic, that in not valuing the terms-of-trade externalities
imposed by their commercial policy choices governments were led to make unilateral commercial
policy choices that were overly protective from an international efficiency perspective. And in any
event these quotes are not a substitute for systematic empirical evidence (some of which we survey
below) relating to the terms-of-trade theory’s relevance for interpreting GATT/WTO outcomes.
But in suggesting that the designers of GATT placed emphasis on the terms-of-trade externalities
associated with the commercial policy choices of individual countries, and that they viewed GATT
as a forum for addressing these externalities, the statements quoted above lend credence to the
view that GATT could be especially well designed to solve the terms-of-trade problem — in part
perhaps as a result of experimentation and purposeful engineering and in part perhaps by luck —,
that the GATT/WTO may in large part owe its successes to these design features, and that its
failings might also be understood at least in part from the perspective of this theory.
A final observation is also relevant: while we have presented the terms-of-trade theory using
the “world price” and “terms-of-trade” language that economists typically employ to describe the
relevant policy externalities, the theory can easily be translated into the language of “market
access” that real-world trade-policy negotiators prefer. When a country raises its import tariff
and thereby shifts in its import demand curve, the resulting price effect under which it enjoys a
terms-of-trade improvement is accompanied by a volume effect under which its trading partner
experiences a reduction in access to its market. Once this link between price and volume effects
is forged, the terms-of-trade theory can be re-expressed in the market access language that tradepolicy negotiators adopt.43
We now turn to the literature on the key design features of trade agreements. We emphasize
three prominent features of the GATT/WTO: the principle of reciprocity, the principle of nondiscrimination as embodied in MFN, and tariff caps that allow for “binding overhang.”

3

Reciprocity

In this section we consider the GATT principle of reciprocity. We begin with a discussion of reciprocal liberalization, define the principle of reciprocity in GATT, describe its applications in the
GATT/WTO, consider its implications for sustainable bargaining outcomes, and consider its impacts on the GATT tariff bargaining process. Our initial discussion of the implications of reciprocity
adopts the perspective of the terms-of-trade theory. We then consider as well the implications of
reciprocity when a number of the standard assumptions which typically accompany analyses based
on the terms-of-trade theory are relaxed. Finally, we close this section with a discussion of reciprocity from modeling perspectives that fall outside the terms-of-trade theory.
43

Bagwell and Staiger (2002) provide a formal definition of market access and further development of the relationship
between the terms-of-trade theory and the language of market access.

37

3.1

Reciprocal Liberalization

At a general level, reciprocity in trade agreements can be thought of as a norm or rule stating
that negotiated tariff changes should result in tariff movements in the same direction across the
participating countries. When negotiations are aimed at liberalizing market access, as is the focus of
multilateral GATT/WTO negotiating rounds under GATT Article XXVIII bis, the reciprocity norm
is that the tariffs of each negotiating partner should be reduced. And if one country increases its
tariff, as in the context of re-negotiations under GATT Article XXVIII or the settlement of disputes
about negotiated market access commitments under GATT Article XXIII, then the tariffs of its
trading partners should rise as well. The expectation that reciprocity in market access commitments
will be achieved and maintained in the GATT/WTO is fundamental to the institution.44
But the reciprocity principle in GATT is more specific than simply a general complementarity
in the direction of tariff changes across countries: it refers to a balance of tariff changes (in either
a downward direction or an upward direction) that leads to changes in the volume of a country’s
exports that are commensurate with the changes in the volume of its imports.45 In the context of
negotiations over market access, therefore, GATT’s principle of reciprocity is a negotiation norm
that defines an idealized terms of exchange of market access, and it sets this terms of exchange at
one for one: if country A wishes to acquire for its exporters a certain amount of additional access
to the markets of country B, then under the GATT reciprocity norm it is expected that country
A will in exchange provide to country B’s exporters the same amount of additional access to its
own markets; and the same terms of exchange applies to country B if country B seeks to obtain
additional access for its exporters to the markets of country A.46
Two questions naturally follow. A first question is: Why did governments adopt the particular
(one for one) terms of exchange embodied in the reciprocity principle of GATT? And a second
question is: What advantage would there be for governments in choosing to fix the terms of exchange
in GATT market access bargains in the first place?
The GATT Principle of Reciprocity Why did this particular notion of reciprocity take hold
in GATT? Put differently, what accounts for the feature that in the GATT/WTO the “price”
of “purchasing” one additional unit of export market access is set equal to one additional unit
of import market access?47 Even if the price is to be fixed, why not a different price or terms
44

Indeed, GATT’s reciprocity principle was thought to be critical to ensuring the constitutionality of US participation in GATT. See United States Council of the International Chamber of Commerce (1955, pp. 74-76).
45
For example, in calibrating the magnitude of the Canadian tariff increase aimed at reducing exports from the
EU that would be consistent with reciprocity and therefore permissible in response to the EU ban on imports of
hormone-treated beef in the EC-Hormones dispute, the arbitrators (WTO, 1999, paragraph 41) stated: “ To do so...,
we have to focus on trade flows. We must estimate trade foregone due to the ban’s continuing existence...”.
46
As we discuss in detail below, the principle of reciprocity arises as a negotiation norm when governments negotiate
tariff reductions under GATT Article XXVIII bis, and the principle of reciprocity arises in GATT rules when tariffs
are increased under GATT Article XXVIII renegotiations. See also Bagwell and Staiger (1999, 2002).
47
As is well-known, much of the design of GATT was inspired by the US Reciprocal Trade Agreements Act of
1934, and this included the particular notion of reciprocity adopted in GATT (see, for example, the discussion of
this point in Penrose, 1953, p. 93), though as we discuss later in our chapter GATT allowed for an important
multilateralization of the reciprocity principle. So although we pose our questions here in the context of GATT, they

38

of exchange, such as two additional units of exports for one additional unit of imports, or one
additional unit of exports for three additional units of imports? In fact, there is an immediate and
simple answer to this question, as long as governments are committed to adopting a common terms
of exchange applied uniformly across all countries: the adding-up constraint imposed by market
clearing makes any other terms of exchange infeasible. Of course, this is just the observation that
one country’s exports are another’s imports, and hence together all countries cannot increase their
exports more (or less) than they increase their imports.
Formally, this point can be confirmed very simply in any model that exhibits market clearing as a
feature of the equilibrium outcome. Here we illustrate the point in a two-good, two-country general
equilibrium setting, remaining agnostic for now about the other features of the model economy
(e.g., the nature of competition, or of international price determination).48 For the purposes of
defining reciprocity, we use the equilibrium terms of trade at original tariffs, P̃0w , to convert “apples
to oranges.”49 With “∆” in front of a variable denoting the change in that variable induced by a
change in tariffs, let us begin with the home country, and consider a general version of reciprocity
defined as any change in tariffs that leads to a change in home-country export and import volumes
satisfying
∆E = γ P̃0w ∆M

(63)

where E and M denote home country export and import volumes, and γ is a parameter specifying
the terms of exchange of market access. Next observe that market clearing implies
∆E = ∆M ∗

(64)

∆E ∗ = ∆M

(65)

where E ∗ and M ∗ denote foreign country export and import volumes. But (63) and (65) imply
∆E = γ P̃0w ∆E ∗ , which using (64) then implies ∆M ∗ = γ P̃0w ∆E ∗ or
P̃0w ∆E ∗ =

1
∆M ∗ ,
γ

(66)

which describes the foreign-country terms of exchange of market access that must accompany (63)
according to the market clearing requirements. Evidently, if a common terms of exchange is to be
applied to both the home and the foreign country, then (63) and (66) imply γ = 1, which is to say a
one-for-one exchange of import volumes for export volumes. Hence, if governments wish to adopt a
common terms of exchange for all countries, the adding-up constraint imposed by market clearing
makes it inevitable that they must adopt the one-for-one terms of exchange that characterizes
should be interpreted more broadly to include GATT’s antecedents.
48
In the Online Appendix, we show how the points we emphasize below regarding GATT’s principle of reciprocity
and its implications within GATT/WTO practice extend to a many-good general equilibrium setting.
49
As long as countries agree to use the same conversion factor of apples to oranges in their assessments of reciprocity,
for our purposes here the conversion factor can be anything they want, but the original world prices are a natural
choice. Using world prices (original or new) as the conversion factor is important for the fixed-terms-of-trade property
that we highlight next.

39

GATT’s reciprocity principle.
The essence of the first question posed above, then, is not why GATT’s reciprocity principle
reflects a one-for-one exchange, but rather why a common terms of exchange was adopted for all
countries.50 This is a question that to our knowledge has not received specific attention in the trade
agreements literature, but at a general level it seems plausible that part of the explanation may
reflect a desire for fairness: there are reasons to think that fairness might originate as a social norm
in a wide variety of bargaining settings (see, for example, Binmore, 2014), and ensuring a common
terms of exchange for each country participating in GATT market access bargains resonates with a
norm of fairness. In the context of answering the second question posed above, we will also suggest
that the link between a common terms of exchange and fairness can be given a more specific
representation in the trade agreements context, and as well that there may be additional efficiency
benefits to adopting a common terms of exchange, provided that governments seek (at least in part)
to solve the terms-of-trade driven Prisoners’ Dilemma problem described in Section 2.51
We now turn to the second question: What advantage would there be for governments in
choosing to fix the terms of exchange in GATT market access bargains in the first place? As
we next describe, a number of potential benefits can be appreciated, once it is observed that
negotiations that achieve the balance described by the GATT reciprocity principle leave the terms
of trade unchanged. In this way, GATT’s principle of reciprocity helps to create a bargaining
forum within which, for each government, terms-of-trade manipulation is effectively removed from
the calculus of preferred tariffs.52
The terms-of-trade fixing property of reciprocity can also be shown simply in any model that
exhibits market clearing as a feature of the equilibrium outcome, provided that countries also satisfy
a balanced trade condition. In fact, it is easy to show that reciprocity fixes the terms of trade even
in the presence of non-zero trade imbalances, provided only that the size of the trade imbalances
are not impacted by the tariff changes, but for simplicity we adopt here the assumption that trade
is balanced.53 Staying within the two-good two-country general equilibrium setting described just
above, and with reciprocity now defined by any set of tariff changes that satisfies
∆E = P̃0w ∆M

(67)

P̃0w ∆E ∗ = ∆M ∗ ,

(68)

for our present purposes we may focus on the home country, and we next introduce the home
50

An important exception to the reciprocity norm was granted to developing countries in the GATT/WTO. We
touch on some of the implications of this “special and differential treatment” exception below (see Ornelas, forthcoming, for a comprehensive treatment).
51
We have in mind that such benefits could help explain why a particular design feature might have been included
in a trade agreement, either because the specific benefits suggested by the theory were understood to flow from the
feature in question, or because the feature was incorporated by chance in some earlier agreement that performed well
as a result of the benefits suggested by the theory.
52
Bagwell and Staiger (1999) derive this property of reciprocity and highlight the benefits that we discuss below.
53
What is required is that the size of the new trade imbalance, measured at the new equilibrium world prices, must
be the same as the size of the original trade imbalance, measured at original equilibrium world prices.

40

country’s balanced trade condition. The balanced trade condition must hold both at the original
and at new tariffs (as before, P̃0w denotes the equilibrium terms of trade at original tariffs, and we
now denote the equilibrium terms of trade at the new tariffs by P̃1w ):
E0 = P̃0w M0 and E1 = P̃1w M1 .

(69)

Using ∆E ≡ E1 − E0 and ∆M ≡ M1 − M0 , it then follows from (69) that (67) may be rewritten as
[P̃1w − P̃0w ]M1 = 0.

(70)

Hence, according to (70) and assuming only that a strictly positive volume of trade takes place at
the new tariffs so that M1 > 0, reciprocity exhibits a striking property: mutual changes in trade
policy conform to the principle of reciprocity if and only if they leave the terms of trade unchanged.
We thus arrive at the following general conclusion. If governments wanted to create a forum
for the exchange of market access commitments in which the terms of exchange were fixed at a
common level for all countries, then they would have had to fix the terms of exchange of export
market access for import market access at one for one, the same terms of exchange described by
GATT’s reciprocity principle. And having enshrined into the GATT reciprocity principle the only
common terms of exchange available to them and provided that their trade was balanced (or if
unbalanced, provided that the magnitude of the imbalances were independent of the outcome of
tariff negotiations), governments would have, with GATT’s reciprocity principle, directed the focus
of GATT market access negotiations toward the volumes of trade desired by the participating
governments rather than the terms of trade.
The Applications of Reciprocity in the GATT/WTO Armed with this general conclusion,
we consider next the specific applications of reciprocity within GATT/WTO practice. We highlight the potential implications of reciprocity with regard to addressing the terms-of-trade driven
Prisoners’ Dilemma problem; and for this purpose we now return to our benchmark two-good
two-country perfectly competitive general equilibrium trade model described in Section 2. We first
express our formal definition of reciprocity in terms of the notation introduced in that model. From
an initial pair of tariffs, (τ 0 , τ ∗0 ), suppose that a tariff negotiation results in a change to the new
pair of tariffs, (τ 1 , τ ∗1 ). Denoting the initial world and home local prices as pew0 ≡ pew (τ 0 , τ ∗0 ) and

p0 ≡ p(τ 0 , pew0 ), and the new world and home local prices as pew1 ≡ pew (τ 1 , τ ∗1 ) and p1 ≡ p(τ 1 , pew1 ),
we say that the tariff changes conform to the principle of reciprocity provided that
pew0 [M (p1 , pew1 ) − M (p0 , pew0 )] = [E(p1 , pew1 ) − E(p0 , pew0 )],

(71)

where changes in trade volumes are valued at the existing world price.54 We next use the balanced
54
We have defined reciprocity here only for the domestic country, but as should now be clear in our two-country
setting tariff changes conform to reciprocity for the domestic country if and only if they conform to reciprocity for
the foreign country as well.

41

trade condition (1) — which must hold at both the initial tariffs and the new tariffs — to confirm
that (71) may be rewritten as
[e
pw1 − pew0 ]M (p1 , pew1 ) = 0.

(72)

As (72) reflects and as stated above, mutual changes in trade policy conform to the principle of
reciprocity if and only if they leave the terms of trade unchanged. We are now ready to consider
the specific applications of reciprocity within GATT/WTO practice.
A first application of reciprocity can be found when negotiations are aimed at liberalizing market
access, as is the focus of multilateral GATT/WTO negotiating rounds under GATT Article XXVIII
bis. Suppose that governments begin with Nash tariffs. A key observation follows from a property
of the Nash point that we emphasized earlier, namely, that using (4) and (5) the Nash first-order
conditions (6) imply that Wp < 0 < Wp∗∗ . The structure of international cost-shifting therefore
implies that, beginning from their Nash tariff choices, each government would desire greater trade
volume if this could be achieved at a fixed terms of trade. But if governments were to reduce
tariffs according to reciprocity, then by (72) the terms of trade would be fixed, while the home
local price p would fall and the foreign local price p∗ would rise, allowing each government to
achieve greater trade volume. Hence, as long as their tariff cuts are not too large, both the homegovernment welfare and the foreign-government welfare would then rise. In other words, starting
at the Nash equilibrium and for tariff cuts that are not too large, liberalization under the principle
of reciprocity is sufficient for mutual gains.55 Evidently, by directing the focus of GATT market
access negotiations toward the volumes of trade desired by the participating governments at a fixed
terms of trade, the principle of reciprocity provides a recipe for efficiency-enhancing gains from
tariff liberalization.
A second application of reciprocity in the GATT/WTO can also be identified, in this case
applying to situations where protective measures are being reimposed rather than liberalized. Such
situations can arise in the GATT/WTO, both in the context of dispute resolution and in the
context of the renegotiation of GATT tariff bindings. We focus here on renegotiation.56 The rules
for renegotiation of GATT tariff bindings, contained in GATT Article XXVIII, apply when one
country re-opens negotiations with its trading partners on a tariff binding to which it had earlier
agreed, for the purpose of modifying (in an upward direction) or withdrawing the original tariff
binding. These rules explicitly provide for the possibility that agreement might not be reached;
and when this possibility arises, the country is permitted to modify or withdraw its original tariff
55
This sufficiency finding for the principle of reciprocity may be contrasted with our discussion in Section 2, where
we show for various models that a general form of reciprocity is necessary for mutual gains.
56
Our focus is on the implications of reciprocity and whether it can be interpreted as serving a useful purpose
rather than on its optimality per se. Maggi and Staiger (2015a) explore the optimal design of trade agreements in the
presence of renegotiation more generally, and argue that reciprocity exhibits features that under certain conditions
can be part of an optimal compensation rule in the event of disagreement. A related literature (e.g., Lawrence, 2003,
Bagwell, 2008, Beshkar, 2010, Grossman and Sykes, 2010, Maggi and Staiger, 2015b and Staiger and Sykes, 2015)
evaluates reciprocity in the context of GATT/WTO dispute resolution. As Mavroidis (forthcoming) emphasizes, a
distinguishing feature of reciprocity as it arises under dispute settlement is that the associated retaliation is prospective
in nature and is available to the complainant only after the judicial process has run its course.

42

binding anyway, with the understanding that the trading partners may then reciprocate. Here,
the principle of reciprocity puts a lid on the response of the trading partners, who are allowed
to withdraw “substantially equivalent concessions” of their own. And accordingly, the country
initiating the renegotiation (i.e., the country desiring less trade volume at the existing terms of
trade) can anticipate that it can achieve its desired trade volume at the existing terms of trade.
This suggests in turn that incentives to renegotiate a GATT tariff binding will arise any time that,
at the existing terms of trade, some government desires less trade volume than its existing tariff
commitments imply.
This second application of reciprocity points to a potentially attractive feature of the political
optimum: the political optimum is the only point on the efficiency frontier where each government
has achieved its preferred local price — and hence its desired trade volume — at the existing terms
of trade. At all other points on the efficiency frontier, some government would want more trade
volume at the existing terms of trade and some government would want less. In light of the explicit
provisions that govern renegotiations of GATT tariff bindings, the political optimum is therefore
also the only point on the efficiency frontier where governments would have no reason to attempt
to renegotiate their tariff commitments. In this sense, once achieved, the political optimum can be
viewed as a particularly robust and stable bargaining outcome of GATT tariff negotiations.
Figure 2 (adapted from Figure 4 of Bagwell and Staiger, 1999) illustrates the point. With the
home tariff τ on the vertical axis and the foreign tariff τ ∗ on the horizontal axis, Figure 2 depicts
the locus of efficient tariff combinations labeled as EE. The point on EE labeled as P O is the
political optimum. At the political optimum the iso-welfare contours of the home country (labeled
W ) and the foreign country (labeled W ∗ ) are tangent to each other and to the iso-terms-of-trade
locus passing through the point P O and labeled pw
P O , reflecting the property that each government
has achieved its preferred local price and desired trade volume at the existing terms of trade.
Now consider the possibility of renegotiation subject to reciprocity beginning from the political
optimum. As we have observed, in such renegotiations any country desiring less trade volume at
the existing terms of trade can achieve the trade volume it desires; but beginning from the point
P O, each country already achieves its desired trade volume at the existing terms of trade. Clearly
then, and as Figure 2 illustrates, there is nothing to be gained for either government from such
renegotiations: once achieved the political optimum is robust to the possibility of renegotiation
subject to reciprocity.
Next consider a point on EE that does not correspond to the political optimum, such as point
B in Figure 2. Point B is also efficient, but relative to the political optimum point P O the
foreign tariff is higher while the home tariff is lower, with these tariff adjustments orchestrating a
terms-of-trade improvement for the foreign country which efficiently transfers surplus toward the
foreign country relative to the political optimum. Beginning from an efficient point such as B,
the possibility of renegotiation subject to reciprocity will be exercised. This is because in such
renegotiations, the home government can be assured of achieving no less than its welfare level at
the point B ′ in Figure 2, where it has achieved its desired trade volume at the existing terms of

43

trade (corresponding to a point on the home government’s politically optimal reaction curve where
Wp = 0); and this is a welfare level that is higher than the welfare level that the home government
achieves at the efficient point B. Analogous statements apply to an efficient point such as A and its
counterpart A′ in Figure 2, with the roles of the home and foreign governments reversed. Hence, in
light of the explicit provisions that govern renegotiations of GATT tariff bindings, any point on the
efficiency frontier EE other than the efficient political optimum P O is susceptible to renegotiation.
And for this reason we can think of the points B ′ , P O and A′ in Figure 2 as tracing out the
“reciprocity-constrained” efficiency frontier for GATT tariff negotiations.
We have described these two properties of the applications of reciprocity in the GATT/WTO
within our benchmark two-good two-country perfectly competitive general equilibrium trade model,
but these properties have also been shown to hold in each of the other models described in Section 2
that fall within the terms-of-trade theory class. Consider for example the monopolistic competition
model of firm delocation presented in Section 2.57 As demonstrated in Bagwell and Staiger (2015), in
this model as well these applications of reciprocity both provide a recipe for mutually advantageous
liberalization and suggest that, once achieved, the political optimum can be viewed as a particularly
robust and stable bargaining outcome of GATT tariff negotiations.
To illustrate these features in the monopolistically competitive model of firm delocation, we
follow Bagwell and Staiger (2015) and again define tariff changes that conform to reciprocity as
those that bring about equal changes in the volume of each country’s imports and exports when
valued at existing world prices, but in this partial equilibrium setting we now also take into account
trade in the numeraire good. Letting a superscript “0” denote original trade tax levels and a
superscript “1” denote new trade tax levels, Bagwell and Staiger show that in this model tariff
changes conforming to reciprocity must satisfy58
∗w ∗0
∗w ∗1
1 ∗1
[pw (τ 0f ) − pw (τ 1f )]M (p1f , p∗1
h ) = [p (τ h ) − p (τ h )]E(pf , ph ).

(73)

As with the benchmark competitive model, in the monopolistically competitive model tariff changes
that conform to reciprocity remove terms-of-trade manipulation from the calculus of preferred tariffs
because, according to (73), such tariff changes imply either that world prices are left unchanged
as a result of the tariff changes, or if world prices are altered, that they are altered in a way that
leaves net trade—tax revenue unchanged.
With the terms-of-trade fixing property of reciprocity now recorded for the monopolistically
competitive model, it follows that, starting at the Nash equilibrium, the home and foreign countries
must each gain from an adjustment in trade taxes that reduces total trade barriers (ι and ι∗ , and
57

Bagwell and Staiger (2015) also demonstrate that these same properties of reciprocity hold in the Cournot model
of firm delocation with segmented markets first introduced in Venables (1985). See Bagwell and Staiger (2012a) and
(2001a), respectively, for the demonstration that these properties of reciprocity hold in the profit-shifting model of
trade agreements and the competitive partial equilibrium model of trade agreements described in Section 2.
58
The steps to derive (73) use the balanced trade condition at the original and the new world prices, and are
identical to those described in note 19 of Bagwell and Staiger (2001a). See also Bagwell and Staiger (2012a) for a
related application.

44

hence by (25) and (27), p∗h and pf ) and satisfies reciprocity, as long as the reduction in total trade
barriers is not too large. Consider for example a small reduction in ι and ι∗ that is brought about
by reciprocal reductions in the home and foreign export taxes τ ∗h and τ f from their Nash levels.59
From (73) it follows that the reduction in τ f that is required to satisfy reciprocity in response to a
small reduction in τ ∗h , which we denote by

dτ f
dτ ∗h |rec ,

is defined by

dτ f
E0
=
|
,
dτ ∗h rec
M0

(74)

where M 0 and E 0 denote the initial levels of home-country imports and exports, respectively.60
But then, evaluated at the Nash conditions given by (36) and (37) and using (74), the impact on
home and foreign welfare of a small reciprocal reduction in τ ∗h and τ f is given respectively by
w
dpf dτ f
dp∗h
dp∗w
dpw dτ f
N dp
∗
∗w
w
+
V
}
=
E
|
+
V
+
V
|
> 0, and
p
p
p
h dτ ∗
dτ f dτ ∗h rec
dτ ∗h
dτ f dτ ∗h rec
dτ f
h
∗w
∗w
w
dpf dτ f
dp∗
∗ dp
N dp
∗ dp dτ f
+
V
}
=
E
−{Vp∗∗ h∗ + Vp∗f
|
+
V
|
> 0.
∗w
w
rec
rec
p
p
h dτ
dτ f dτ ∗h
dτ ∗h
dτ f dτ ∗h
dτ ∗h
h

−{Vpf

Consider next the impact of reciprocity in the monopolistically competitive model when reciprocity is applied in response to the reintroduction of trade barriers. As with our benchmark
competitive model, if countries negotiate to the political optimum, then neither country can gain
from unilaterally raising its import tariff or export tax as long as such behavior would result in a
reciprocal action from its trading partner, and hence the political optimum is robust to the possibility of renegotiation subject to reciprocity. To see this, suppose we begin at the politically optimal
policies defined by (42), and let us focus again on export policies.61 Beginning from the political
optimum, if the home country were to raise τ ∗h and the foreign government were to reciprocate
according to
Vpf

dτ f
dτ ∗h |rec ,

the impact on home-country welfare would be

dpf dτ f
dpf dτ f
dp∗h
dp∗h
dp∗w
dpw dτ f
∗
∗
∗w
w
+
V
=
V
+
V
|
+
V
+
V
|
|
= 0,
p
p
p
p
p
rec
rec
rec
f
h dτ ∗
h dτ ∗
dτ f dτ ∗h
dτ ∗h
dτ f dτ ∗h
dτ f dτ ∗h
h
h

where the first equality uses (74) and the fact that

dp∗w
dτ ∗h

= p̂ =

dpw
dτ f ,

and the second equality

follows according to the conditions for the home-country’s politically optimal tariff choices given in
(42). An analogous argument applies for the foreign country’s incentive to raise τ f in the face of a
reciprocal response from the home country.
Finally, it is straightforward to show that, as in the competitive benchmark model, in the monopolistically competitive model the political optimum is the only point on the efficiency frontier
that exhibits this robustness feature. Hence, like the competitive benchmark model, the monopo59

See Bagwell and Staiger (2015) for the case of a reduction in ι and ι∗ that is engineered with a small reduction
in the home and foreign import tariffs τ h and τ ∗f .
60
The expression in (74) may be derived in the same way as (73) by considering small tariff changes and dropping
w
∗w
second-order terms, and using dp
= p̂ = dp
.
dτ f
dτ ∗
h
61
See Bagwell and Staiger (2015) for the arguments related to import tariffs.

45

listic competition model of firm delocation (as well as the Cournot firm delocation model and the
profit-shifting model) suggests that the points B ′ , P O and A′ in Figure 2 can be thought of as
tracing out the (reciprocity-constrained) efficiency frontier for GATT tariff negotiations.62
The Political Optimum as a Focal Outcome of GATT/WTO Negotiations Our discussion above indicates that under GATT Article XXVIII governments will end up on the reciprocityconstrained efficiency frontier as a result of their GATT tariff negotiations. And as Figure 2 depicts,
this implies an efficiency penalty away from the political optimum. The political optimum may
therefore be viewed as a possible focal outcome for negotiations of reciprocity-constrained efficient
points, in addition to being an idealized outcome for the purpose of undoing the terms-of-trade
problem. According to this perspective, deviations from the political optimum to other points on
the reciprocity-constrained efficiency frontier are then desirable only to the extent that the implied
redistribution of the gains from tariff bargaining across countries makes such deviations desirable,
where this redistribution is effected through the implied movements in the terms of trade away
from the terms of trade associated with the political optimum.
Is there evidence that the political optimum describes an outcome which is viewed as focal
in GATT/WTO discussions, or which is actually delivered in GATT/WTO negotiations, as our
theoretical discussion above suggests might be the case? This is an important question whose answer
has practical implications. It is related to the often-heard claim that the rules-based outcomes of the
GATT/WTO protect small and weak countries from the exploitation they would otherwise suffer at
the hands of larger and stronger countries if trade negotiations took place outside the GATT/WTO
forum, a claim that if true would help to strengthen the link suggested above between GATT’s
adoption of a common terms of exchange (from which, according to the terms-of-trade theory, the
features we have emphasized here then follow) and fairness in the context of trade agreements.63
And it is related to the policy debate concerning the performance of the WTO in general and the
benefits for developing countries of GATT/WTO membership in particular.
Some broadly suggestive evidence on the focal nature of the political optimum in GATT/WTO
discussions can be found in the many references to the GATT/WTO as a “member-driven” organization that leaves room for countries with different needs to pursue different trade policies.
Certainly this would be a necessary feature of an institution designed to deliver the political optimum — and thereby to simply strip away the terms-of-trade motivations from the policy choices
of governments with diverse policy goals — rather than, say, laissez faire. A suggestive discussion
in this regard can be found in the Haberler Report’s description of GATT’s accommodation of the
different needs of industrialized and developing country members:
62

See Bagwell and Staiger (2012a, 2015) for further discussion.
On the rules-based nature of GATT/WTO bargaining, see for example Jackson (1989, pp. 85-86) and Bagwell and
Staiger (1999). As we discuss further below, Bagwell and Staiger suggest an added efficiency benefit that, in guiding
governments toward the political optimum, GATT’s reciprocity norm may help powerful countries commit not to
exploit weaker countries at the tariff bargaining table, and in this way encourage the participation of weaker countries
in GATT/WTO rounds of negotiation. On whether developing countries benefit from GATT/WTO membership, see
for example Jawara and Kwa (2003) and the review of Jawara and Kwa in Staiger (2006), and see Bagwell, Bown
and Staiger (forthcoming) for a more general assessment of issues relating to the WTO’s performance.
63

46

We recognize that there are special considerations affecting the position of under-developed
primary producing countries which justify a rather greater use of trade controls by them than
by the highly industrialized countries. Industries may need special promotion during the first
stages of industrialization when the process of learning industrial techniques is in its early stages
and when the promotion of one industry may set a general background which is favourable
to the successful growth of others. Special measures to promote industry may be desirable
in order to bring into productive employment labour which is under-employed in agriculture.
Where the whole or the greater part of a luxury product comes from imports, the restriction
of such imports may be administratively the best way of discouraging luxury consumption and
promoting savings. Under-developed primary producing countries may be more likely to be in
genuine balance-of-payments difficulties than the majority of highly industrialized countries, in
which case they will need more often to control imports on these grounds. Finally, insofar as
import restrictions can turn the international terms of trade in favour of the restricting countries,
it can be argued that poorer countries should have a somewhat greater freedom in their use than
richer countries. (GATT, 1958, p. 125).

Rather than advocating laissez faire policies for all, the Panel of Experts for the Haberler Report
appears instead to offer as a benchmark a member-driven set of policies where an expansive list
of motives for trade controls are seen as potentially justified depending on the needs of individual
countries as perceived by their governments, but where terms-of-trade motives are absent from
this list.64 And with this benchmark established, the potential desirability of a movement away
from the benchmark trade policies in the direction that permits terms-of-trade considerations to
re-enter the determination of policies so as to improve the terms of trade of developing countries
and thereby transfer surplus from richer to poorer countries is then suggested for consideration.65
64
The excerpt quoted above lists a number of potential rationales for protection that might be interpreted as
consistent with the political optimum, but it does not explicitly mention the use of import protection for distributional
purposes. This use, too, however, appears to be acknowledged in the Haberler Report, as is confirmed by the
following qualification to the Report’s statement that a fall in the world price of its import good caused by the policy
interventions of its trading partners will benefit an importing country:

It will, of course, tend to depress the market for the domestic producers in the importing country;
but this tendency can be offset by protective measures in the importing countries which support the
incomes of their producers. The importing country, in any case, purchases its imports on better terms.
(GATT, 1958, p. 93, footnote 1, emphasis in the original).
On the other hand, it should be noted that while the Report lists a number of points that could legitimize greater
use of trade controls in less developed as compared to highly industrialized countries, it also emphasizes that “...there
have certainly been cases in which the trade control policies of the under-developed countries have gone far beyond
these points in discouraging exports of their primary products and in encouraging import-competing industries” and
notes that these policies have probably hurt both the less-developed and the industrialized countries.
65
Interestingly, in its discussion of agricultural export subsidies the Haberler Report develops this particular point
further and advocates that, where possible, the best form for aid from industrialized to less-developed countries is
direct financial aid, rather than aid orchestrated indirectly through the terms-of-trade consequences of trade policy
intervention and thereby attached to transactions in particular commodities, summarizing with:
For these reasons we would wish to combine our general recommendation in favour of a moderation
of policies for agricultural protectionism with the recommendations (i) that such policies should be
moderated in importing and exporting countries simultaneously; and (ii) that economic aid from the

47

As to whether politically optimal outcomes are actually delivered in GATT/WTO negotiations,
at a broad level there are features of the outcomes that have emerged from nearly 70 years of
GATT/WTO negotiations that are consistent with the political optimum. For example, it is the
policies of the countries which are large in world markets that should be most constrained by a
trade agreement that delivers the political optimum, with the policies of the smallest countries
left largely or even completely unconstrained. Consistent with this feature, most of the significant
market-access concessions have been made by the large industrialized countries, a feature that is in
some sense almost guaranteed by the exporter-driven process through which governments identify
the markets of their trading partners which they would most like GATT/WTO negotiations to
open, and which is further accentuated by special and differential treatment clauses that exempt
developing countries and especially the least developed countries from a host of GATT/WTO
obligations to which other countries must conform.66 And even where a country that is small in a
given market accepts on paper obligations that apply to that market, the GATT/WTO enforcement
procedures operate “on demand,” and so a small player in a market can often expect to violate
GATT/WTO obligations in that market with impunity in any event. But beyond these broad
observations, there is little available evidence one way or another as to whether GATT/WTO
outcomes are well-described by the political optimum, a fact that is surprising in light of the
potential importance of such evidence both in relation to the theory and to the policy debate. Here
we discuss several papers that provide some partial evidence on this question.
One way to shed light on this question is to look for evidence that GATT/WTO negotiating
outcomes differ significantly from “power-based” bargaining outcomes such as those predicted by
the Nash bargaining solution. Baldwin and Clarke (1987) offer an early attempt to gauge the
ability of the Nash bargaining solution to track actual bargaining outcomes in the GATT/WTO,
focusing on the Tokyo Round of GATT negotiations concluded in 1979. As Baldwin and Clarke
note, in the Tokyo Round and the earlier GATT Kennedy Round, an initial bargain occurred over
the formula by which each county would in principle cut its tariffs; and then once the formula
was agreed, countries engaged in essentially bilateral tariff-item-by-tariff-item negotiations over
exceptions to the formula cuts. Baldwin and Clarke focus only on the outcomes for the US and the
(then) European Community, so their results cannot speak directly to our question here. But their
richer and more developed to the poorer and less-developed countries — which, as we have argued above
(paragraph 148), is certainly much needed — should as far as possible take the form of direct financial
aid from the former to the latter. In this way aid can flow in the desired direction and at the same
time production can be undertaken where it is most economic. Aid which is indirectly attached to
transactions in particular commodities will inevitably make it difficult for the world resources to be
used in the most productive manner... (GATT, 1958, pp. 96-97).
From the perspective of Figure 2, this statement can be interpreted as an argument that a position such as B ′ can
be improved upon by eliminating the use of terms-of-trade movements for purposes of aid to the foreign country,
repositioning trade policies at the political optimum point P O, and providing aid directly to the foreign country in
the form of direct financial transfers.
66
Of course, to the extent that special and differential treatment clauses in the GATT/WTO lead developing
countries with significant market power, such as the emerging economies of the BRICS, to not engage in meaningful
tariff cutting negotiations of their own in the GATT/WTO, this would interfere with attainment of the political
optimum, a point emphasized by Staiger (2006) and Bagwell and Staiger (2014).

48

findings are still interesting for the present discussion. They find that the Nash bargaining solution
does reasonably well at matching the tariff cuts that would have been implemented under the
negotiated formula, but that the Nash bargaining solution performs relatively poorly in predicting
the actual tariff cuts that emerged from the Tokyo Round (i.e., the cuts that resulted once the
exceptions to the formula cuts were taking into account). Baldwin and Clarke conclude (p. 281)
that the while concepts such as the Nash bargaining solution “may be successful at predicting the
outcome of formal GATT negotiations, they are less accurate in describing the subsequent, more
political, process of requesting exceptions from the general formula.” Interestingly, Baldwin and
Clarke (p. 282) also observe that “[m]any of the pullbacks in both the Kennedy and Tokyo Rounds
were on items on which there was not much domestic political pressure for less-than-formula cuts,
and hence, were made for reciprocity purposes only...The main point to emphasize is that the process
of determining exceptions and achieving reciprocity resulted in a considerably different outcome
than would have occurred if the cutting rules were followed strictly.” This suggests the possibility
that GATT’s reciprocity principle may have played an important role in moving the negotiating
outcomes of the Tokyo Round away from power-based outcomes such as those predicted by the
Nash bargaining solution. What is left unanswered by the Baldwin and Clarke analysis is whether
the Tokyo Round outcomes were moved in the direction of the political optimum.67
Some suggestive evidence that the political optimum is useful for understanding GATT/WTO
negotiating outcomes is provided from a different perspective by the findings of Bagwell and Staiger
(2011) and Bagwell, Staiger and Yurukoglu (2015). Bagwell and Staiger study the tariff cuts agreed
in WTO accession negotiations by 16 countries that joined the WTO as new members after its creation in 1995. They ask whether the pattern of agreed tariff cuts for these countries correspond to
the pattern that would be predicted by the terms-of-trade theory if the cuts moved each acceding
country from its reaction curve (pre-WTO membership) tariff to its politically optimal reaction
curve, and find strong support for this prediction. Bagwell, Staiger and Yurukoglu study the recently declassified GATT bargaining records from the 1950-51 Torquay Round. They ask whether
the pattern of tariff cuts offered by the US in this round, and the probability that the US offers
were successful (i.e., led to an agreed US tariff binding in the round), can be understood from the
perspective of the terms-of-trade theory under the assumption that the US offers correspond to its
politically optimal reaction curve tariffs.68 Bagwell, Staiger and Yurukoglu, too, find support for
the terms-of-trade theory and the view that the US made tariff offers at Torquay that resided on
67

Ossa (2014) undertakes a quantitative multi-country analysis of the potential losses from trade wars and potential
gains from trade talks while incorporating into his model both inter- and intra-industry trade as well as political
economy motives for trade policy intervention. Ossa’s analysis of negotiated tariffs focuses on the Nash bargaining
solution, but he does not offer a comparison of model predictions under the Nash bargaining solution relative to the
actual tariff levels that have emerged from GATT/WTO tariff negotiations (what Ossa terms the “factual” tariffs).
Ossa does consider how the MFN principle alters the bargaining outcomes predicted by his model relative to the
model’s predicted Nash bargaining outcomes in the absence of MFN. We discuss further some of Ossa’s findings later
in our chapter in the context of our consideration of MFN.
68
As Bagwell, Staiger and Yurukoglu (2015) demonstrate and as we describe further below, according to the termsof-trade theory a country’s tariff-cutting offers should correspond to its politically optimal reaction curve under strict
adherence to reciprocity and MFN.

49

its politically optimal reaction curves. These two papers do not yield direct evidence on whether
GATT/WTO outcomes deliver the political optimum, because they merely suggest that the tariff
bindings of individual countries agreed in GATT/WTO negotiations can be understood with reference to their politically optimal reaction curves, but their findings are nonetheless suggestive. In
terms of Figure 2, the distinction here is between, on the one hand, whether GATT delivers the
political optimum as defined by the point P O, and on the other hand whether the politically optimal reaction curve as depicted for example by the point B ′ is helpful for predicting the negotiated
tariff choices of individual countries. Our question posed above concerns the first point, but the
supporting evidence on the second point provided by these two papers is still encouraging, in the
sense that a lack of support on this second point would have cast doubt on an affirmative answer
to the question of interest.
Reciprocity and the GATT/WTO Bargaining Process

Thus far we have considered sepa-

rately the two applications of reciprocity that arise in GATT practice, one relating to market access
liberalizing tariff negotiations and the other relating to renegotiation of tariff commitments for the
purpose of reintroducing tariffs. The second of these applications of reciprocity constitutes a fairly
rigid rule in GATT/WTO practice, but the first is in principle simply a norm of behavior.
There is evidence, however, that supports an important role for even this first application
of reciprocity in the GATT/WTO practice. Finger (1979) describes the central role that the
desire to achieve reciprocity as felt by GATT member governments played in determining the
outcomes of each GATT round through the 1964-67 Kennedy Round, focusing on how this desire
and the exception from reciprocity granted to less-developed countries prevented the less-developed
countries from achieving meaningful increases in access to the markets of their trading partners
as a result of these rounds (see also Hoda, 2001, pp. 52-63). And in an early analysis of the
1950-51 Torquay Round prepared for the US International Chamber of Commerce (1955, p. 33),
the need for reciprocity in GATT tariff negotiations was viewed as sufficiently rigid to constitute
an impediment to further negotiated tariff liberalization in light of existing tariff asymmetries
across the bargaining countries. More recently, Shirono (2004) finds that the tariff-cutting results
of the Uruguay Round conform well with the reciprocity norm. Focusing on US tariff cuts in the
Uruguay Round and constructing a measure of market-access concessions while instrumenting to
address the potential endogeneity issues, Limão (2006, 2007) also finds evidence consistent with
reciprocity, reporting that a decrease in the tariff of a US trading partner that exports a given
product leads to a decrease in the US tariff on that product, and that a significant determinant of
cross—product variation in US tariff liberalization is the degree to which the US received reciprocal
market-access concessions from the corresponding exporting countries. A similar exercise for the
EU tariff cutting behavior in the Uruguay Round is carried out by Karacaovali and Limão (2008),
who find analogous support for the importance of reciprocity in explaining the pattern of EU tariff
cuts. Evidence of reciprocity may be stronger for some sectors than others, however. Examining
tariff liberalization by the US in the Uruguay Round, Gulotty (2014) reports evidence that sectors

50

with high contract-intensive products do not exhibit reciprocity.
While more evidence is needed and findings may differ across sectors, the empirical work
described above is broadly supportive of an important role for the reciprocity norm in actual
GATT/WTO tariff negotiations. In combination with our earlier observation that the application
of reciprocity in the context of renegotiations constitutes a fairly rigid rule in GATT/WTO practice, it is then relevant to consider the ramifications for the GATT/WTO bargaining process of
a rigid application of reciprocity both in the context of tariff liberalizing negotiations and in the
context of renegotiation to higher tariff levels. To this end, we return to Figure 2, and illustrate a
simple point: the first application of reciprocity focuses bargaining on the volume of trade rather
than the terms of trade; and together with the first application, the second application of reciprocity in GATT effectively eliminates (strategic) bargaining on the volume of trade as well. In
fact, as we now describe, together the two applications of reciprocity in GATT simplify the market
access bargaining process and leave each country with a dominant “truth-telling” strategy to offer
to adopt its politically optimal reaction curve tariffs in exchange for reciprocal cuts from its trading
partners.69
That the first application of reciprocity focuses bargaining on the volume of trade rather than
the terms of trade follows directly from the terms-of-trade fixing property of reciprocity highlighted
above. In terms of Figure 2, this is manifested in the fact that, beginning from any pair of initial
tariffs, tariff liberalizing negotiations that conform to reciprocity must lead to an outcome on the
iso-terms-of-trade locus passing through the initial tariff pair. In Figure 2 we take the initial tariffs
to be the pair of Nash tariffs and illustrate with three possible Nash points labeled in the figure as
N (A), N (B) and N (C). Notice that, beginning from any of these Nash points and with the terms-oftrade pinned down by the requirement of reciprocity, the preferred trade volume of each government
corresponds to the point on the government’s politically optimal reaction curve at this terms-oftrade (i.e., the tangency of the government’s iso-welfare contour with the relevant iso-terms-of-trade
locus). Any bargaining that occurs in the presence of this first application of reciprocity would then
be over trade volumes at the fixed terms of trade, with each government attempting to achieve its
preferred volume. Next notice from Figure 2 that, together with the first application, the second
application of reciprocity in GATT effectively eliminates (strategic) bargaining on the volume of
trade as well. This is because under the second application of reciprocity, no government can
be forced to accept more trade volume than it desires at the existing terms of trade, and so the
government whose preferred volume is lowest will ultimately get its way.
As Bagwell and Staiger (1999) argue, the implications of the two applications of reciprocity in
GATT can together then be captured in the following stylized game. An initial pair of tariffs, say
the Nash point N (C) in Figure 2, corresponds to a particular iso-terms-of-trade line. Governments
simultaneously make tariff proposals, where any proposal must conform to reciprocity and therefore
amount to a tariff pair that lies along the iso-terms-of-trade line passing through the point N (C). If
69

For a more complete presentation of these points, see Bagwell and Staiger (1999) and Bagwell, Staiger and
Yurukoglu (2015). Bagwell, Staiger and Yurukoglu extend these arguments to a multi-country setting in the presence
of MFN; we discuss their extended results further in the next section.

51

the proposals agree, then the common proposal is implemented, while if the proposals disagree then
the proposal implying the least trade volume (the higher tariff pair) is implemented. In this game,
as Bagwell and Staiger demonstrate, it is a dominant strategy for each government to propose the
tariff pair that if implemented would deliver its preferred trade volume at the existing terms of
trade (i.e., its politically optimal reaction curve tariff paired with the reciprocity-consistent tariff
for its trading partner). And importantly, it is easy to see that this conclusion holds whether or
not governments possess private information about their preferred trade volumes.
This discussion suggests a potential benefit from strict adherence to reciprocity in the two
applications where it arises in GATT: strict adherence to reciprocity can induce governments to
reveal their politically optimal reaction curves, and thereby allow governments to avoid costly
bargaining delays that might otherwise be associated with the presence of private information (see,
for example, Admati and Perry, 1987, and Cramton, 1992). But the costs of strict adherence to
reciprocity are also evident from Figure 2: whenever the negotiating environment is asymmetric, in
the particular sense that the Nash terms of trade differ from the politically optimal terms of trade,
negotiations under strict adherence to reciprocity fails to reach the efficiency frontier. In Figure 2
this is illustrated by the fact that the stylized game described just above would deliver governments
to the political optimum in the symmetric case corresponding to the Nash pair N (C), where the
Nash and the politically optimal tariffs both lie on the same iso-terms-of-trade line.70 Asymmetric
cases are illustrated in Figure 2 by the Nash points N (A) and N (B):71 for these asymmetric cases,
the stylized game described above would deliver governments to the inefficient points A′ and B ′ ,
respectively, in Figure 2. In general, as Figure 2 illustrates, the performance of strict adherence to
reciprocity in GATT/WTO tariff negotiations as measured by its ability to deliver governments to
the efficiency frontier deteriorates with the asymmetry of the environment.
As is known from the Myerson and Satterthwaite Theorem (Myerson and Satterthwaite, 1983),
in the presence of private information it is generally not possible to design an institution or mechanism that satisfies certain attractive constraints (Bayes-Nash incentive compatibility, interim individually rationality and budget balancing) and yet achieves ex-post efficient (first-best) outcomes.
Still, given these constraints, the optimal or second-best mechanism would typically out-perform
the strict adherence to reciprocity that we have described above. But in this regard the observations
of Hagerty and Rogerson (1987) concerning shortcomings of this Bayesian approach to second-best
mechanisms seem relevant:
The key shortcoming of this approach is that it relies heavily on the assumption
that there exists a common prior over traders’ valuations known to all participants. In
particular, an institution which produces a very efficient outcome for one prior might
70
In the symmetric case, beginning from their politically optimal tariffs at the point P O in Figure 2, if a trade war
were to break out and move the countries back to the Nash point N (C), neither country would succeed in pushing
the terms-of-trade in its favor.
71
In these asymmetric cases, if a trade war were to break out beginning from P O the home country would succeed
in pushing the terms of trade in its favor in the case corresponding to the Nash point N (A) and the foreign country
would succeed in pushing the terms of trade in its favor in the case corresponding to the Nash point N (B).

52

perform very poorly under some other prior. This creates two related problems. First,
a social planner may not be able to ascertain exactly what traders’ priors are when
choosing an institution. Second, given the costs of creating new institutions, a trading
institution (such as a stock exchange, for example) is often chosen with the intention
that it will be used by a variety of traders over a long period of time. A variety of
priors might be expected to occur over this time. These problems suggest that an
important concern when choosing a trading institution is that it work “fairly well” over
a broad range of priors, i.e., that it be robust with respect to changes in the information
structure of the market. (Hagerty and Rogerson, 1987, p. 95).
On this basis, Hagerty and Rogerson advocate the consideration of mechanisms under which each
player has a dominant strategy, which they argue can then avoid these shortcomings. Interestingly,
Hagerty and Rogerson show for the simple bilateral trade setting that “posted-price” mechanisms,
whereby a price is posted in advance and trade occurs if and only if all traders agree to trade,
are essentially the only mechanisms such that each trader has a dominant strategy. The generalequilibrium model that we consider differs from a simple bilateral trade setting. Nevertheless,
together the two applications of reciprocity in GATT can be interpreted as working like a posted
price mechanism for tariff bargaining and therefore exhibiting these robustness benefits.72 From
this perspective, strict adherence to reciprocity may be understood to be a potentially attractive
design feature of the GATT/WTO.
It thus appears that, in the context of trade agreements and from the perspective of the termsof-trade theory, fixing the terms of exchange of market access at a common level for all countries —
from which GATT’s one-for-one definition of reciprocity and each of the features we have described
above then follows — produces a number of potentially desirable properties, and the more so the
more symmetric is the underlying tariff bargaining environment. Notice, too, that these properties
should remain desirable as long as terms-of-trade manipulation is an important problem for trade
agreements to solve, even if it is not the only problem as the terms-of-trade theory suggests.
We close this section with a brief consideration of a question we have thus far ignored: Why
are the terms of exchange of market access in the GATT/WTO expressed in barter terms; that is,
why is there no role for cash? This is an important question that has received little attention in
the trade agreements literature. Greater use of cash transfers in the WTO system offers potential
benefits. As the Haberler Report well describes (see note 65), cash payments may be attractive
as a relatively efficient instrument with which to achieve transfers across countries.73 From this
perspective, monetary compensation is a potentially attractive means of offering compensation
in bilateral disputes.74 Furthermore, and especially as asymmetries in the GATT/WTO system
72

An interesting direction for future research concerns the conditions under which dominant strategy implementation in the general-equilibrium model of trade necessitates that an exchange of tariff changes must satisfy the principle
of reciprocity.
73
As Bagwell and Staiger (2005b) confirm, in a partial-equilibrium model with privately informed governments,
governments can achieve first-best efficient policies when cash transfers are available.
74
In a self-enforcing, repeated-game context, Limao and Saggi (2008) argue that a system in which retaliatory

53

become increasingly prominent (for example, between the advanced industrialized countries and the
BRICs), the findings we have described above suggest that the GATT/WTO reliance on reciprocity
could become increasingly problematic, and other methods of orchestrating internationally efficient
trade liberalization — such as holding auctions for reductions in tariffs and increased market access
in exchange for cash payments — may in principle become relatively more attractive.
At the same time, the use of cash transfers raises potential concerns as well. One potential
drawback is suggested by the finding in Bagwell and Staiger (1999) that, in guiding governments
toward the political optimum and away from power-based outcomes, GATT’s reciprocity norm may
help more powerful countries commit not to exploit weaker countries at the tariff bargaining table,
and thereby help to solve a potential hold-up problem that could otherwise reduce the participation
of weaker countries in GATT/WTO rounds of negotiation. The availability of monetary transfers
at the negotiation stage would make such commitments less meaningful, because direct monetary
transfers can be used to undo the transfers implied by the terms-of-trade movements of tariff choices;
and this could be one potential downside of facilitating a greater role for such transfers in exchange
for trade liberalization. In the broader bargaining literature, Harstad (2007) makes the argument
that the availability of cash side-payments in settings of bargaining with private information can
exacerbate the reasons for delay and lead to worse outcomes in some situations than if the cash
payments were not available. We discuss further in the context of our consideration of MFN an
additional potential reason suggested by the literature that cash payments are not more prominent
in the GATT/WTO, but we see this as an understudied and fruitful area for further research.

3.2

Reciprocity and the Terms-of-Trade Theory under Alternative Assumptions

We now return to the first application of reciprocity in the GATT/WTO with which we began our
discussion, namely, the application that arises when negotiations are aimed at liberalizing market
access as in multilateral GATT/WTO negotiating rounds under GATT Article XXVIII bis. We
described in our earlier discussion how the structure of international cost-shifting implies that,
beginning from their Nash tariff choices, each government would desire greater trade volume if this
greater trade volume could be achieved at a fixed terms of trade. And we argued that tariff-cutting
according to reciprocity is a way to achieve such fixed-terms-of-trade increases in trade volume,
and that liberalization under the principle of reciprocity thus delivers mutual gains.
Here we comment on how this conclusion must be modified when a number of the standard
assumptions that usually accompany the terms-of-trade theory of trade agreements are relaxed.
And for this purpose we now return to our benchmark two-good two-country perfectly competitive
general equilibrium trade model described in Section 2.
A first and critical assumption is contained in (5), which states that Wpew < 0 and Wpe∗w > 0 and
tariffs enforce the payment of monetary fines does not offer greater cooperation than a system that relies directly
on retaliatory tariffs. A system with fines offers an advantage when (unanticipated) shocks result in actual disputes, however. Bagwell, Mavroidis and Staiger (2007) demonstrate that the auctioning of retaliation rights in the
GATT/WTO could serve as a third-party mechanism for enforcing the payment of cash compensation to countries
injured by GATT/WTO inconsistent policies of their trading partners.

54

indicates that each government benefits from a terms-of-trade improvement, when the local price in
its country is held fixed. As we observed, this assumption is satisfied by each of the leading models of
trade policy formulation. But as Blanchard (2007a, 2010) shows, there is an important qualification
to this statement that can arise in the presence of international ownership. Blanchard (2007a)
considers the impact that export-platform foreign direct investment can have on the unilateral
tariff choices of the investment-source country, while Blanchard (2010) extends the analysis of
optimal tariffs to international ownership more generally. In both cases, Blanchard demonstrates
that international ownership can mitigate the unilateral incentive to use tariffs for purposes of
manipulating the terms of trade, and thereby can have important effects on the inefficiency of
unilateral tariff setting, serving to reduce Nash tariffs closer to their internationally efficient levels
and possibly even to lead to Nash tariffs that are efficient (in a knife edge case) or too low from an
international perspective. In relation to the Nash conditions described by (6), the key difference
here is that international ownership operates to diminish the absolute value of Wpew and Wpe∗w ,
possibly all the way to zero, and may even reverse the sign of these terms.75
As Blanchard (2007a, 2010) demonstrates and as the Nash conditions in (6) confirm, if international ownership ends up reversing the signs of Wpew and Wpe∗w , then in the Nash equilibrium we
would have Wp > 0 and Wp∗∗ < 0 and a trade agreement would need to raise tariffs to reach the
international efficiency frontier; this can be seen most clearly by considering a trade agreement that
satisfies reciprocity and therefore fixes pew , and where it is then clear that both countries gain by

reciprocally raising their tariffs. And if the pattern of international ownership happened to deliver
Wpew = 0 = Wpe∗w then governments would adopt the efficient politically optimal tariffs (defined by
Wp = 0 = Wp∗∗ ) in the Nash equilibrium and the pattern of international ownership would obviate
the need for a trade agreement completely. More generally, even absent these extreme cases, it is
clear that by reducing the absolute magnitude of Wpew and Wpe∗w , international ownership can reduce the magnitude of the terms-of-trade driven policy inefficiencies associated with unilateral tariff
75

In addition to this international-ownership effect, Blanchard (2010) identifies a second effect, according to which
the domestic local price can be manipulated to extract rents from foreign investors; and with this second effect
she demonstrates that in the presence of international ownership the terms of trade is not the only channel through
which externalities travel. As we describe above, local price externalities also arise in the profit shifting and delocation
models analyzed by Bagwell and Staiger (2012a,b, 2015), but Bagwell and Staiger show for these models that the
terms-of-trade externality is nevertheless the only source of policy inefficiency in the Nash equilibrium (i.e., at the
political optimum these local price externalities are “shut down”). In her working paper (see Blanchard, 2007b,
Appendix 5.3), Blanchard establishes a related result in the presence of international ownership. Exploiting the fact
that market clearing allows p∗ to be expressed as p∗ (p, pew ) and p to be expressed as p(p∗ , pew ), thereby allowing the
home and foreign objectives to be written as W (p, pew ) ≡ w(p, p∗ (p, pew ), pew ) and W ∗ (p∗ , pew ) ≡ w∗ (p∗ , p(p∗ , pew ), pew )
respectively even in the presence of local price externalities, and defining the political optimum with respect to the W
and W ∗ functions (i.e., politically optimal home and foreign tariff selections are made “as if” Wpew ≡ 0 and Wpe∗w ≡ 0
respectively), Blanchard shows that at the political optimum the local price externalities vanish — and therefore that
the political optimum remains efficient — and in this sense that the terms-of-trade externality remains the only source
of policy inefficiency in the Nash equilibrium in the presence of international ownership. It is important to note,
however, that the political optimum defined by Blanchard is related to but different than the political optimum as we
have defined it above. According to the definition employed by Blanchard, not valuing movements in pew implies not
valuing the pure international transfers associated with such movements and the trade volume changes associated
with the implied local price movement (i.e., the implied movement of p∗ in the case of Wpew and of p in the case of
Wpe∗w ), whereas according to the definition of the political optimum that we have described above it is only the pure
international transfer associated with movements in pew that is assumed not to be valued.

55

choices.76 Finally, whether the pattern of international ownership requires governments to agree
to lower or rather to raise their tariffs beginning from Nash to reach the international efficiency
frontier, Blanchard argues that the principle of reciprocity continues to serve as an important guide
to efficient outcomes, once the definition of market access reflects ownership positions.
A second important assumption that is usually made in the context of the terms-of-trade theory
is contained in (4), which states that

dp
dτ

>0>

∂ pew
∂τ

and

dp∗
dτ ∗

<0<

∂ pew
∂τ ∗

and indicates that prices

respond to tariffs in the “regular” way and therefore do not exhibit either the Lerner or the Metzler
paradox. How must the conclusion above be qualified if this assumption fails? An initial observation
is that, as long as international markets are integrated, the Lerner and Metzler paradoxes cannot
both hold at once.77 To see this, consider the home country, where existence of the Metzler and
Lerner paradoxes would imply
p =

τ p̃w

dp
dτ

< 0 <

∂ p̃w
dτ .

As the assumption of integrated markets implies

for non-prohibitive tariffs, it follows immediately that we can not simultaneously have

Metzler and Lerner paradoxes in this setting. Hence, there are two remaining cases to consider.
A first case is where the Metzler paradox arises but there is no Lerner paradox. Focusing on
the domestic country, this corresponds to the case where
tariff hike pushes

p̃w

dp
dτ

< 0 and 0 >

∂ p̃w
dτ .

This can happen if a

down to such an extent as to over-whelm the direct effect on p of the tariff hike.

For this case, the domestic government’s Nash first-order condition recorded in (6) then implies
Wp > 0, where we assume that Wp̃w < 0. This means that, under the principle of reciprocity (i.e.,
holding the world price fixed), the domestic government would want to raise p = τ p̃w , and similarly
for the foreign government.
Therefore, when the Metzler paradox is present, mutual gains under the principle of reciprocity
are achieved via reciprocal tariff increases. To understand why, consider the externality on W of a
change in τ ∗ is computed as follows:
dW
dτ ∗

∂ p̃w
dp
∂ p̃w
w
w]
+
W
=
[W
τ
+
W
p̃
p
p̃
dτ ∗
dτ ∗
dτ ∗
∂ p̃w
w
−Wp̃w dτ
∂ p̃
∂ p̃w 1
w
w]
w
=
[p̃
]W
)
+
W
> 0,
= [τ (
p̃
p̃
dp
dτ ∗
dτ ∗ dp
= Wp

dτ

dτ

where the third equality uses the domestic government’s Nash first-order condition and the inequality follows since p̃w > 0, Wp̃w < 0,

∂ p̃w
dτ ∗

> 0 (and no Lerner paradox for foreign, either) and

dp
dτ

< 0.

So the envelope argument suggests that mutual gains can be achieved starting at Nash if each
country slightly increases its tariff, since its trading partner thereby enjoys a first-order positive externality despite the fact that the trading partner suffers a terms-of-trade loss. Intuitively, if home
were to cut τ slightly from the Nash level, it would receive a small increase in p, and under the
Nash first-order condition the value of this increase would be exactly offset by home’s consequent
76

Assessing the impact of US multinational firms’ affiliate offshoring behavior on US tariff preferences, Blanchard
and Matschke (2015) find evidence consistent with this effect. Gulotty (2014), however, argues that greater international ownership does not similarly lead to reductions in regulatory barriers. He argues that regulatory barriers raise
fixed costs, and that the associated reduction in entry may lead to net gains for efficient, globalized firms.
77
With segmented markets, the Lerner and Metzler paradoxes can coexist (see for example the discussion of export
policies in the Cournot delocation model in Bagwell and Staiger, 2015).

56

terms-of-trade loss. Let us then fix this p increase and consider an alternative way of achieving it,
namely through a small increase in τ ∗ , which induces a higher p by raising p̃w . While the same
p is achieved under both approaches, notice that p̃w is higher under the first approach, since τ is
reduced in this scenario (and p = τ p̃w always holds). So, if home were indifferent about achieving
a higher p while suffering a high value for p̃w , then home will strictly benefit by getting the same
higher p in the company of a lower value for p̃w . The externality is therefore positive, even though
it generates a terms-of-trade loss for the recipient.78
The second case is where the Lerner paradox arises but there is no Metzler paradox. Focusing
again on the domestic country, this corresponds to the case where

dp
dτ

> 0 and 0 <

∂ p̃w
dτ .

For this

case, the domestic government’s Nash first-order condition in (6) then implies Wp > 0, where again
we assume that Wp̃w < 0. This means that, under the principle of reciprocity (i.e., holding the
world price fixed), the domestic government would again want to alter tariffs so as to raise p = τ p̃w ,
and similarly for the foreign government.
For the case where the Lerner paradox is present, therefore, mutual gains under the principle
of reciprocity are thus again achieved via reciprocal tariff increases. To understand why, consider
again the externality on W of a change in τ ∗ beginning from Nash. Following the same steps as
above, we find that:

dW
∂ p̃w 1
w
w
=
[p̃
]W
> 0,
p̃
dτ ∗
dτ ∗ dp
dτ

where the inequality now obtains since p̃w > 0, Wp̃w < 0,
and

dp
dτ

∂ p̃w
dτ ∗

< 0 (Lerner paradox for foreign, too)

> 0. So, once again, starting at Nash, a higher foreign tariff generates a positive externality

for home. In this case, though, the higher foreign tariff also gives home a terms-of-trade gain, due
to the Lerner paradox.
It therefore appears that when either the Metzler or the Lerner paradox is present, the termsof-trade theory’s implication that liberalization under the principle of reciprocity delivers mutual
gains must be modified: it is still the case that reciprocal tariff changes deliver mutual gains, but
now the sign of these changes is reversed, with reciprocal tariff increases pointing the way to the
international efficiency frontier. Finally, we note that when the assumption of integrated markets
is relaxed and segmented markets are instead considered, the standard reciprocal import-tariffliberalizing predictions of the terms-of-trade theory can survive both the Metzler and the Lerner
paradox, though new predictions can also arise regarding export policies in such settings.79

3.3

Reciprocity Beyond the Terms-of-Trade Theory

In the preceding subsections we have considered reciprocity from the perspective of a variety of
models that fall within the terms-of-trade theory of trade agreements, as well as a number of
78
This intuition is similar to that described for the case of export taxes in the linear Cournot delocation model
analyzed by Bagwell and Staiger (2012b).
79
See Bagwell and Staiger (2012b, 2015) and Bagwell and Lee (2015) for theoretical explorations of the design of
trade agreements in settings that feature Metzler and Lerner paradoxes, and see Ludema and Yu (2015) for recent
empirical evidence relating to the existence of the Metzler paradox.

57

extensions to those models. We close this section with a brief discussion of reciprocity from modeling
perspectives that fall outside the terms-of-trade theory, including environments where governments
have a limited set of trade policy instruments, where offshoring is prevalent, and where governments
seek to make commitments to their own private sectors through trade agreements.
A first observation is that, in each of these environments, we may continue to expect that tariff
changes conforming to reciprocity as we have defined reciprocity above will hold the terms of trade
fixed. This is because, as we noted above, we have derived this property of reciprocity in a modeling
framework that features little more than market clearing and trade balance, and that is thus general
enough to include each of the environments that we consider below.
We therefore turn to the remaining two questions around which we have organized our discussion
of reciprocity above. First, beginning from their Nash tariffs, can both countries gain from reciprocal
liberalization in these alternative modeling environments provided they do not go too far;? And
second, in these environments can the political optimum still be singled out as the only point on
the efficiency frontier that is robust to renegotiation subject to reciprocity?
Consider first the case of missing trade policy instruments. For this case we return to the
competitive partial equilibrium model with missing instruments described in Section 2, where we
assumed that export policies are prohibited so that the home government has only an import tariff
τ x and the foreign government has only an import tariff τ ∗y . In this environment, the Nash tariffs
are defined by the first-order conditions
Home :
Foreign:

db
px
∂pw
+ Wpwx x = 0
dτ x
∂τ x
∗
w
db
p
∂p
y
y
= 0.
Wpb∗∗y ∗ + Wp∗wy
dτ y
∂τ ∗y
Wpbx

With Wpbx < 0 and Wpb∗∗ < 0 implied, an immediate observation is then that, beginning from their
y

Nash import tariffs, both countries can gain from at least a small amount of reciprocal liberalization,
because such tariff reductions lower pbx and pb∗y without inducing any welfare-relevant changes in pw
x

∗
and pw
y and therein raise home and foreign welfare according to Wpbx < 0 and Wpb∗ < 0. So our
y

earlier answer to the first question above is unchanged by the limitation we have imposed here on
the set of trade instruments. But our earlier answer to the second question is overturned in this
environment. This follows directly from the result reported earlier, that with missing trade policy
instruments it is no longer generally the case that politically optimal policies are internationally
efficient, because there is a local price externality that now persists at the political optimum. In
fact, as we argued above, when export policies are missing the political optimum will be inefficient
whenever export industries enjoy political support in the objective functions of their governments.
We may therefore conclude that in an environment with missing trade policy instruments, the
political optimum cannot in general be singled out as the only point on the efficiency frontier that is
robust to renegotiation subject to reciprocity, because the political optimum does not itself generally
rest on the efficiency frontier in this environment. Moreover, in light of the fact that any efficient

58

point that does not correspond to the political optimum is susceptible to such renegotiation, we can
make a stronger statement: in general for this missing-instrument setting, no point on the efficiency
frontier is robust to renegotiation subject to reciprocity. This suggests that the attractive features
of reciprocity that hold in the context of the terms-of-trade theory and that we have emphasized
above are substantially diminished in environments where trade policy instruments are missing.
A key question, then, is how to interpret the possibility of missing trade policy instruments.
One possible interpretation is that countries do not in fact possess complete sets of trade policy
instruments, with a possible candidate for missing instruments being export subsidies whose funding needs might make these policies simply inaccessible to all but the richest countries. Under
this interpretation a trade agreement must be designed to both internalize the terms-of-trade externality and provide the missing trade policy instruments. A second possible interpretation is
that these trade policy instruments are not truly missing, but rather their use has been prohibited by international agreement. Under this second interpretation the problem to be solved by a
trade agreement is still fundamentally the terms-of-trade problem, but as part of the approach to
solving the terms-of-trade problem the agreement has altered the nature of the policy externalities
with which the agreement itself must contend. From this perspective an important question is
whether the increasingly stringent prohibition on the use of export subsidies as this prohibition has
evolved from GATT to the WTO (see, for example, Sykes, 2005) creates such a missing-instruments
environment for WTO member governments; and if so, whether the GATT/WTO traditional reliance on reciprocity is growing increasingly at odds with an institution well-designed to solve the
terms-of-trade driven Prisoners’ Dilemma problem.80
Ossa (2011) provides an interesting answer to this question. He demonstrates that, in a general equilibrium monopolistic competition model of firm delocation where export policies are ruled
out, an adaptation of the definition of reciprocity can be found which largely preserves the properties of reciprocity we have emphasized above. Ossa’s model has both a manufacturing and a
non-manufacturing sector, with the manufacturing sector composed of many firms producing differentiated manufacturing goods and representing the sector where firm delocation effects occur.
In Ossa’s model the terms-of-trade manipulation problem is completely absent because, as in the
partial equilibrium monopolistic competition model of firm delocation we described in Section 2,
only export policies can have terms-of-trade impacts, and as we noted in Ossa’s model the use
of export policies is ruled out by assumption. This allows Ossa to highlight the firm-delocation
problem that is then transmitted across countries though local-price channels. Ossa shows in this
setting that if reciprocity is defined to cover only changes in manufacturing exports and imports,
and not also changes in the trade of the non-manufacturing good as would be consistent with our
definition of reciprocity above, then tariff changes that conform to this adaptation of reciprocity
keep the numbers of firms in each country unchanged and hence will be free of the firm delocation
externality that countries would otherwise impose on one another with their trade policy choices;
80

There is also the related question of how to interpret the increasing stringency of GATT/WTO rules on export
subsidies and subsidies more generally. On attempts to interpret these developments, see for example Bagwell and
Staiger (2001c, 2006, 2012b), Potipiti (2012), Brou and Ruta (2013) and Bagwell and Lee (2015).

59

and for this reason reciprocity in Ossa’s model behaves much like the terms-of-trade fixing property
of reciprocity that we have emphasized above in the context of the terms-of-trade theory.
In particular, Ossa (2011) demonstrates that, beginning from Nash and under the restriction
of non-negative import tariffs, countries can gain from reciprocal tariff liberalization if they abide
by this definition of reciprocity. And he shows that any point on the efficiency frontier is robust to
renegotiation subject to reciprocity when reciprocity is defined in this way. More broadly, Ossa’s
findings point to the possibility that the principle of reciprocity can constitute a sensible design
feature of trade agreements in environments that extend beyond the terms-of-trade theory, and
at the same time suggest that in the absence of a full set of trade policy instruments it may be
important to adopt a flexible view about the precise definition of reciprocity.81
We consider next how the answers to the two questions above must be modified in environments
where offshoring is prevalent. To begin, starting from their Nash tariffs, can both countries gain
from at least a small amount of reciprocal liberalization? As it turns out, in the presence of
offshoring this is no longer assured.
To see why, we return to the model of Antràs and Staiger (2012b). Recall that in (53) we defined
the international input price p∗x ; and as the world price of the final good is fixed on world markets
by assumption, p∗x represents the terms of trade between the home and foreign country in this
H
F
model. Hence, reciprocal reductions in τ H
1 , τ x and τ x are defined by any set of tariff reductions

that hold p∗x fixed. Next recall that Nash policies are indeed inefficient in this model. But as Antràs
and Staiger show, the Nash inefficiencies take a particular and interesting form: both the volume
of input trade (x̂N ) and the local price of the final good in the home country market (pHN
1 ) are
inefficiently low. From this vantage point, it can now be seen that, beginning from the Nash point,
even small reciprocal tariff cuts can lead to losses in this setting for a simple reason: if the home
H
country is an exporter of the final good, then a reduction in τ H
1 raises p1 and therefore moves

this price in the direction of the efficient level; but if the home country is an importer of the final
H
good, then a reduction in τ H
1 reduces p1 and moves this price further away from the efficient level.

Whether the resulting first-order loss in joint surplus can be made up with additions to joint surplus
associated with the other elements of the reciprocal liberalization depends on circumstances, but
81

In this light it is interesting to observe that, while reciprocity in the GATT/WTO has a specific definition in the
context of the reintroduction of protective measures and what constitutes a reciprocal response to that reintroduction
(see note 45), the precise definition of what constitutes reciprocity in the context of negotiations aimed at liberalizing
market access, as is the focus of multilateral GATT/WTO negotiating rounds under GATT Article XXVIII bis, has
been left up to each country to decide. Hoda (2001) provides an illuminating account:
As mentioned earlier, neither the provisions of GATT 1994 nor the procedures of the eight rounds
of tariff negotiations indicate how reciprocity is measured or defined. At the [1955 GATT] Review
Session, Brazil had proposed a formula for measurement of concessions for determining reciprocity.
On this ‘the Working Party noted that there was nothing in the Agreement, or in the rules for tariff
negotiations which has been used in the past, to prevent governments from adopting any formula they
might choose, and therefore considered that there was no need for the CONTRACTING PARTIES to
make any recommendation in this matter’ [GATT, BISD, Third Supplement, p. 22]. No further attempt
has been made to give greater definition to the manner in which reciprocity is to be measured and it
has been left to each county to develop its own yardsticks. (Hoda, 2001, p. 53).

60

H
with respect to the impact on pH
1 it is clear that reducing τ 1 (reciprocally or otherwise) reduces

joint surplus when the home country is an importer of the final good.
Hence, in the presence of offshoring our earlier answer to the first question above must at
a minimum be qualified. And our earlier answer to the second question is overturned in this
environment, for the same reason that it is overturned in the missing-instruments environment:
as with missing instruments, in the presence of offshoring it is no longer generally the case that
politically optimal policies are internationally efficient, because as Antràs and Staiger (2012b) show
and as we have described above, there is a local price externality that may now persist at the political
optimum. In fact, as we have discussed, Antràs and Staiger argue that in the presence of offshoring
the political optimum will be inefficient unless government objectives correspond to national income
maximization. And with the inefficiency of the political optimum in the presence of offshoring comes
as well the conclusion that no point on the efficiency frontier is robust to renegotiation subject to
reciprocity. We therefore conclude that the attractive features of reciprocity that hold in the context
of the terms-of-trade theory and that we have emphasized above may be substantially diminished
in environments where offshoring is present.
Finally, notice that at one level all the models we have reviewed thus far share a common perspective on the purpose of a trade agreement: the trade agreement exists to address an international
externality that is associated with unilateral policy choices. As we have described, regarding their
stance on the question of purpose, where these models sometimes differ is in the form that the
externality takes. The “commitment theory” of trade agreements is in this respect quite different,
in that the central role for an international externality is absent. According to the commitment
theory governments value trade agreements as a way to tie their hands (make commitments) against
their own lobbies and citizens.82 Does reciprocity look attractive when viewed from the perspective
of the commitment theory?
To answer this question, we begin by observing that as an international externality plays no
fundamental role in the commitment theory, it is natural that the theory would predict no international inefficiencies associated with the unilateral policy choices of governments. Rather, in
the commitment theory the inefficiencies associated with unilateral policy setting are domestic in
nature: they reflect domestic distortions that are created when governments have incentives to surprise domestic private actors (producers and/or consumers) with unexpected policy intervention,
and lack the ability to pre-commit on their own not to engage in such behavior. In the context
of trade policy the incentive to surprise is especially likely to be present, owing to the second-best
nature of trade-policy intervention and the incentive governments have to bring such intervention
closer to the first best through the element of surprise (see, for example, Staiger and Tabellini,
1989). The point can be seen clearly in the case where a government uses a tariff to address a domestic consumption distortion, say, a negative externality (that does not cross borders) associated
82

Expressions of the commitment theory of trade agreements can be found in a variety of early papers (see, for
example, Carmichael, 1987, Staiger and Tabellini, 1987, Lapan, 1988, Matsuyama, 1990, Tornell, 1991 and Brainard,
1994), but Maggi and Rodriguez-Clare’s (1998) extension of the lobbying model of Grossman and Helpman (1994)
provides what has become the workhorse model of the commitment theory in the trade agreements literature.

61

with domestic consumption. As a tariff is a combination production subsidy and consumption tax,
it is a second-best instrument for addressing the consumption distortion; and it is for this reason
that the government would have an incentive to surprise, announcing a policy of non-intervention
until domestic production decisions had been made, and then following through with a tariff once
production decisions are sunk so as to discourage consumption. In equilibrium domestic producers
would not likely be fooled, and as a result the government might be better off if it could commit
not to use the tariff at all. And if it cannot manage this commitment on its own, a trade agreement
may serve as a useful external commitment device.
It should be fairly clear from this discussion that where governments seek to make commitments
to their own private sectors through trade agreements, the attractive features of reciprocity that we
have emphasized above in the context of the terms-of-trade theory are likely to lose their luster. This
can be most directly appreciated by considering the case of a truly small country that seeks trade
agreements as a way to make commitments to its private sectors. For such a country, reciprocity has
no bite whatsoever, because by definition the trade policy choices of this country cannot alter the
terms of trade; and so, if this country were allowed to renegotiate out of its commitments subject
to reciprocity, its commitments would become meaningless. Put slightly differently, according to
the logic of the commitment theory, governments care about their own tariff commitments but have
no particular reason to care about the tariff commitments of their trading partners, whether those
commitments are reciprocal or not. The one potential caveat to this statement arises in regard to
how the commitments will be enforced. As trade agreements must generally be self-enforcing, and
as commitments have no value if they are not enforced, it is possible that some form of reciprocity
would be desired even by governments who saw the trade agreement as valuable to themselves only
in so far as the agreement helped them to make commitments to their own private sectors. The
logic is that only with reciprocity in some form would these governments (and their private sectors)
expect that the commitments they undertook in a trade agreement might actually be enforced.
We see this logic as a possible route along which reciprocity might be shown to play an important
role in the commitment theory of trade agreements, and in that light as an interesting avenue for
further research.

4

Non-Discrimination

We have focused thus far on two-country modeling environments, but real-world trade agreements
operate in a multi-country setting. With multiple countries, an important design feature of a trade
agreement is whether it allows its member countries to adopt discriminatory tariffs against each
other. In the GATT/WTO, such discriminatory tariff behavior is discouraged by the most-favorednation (MFN) principle contained in GATT Article I, which prohibits any WTO member from
applying its tariff on imports of a given good (a “like product”) in a way that discriminates across
exporters from different WTO member countries (or at a level that is higher than it applies to

62

imports of the good from non-member countries).83 Exceptions to the MFN principle are provided
in GATT/WTO rules, however, and can be invoked by GATT/WTO member governments in
certain circumstances. The most important exception to MFN is contained in GATT Article
XXIV, which allows GATT/WTO members to form preferential trade agreements provided that
the members of such agreements eliminate tariffs on “substantially all trade” between them. The
coexistence of the GATT/WTO on the one hand, which is built on the foundation of the MFN
principle, and on the other hand preferential trade agreements, of which there are now nearly 400
in force, raises the question: What are the advantages and disadvantages of the MFN principle as
a design feature of a trade agreement? This is the question we address in this section.

4.1

A Three-Country Model, Discriminatory Tariffs and MFN

To proceed, we begin by describing a three-country extension of the two-country two-good general
equilibrium trade model developed in Section 2.84 In the three-country extension, the home country
now imports good x from two foreign countries who for simplicity do not trade with each other, and
exports good y to each of them. We denote foreign-country 1 and foreign-country 2 variables with
the superscripts ‘∗1’ and ‘∗2’ respectively. Each foreign country can impose a tariff on its imports
of good y from the home country, and we represent the tariff of foreign-country i by τ ∗i . The home
country can set tariffs on its imports of good x from the two foreign countries; we represent the
home-country tariff on imports from foreign country i by τ i . An important observation is that
there can only be one local price in the home economy, and the pricing relationships p = τ 1 pw1
and p = τ 2 pw2 therefore imply pw1 6= pw2 whenever τ 1 6= τ 2 . That is, if the home country
applies discriminatory tariffs τ 1 6= τ 2 against the imports from foreign-countries 1 and 2, then
separate equilibrium world prices p̃w1 (τ 1 , τ 2 , τ ∗1 , τ ∗2 ) and p̃w2 (τ 1 , τ 2 , τ ∗1 , τ ∗2 ) apply to its trade
with foreign-countries 1 and 2 respectively. Alternatively, if the home country applies a nondiscriminatory (MFN) tariff τ 1 = τ 2 ≡ τ against the imports from foreign-countries 1 and 2, then
a single equilibrium world price pew (τ , τ ∗1 , τ ∗2 ) applies to its trade with both foreign countries.

Discriminatory tariffs Let us start with discriminatory tariffs. Owing to our assumption that

each foreign country trades only with the home country, it is clear that the objectives of the foreign
governments can be represented in this three-country model in a completely analogous fashion
to that of the two-country model: with discriminatory home-country tariffs, foreign government
∗2
welfares can be written as W ∗1 (p∗1 , pew1 ) and W ∗2 (p∗2 , pew2 ) with Wpe∗1
w1 > 0 and Wp
ew2 > 0. But

discriminatory tariffs complicate the expression for the welfare of the home government relative to
that in the two-country model. In particular, we cannot simply express home government welfare
as a function of the home local price and the two world prices, because the home government is
83

In addition to the MFN principle, the National Treatment principle, contained in GATT Article III and prohibiting discriminatory treatment against foreign produced goods once they have cleared customs, is the other major leg
of the nondiscrimination principle in the GATT/WTO.
84
Bagwell and Staiger (1999, 2005a, 2010a) provide details of this model and develop most of the themes we describe
here. See also Bagwell, Staiger and Yurukoglu (2015).

63

not indifferent to the foreign source of its imports of x when pw1 and pw2 are not equal: the home
government would prefer to have more of its imports of x coming from the foreign country with
which its tariff is higher and its terms of trade more favorable (pwi lower), and the share of its
imports coming from each foreign source depends on the local prices in each foreign country. For
this reason, as Bagwell and Staiger (1999) show, when the home government adopts discriminatory
tariffs its welfare can now be represented by W (p, T ) with WT < 0, where T is the home country’s
multilateral terms of trade defined as a trade-weighted average of the bilateral world prices with
each of its trading partners and is therefore a function of both world prices and foreign local prices.
Hence, in the presence of discriminatory tariffs the channels through which externalities travel
extend beyond world prices to include local prices. A number of conclusions relevant to trade
agreements that permit tariff discrimination then follow. First, as Bagwell and Staiger (1999)
show, these local price externalities are not neutralized at the political optimum, and so politically
optimal tariffs are not efficient in the presence of discriminatory tariffs. As can be expected from
our discussion in the previous section, this implies in turn that the attractive features of reciprocity
that we emphasized above fail to survive in a multi-country world with discriminatory tariffs.
Second, as Bagwell and Staiger (2005a) show, trade agreements that permit discriminatory tariffs
are susceptible to an extreme form of bilateral opportunism through “concession erosion”: beginning
from any point on the efficiency frontier, the home government and the government of either of its
trading partners can gain from a bilateral agreement in which each agrees to lower its tariff against
the other and worsen the terms of trade of the third country, converting the third-country loss into
their own gain.85 This suggests that trade agreements that allow for discriminatory tariffs may
have particular difficulty reaching and maintaining any position on the efficiency frontier.
MFN Next consider the impact of the MFN principle, which in this setting requires that the home
government apply a common tariff level τ 1 = τ 2 ≡ τ to the imports of x, regardless of whether
these imports originate from foreign-country 1 or 2. As we have observed, this implies that a single
equilibrium world price pew (τ , τ ∗1 , τ ∗2 ) must then prevail. But then, in complete analogy to the two-

country model, the objectives of the three governments may be written as W (p, pew ), W ∗1 (p∗1 , pew )
∗2
and W ∗2 (p∗2 , pew ), with Wpew < 0, Wpe∗1
w1 > 0 and Wp
ew2 > 0.

Evidently, in a multi-country environment, the MFN principle ensures that the international

externality continues to exhibit the same structure as in the simpler 2-country setting. And as a
result, in the company of MFN the attractive properties of reciprocity described in the previous
section extend to the multi-country setting as well. In particular, under the MFN principle and
beginning from noncooperative tariffs, each country can gain from reciprocal liberalization that
does not go too far; and MFN politically optimal tariffs (which are efficient) are the only efficient
tariffs that are robust to renegotiation under the reciprocity rule, suggesting that, once achieved,
85
With previous concessions exchanged to position the three countries initially on the efficiency frontier, and with
the deterioration in foreign country 2’s terms of trade synonymous with a reduction in its access to the home-country
market, it is natural to use the term “concession erosion” to describe the impact on foreign country 2 of the bilateral
bargain between the home country and foreign county 1.

64

the political optimum can be viewed as a particularly robust and stable bargaining outcome of
GATT tariff negotiations.86

4.2

MFN Plus Reciprocity

The MFN principle can be understood to offer a further advantage when it is joined with reciprocity
in a multi-country world. As we next describe, together reciprocity and MFN can neutralize thirdparty externalities of bilateral tariff bargaining.
The bilateral opportunism problem and the free-rider problem

To appreciate the ad-

ditional advantage of MFN when it is combined with reciprocity, we first return to the bilateral
opportunism problem raised above in the presence of discriminatory tariffs, and note that the MFN
restriction by itself mitigates against this problem (as Schwartz and Sykes, 1997, point out) but
does not completely prevent it (as emphasized by Bagwell and Staiger, 2005a). Suppose for example that the home country and foreign country 1 engage in a bilateral bargain to cut their tariffs,
with the home-country tariff constrained to abide by MFN. If foreign country 1 agrees to cut its
tariff unilaterally, this will worsen its terms of trade, which under MFN is to say it will also worsen
the terms of trade of foreign country 2 (who experiences concession erosion) while improving the
terms of trade of the home country. Under this agreement, the bilateral bargain between the home
country and foreign country 1 would impose a negative externality on Foreign country 2. Of course,
unless foreign country 1 begins the negotiations with its tariff above its own reaction curve, it would
lose from such a unilateral tariff cut, but it could gain from the bargain if the home country agrees
to cut its tariff as well, and it might gain even if the agreed changes to the two tariffs together
still result in a deterioration of the foreign (country 1 and country 2) terms of trade. Bagwell and
Staiger show that the MFN restriction would prevent the home country and foreign country 1 from
jointly gaining in such a bilateral bargain beginning from some points on the efficiency frontier (the
MFN political optimum included among them), thereby confirming the position of Schwartz and
Sykes that MFN can help protect against concession erosion; but Bagwell and Staiger show that
there are also points on the efficiency frontier from which, even under the MFN restriction, the
home country and foreign country 1 can jointly gain from engineering concession erosion and the
associated terms-of-trade deterioration suffered by foreign country 2.
Hence, the negative third-party externality problem associated with concession erosion is mitigated under the MFN restriction, but only partly so.87 At the same time, it is also true that
86

It is also straightforward to extend to the multi-country MFN setting our earlier finding that, if governments
wish to adopt a common terms of exchange of market access for all countries, the adding-up constraint imposed
by market clearing requires that they adopt the one-for-one terms of exchange embodied in GATT’s reciprocity
principle. A different view of the benefits of the MFN principle than we have emphasized in the text is offered
by McCalman (2002). In McCalman’s model private information plays a central role, and if the number of small
countries is sufficiently great, MFN helps to diminish the ability of a large country to hold an agreement hostage
and extract rents from its small trading partners, thereby enhancing both global efficiency and the payoffs of small
countries. Other implications of the MFN principle are explored in Ludema (1991), Choi (1995) and Saggi (2004).
87
And as Bagwell and Staiger (2010b, note 10) point out, this partial mitigation is further weakened if international
transfers are possible, providing a potential reason to discourage the use of transfers in the GATT/WTO system.

65

MFN introduces a new concern associated with a positive externality to third parties: the free rider
problem. This is the familiar weakness of the MFN principle, which in our three-country model
requires that any tariff cut given by the home country to one foreign country must be automatically (and unconditionally) extended as well to the other foreign country. In the context of the
bilateral bargain between the home country and foreign country 1 that we considered just above,
the free-rider problem associated with MFN arises when the home country agrees to cut its tariff,
because in so doing the home country is then worsening its own terms of trade and conferring
a terms-of-trade benefit to foreign country 1, which under MFN is to say it is also conferring a
terms-of-trade benefit to foreign country 2, who “free rides” on the additional market access that
the home country’s tariff cut implies. The free-rider problem is typically viewed as the Achilles
heel of the MFN principle.
MFN plus reciprocity Notice, however, that what we describe above is in the first instance the
possibility that a bilateral MFN tariff bargain might impose a negative externality on third parties;
there the negative externality arises when foreign country 1 cuts its tariff on imports of good y in a
bilateral bargain with the home country, and the externality is transmitted to competing importers
of good y (foreign country 2). And what we describe in the second instance is a positive third-party
externality that arises when the home country cuts its tariff on imports of good x in a bilateral
bargain with foreign country 1 and is transmitted to competing exporters of good x (foreign country
2). Suppose, then, that the home country and foreign country 1 were to engage in a bilateral MFN
tariff bargain that cut the tariff of foreign country 1 and the tariff of the home country in a way
that just balanced these two opposing third-party externalities; in principle, the home country and
foreign country 1 could then neutralize the third-party externality of their bilateral tariff bargain.
As Bagwell and Staiger (2005a) show, this balance is precisely what GATT’s principle of reciprocity
achieves in a multi-country MFN world, because the balance requires nothing more than ensuring
that the terms of trade does not move in either direction as a result of the bilateral bargain, and
that is what MFN tariff changes that abide by reciprocity deliver.
It bears emphasis that, following a bilateral reciprocal MFN tariff bargain between the home
country and foreign country 1, exporters from foreign-country 2 experience a reduced MFN tariff
from the home country and yet do not enjoy any increase in their export volume. How can this
be? The reason is that the exports from foreign country 2 must compete for sales in the domestic
market with the exports from foreign-country 1, and exports from foreign-country 1 are stimulated
by the negotiated reduction in foreign-country 1’s import tariff (Lerner symmetry).88 Put another
way, what we are describing here is the possibility that tariff adjustments in one country (the home
country) that, in isolation, would have altered the local prices in a second country (foreign country
2) and as a consequence triggered changes in that country’s export volumes, might be matched by
the tariff adjustments of a third country (foreign country 1) in a way that ultimately left the local
88

In this light, it is also easy to see that in a many-good setting where reciprocity could lead to changes in individual
world prices but not the overall terms of trade, the third country could experience changes in the export volumes of
individual goods but not in its overall export volume.

66

prices of the second country, and hence its export volumes, unchanged. This reasoning is admittedly
subtle, and there is as yet scant evidence available on its empirical relevance.89 There is, however,
ample evidence on the empirical relevance of Lerner symmetry, and the point we describe here is
simply an application of Lerner symmetry to the context of bilateral MFN tariff bargaining.90
Finally, we note that Ossa (2014) provides an important qualification to the claim that reciprocity and MFN can neutralize the third-party externalities of bilateral tariff bargaining, arguing
that the existence of differentiated products can interfere with this claim. Intuitively, in a setting with differentiated products, even if it imposes an MFN tariff a country can trade at distinct
world prices for (differentiated) products exported from distinct foreign sources, contrary to the
homogeneous-good case; and in this setting, negotiating reciprocal tariff changes with one foreign
partner that leave unchanged the terms of trade with that partner will generally alter (and as Ossa
demonstrates, in fact improve) the terms of trade with the other foreign partner.91 Of course, with
product differentiation the definition of “like products” takes center stage in the application of the
MFN principle: At what point do differentiated products cease to become like products and hence
not demand a common tariff treatment under MFN? The answer to this question is especially
important here, because as Ossa demonstrates and as is intuitively clear, the magnitude of the
3rd −party externality imposed by bilateral bargains that respect reciprocity and MFN is proportional to the degree of product differentiation within the scope of the like-product determination
over which the MFN restriction applies; in the GATT/WTO this scope is typically constrained to
fall within narrow product classifications. And as Ossa observes, for his quantification exercises he
must impose MFN at the level of broad industry categories. Nevertheless, with this caveat noted
Ossa reports that in the presence of differentiated products the 3rd −party externality associated
with MFN can be substantial, even when negotiations conform closely to reciprocity.92
89
But we note here that, though with the purpose of making a different point, the Haberler Report (GATT 1958,
pp. 95-96) includes discussions that mirror a key part of the reasoning we sketch above, namely, that multiple tariff
adjustments can have offsetting impacts on local prices with no consequence for trade volumes.
90
See Bagwell and Staiger (2014) for further discussion of empirical studies reporting evidence that a country’s
own tariff cuts stimulate its exports. Two recent papers provide evidence on the extent of the free-rider problem
in GATT/WTO tariff negotiations more generally, though neither provides specific evidence on the contribution of
reciprocity in mitigating the problem. Ludema and Mayda (2013) report evidence of significant free-riding effects in
the pattern of tariff commitments implemented as a result of the 1986-94 Uruguay Round of GATT negotiations,
while Bagwell, Staiger and Yurukoglu (2015) fail to find evidence of a free-rider problem in their analysis of the
detailed bargaining records of the 1950-51 Torquay Round of GATT negotiations.
91
In this sense, Ossa’s (2014) finding shares similarities with the finding of Bagwell and Staiger (2005a), that with
discriminatory tariffs across trading partners — and hence multiple world prices for the same good — reciprocity does
not eliminate 3rd -party externalities. A difference, though, is that with discriminatory tariffs (and homogeneous
goods) Bagwell and Staiger show that reciprocal tariff liberalization between two parties will hurt the third party via
a terms-of-trade deterioration, while Ossa shows with MFN tariffs and differentiated products that the third party
benefits via a terms-of-trade improvement. See also Suwanprasert (2014), who reports an analogous result to that of
Ossa (2014) in the firm-delocation model of Ossa (2011).
92
In their analysis of the Torquay bargaining records, Bagwell, Staiger and Yurukoglu (2015) report evidence which
they interpret as consistent with Ossa’s (2014) result that 3rd −party externalities should be larger where products
are more differentiated. In addition, Ossa (2014) reports results from counterfactuals that are designed to illuminate
how the MFN principle by itself impacts GATT/WTO bargaining outcomes. Again as Ossa notes, imposing MFN at
the broad industry categories used in his quantification exercise is problematic, but with this caveat he reports that
the MFN restriction appears to have little quantitative impact on bargaining outcomes.

67

4.3

Multilateral Reciprocity

Overall, the preceding discussion suggests an important insight: broadly speaking, the MFN principle permits the liberalizing force of reciprocity to be harnessed in an essentially bilateral manner even in a multi-country world. Indeed, in the context of reciprocity’s implications for the
GATT/WTO bargaining process discussed in the earlier two-country setting, it can be shown that
when that setting is extended to a multi-country world, reciprocity and MFN together work to eliminate bargaining externalities across bargaining pairs, and at the same time induce truth-telling
on the part of governments, and in this way convert a potentially complex multilateral bargaining problem with private information into a comparatively simple set of full-information bilateral
bargains (albeit with difficulties encountered in the face of asymmetries as we described above).93
But this observation raises a further question: If MFN and reciprocity can together essentially
“decentralize” the tariff problem in a multi-country world into a collection of bilateral bargains, why,
then, is there a need for GATT/WTO multilateral rounds? Why not simply let countries negotiate
a web of bilateral reciprocal MFN tariff agreements on their own, much as was the practice of the
United States during the 1930s under the US Reciprocal Trade Agreements Act (RTAA)?
One answer to this question is that, at least in the later GATT/WTO rounds, writing and
elaborating on agreed common codes of behavior has been an important function, and for this the
multilateral features of the negotiations are no doubt crucial. A second answer to this question is
provided by Maggi (1999). Maggi demonstrates that, even in a world without externalities across
bilateral relationships, multilateral tariff bargaining yields a Pareto-superior outcome to bilateral
tariff bargaining whenever there are bilateral imbalances of power across bargaining pairs. As Maggi
explains, bilateral bargains generate outcomes that are biased in favor of the “strong” country in
each bilateral relationship, and unless countries can make international lump sum transfers this
results in an inefficiency at the global level that multilateral tariff bargaining can avoid.
Here we suggest a third answer to the question why multilateral rounds of negotiation might be
desirable: the GATT/WTO multilateral rounds relax the requirement of bilateral reciprocity and
allow countries to seek instead only multilateral reciprocity in their bargaining outcomes. And as
we explain, in a multi-country MFN world, multilateral reciprocity is sufficient to deliver all of the
properties that we have above attributed to the pairing of reciprocity with MFN.94
To see the point, it is helpful to return to the three-country two-good general equilibrium model
described above, with the home government restricted to an MFN tariff. As we observed, this
implies that there is a single equilibrium world price pew (τ , τ ∗1 , τ ∗2 ), and under standard conditions

pew is decreasing in the home tariff τ and increasing in each of the foreign tariffs τ ∗1 and τ ∗2 . Let

us suppose, then, that the tariff reductions ∆τ , ∆τ ∗1 and ∆τ ∗2 together satisfy reciprocity, in the
sense that together they leave pew unchanged.

One way to structure these tariff changes is to proceed sequentially through the bilaterals and

demand bilateral reciprocity at every stage. Under this approach, the home country could split its
93
94

See Bagwell and Staiger (1999, 2010a) and Bagwell, Staiger and Yurukoglu (2015).
This is a point emphasized by Bagwell, Staiger and Yurukoglu (2015).

68

tariff reduction ∆τ into two parts: a ∆τ 1 that was matched with ∆τ ∗1 so that pew remained unchanged under the tariff reductions ∆τ 1 and ∆τ ∗1 ; and a further ∆τ 2 that was matched with ∆τ ∗2

so that pew remained unchanged under the tariff reductions ∆τ 2 and ∆τ ∗2 (and by construction,

∆τ 1 + ∆τ 2 = ∆τ ). “Split concessions” of this kind were a common tactic used by the United
States to maintain reciprocity in each of its bilaterals under the RTAA (see Beckett, 1941).
An alternative way to structure these tariff changes, however, is to not worry about achieving
bilateral reciprocity in each bilateral bargain, as long as overall multilateral reciprocity is achieved
once the direct-plus-indirect impacts of all the bilateral bargains on each country’s trade are taken
into account. Under this approach, in its bilateral with foreign country 1 the home country could
offer its entire tariff cut ∆τ in exchange for the tariff cut ∆τ ∗1 from foreign country 1, creating a
positive spillover for foreign country 2 from this bilateral; and in its bilateral with foreign country
2, the home country could then ask for the tariff cut ∆τ ∗2 and offer nothing directly in return, with
the tariff cut ∆τ ∗2 serving as compensation for the indirect benefit that foreign country 2 would be
receiving from the bilateral between home and foreign country 1. Neither of these bilaterals satisfies
bilateral reciprocity, but each country nevertheless achieves reciprocity — and pew is left unchanged
— once the direct and indirect effects of all the tariff cutting agreed in the round are added up.

It is not hard to see that the second approach would be facilitated by a multilateral round of
bilateral negotiations in which all participants in the bilaterals could assess both what they were
obtaining directly in their own bilaterals and also what they would be obtaining indirectly from the
bilaterals of other pairs of countries. In the simple model here, there is nothing to gain from relaxing
the restriction of bilateral reciprocity and replacing it with the weaker requirement of multilateral
reciprocity. But it is easy to see with more complicated trade patterns that the relaxation of the
constraint from one of bilateral reciprocity to one of multilateral reciprocity could make possible
some deals that would otherwise not be possible.95
In a four-country version of this model with one home and three foreign countries, Bagwell,
Staiger and Yurukoglu (2015) show that if the home country and foreign countries 1 and 2 engage in
negotiations that conform to MFN and multilateral reciprocity, then foreign country 3 is unaffected
by their bargain. And with this result they also establish that multilateral reciprocity is sufficient to
deliver all of the properties attributed above to the pairing of reciprocity with MFN. Bagwell, Staiger
and Yurukoglu then use these properties to guide their empirical analysis of GATT bargaining
records from the Torquay Round, and find evidence consistent with a number of themes developed
above. But for our purposes here their findings concerning multilateral versus bilateral reciprocity
are the most relevant. Exploiting the “quasi experiment” created by the breakdown of the US-UK
bilateral in the middle of the Torquay Round, Bagwell, Staiger and Yurukoglu report evidence
of rebalancing in the offers and counter-offers made by the United States and its other bilateral
bargaining partners subsequent to the news of this breakdown that would not have been required to
95

Indeed, the relaxation of this constraint was seen by early GATT practitioners as a key innovation of GATT
relative to the RTAA (ICITO, 1949). Notice, too, that our point here is distinct from that made by Maggi (1999), as
our point relates to the ability to balance spillovers across bilaterals in the presence of MFN whereas Maggi’s point
addresses power asymmetries in bilaterals with no spillovers and no essential role for MFN.

69

maintain reciprocity if countries had been achieving bilateral reciprocity in each of their bargains
all along. These findings support the view that the bilateral reciprocity restriction that might
otherwise have constrained negotiations was indeed relaxed in the GATT multilateral bargaining
forum, where the weaker restriction of multilateral reciprocity could instead be achieved.96

5

Bindings and Overhang

Governments in the GATT/WTO negotiate bound tariff rates, or tariff caps, rather than exact tariff
levels. When a government agrees to a tariff cap for some product, the government is permitted
under GATT/WTO rules to set any (non-discriminatory) tariff below that cap but is not allowed
to apply a tariff above the cap unless certain contingencies arise.97 Binding overhang occurs when
the applied tariff is below the bound level. In practice, the extent of binding overhang varies
markedly across countries and products, but is a prominent feature of tariff policies for many WTO
members.98 Thus, GATT/WTO rules allow for substantial “downward flexibility” but impose
significant constraints on “upward flexibility.”
Does the GATT/WTO tariff-cap approach make sense in light of the trade-agreement models
described in Section 2? The terms-of-trade theory of trade agreements clearly suggests that an
effective trade agreement must include some constraints against opportunistic tariff hikes. A tariff
cap is one such constraint. From the perspective of this theory, we can also appreciate that a welldesigned trade agreement might provide substantial downward flexibility; after all, if a government
applies a (non-discriminatory) tariff that is below the bound level for a given product, then the
trading partners that export this product enjoy a terms-of-trade gain. A further consideration is
that the nature of tariff flexibility may impact the negotiated baseline tariff; for example, a higher
baseline tariff may be more attractive in the presence of downward flexibility. To address these and
other considerations and to thereby assess the optimality of the GATT/WTO tariff-cap approach,
we require a model of tariff negotiations in which shocks occur so that flexibility would sometimes
be exercised if permitted.
Bagwell and Staiger (2005b) analyze tariff caps and binding overhang in the context of a model
in which governments are exposed to preference shocks in the form of political pressure. They
posit that at the time of negotiation governments face at least some uncertainty about the political
pressures that they might later face. After the trade agreement is negotiated, governments privately
96

A remaining question is why, given the multilateral bargaining forum, the organizing principle of GATT/WTO
tariff negotiations remained focused on bilaterals. In fact, in several of the GATT Rounds (the Kennedy Round and
the Tokyo Round) countries first negotiated on a multilateral basis over a tariff cutting rule (or rules) to be adopted
by all, and the bilaterals then reemerged in these rounds as a way of introducing exceptions to the agreed rules and
to establish and maintain reciprocity. In the now-stalled WTO Doha Round, a mixture of these approaches is being
utilized. Especially with the recent declassification of the GATT bargaining records for many of the GATT rounds,
we see the choice of bargaining protocols to be an important topic for future theoretical and empirical research.
97
Tariff caps play a central role in GATT/WTO design. This role is highlighted, for example, in the World Trade
Report 2009 (World Trade Organization, 2009, p. 105), which argues that the “concept of a tariff binding - i.e.,
committing not to increases a duty beyond an agreed level - is at the heart of the multilateral trading system.”
98
See, for example, WTO (2009, p. xix) for a related description. Recent empirical work includes Bacchetta and
Piermartini (2011) and Beshkar, Bond and Rho (2015).

70

observe their respective political pressure realizations and select their preferred import tariffs from
those that are permitted by the trade agreement. Bagwell and Staiger develop their analysis in
the context of the linear-quadratic partial-equilibrium model presented in Section 2.2.1, under the
assumptions that only import tariffs are selected (i.e., export policies are exogenously set at free
trade), the political-economy weights attached to export interests are unitary, and the politicaleconomy weights that governments attach to import-competing interests are independently drawn
from the interval [γ, γ] according to the continuously differentiable distribution function F (γ) and
where γ = 1 < γ < 7/4.99
Given the separable structure of the linear-quadratic model and the absence of export policies,
the tariff policy of one government has no direct interaction with the tariff selection of the other
government. We therefore focus on the home-country import good, which we denote as good x in
Section 2.2.1.100 To simplify our presentation, we drop the good x subscript in our notation here.
Consider then the import tariff policy of the home country. For the linear-quadratic model,
the optimal tariff for the government of the home country is the same as its Nash tariff.101 As
Bagwell and Staiger (2005b) confirm, the Nash tariff function for the linear-quadratic model takes
the form τ N (γ) = (8γ − 5)/[4(17 − 2γ)], where γ is the political-economic welfare weight attached
to profit in the import-competing industry. As illustrated in Figure 3 (adapted from Figure 1 of
Bagwell and Staiger, 2005b), the Nash tariff function is strictly increasing. This simply reflects the
fact that a home-country government with a greater welfare weight on import-competing interests
derives greater benefit from the higher local price that a tariff hike implies. Similarly, we let
τ E (γ) denote the import tariff for the home-country government that maximizes joint government
welfare, W +W ∗ . Bagwell and Staiger show that τ E (γ) = 4(γ−1)/(25−4γ). This function is strictly
increasing as well, and it is also strictly lower than the Nash tariff: τ E (γ) < τ N (γ). The difference
between the two tariffs is attributable to the terms-of-trade externality. A final feature illustrated
in Figure 3 is that the difference between τ N (γ) and τ E (γ) shrinks as γ rises. The intuition is that
the incentive to manipulate the terms of trade diminishes at higher values for γ, since τ N (γ) and
τ E (γ) then take higher values and thus generate lower trade volumes. Of course, τ N (γ) and τ E (γ)
also characterize the tariff policies for the foreign government, when γ is interpreted as the welfare
weight that the foreign government attaches to its import-competing industry (for good y).
Since we have ruled out export policies, governments do not have sufficient trade-policy instruments with which to effect lump-sum transfers. The relationship between efficient tariffs and the
function τ E (γ) thus requires some additional discussion. We make two points. First, if governments have available an ex ante (non-contingent) lump-sum transfer instrument, then they achieve
99

Thus, in terms of the model presented in Section 2.2.1, Bagwell and Staiger (2005b) assume that γ e = γ ∗e = 1 while
γ m and γ ∗m are independently determined according to the distribution function F (γ). Recall now the assumption
that 5/8 + 9γ e /8 > γ m for the linear-quadratic model in Section 2.2.1, which ensures that trade volume is positive
at Nash (and efficient) tariffs. In the present context, with γ e = 1, this assumption requires that 7/4 > γ m , which
explains the assumption that γ < 7/4.
100
Even though the model has a separable structure, in the private-information setting under consideration here,
gains may exist from “linking” tariff decisions over time or across products. We return to this issue below.
101
Amador and Bagwell (2013) refer to this tariff as the flexible tariff, since it is the tariff that a government would
select if it were granted full flexibility under the trade agreement.

71

efficiency by maximizing W + W ∗ , and so τ E (γ) then indeed defines the efficient tariff function.
Second, if such an instrument is not available, then the Pareto frontier includes other tariff functions as well; however, in the symmetric environment under consideration here, a focal point on the
efficiency frontier is arguably where governments use the same tariff function, τ E (γ). We therefore refer below to the tariff function τ E (γ) as the efficient tariff function, and we evaluate a trade
agreement relative to the objective of maximizing the expected value of W + W ∗ . The efficient tariff
function is the first-best function for this objective, since it maximizes the objective pointwise.
Unfortunately, however, the efficient tariff function is not feasible in this private-information
setting, since it fails to be incentive compatible. To see the issue, we may refer again to Figure 3
For a given value of γ, the home-country government prefers τ N (γ) to τ E (γ). If the governments
were to attempt to implement the efficient tariff function, then the home-country government with
true political pressure γ would have incentive to claim that its type is γ ′ > γ where τ E (γ ′ ) = τ N (γ).
Thus, if governments are unable to observe and write verifiable contracts that condition on political
pressure realizations, and if governments do not have available contingent transfer functions with
which to make the efficient tariff function incentive compatible, then a trade agreement cannot
deliver the efficient tariff function.102
Bagwell and Staiger (2005b) compare a strong tariff binding, whereby a government must select
the same tariff for all political-pressure realizations, with a weak tariff binding, whereby a government can apply any tariff so long as the applied tariff does not exceed the bound tariff level (i.e., the
tariff cap). Given that political pressure enters welfare in a linear way, they find that the optimal
strong tariff binding is at the tariff τ E (E(γ)), where E(γ) is the expected value of political pressure.
Imposing the assumption that E(γ) > 5/4 so that τ E (E(γ)) > τ N (γ), they further show that the
optimal weak binding, τ w , strictly exceeds τ E (E(γ)) and corresponds to the efficient tariff level for
the average political pressure among those types that are constrained by the binding (i.e., among
those higher types for which τ N (γ) > τ w ). Intuitively, when a weak binding is used, lower types
automatically satisfy the binding while selecting their Nash tariffs; thus, the bound rate is actually
selected only by higher types, and so the optimal weak binding is efficient on average conditional
on the realization of higher types.
For both the strong and weak tariff bindings, the induced applied tariff schedules are incentive
compatible and thus correspond to a feasible trade agreement.103 Furthermore, and as Bagwell and
Staiger (2005b) show, the optimal weak binding generates strictly greater expected joint welfare
than does the optimal strong binding.104 In this sense, their analysis provides a rationalization for
102
As Bagwell and Staiger (2005b) discuss, since the efficient tariff function is strictly increasing, it could be implemented were lump-sum and contingent transfers feasible. In practice, however, state-contingent and monetary
transfers are not a prominent feature of GATT/WTO practice.
103
The applied tariff schedule induced by the strong tariff binding is trivially incentive compatible, since all types
apply the same tariff. The applied tariff schedule induced by the weak tariff binding entails lower types selecting
their Nash tariffs and higher types pooling at the weak binding, τ w . This applied tariff schedule is also incentive
compatible, since each type applies the permitted tariff that is as close as possible to its Nash tariff.
104
To establish this point, suppose that governments were to use a weak binding where the cap is set at the optimal
strong tariff binding, τ E (Eγ). Given τ N (γ) < τ E (Eγ), it follows that the weak binding leads to strictly lower tariffs
for lower types, with both governments strictly gaining as a result. The optimal weak binding is then an even better

72

the GATT/WTO tariff-cap approach, while also providing an interpretation of binding overhang
(by lower types for which τ N (γ) < τ w ). At the same time, the analysis is not fully complete in that
it does not establish that the trade agreement defined by the optimal weak binding offers greater
expected joint welfare than does any other incentive-compatible trade agreement.
Amador and Bagwell (2013) develop a theory of optimal delegation that completes and extends
this analysis. In a delegation problem, a principal selects a set of permissible actions from which a
privately informed agent selects.105 The principal faces a trade off when selecting this set, since the
agent has superior information (which argues in favor of giving the agent substantial discretion)
but has biased preferences (which argues in favor of limiting the agent’s discretion). Amador and
Bagwell characterize optimal delegation for a general family of preferences for the principal and
agent, and they then apply their characterizations to the trade-agreement problem. Specifically,
they show that the trade-agreement problem can be understood as a delegation game in which the
“principal’s” objective corresponds to the ex ante expected joint welfare of the two governments,
the privately informed “agent’s” objective corresponds to the ex post welfare of the government of
the importing country, the state of the world about which the agent obtains private information
corresponds to the level of political pressure that this government ultimately faces, and the set of
permissible actions corresponds to the set of tariffs that are allowed under the trade agreement.
Formally, Amador and Bagwell (2013) analyze the following delegation problem:
max

Z

π:Γ→Π Γ

w(γ, π(γ))dF (γ) subject to

(75)

γ ∈ arg max[γπ(e
γ ) + b(π(e
γ ))] for all γ ∈ Γ,
γ
e∈Γ

where Γ ≡ [γ, γ] ⊂ ℜ, F is continuous with an associated continuous and strictly positive density f ,
Π is an interval of the real line with non-empty interior where, without loss of generality, inf Π = 0
and π is in the extended reals such that π = sup Π. Their maintained assumptions are that:
(i) w : Γ × Π → ℜ is continuous on Γ × Π; (ii) for all γ 0 ∈ Γ, w(γ 0 , ·) is concave on Π and twice
differentiable on (0, π); (iii) b : Π → ℜ is strictly concave on Π and twice differentiable on (0, π); (iv)
there exists a twice-differentiable function π f : Γ → (0, π) such that, for all γ 0 ∈ Γ, π ′f (γ 0 ) > 0 and
π f (γ 0 ) ∈ arg maxπ∈Π [γ 0 π(γ) + b(π(γ)); and (v) wπ : Γ × (0, π) → ℜ is continuous on Γ × (0, π).106
The objective of the principal is thus to maximize the expected value of the function w, where
w depends on the state variable γ and the associated action, π(γ). The agent privately observes
the state γ and chooses over actions π to maximize γπ + b(π). The principal, however, selects
the set of permissible actions, and is thereby able to match states to actions provided that the
incentive compatibility constraint is met (so that an agent that observes state γ does not prefer to
choose a permissible action π(e
γ ) intended for a different state). Amador and Bagwell (2013) provide
sufficient and necessary conditions under which an interval allocation solves the delegation problem
alternative for governments.
105
See Holmstrom (1977) for an original statement and analysis of the delegation problem.
106
Amador and Bagwell (2013) also analyze and apply a version of the delegation problem that allows for a nonnegative money-burning variable.

73

defined in (75), where an interval allocation π is defined by bounds γ L and γ H with γ L , γ H ∈ Γ
and γ L < γ H and satisfies π(γ) = π f (γ L ) for γ ∈ [γ, γ L ], π(γ) = π f (γ) for γ ∈ (γ L , γ H ), and
π(γ) = π f (γ H ) for γ ∈ [γ H , γ]. Thus, when the principal selects an interval allocation, an agent
that observes an intermediate value of γ selects the optimal (i.e., flexible) action π f (γ) while an
agent that observes a higher (lower) value of γ selects the highest (lowest) permissible action. A
cap allocation is an interval allocation for which γ L = γ.
A case of particular interest for trade-agreement applications occurs when w(γ, π(γ)) = v(π) +
b(π) + γπ. For example, consider again a partial equilibrium model of trade in which only import
tariffs are available. For a given traded good, the interpretation here is that π is the profit that
is delivered to the import-competing industry, with γ then indicating the welfare weight that the
government of the importing country ultimately places on π. Since a higher import tariff results in
a higher profit level in the import-competing industry, there is a one-to-one relationship between
import tariffs and import-competing industry profit. The optimal import tariff, for example, is the
unique tariff that delivers the corresponding optimal profit level, π f (γ). More generally, a trade
agreement that specifies permissible import tariffs can be understood equivalently as specifying
permissible levels of profit for the import-competing industry. We then may use b(π) to capture
the consumer surplus and tariff revenue in the importing country as a function of the delivered
profit, so that the welfare function for the government of the importing country can be represented
as b(π)+γπ. Finally, when the two governments design the trade agreement, they seek to maximize
their ex ante expected welfare, w(γ, π(γ)) = v(π) + b(π) + γπ, where the function v(π) captures the
impact of π on welfare in the exporting country. In other words, v(π) represents export-industry
profit and consumer surplus for the traded good in the exporting country, when these values are
expressed as functions of the profit that is enjoyed on this good in the importing country.
For trade-agreement applications, cap allocations correspond to tariff caps and are thus of
particular interest. Under the assumption that v ′ (π f (γ)) < 0 for all γ ∈ Γ, Amador and Bagwell
(2013) show that, within the family of cap allocations, the optimal value for γ H is interior (i.e.,
satisfies γ H ∈ (γ, γ)) provided that v ′ (π f (γ)) + E(γ) − γ > 0. The assumption that v ′ (π f (γ)) < 0
is quite natural in trade-agreement applications, where a higher import tariff imposes a negative
international externality on a country’s trading partner. For example, in the linear-quadratic partial
equilibrium model that Bagwell and Staiger (2005b) use, the assumption that v ′ (π f (γ)) < 0 for all
γ ∈ Γ is satisfied, and the requirement that v ′ (π f (γ)) + E(γ) − γ > 0 holds given γ = 1 if and only
if E(γ) ≥ 5/4.107 The tariff cap implied by the optimal cap allocation in this example corresponds
to the optimal weak binding, τ w , that Bagwell and Staiger (2005b) characterize.
For the case where w(γ, π(γ)) = v(π) + b(π) + γπ, Amador and Bagwell (2013) further provide
a simple set of sufficient conditions under which the optimal cap allocation solves the delegation
problem defined in (75) and is thus the optimal allocation among all incentive-compatible allocations. The sufficient conditions are those just mentioned - that v ′ (π f (γ)) < 0 for all γ ∈ Γ and
√
As Amador and Bagwell (2013) show, for the linear-quadratic model, b(π) = (1/2)(−1 + 9 π − 17π) and v(π) =
√
(1/4)(2 − 6 π + 9π), where π is the profit in the import-competing industry and π = 1/9 is the maximal profit
obtained when the prohibitive tariff of 1/6 is applied.
107

74

v ′ (π f (γ)) + E(γ) − γ > 0 - as well as two additional conditions. The additional conditions are that
the density f is nondecreasing on Γ and that
κ≡

inf

(γ,π)∈Γ×Π

{

wππ (γ, π)
1
}≥ .
′′
b (π)
2

(76)

The latter condition allows that v may be convex but ensures that the magnitude of any convexity in
v is not too large relative to the magnitude of the concavity in b. The stated conditions are sufficient
to ensure that the optimal cap allocation generates higher expected welfare for the principal than
does any other incentive-compatible allocation.108
As Amador and Bagwell (2013) show, these conditions can be easily applied to trade models.
As a first application, they apply their analysis to the linear-quadratic partial equilibrium model
studied by Bagwell and Staiger (2005b) and show that the optimal tariff-cap allocation is optimal
in the full set of incentive-compatible allocations given γ = 1 if E(γ) ≥ 5/4 and f is non-decreasing.
For this model, κ = 2/3 and so the condition that κ ≥ 1/2 is automatically satisfied. Amador and
Bagwell also show for this model that the monotonicity restriction on the density can be relaxed
to allow for differentiable densities that are decreasing over ranges or even over the whole support,
provided that the rate of decrease is not too great.109 Thus, under the described conditions, the
optimal weak binding τ w that Bagwell and Staiger (2005b) characterize indeed describes the optimal
trade agreement in the full set of incentive-compatible allocations for this model.110
In a second application, Amador and Bagwell (2013) consider a model closely related to the
monopolistic competition model described in Section 2.3. Specifically, they consider a short-run
version of the model in which the number of home- and foreign-country firms is fixed at the exogenous value nh = nf > 1, so that firms may enjoy positive profits, and in which the utility
∗ ) + C , where as before
functions in (17) are replaced by U = log(CD ) + CY and U ∗ = log(CD
Y
P ∗ α 1/α
P
∗
α
1/α
∗
CD = [ (ci ) ] , CD = [ (ci ) ] , α ∈ (0, 1), and ci and ci are the respective consumption levi

i

els in the home and foreign countries of variety i of the differentiated good. Relative to the partial

equilibrium model with perfect competition, a novel feature of this model is that trade is two-way
within the differentiated sector, and so the profit earned by each home-country firm depends on
the import tariffs in both countries.111 To simplify that analysis, Amador and Bagwell assume
that the private information is one-sided and concerns the welfare weight that the home-country
government attaches to the producer surplus enjoyed by home-country firms.112 Despite the more
108

Alternative incentive-compatible allocations must be non-decreasing and include a large family of allocations with
points of discontinuity, where the allocation hurdles the flexible allocation π f (γ).
109
The specific condition is that f (γ) + (7/4 − γ)f ′ (γ) ≥ 0 for all γ ∈ Γ. To establish this point, Amador and
Bagwell (2013) refer to the sufficient conditions that they provide for the optimality of interval allocations in the
general version of their model.
110
Amador and Bagwell (2013) show also that related results hold in a partial equilibrium model with perfect
competition that features log utility and endowments (inelastic supply).
111
The dependence takes a separable form, since the import tariff in one country does not affect the terms of trade
and nor thereby the price index in the other country. See also Ossa (2012) for a complete-information analysis of
trade negotiations in a monopolistic competition model where profits matter due to a fixed number of firms.
112
The foreign-country government is assumed to maximize national income. An alternative would be to assume a
second differentiated sector and let the foreign government be privately informed about its preferences as well.

75

complex trade setting, Amador and Bagwell show that the simple sufficient conditions described
above can be applied once π is appropriately defined.
In particular, Amador and Bagwell (2013) establish conditions under which the optimal tariffcap allocation is optimal in the full set of incentive-compatible allocations for the (short-run)
monopolistic competition model. The simple sufficient conditions for this model are satisfied if
the density is non-decreasing and the parameters are such that 1 > α ≥ 2/3, α(1 − α)γ < 1 and
E(γ) − αγ − (2 − α)/α > 0, where α ≥ 2/3 ensures that κ ≥ 1/2, the role of the latter condition
is to generate an interior value for γ H , and the other parameter restrictions ensure that the model
satisfies the basic assumptions of the general delegation problem.113
The work described above provides a foundation for other recent analyses of tariff caps and
binding overhang. Beshkar, Bond and Rho (2015) extend the linear-quadratic partial-equilibrium
model in an important direction to allow for countries with asymmetric sizes. They focus on tariff
caps and provide theoretical and empirical support for the prediction that a higher tariff cap, and
thus a greater probability of binding overhang, is optimal when the market power of the importing
country is lower. To gain some insight, consider the extreme case of a small country. Since the
import tariff for such a country does not generate a terms-of-trade externality, an optimal trade
agreement would grant such a country full discretion to respond to its preference shocks. A tariff
cap that is sufficiently high accomplishes this objective. Amador and Bagwell (2012) consider
the possibility that governments have private information about the value of tariff revenue. They
provide an approach under which this problem can be solved using Amador and Bagwell’s (2013)
propositions for the delegation problem with money burning. For the linear-quadratic model, they
then give conditions under which an optimal trade agreement again takes the form of a tariff cap.114
Tariff caps can also be rationalized in other modeling frameworks. Horn, Maggi and Staiger
(2010), for example, consider a model with contracting costs and show that a weak-binding rule
is preferred to a rigid- (i.e., strong-) binding rule, due to the downward flexibility that the former
allows. As in the discussion above, binding overhang occurs with positive probability when a weakbinding rule is used. Maggi and Rodriguez-Clare’s (2007) work is also related. They consider
a model in which a trade agreement addresses both terms-of-trade and a domestic-commitment
problems. While binding overhang does not occur in equilibrium in their model, the potential to
apply a tariff below the bound level gives rise to ex post lobbying and thereby helps to diminish
the extent of excess investment that occurs in the ex ante stage.115
113

Amador and Bagwell (2013) represent home-country government welfare as W = CS + T R + γP S, where CS is
the consumer surplus enjoyed by home-country consumers, T R is home-country tariff revenue, and P S is the producer
surplus enjoyed by home-country firms. They then define π as a specific function of nh = nf and the home-country
import tariff, τ , where π influences P S but is distinct from P S, and they show that the corresponding formulation
of the delegation problem satisfies v ′ (π) < 0 < v ′′ (π).
114
In other related work, Bagwell (2009) considers the linear-quadratic model but assumes that the political pressure
variable, γ, can only take two values. The optimal trade agreement in the two-type setting does not take the form of a
tariff cap. Frankel (forthcoming) is also related. He considers delegation problems with multiple decisions, where each
decision has its own underlying state variable, and describes a constant-bias setting where a cap (defined as a ceiling
on the weighted average of actions) is optimal. A key theme is that linking decisions can soften incentive constraints.
See Athey and Bagwell (2001) and Jackson and Sonnenschein (2007) for broadly related themes in different contexts.
115
Another approach is taken by Bowen (2015). Working with a dynamic legislative bargaining model, she considers

76

We also highlight a new literature on the trade effects of tariff bindings, as distinct from reductions in applied tariffs, for settings characterized by policy uncertainty.116 As Handley (2014) and
Handley and Limao (forthcoming) argue, exporters may be sensitive to policy uncertainty, and tariff
caps may thus stimulate entry into export markets by reducing the risk of future increases in protection. Their empirical analyses indicate large trade effects of tariff bindings in trade agreements,
both in the context of WTO bindings (for Australia, in Handley, 2014) and preferential-agreement
bindings (for Portugal joining the EC, in Handley and Limão, forthcoming). We view the study of
tariff caps in the presence of policy uncertainty as a promising direction for future research.

6

Conclusion

What does economics have to say about the design of international trade agreements? In this
chapter, we have reviewed a literature on this question, providing detailed coverage on three key
design features of the GATT/WTO: reciprocity, nondiscrimination as embodied in the MFN principle, and tariff bindings and binding “overhang.” Each of these features is central to the design
of the GATT/WTO, and we have argued that an economic perspective can go a long way toward
revealing a consistent logic to the inclusion of these design features in trade agreements.
We conclude by briefly mentioning several other topics relating to trade-agreement design that
are examined in detail elsewhere in this Handbook. A broad theme of our chapter is that the
design features of trade agreements are sufficiently deliberate and connected to economic tradeoffs
that they can be usefully analyzed from an economic perspective. A good further illustration
of this theme can be found in early discussions of the role of dispute settlement procedures to be
included in GATT. GATT’s dispute settlement procedures raise remarkably subtle tradeoffs between
completion of the contract, compliance and compensation that were at the heart of the discussions
surrounding these procedures at the time of their initial design.117 Themes developed in this chapter
provide a foundation for understanding economic aspects of enforcement and dispute settlement
procedures in trade agreements, and for understanding as well the manner in which trade agreements
can provide upward flexibility to shocks. The themes raised in this chapter also suggest that a
properly designed trade agreement must ensure that non-tariff and behind-border measures are not
used opportunistically, so as to undermine the value of negotiated tariff commitments. Similarly,
in multi-country settings, the work described above suggests that discriminatory liberalization may
give rise to third-party externalities, a consideration that informs the debate over preferential versus
multilateral liberalization. More broadly, other design issues include the treatment of investment
how tariff caps affect the domestic legislative process and thereby the resulting applied tariffs.
116
Other recent contributions to this literature include Limao and Maggi (2015) and Pierce and Schott (2015).
117
For example, in his proposal for a commercial union which would lay much of the groundwork for the design of
GATT, James Meade emphasized the tradeoff between writing a more detailed and precise contract versus relying
on the dispute settlement system to interpret the contract when disputes inevitably arise (see Meade, 1942, as
reproduced in Culbert, 1987, p. 404). And in an early analysis of the 1950-51 GATT Torquay Round, it was suggested
that measured compensatory adjustments to restore reciprocity might require on—equilibrium-path authorization of
retaliation by GATT at the same time that the possibility of further retaliation and an all-out trade war was to be
held as an off-equilibrium threat (see US International Chamber of Commerce, 1955, p. 63-64).

77

and intellectual property in trade agreements; indeed, it is natural to ask what criteria may be put
forth to determine which policies are “linked” through trade agreements. These and other design
issues are treated in later chapters of this Handbook. These chapters, as they relate to design
issues, reinforce the main message of our chapter: economic arguments provide valuable tools for
evaluating and interpreting the design of trade agreements.

References
Admati, Anat R. and Motty Perry. 1987. “Strategic Delay in Bargaining,” Review of Economic Studies,
LIV, 345-364.
Amador, Manuel and Kyle Bagwell. 2012. “Tariff revenue and tariff caps.” American Economic Review:
Papers and Proceedings 102(3): 459-65.
Amador, Manuel and Kyle Bagwell. 2013. “The theory of optimal delegation with an application to tariff
caps.” Econometrica 81(4): 1541-99.
Antràs, Pol and Robert W. Staiger. 2012a. “Trade agreements and the nature of price determination.”
American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings 102(3): 470-6.
Antràs, Pol and Robert W. Staiger. 2012b. “Offshoring and the role of trade agreements.” American
Economic Review 102(7): 3140-3183
Athey, Susan and Kyle Bagwell. 2001. “Optimal collusion with private information.” Rand Journal of
Economics 32(3): 428-465.
Bacchetta, Marc and Roberta Piermartini. 2011. “The value of bindings.” Staff Working Paper ERSD2011-13, World Trade Organization.
Bagwell, Kyle. 2008. “Remedies in the WTO: An Economic Perspective.” In The WTO: Governance,
Dispute Settlement & Developing Countries, edited by Merit E. Janow, Victoria J. Donaldson and
Alan Yanovich, Chapter 40, 733-770. Huntington, New York: Juris Publishing.
Bagwell, Kyle. 2009. “Self-enforcing trade agreements and private information.” NBER Working Paper
No. 14812.
Bagwell, Kyle, Chad Bown and Robert W. Staiger. Forthcoming. “Is the WTO passé?” Journal of Economic Literature.
Bagwell, Kyle and Seung Hoon Lee. 2015. “Trade policy under monopolistic competition with firm selection.” Mimeogr., Stanford University.
Bagwell, Kyle, Petros C. Mavroidis, and Robert W. Staiger. 2007. “Auctioning countermeasures in the
WTO.” Journal of International Economics 73(2): 309-32.

78

Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger. 1999. “An Economic Theory of GATT.” American Economic Review
89(1): 215-48.
Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger. 2001a. “Reciprocity, non-discrimination and preferential agreements
in the multilateral trading system.” European Journal of Political Economy 17(2): 281-325.
Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger. 2001b. “Domestic Policies, National Sovereignty, and International
Economic Institutions.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 116(2): 519-562.
Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger. 2001c. “Strategic Trade, Competitive Industries and Agricultural
Trade Disputes.” Economics and Politics 13(2): 113-28.
Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger. 2002. The Economics of the World Trading System. Cambridge,
MA: The MIT Press.
Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger. 2005a. “Multilateral Trade Negotiations, Bilateral Opportunism
and the Rules of GATT/WTO.” Journal of International Economics 67(2): 268-94.
Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger. 2005b. “Enforcement, Private Political Pressure and the GATT/WTO
Escape Clause.” Journal of Legal Studies 34(2): 471-513.
Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger. 2006. “Will International Rules on Subsidies Disrupt the World
Trading System?” American Economic Review 96(3): 877-95.
Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger. 2010a. “The WTO: Theory and Practice.” Annual Review of
Economics 2: 223-56.
Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger. 2010b. “Backward Stealing and Forward Manipulation in the
WTO.” Journal of International Economics 82(1): 49-62.
Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger. 2011. “What do trade negotiators negotiate about? Empirical
evidence from the World Trade Organization.” American Economic Review 101(4): 1238-73.
Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger. 2012a. “Profit Shifting and Trade Agreements in Imperfectly
Competitive Markets.” International Economic Review 53(4): 1067-1104.
Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger. 2012b. “The economics of trade agreements in the linear cournot
delocation model.” Journal of International Economics 88(1): 32-46.
Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger. 2014. “Can the Doha Round be a Development Round? Setting
a Place at the Table.” In Globalization in an Age of Crisis: Multilateral Economic Cooperation in
the Twenty-First Century, edited by Robert C. Feenstra and Alan M. Taylor, 91-124. Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Press for the NBER.
Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger. 2015. “Delocation and trade agreements in imperfectly competitive
markets.” Research in Economics.

79

Bagwell, Kyle, Staiger, Robert W. and Ali Yurukoglu. 2015. “Multilateral Trade Bargaining: A First Look
at the GATT Bargaining Records,” Mimeogr., August.
Baldwin, Richard. 1987. “Politically realistic objective functions and trade policy PROFs and tariffs.”
Economics Letters 24(3): 287-290.
Baldwin, Robert E. and Richard N.Clarke. 1987. “Game-Modeling Multilateral Trade Negotiations,”
Journal of Policy Modeling 9(2): 257-284.
Beckett G. 1941. The Reciprocal Trade Agreements Program. New York: Columbia Univ. Press.
Beshkar, Mostafa. 2010. “Trade skirmishes and safeguards: a theory of the WTO dispute settlement
process.” Journal of International Economics 82(1): 35-48.
Beshkar, Mostafa, Eric W. Bond, and Youngwoo Rho. 2015. “Tariff binding and overhang: theory and
evidence.” Journal of International Economics 97(1):1-13.
Binmore, Kenneth. 2014. “Bargaining and Fairness.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of
the United States of America 111 (Supplement 3): 10785-10788.
Blanchard, Emily J. 2007a. “Foreign direct investment, endogenous tariffs, and preferential trade agreements.” BE Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy 7.
Blanchard, Emily J. 2007b. “Reevaluating the role of trade agreements: Does investment globalization
make the WTO obsolete?” Mimeogr., University of Virginia, August 2.
Blanchard, Emily J. 2010. “Reevaluating the role of trade agreements: Does investment globalization make
the WTO obsolete?” Journal of International Economics 82(1): 63-72.
Blanchard, Emily J. and Xenia Matschke. 2015. “US multinationals and preferential market access.”
Review of Economics and Statistics 97(4): 839-854.
Bowen, T. Renee. 2015. “Legislated Protection and the World Trade Organization.” International Economic Review 56(4): 1349-84.
Brainard, Lael. 1994. “Last one out wins: trade policy in an international exit game.” International
Economic Review 35(1): 151-72.
Brander, James A. 1995. “Strategic trade policy.” In Handbook of International Economics, edited by Gene
M. Grossman and Kenneth Rogoff, 3: 1395-1455. Amsterdam, NL: North-Holland.
Brock, William A. and Stephen P. Magee. 1978. “The Economics of Special Interest Politics.” American
Economic Review 68(2): 246-250.
Brou, Daniel and Michele Ruta. 2013. “A commitment theory of subsidy agreements.” BE Journal of
Economic Analysis & Policy 13(1): 239-270.

80

Campolmi, Alessia, Harald Fadinger and Chiara Forlati. 2014. “Trade policy: Home market effect versus
terms-of-trade externality.” Journal of International Economics 93: 92-107.
Carmichael, Calum M. 1987. “The control of export credit subsidies and its welfare consequences.” Journal
of International Economics 23(1-2): 1-19.
Caves, Richard E. 1976. “Economic models of political choice: Canada’s tariff structure.” Canadian Journal
of Economics 9(2): 278-300.
Choi, Jay Pil. 1995. “Optimal Tariffs and the Choice of Technology: Discriminatory Tariffs vs. the Most
Favored Nation Clause.” Journal of International Economics 38(1-2): 143-60.
Costinot, Arnaud, Andres Rodriguez-Clare and Ivan Werning. 2015. “Micro to Macro: Optimal Trade
Policy with Firm Heterogeneity.” Mimeogr., December.
Cramton, Peter. 1992. “Strategic Delay in Bargaining with Two-Sided Uncertainty.” Review of Economic
Studies, 59(1): 205—225.
Culbert, Jay. 1987. “War-time Anglo-American Talks and the Making of the GATT.” World Economy 10
(4): 381-408.
DeRemer, David R. 2012. Essays on International Trade Agreements Under Monopolistic Competition.
Columbia University Dissertation.
DeRemer, David R. 2013. “Domestic Policy Coordination in Imperfectly Competitive Markets.” Mimeogr.,
December.
Dhingra, Swati. 2014. “Reconciling Observed Tariffs and the Median Voter Model.” Economics and
Politics, 26(3): 483-504.
Dixit, Avinash. 1987. “Strategic Aspects of Trade Policy.” In Advances in Economic Theory: Fifth World
Congress, edited by Truman F. Bewley, 329-62. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Dutt, Pushan and Devashish Mitra. 2002. “Endogenous trade policy through majority voting: an empirical
investigation.” Journal of International Economics 58(1): 107-133.
Ederington, Josh. 2001. “International coordination of trade and domestic policies.” American Economic
Review 91(5): 1580-93.
Feenstra, Robert C. and Jagdish N. Bhagwati. 1982. “Tariff Seeking and the Efficient Tariff.” In: Import
Competition and Response, edited by Jagdish N. Bhagwati, 245-262. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago
Press for the NBER.
Findlay, Ronald and Stanislaw Wellisz. 1982. “Endogenous Tariffs, the Political Economy of Trade Restrictions, and Welfare.” In: Import Competition and Response, edited by Jagdish N. Bhagwati, 223-244.
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press for the NBER.

81

Finger, J. Michael. 1979. “Trade Liberalization: A Public Choice Perspective,” in R.C. Amacher, G.
Haberler and T.D. Willett (eds), Challenges to a Liberal International Economic Order, Washington,
DC: American Enterprise Institute: 421-453.
Frankel, Alexander. Forthcoming. “Delegating Multiple Decisions.” American Economic Journal: Microeconomics.
GATT. 1958. Trends in International Trade: A Report by a Panel of Experts. Geneva, October.
Grossman, Gene M.. Forthcoming. “.” In: The Handbook of Commercial Policy, edited by Kyle Bagwell
and Robert W. Staiger, Chapter 7, Elsevier.
Grossman, Gene M. and Elhanan Helpman. 1994. “Protection for sale.” American Economic Review 84(4):
833-50.
Grossman, Gene M. and Elhanan Helpman. 1995. “Trade wars and trade talks.” Journal of Political
Economy 103(4): 675-708.
Grossman, Gene M. and Alan O. Sykes. 2010. “Optimal Retaliation in the WTO —A Commentary on the
Upland Cotton Arbitration,” World Trade Review 10: 133-64.
Gulotty, Robert. 2014 “Governing Trade Beyond Tariffs: The Politics of Multinational Production and Its
Implications for International Cooperation.” Mimeogr., Stanford University.
Hagerty, Kathleen M. and William P. Rogerson. 1987. “Robust Trading Mechanisms.” Journal of Economic
Theory 42: 94-107.
Handley, Kyle. 2014. “Exporting under Trade Policy Uncertainty: Theory and Evidence.” Journal of
International Economics 94(1): 50-66.
Handley, Kyle and Nuno Limão. forthcoming. “Trade and Investment under Policy Uncertainty: Theory
and Firm Evidence.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy..
Harstad, Bård. 2007. “Harmonization and Side Payments in Political Cooperation.” American Economic
Review, 97(3): 871-889.
Helpman, Elhanan and Paul E. Krugman. 1989. Trade Policy and Market Structure. Cambridge, MA: The
MIT Press
Hillman, Arye L. 1982. “Declining Industries and Political-Support Protectionist Motives.” American
Economic Review 72(5): 1180-87.
Hoda, Anwarul. 2001. Tariff Negotiations and Renegotiations under the GATT and the WTO: Procedures
and Practices. WTO and Cambridge University Press.
Hoekman Bernard and Michel Kostecki. 1995. The Political Economy of the World Trading System.
Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press

82

Holmstrom, Bengt. 1977. “On incentives and control in organizations.” PhD dissertation, Stanford.
Horn, Henrik, Giovanni Maggi, and Robert W. Staiger. 2010. “Trade agreements as endogenously incomplete contracts.” American Economic Review 100(1): 394-419.
Interim Commission for the ITO. 1949. The Attack on Trade Barriers: A Progress Report on the Operation
of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade. Geneva, August.
Jackson, John H. 1969. World Trade and the Law of GATT. New York: Bobbs-Merrill.
Jackson, Matthew O. and Hugo F Sonnenschein. 2007. “Overcoming Incentive Constraints by Linking
Decisions.” Econometrica 75(1): 241-257.
Jawara F, Kwa A. 2003. Behind the Scenes at the WTO: the Real World of International Trade Negotiations.
London: Zed Books
Johnson, Harry G. 1953-4. “Optimum Tariffs and Retaliation.” Review of Economic Studies 21(2): 142—53.
Karacaovali, Baybars and Nuno Limão. 2008. “The Clash of Liberalizations: Preferential vs. Multilateral
Trade Liberalization in the European Union.” Journal of International Economics 74(2): 299-327.
Kennan, John and Raymond Riezman. 1988. “Do Big Countries Win Tariff Wars?” International Economic
Review 29(1): 81-85.
Krugman, Paul R. 1997. “What Should Trade Negotiators Negotiate About?” Journal of Economic Literature 35(1):113-120.
Lapan, Harvey E. 1988. “The optimal tariff, production lags, and time consistency.” American Economic
Review 78(3): 395-401.
Lawrence, Robert Z. 2003. Crimes and Punishments? Retaliation under the WTO. Washington, DC:
Institute for International Economics.
Lee, Gea M. 2007. “Trade agreements with domestic policies as disguised protection.” Journal of International Economics 71(1): 241-59.
Lee, Gea M. 2014. “Optimal International Agreement and Restriction on Domestic Efficiency.” Mimeogr.,
Singapore Management University.
Limão, Nuno. 2005. “Trade policy, cross-border externalities and lobbies: do linked agreements enforce
more cooperative outcomes?” Journal of International Economics 67(1): 175-99.
Limão, Nuno. 2006. “Preferential Trade Agreements as Stumbling Blocks for Multilateral Trade Liberalization: Evidence for the U.S.” American Economic Review 96(3): 896-914.
Limão, Nuno 2007. “Are Preferential Trade Agreements with Non-Trade Objectives a Stumbling Block for
Multilateral Liberalization?” Review of Economic Studies 74(3): 821-55.

83

Limão, Nuno and Giovanni Maggi. 2015. “Uncertainty and Trade Agreements.” American Economic
Journal: Microeconomics 7(4): 1-42.
Limão, Nuno and Kamal Saggi. 2008. “Tariff retaliation versus financial compensation in the enforcement
of international trade agreements.” Journal of International Economics 76(1): 48-60.
Ludema, Rodney D. 1991. “International Trade Bargaining and the Most-Favored Nation Clause.” Economics and Politics 3(1): 1-20.
Ludema, Rodney D. and Anna Maria Mayda. 2013. “Do Terms-of Trade Effects Matter for Trade Agreements? Theory and Evidence from WTO Countries.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 128(4): 1837-93.
Ludema, Rodney D. and Zhi Yu. 2015. “Tariff Pass-through, Firm Heterogeneity and Product Quality.”
Mimeogr., September.
Maggi, Giovanni. 1999. “The Role of Multilateral Institutions in International Trade Cooperation.” American Economic Review 89(1): 190-214.
Maggi, Giovanni. 2014.“International Trade Agreements,” in G. Gopinath, E. Helpman and K. Rogoff
(eds.), The Handbook of International Economics, vol.4, Elsevier.
Maggi, Giovanni. Forthcoming. “Issue Linkage.” In: The Handbook of Commercial Policy, edited by Kyle
Bagwell and Robert W. Staiger, Chapter 18, Elsevier.
Maggi, Giovanni and Andres Rodriguez-Clare. 1998. “The value of trade agreements in the presence of
political pressures.” Journal of Political Economy 106: 574-601.
Maggi, Giovanni and Andres Rodriguez-Clare. 2007. “A political-economy theory of trade agreements.”
American Economic Review 97(4): 1374-1406.
Maggi, Giovanni and Robert W. Staiger. 2015a. “Optimal Design of Trade Agreements in the Presence of
Renegotiation.” American Economic Journal: Microeconomics 7(1): 109-143.
Maggi, Giovanni and Robert W. Staiger. 2015b. “Trade disputes and settlement.” Mimeogr., Yale University, February.
Matsuyama, Kiminori. 1990. “Perfect equilibria in a trade liberalization game.” American Economic
Review 80(3): 480-92.
Mavroidis, Petros C.. Forthcoming. “Dispute Settlement in the WTO: Mind over Matter.” In: The
Handbook of Commercial Policy, edited by Kyle Bagwell and Robert W. Staiger, Chapter 6, Elsevier.
Mayer, Wolfgang. 1981. “Theoretical Considerations on Negotiated Tariff Adjustments.” Oxford Economic
Papers 33(1): 135-153.
Mayer, Wolfgang. 1984. “Endogenous Tariff Formation.” American Economic Review 74(5): 970-85.

84

McCalman, Phillip. 2002. “Multi-lateral Trade Negotiations and the Most-Favored Nation Clause.” Journal
of International Economics 57(1): 151-76.
Melitz, Marc and Gianmarco Ottaviano. 2008. “Market size, trade, and productivity,” The Review of
Economic Studies. 75(1): 295-316.
Mill JS. 1844. Essays on Some Unsettled Questions of Political Economy. London: Parker
Myerson, Roger B. and Mark A. Satterthwaite. 1983. “Efficient Mechanisms for Bilateral Trading.” Journal
of Economic Theory 29: 265-281.
Olson, Mancur. 1965. The Logic of Collective Action: Public Goods and the Theory of Groups. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Ornelas, Emanuel. Forthcoming. “Special and Differential Treatment for Developing Countries.” In: The
Handbook of Commercial Policy, edited by Kyle Bagwell and Robert W. Staiger, Chapter 18, Elsevier.
Ossa, Ralph. 2011. “A ‘new-trade’ theory of GATT/WTO negotiations.” Journal of Political Economy
119(1): 122-52.
Ossa, Ralph. 2012. “Profits in the “new trade” approach to trade negotiations.” American Economic
Review: Papers and Proceedings 102(2): 466-69.
Ossa, Ralph. 2014. “Trade Wars and Trade Talks with Data.” American Economic Review 104(12):
4104-46.
Penrose, E.F. 1953. Economic Planning for the Peace. Princeton University Press. Princeton New Jersey.
Pierce, Justin and Peter K. Schott. 2015. “The Surprisingly Swift Decline of U.S. Manufacturing Employment." Mimeogr., Yale University.
Potipiti, Tanapong. 2012. “Import tariffs and export subsidies in the WTO: a small country approach.”
Mimeogr., Chulalongkorn Univ.
Saggi, Kamal. 2004. “Tariffs and the Most Favored Nation Clause.” Journal of International Economics
63(2): 341-68.
Schwartz, Warren F. and Alan O. Sykes. 1997. “The Economics of the Most Favored Nation Clause.”
In Economic Dimensions in International Law: Comparative and Empirical Perspectives, edited by
Jagdeep S. Bhandari and Alan O. Sykes, 43-79. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Shirono, Kazuko. 2004. “Are WTO Tariff Negotiations Reciprocal? An Analysis of Tariff Liberalization.”
Mimeogr., Columbia University.
Spagnola, Giancarlo. 1999a. “On interdependent supergames: multimarket contact, concavity and collusion.” Journal of Economic Theory 89(1): 127-39.

85

Spagnola, Giancarlo. 1999b. “Issue linkage, delegation and international policy coordination.” Mimeogr.
Stockholm School of International Economics.
Staiger Robert W. 2006. What can developing countries achieve in the WTO? Journal of Economic Literature 44: 779-95
Staiger, Robert W. and Alan O. Sykes. 2011. “International Trade, National Treatment, and Domestic
Regulation.” The Journal of Legal Studies 40(1):149-203.
Staiger, Robert W. and Alan O. Sykes. 2015. “How important can the non-violation clause be for the
GATT/WTO?.”Mimeogr., Dartmouth College, February.
Staiger, Robert W. and Guido Tabellini. 1987. “Discretionary trade policy and excessive protection.”
American Economic Review 77(5): 823-37.
Staiger, Robert W. and Guido Tabellini. 1989. “Rules and Discretion in Trade Policy.” European Economic
Review 33(6): 1265-1277.
Suwanprasert, Wisarut. 2014. “The Role of MFN in the ‘New Trade’ Model. Mimeogr., March.
Sykes, Alan O. 2005. “The economics of WTO rules on subsidies and countervailing measures.” In The
World Trade Organization: Legal, Economic and Political Analysis, edited by Arthur E. Appleton,
Patrick F. J. Macrory, and Michael G. Plummer, 2. Springer-Verlag.
Tornell, Aaron. 1991. “On the ineffectiveness of made-to-measure protectionist programs.” In International
Trade and Trade Policy, edited by Elhanan Helpman and Assaf Razin, 66-79. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Torrens, Robert 1844. The Budget: On Commercial Policy and Colonial Policy. London: Smith, Elder
United States Council of the International Chamber of Commerce. 1955. G.A.T.T.: An analysis and
appraisal of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade. Prepared by the William L. Clayton Center
for International Economic Affairs of the Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy, February.
Venables, Anthony J. 1985. “Trade and trade policy with imperfect competition: The case of identical
products and free entry.” Journal of International Economics 19(1-2): 1-19.
Venables, Anthony J. 1987. “Trade and Trade Policy with Differentiated Products: A ChamberlinianRicardian Model.” Economic Journal 97(387): 700-717.
WTO Arbitrators. 1999. European Communities - Measures Concerning Meat and Meat Products (Hormones); Original Complaint by Canada; Recourse to Arbitration by the European Communities under
Article 22.6 of the DSU: Decision by the Arbitrators. WT/DS48/ARB, 12 July.
WTO. 2009. World Trade Report 2009: Trade Policy Commitments and Contingency Measures. Geneva.

86

W

1

1

E
W

w
p PO

W*

Figure 1

WN

N

PO

E

W*

W *N

W

E

A

A'

PO

W

W*

N(A)

B

B'
*
p*

W

W

Figure 

W

*

N(C)

p Nw (A)

0

w
p PO

Wp

N(B)

E

0

p Nw (B )

W*

τ

1

τE(γ)

τN(γ)

Figure 3

7/4

γ

