NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE "REAL" EXPLANATION OF THE FELDSTEIN-HORIOKA PUZZLE
Nicholas Ford
Charles Yuji Horioka
Working Paper 22081
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22081

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2016

The authors are indebted to Chris Dillow and Graeme Roy for their valuable advice and
comments. This work was supported by JSPS (Japan Society for the Promotion of Science)
KAKENHI Grant Number 15H01950, an Asian Growth Research Institute project grant, and a
grant from the MEXT Joint Usage/Research Center for Behavioral Economics, Institute of Social
and Economic Research, Osaka University. Any remaining errors are the authors’. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Nicholas Ford and Charles Yuji Horioka. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The "Real" Explanation of the Feldstein-Horioka Puzzle
Nicholas Ford and Charles Yuji Horioka
NBER Working Paper No. 22081
March 2016
JEL No. F21,F32,F36,G15
ABSTRACT
This paper shows that global capital markets cannot, by themselves, achieve net transfers of
financial capital between countries and that both the integration of global financial markets as
well as the integration of global goods markets are needed to achieve net transfers of capital
between countries. Frictions (barriers to mobility) in one or both of these markets can impede net
transfers of capital between countries, produce the Feldstein and Horioka (1980) results, and
prevent real interest rates from being equalized across countries. Moreover, there is empirical
evidence that barriers to the mobility of goods and services are an important obstacle to
international capital mobility.

Nicholas Ford
Wolfson College
Cambridge University
Cambridge, England, U.K.
nicholassford@hotmail.co.uk
Charles Yuji Horioka
Asian Growth Research Institute
11-4, Ohtemachi, Kokurakita-ku
Kitakyushu City, Fukuoka 803-0814
JAPAN
and NBER
horioka@iser.osaka-u.ac.jp

1. Introduction

Most academic economists presume that net transfers of capital between countries are
possible as long as global financial markets are integrated and gauge the extent to which
there are barriers to capital mobility by the extent to which net transfers of capital occur
between countries.

For example, Feldstein and Horioka (1980) and the subsequent

research they spawned find high cross-country correlations between domestic saving
and domestic investment, which imply that the vast majority of incremental domestic
saving is invested at home rather than abroad, and conclude from this finding that there
must be considerable barriers to international capital mobility (see Apergis and Tsoumas
(2009) for a useful survey of this literature).

Another oft-used gauge of barriers to capital mobility is the extent to which real interest
rates are equalized across countries, and the finding of Mishkin (1984) and others that
real interest rates are not equalized across countries is cited as further evidence of the
existence of barriers to capital mobility.

In reality, however, global financial markets cannot, by themselves, achieve net
transfers of financial capital, and the integration of global financial markets is a
necessary but not sufficient condition for achieving net transfers of capital between
countries.

It is true that gross transfers of financial capital can and will take place in

both directions if global financial markets are integrated, but net transfers of financial
capital can occur only if, in addition, global goods markets are also integrated.
Consequently, although frictionless financial markets may allow an individual agent’s
financial capital to be “perfectly mobile” between countries, this does not correspond to
capital being “perfectly mobile” in the sense of rapid net transfers of financial capital
between countries occurring.

This would additionally require the absence of frictions

in goods markets (e.g., transport, marketing and distribution costs, technical standards,
certification procedures, tariffs and non-tariff trade barriers, etc.).

To the best of our knowledge, Niehans (1986) is the first economist to have made the

2

point that global financial markets cannot by themselves achieve net transfers of capital
between countries, but he does not explain why this is the case and he does not seem to
realize that it is frictions in global goods markets that impede net transfers of both
financial and real capital between countries.

By contrast, Obstfeld and Rogoff (2000) do point out that barriers to the mobility of
good and services may impede net transfers of capital between countries from being
achieved but fail to point out that global financial markets cannot, by themselves,
achieve net transfers of financial capital between countries.

To the best of our knowledge, this is the first paper to synthesize the views of Niehans
(1986) and Obstfeld and Rogoff (2000) and to show that global capital markets cannot,
by themselves, achieve net transfers of financial capital between countries and that both
the integration of global financial markets as well as the integration of global goods
markets are needed to achieve net transfers of capital between countries.

Frictions

(barriers to mobility) in either of these markets can impede net transfers of both real and
financial capital between countries, produce the Feldstein and Horioka (1980) results,
and prevent real interest rates from being equalized across countries.

Moreover, there

is empirical evidence that barriers to the mobility of goods and services are an important
obstacle to international capital mobility (see, for example, Eaton, Kortum, and Nieman
(2015)).

2. An Anecdotal Example

A more rigorous formulation of the line of argumentation presented in this paper can be
found in Ford (2015), but a simple anecdotal example will suffice to illustrate our point.
In scenario 1, let us assume that there are no barriers to capital mobility or to the
mobility of goods and services.

Let’s further assume that Ms. Tanaka, a Japanese

investor, wants to purchase the dollar equivalent of 100,000 yen worth of corporate
bonds from Ford Motor Company.

She will be able to do so because we assume that

there are no barriers to capital mobility.

Ms. Tanaka will simply convert 100,000 of

3

her Japanese yen to U.S. dollars and use these dollars to buy Ford bonds.

This means

that 100,000 yen worth of financial capital has moved from Japan to the U.S.

But the story does not end there.

Let us assume that Mr. Smith, an American consumer,

is the one who sold the U.S. dollars to Ms. Tanaka in exchange for her Japanese yen.
Mr. Smith now has 100,000 yen in Japanese currency.

Let’s further assume that Mr.

Smith is an avid manga fan and wants to buy 100,000 yen worth of Japanese comic
books.

Since we assume that there are no barriers to the mobility of goods and

services including comic books, Mr. Smith will be able to import a 100,000 yen stock of
comic books from Japan and pay for them using the 100,000 yen he received from Ms.
Tanaka.

Thanks to both financial and goods markets being fully integrated, the end

result is that there has been a 100,000 yen net transfer of financial capital from Japan to
the U.S. as a result of Ms. Tanaka transferring her 100,000 yen from Japan to the U.S. to
purchase Ford bonds and that there has simultaneously been a net transfer of real capital
from Japan to the U.S. as a result of Mr. Smith transferring a 100,000 yen stock of
comic books from Japan to the U.S.

By contrast, in scenario 2, let us assume that there are no barriers to the mobility of
financial capital but that there are prohibitive barriers to the mobility of goods and
services including comic books.

As in the case of scenario 1, Ms. Tanaka will be able

to convert 100,000 of her Japanese yen to U.S. dollars and uses these dollars to buy the
corporate bonds of Ford Motor Company.

However, the behavior of Mr. Smith will

change relative to scenario 1 because he will no longer be able to import comic books
from Japan.

Let us further assume that Mr. Smith reluctantly decides instead to

purchase the corporate bonds of Toyota Motor Corporation using his Japanese yen,
which he can do since we assume that there are no barriers to the mobility of financial
capital.

In this case, there will be gross transfers of financial capital in both directions

between Japan and the U.S. but no net transfers of financial capital between the two
countries because Ms. Tanaka’s purchases of Ford bonds will be exactly offset by Mr.
Smith’s purchase of Toyota bonds.

This result arises not because there are barriers to

the mobility of financial capital but because there are barriers to the mobility of goods

4

and services.

In scenario 3, let us assume that there are no barriers to the mobility of goods and
services including comic books but that there are barriers to the mobility of financial
capital.

As in the case of scenario 1, Mr. Smith will be able to buy 100,000 yen worth

of Japanese comic books (say from Ms. Tanaka).

However, Ms. Tanaka will not be

able to purchase the corporate bonds of Ford Motor Company using the U.S. dollars she
receives from Mr. Smith.

If she instead chooses to buy American comic books using

her U.S. dollars, there will be not be any net or gross transfers of financial capital
between the two countries.

Finally, in scenario 4, let us assume that there are barriers to the mobility of financial
capital as well as to the mobility of goods and services including comic books.

Under

such circumstances, Ms. Tanaka will not be able to buy the corporate bonds of Ford
Motor Company so she will have to settle for buying the corporate bonds of Toyota
Motor Corporation.

Similarly, Mr. Smith will not be able to buy Japanese comic books

so he will have to settle for buying American comic books. Thus, there will not be any
gross or net transfers of capital (or of goods and services) between the two countries.

In scenario 2, the transactions cost of purchasing foreign assets might be so low that,
from their own perspectives, both Ms. Tanaka and Mr. Smith might regard their own
capital as being “perfectly mobile” between countries.

However, this still does not

lead to any net mobility of capital, either real or financial, between countries.

Net

capital transfers will occur only when there is a net transfer of goods and services
between the two countries (scenario 1).

There will be no net transfers of capital

between the two countries if there are barriers to the mobility of either financial capital
and/or goods and services between the two countries (scenarios 2, 3, and 4).

Thus, it is

presumably a combination of scenario 2 (which assumes barriers to the mobility of good
and services) and scenario 3 (which assumes barriers to the mobility of financial capital)
that leads to the Feldstein and Horioka (1980) finding of high saving-investment
correlations and prevents real interest rates from being equalized across countries.

5

Furthermore, there is empirical evidence suggesting that scenario 2 is an important
explanation of the Feldstein and Horioka (1980) results.

For example, Eaton, Kortum,

and Neiman (2015) find that the Feldstein and Horioka (1980) puzzle is greatly
attenuated if trade frictions are assumed not to exist.

3. Summary and Conclusion

This paper has shown that global capital markets cannot, by themselves, achieve net
transfers of financial capital between countries and that both the integration of global
financial markets as well as the integration of global goods markets are needed to
achieve net transfers of both real and financial capital between countries.

Frictions

(barriers to mobility) in one or both of these markets can impede net transfers of capital
between countries, produce the Feldstein and Horioka (1980) results, and prevent real
interest rates from being equalized across countries.

Moreover, there is empirical

evidence that barriers to the mobility of goods and services are an important obstacle to
international capital mobility.

Acknowledgements

The authors are indebted to Chris Dillow and Graeme Roy for their valuable advice and
comments. This work was supported by JSPS (Japan Society for the Promotion of
Science) KAKENHI Grant Number 15H01950, an Asian Growth Research Institute
project grant, and a grant from the MEXT Joint Usage/Research Center for Behavioral
Economics, Institute of Social and Economic Research, Osaka University.
remaining errors are the authors’.

6

Any

References

Apergis, Nicholas, and Tsoumas, Chris (2009), “A Survey of the Feldstein-Horioka
Puzzle: What Has Been Done and Where We Stand,” Research in Economics, vol. 63,
no. 2 (June), pp. 64-76.

Eaton, Jonathan; Kortum, Samuel S.; and Neiman, Brent (2015), “Obstfeld and
Rogoff’s International Macro Puzzles: A Quantitative Assessment,” NBER Working
Paper No. 21774, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, Massachusetts,
USA (December).

Feldstein, Martin S., and Horioka, Charles Yuji (1980), “Domestic Saving and
International Capital Flows,” Economic Journal, vol. 90, no. 358 (June), pp. 314-329.

Ford, Nicholas (2015), “A Solution to the Feldstein-Horioka Puzzle, and an Exchange
Rate Model that Works,” mimeo., Wolfson College, Cambridge University, Cambridge,
U.K.

Mishkin, Frederic S. (1984), “Are Real Interest Rates Equal Across Countries: An
Empirical Investigation of International Parity Conditions,” Journal of Finance, vol. 39,
no. 5 (December), pp. 1345-1357.

Niehans, Jurg (1986), International Monetary Economics.

Baltimore, Maryland, USA:

Johns Hopkins University Press.

Obstfeld, Maurice, and Rogoff, Kenneth (2000), “The Six Major Puzzles in
Macroeconomics: Is There a Common Cause?” in Ben S. Bernanke and Kenneth Rogoff,
eds., NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2000, vol. 15 (Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA:
MIT Press), pp. 339-412.

7

