                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            COPYRIGHT ENFORCEMENT:
                      EVIDENCE FROM TWO FIELD EXPERIMENTS

                                            Hong Luo
                                     Julie Holland Mortimer

                                      Working Paper 22082
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22082


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2016




The authors thank James Dana, Alberto Galasso, Shane Greenstein, Michael Grubb, William
Hickman, Gastón Llanes, Mike Luca, Cynthia Montgomery, Felix Oberholzer-Gee, Jason Snyder,
Scott Stern, Ricardo Perez-Truglia, Dennis Yao and seminar participants at the Canadian
Conference on the Economics of Innovation and Entrepreneurship, Harvard Business School,
MIT Sloan, Microsoft Research, NBER Economics of Digitization Conference, NBER
Productivity Lunch, Stern School of Business, the Strategic Research Forum, and Washington
University in St. Louis for helpful comments. We thank the Agency for providing the proprietary
data and for their collaboration on the experiments. We also thank Danielle Wedde and Esther
Yan for their excellent research assistance. All errors and omissions are ours The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Hong Luo and Julie Holland Mortimer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Copyright Enforcement: Evidence from Two Field Experiments
Hong Luo and Julie Holland Mortimer
NBER Working Paper No. 22082
March 2016, Revised August 2016
JEL No. L0,M2,O30,O34

                                        ABSTRACT

Effective dispute resolution is important for reducing private and social costs. We study how
resolution responds to changes in price and communication using a new, extensive dataset of
copyright infringement incidences by firms. The data cover two field experiments run by a large
stock-photography agency. We find that substantially reducing the requested amount generates a
small increase in the settlement rate. However, for the same reduced request, a message
informing infringers of the price reduction and acknowledging the possible unintentionality
generates a large increase in the settlement rate; including a deadline further increases the
response. The small price effect, compared to the large message effect, can be explained by two
countervailing effects of a lower price: an inducement to settle early, but a lower threat of
escalation. Furthermore, acknowledging possible unintentionality may encourage settlement due
to the typically inadvertent nature of these incidences. The resulting higher settlement rate
prevents additional legal action and significantly reduces social costs.


Hong Luo
Harvard University
Morgan Hall 241
Soldiers Field Road
Boston, MA 02163
hluo@hbs.edu

Julie Holland Mortimer
Department of Economics
Boston College
140 Commonwealth Avenue
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
and NBER
julie.mortimer.2@bc.edu
1    Introduction

Disputes involving economic damages, such as breach of contract, overdue payment, and violation of prop-
erty rights, are commonplace in the economy. Effectively resolving these disputes can save time and stress,
and reduce legal expenses. The threat of legal sanction may be credible only in some circumstances (e.g., it is
impractical when monetary claims are small), and it may not always be desirable even if effective, because a
litigious reputation may drive away customers. Encouraging collaborative outcomes in these situations may
require alternative, creative methods.
    Copyright enforcement is an interesting example of this problem and is important in the management
of intellectual property (IP). While digital technologies have facilitated piracy in recent years, they have
also substantially lowered the costs of detecting infringement, making enforcement an increasingly relevant
option.1 How to do so effectively, however, remains a challenge. Monetary amounts are generally small, and
infringers are numerous and dispersed. Many content producers want to avoid a litigious reputation because
it may hurt their primary source of revenue from the legitimate market. Legal actions against file-sharing
networks and infringing individuals, notably by trade associations in the music and movie industries, have
been controversial and have met with limited success. In this paper, we study the effectiveness of new
approaches to enforcement on copyright infringement settlement outcomes. In particular, we focus on two
aspects of enforcement methods: (1) the requested settlement amount (pricing), and (2) communication.
    Our empirical application comes from the stock-photography industry.2 Stock photos are pre-shot im-
ages that are readily available for licensing. On behalf of photographers, agencies such as Corbis Images
and Getty Images manage, market, and license images to business customers. An interesting feature that
distinguishes our context from the prior piracy literature is the prevalence of uninformed infringement (Luo
and Mortimer (2016)). As digital images are easily accessible online through search engines and social
media sites, users often have limited knowledge about the legal obligation of using an image. Furthermore,
the frequent use of third-party advertisers and web designers results in many indirect instances of infringe-
ment, for which end-users are ultimately liable. We use data provided by one of the leading agencies in the
industry (hereafter, the Agency), which monitors the online use of a small set of its most expensive images
and pursues settlement for instances of infringement carried out for commercial purposes. The dataset con-
tains detailed information on all infringement instances for which the Agency pursued settlement in the U.S.
and Canada between October 2013 and March 2014, including the requested amount, the characteristics of
   1 Some recent examples of anti-piracy services that have been developed by private companies include Digimarc in the publishing

industry and MarkMonitor (purchased by Thomson Reuters in 2012) in industries such as movies, music, software, and publishing.
   2 Glückler and Panitz (2013) estimates that the global revenue of the stock-photography industry was $2.88 billion in 2011. In

comparison, the revenues of ASCAP and BMI, the largest two performance rights organizations that collect royalties on behalf of
copyright holders in the music industry for public use of their works, were $1B each in 2012.



                                                                2
infringing firms, and settlement outcomes.
    Our data are novel for three reasons. First, previous empirical studies on settlement have depended
primarily on court filings, which capture only a small percentage of disputes.3 Our sample is ‘unselected’ in
that it includes all instances of infringement for which the Agency pursues settlement, and the data capture
the earliest stage of the enforcement process. This is important because the set of infringers (and their
settlement behavior) at this stage are likely to differ from those in the cases that reach litigation. Second, it
is rare for field data to contain exogenous variation in enforcement methods, and laboratory experiments may
be hard to generalize to real-world settings. Our data are generated by two field experiments, and include
exogenous variation in both pricing and communication. Third, infringing firms in our sample are largely
representative of the U.S. firm population based on observable characteristics.4 This is valuable because
it documents the prevalence of infringement among businesses and provides insight into the resolution of
disputes between firms, rather than between individuals, as typically studied in lab experiments.
    Prior to either of the two experiments, the Agency’s settlement offer is the sum of two components: a
baseline licensing fee for each image and an additional $400 per-image amount to recover the Agency’s en-
forcement expenses. The baseline licensing fee depends on the infringing use (e.g., a high-resolution image
posted on a website’s home page) and is a weighted average of use-related list prices on the Agency’s li-
censing site. The two price components are not broken down separately in the Agency’s letters to infringers.
In the pricing experiment, the Agency exogenously varies the requested settlement amount by eliminating
the $400 per-image enforcement cost in some cases but not in others. The wording of the letter is otherwise
kept identical, and no information on the price reduction is provided. Baseline licensing fees range from
$380 to $825 per image, so removing the enforcement cost is economically significant.
    After the pricing experiment, the Agency removes the enforcement cost for all cases. After this policy
change, we worked with the Agency on the second experiment—the message experiment. In this experi-
ment, an extra statement is inserted in the letters sent to infringers in four treatment groups, with no extra
statement added for the control group. The first two messages explain that the Agency has forgiven a $400
per-image amount, either as a waiver of enforcement costs or as a discount. To justify the reduction, the
messages acknowledge that the infringement may have been unintentional. The last two treatment messages
are the same as the first two, but with a deadline after which the forgiven amount is added back. We do not
have a treatment message that explicitly increases the threat of legal sanction, because the Agency moved
   3 Trubek  et al. (1983) estimate that 90 percent of civil disputes are settled without filing suit. In our setting, according to Lex
Machina (a legal analytics database), the Agency filed 12 cases in the U.S. courts between 2008 and 2013. In contrast, the Agency
pursues settlement for about 1,000 cases per month in the U.S., implying a litigation probability of about 0.02 percent.
   4 According to the 2012 Statistics of U.S. Businesses, 62 percent of U.S. firms have 0-4 employees, 17 percent have 5-9, 10

percent have 10-19, 8.6 percent have 20-99, 1.4 percent have 100-499, and 0.3 percent have more than 500. The corresponding
percentages in our data are 50, 17.6, 12, 15, 5.1, and 0.89.



                                                                  3
away from any enforcement approach that was explicitly threatening.
    The pricing experiment shows that after 30 days, removing the $400 per-image charge increases the
settlement probability by three percentage points (from 12 to 15 percent, marginally significant) for an
average case. However, this increase is offset by the significantly lower revenue for those cases that do
settle. As a result, the expected revenue per case is slightly lower for the lower-priced group (although
the difference is not statistically significant). In contrast, the message experiment, after 30 days, shows
that adding either of the first two messages increases settlement probability by 12 percentage points and
expected revenue by $65 per case, both representing an increase of over 80 percent relative to the control
group. Adding a deadline to either message further improves the settlement rate by another six percentage
points, and increases expected revenue by 130 percent relative to the control group.
    The large and positive effect of adding a deadline to the messages suggests that the weak response to
the substantial price reduction in the first experiment occurs not because price does not matter. A plausible
explanation is that, when the requested amount is lower, infringers perceive the Agency as being less seri-
ous. In other words, a lower request may not generate a higher settlement rate if it simultaneously sacrifices
an implicit threat of escalation. The deadline in the messages appears to simultaneously leverage the in-
ducement of a lower price today and signal a willingness to escalate in the future. This conclusion is further
supported by heterogeneity in the effect: while the deadline has a large and positive effect on the settlement
rate for relatively small firms (ten percentage points), it has no effect for larger firms (those in the top 40
percent of the firm-size distribution). This may be due to larger firms being less price-sensitive and less
influenced by the implied threat, perhaps because they have more precise knowledge about the likely legal
risks.
    The effect of the first two messages (i.e., those without a deadline) is large and positive for all firms,
and we find evidence suggesting that the acknowledgment of possible unintentionality is important for ex-
plaining this effect. At least two different mechanisms may be at work. First, the acknowledgment of
unintentionality may encourage an infringer’s intrinsic motivation to correct a mistake, especially given that
infringement in this market is likely to be inadvertent (or indirect through third-party web designers) with
small monetary claims. This effect is consistent with findings in the tax compliance literature (Feld and Frey
(2002a,b)), and may be especially relevant for smaller firms. Second, the acknowledgement of unintention-
ality may make the settlement request conform more closely to standard invoices, providing a smoother path
for processing payment, rather than initiating a lengthy internal legal review. This effect may be especially
pertinent for larger firms.
    Finally, the additional settlement induced by the treatment messages substantially reduces social costs.
The probability that the Agency will engage a professional law firm for enforcement decreases by roughly


                                                      4
five to 12 percentage points (a 10-27 percent reduction) for the treatment groups relative to the control group.
The estimated savings in legal costs (for the Agency and infringing firms combined) range from about three
to seven percent of the Agency’s in-house settlement revenue. This calculation is likely to underestimate the
savings in total social costs because it does not take into account the opportunity cost of time or the stress
associated with prolonged disputes.


Related literature

This paper brings together two literatures that investigate why disputes fail to reach settlement and instead go
to trial. The first group of papers is from law and economics (e.g., Bebchuk (1984), Priest and Klein (1984),
and the survey by Spier (2007)). Empirical work in this area studies the determinants of settlement, including
the expected size of the verdict, litigation costs, asymmetric beliefs, and legal environments (e.g., Danzon
and Lillard (1983), Waldfogel (1995), and Fournier and Zuehlke (1996)). The second set of studies is from
behavioral law and economics, and uses lab experiments to study the effects of psychological factors on pre-
trial bargaining (see a survey by Jolls et al. (1998)). For example, Rachlinski (1996) shows that, consistent
with prospect theory (Kahneman and Tversky (1979)), disputants are more likely to accept a settlement offer
if they view it as a gain relative to provided references. Korobkin and Guthrie (1994) find that victims are
more likely to settle if there is a sympathetic explanation for the harm they have suffered, reflecting general
concerns for fairness and reciprocity (e.g., Güth et al. (1982) and Kahneman et al. (1986)). We contribute
to both literatures by introducing a novel dataset examining pre-filing settlements and two large-scale field
experiments that provide exogenous variation in settlement methods. Our results, collectively, show that
infringers respond both to price and threat incentives that are typically captured by an economic model of
settlement, as well as to motivations outside a standard cost-benefit framework.
    Most of the IP enforcement literature studies patents (e.g., Lanjouw and Schankerman (2001, 2004)).5
Our paper contributes to this literature with empirical evidence on copyright enforcement and settlement.
Recent studies in economics have examined the effects of stronger enforcement on file-sharing activities
and sales in the music and movie industries (Bhattacharjee et al. (2006), Danaher et al. (2014), and Reimers
(2015)). Our study differs from these papers and from the broader consumer piracy literature (see survey by
Waldfogel (2012)) in its investigation of infringement by businesses and its focus on settlement outcomes.
   5 Examples of theoretical papers on patent litigation include Meurer (1989) and Bessen and Meurer (2006), and empirical studies

include the role of cross-licensing in litigation (Galasso et al. (2013)) and non-practicing entities (Bessen et al. (2011), Scott Morton
and Shapiro (2014), and Cohen et al. (2014)). It is important to note that the two contexts, though conceptually similar, differ in
substantial ways. First, liability in our context is generally clear, given the accuracy of detection technology and the simpler nature
of copyright infringement; liability is much harder to establish in patent disputes. Second, patent claims (at least for complaints
filed in court) are typically much larger. These differences may limit the effectiveness of our particular interventions in patent
contexts.



                                                                   5
In a related paper, Fellner et al. (2013) randomize messages mailed to Austrian households that evade TV
licensing. They observe a significant positive effect on compliance as a result of threat, while moral appeal
(emphasizing compliance as a matter of fairness) and social-norm information (highlighting the high level of
compliance) have no effect. Similarly, a law literature on copyright litigation strategies argues that sanctions
can be effective in inducing settlement because statutory damages for willful infringement are prohibitively
high (Lantagne (2004) and DeBriyn (2012)). One salient difference between our paper and these studies is
the nature of infringement. For example, Fellner et al. (2013) suggests that moral persuasion may lack effect
in their setting due to a particularly dishonest sample of infringers. In contrast, we are among the first to
assess infringement incidences that are likely to be inadvertent.
    Finally, our paper joins the small but growing body of work that uses large-scale field experiments to
study the effects of small, low-cost interventions (especially communication). Other enforcement contexts
include tax compliance and enforcement (Hallsworth et al. (2014) and Perez-Truglia and Troiano (2015))
and loan repayments (Cadena and Schoar (2011) and Karlan et al. (2015)). DellaVigna and Gentzkow (2010)
surveys empirical evidence on the effects of persuasive communication in several domains and defines a
‘persuasion rate’ that harmonizes results across studies.6 Compared to the 17 previous studies surveyed in
that paper, in which the persuasion rate ranges from 0.7 to 29.7 percent, our results show generally high
persuasion rates of 14 to 20 percent for messaging within the first 30 days.
    The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides the background and introduces the two
experiments. Section 3 describes the sample, the variables, and the descriptive results. Section 4 develops a
conceptual framework that potentially explains the observed effects. Section 5 reports the regression results
and discusses the plausible mechanisms and the effects on social costs, and Section 6 concludes.


2     Background and Experiments

The Agency monitors the online use of images that satisfy the following criteria: (i) the image is governed
by a ‘rights-managed’ license model, which allows a licensee a one-time use of the image for a fee that
depends on the specified scope of use (e.g., a high-resolution image placed on a firm’s home page for three
months); and (ii) the Agency distributes the image exclusively, allowing the Agency to determine whether
the use is unauthorized by checking its own licensing database. Images that satisfy these criteria are the most
expensive ones; they account for less than five percent of the images in the Agency’s complete portfolio.
The Agency pursues enforcement only if infringement involves commercial use of an image, and it drops
   6 The notion of a ‘persuasion rate’ estimates the percentage of receivers that change behavior among those that receive a message

and are not already persuaded.




                                                                 6
cases that involve small non-profit organizations or current customers who use the images beyond the scope
of their current license.
      For cases it pursues, the Agency sends a letter to the infringing firm, which (1) informs the firm of
the detected infringement, (2) requests the removal of the image(s) from the firm’s website, and (3) asks
for a settlement to cover the past infringing use. Prior to both experiments, the requested amount was the
baseline licensing fee plus an additional $400 charge per image to recoup the Agency’s enforcement costs.
The additional $400 enforcement amount was never broken out separately in the letter. Table 1 lists the six
use categories for a single image, the corresponding baseline licensing fees for the sample period we study,
and the percentage of cases from our combined experimental groups (described later) that corresponds to
each use category. When multiple images are involved in a case, the licensing fee is the sum for all the
images. The list prices posted on the Agency’s website also vary across other dimensions, including image
type (e.g., theme) and duration of use. The fee charged for an infringing use is a weighted average of a few
listing prices from within one of the six categories listed in table 1.


                                              Table 1: Licensing fee (the baseline price)

                             Image-use category                                Licensing fee              % of cases
                             Low resolution & secondary page                        $380                     28
                             High resolution & secondary page                       $475                     31
                             Low resolution & home page                             $565                      8
                             Low resolution & repeat pages                          $665                      4
                             High resolution & home page                            $775                     12
                             High resolution & repeat pages                         $825                      7
                             Multi-image cases                            Sum of fees for all images         10

Notes: This table describes the licensing-fee part of the total requested amount. The first six rows apply to single-image cases. The corresponding
percentages are based on our combined experimental groups, described later.




Two experiments

2.1     The requested amount

Between October and December 2013, for cases in the U.S. and Canada, the Agency exogenously selected
a subset of cases for which it removed the enforcement cost completely (the ‘Low Price’ group); for the rest
of the cases, it continued to add $400 per image on top of the licensing fee (the ‘High Price’ group). The
letters to the two groups are otherwise identical. That is, no explanation is given about the price reduction
for the Low Price group. We refer to this as the pricing experiment. This exogenous price variation is
valuable because, otherwise, it is not possible to separate the effect of a price change from the way in which
the image is used, as the licensing fee is determined completely by the image use category.

                                                                         7
2.2     The messages

In January 2014, the Agency implemented two changes to its enforcement policy. First, the Agency no
longer requested any settlement amount from “less valuable” infringers, although it still requested removal
of the images from the infringer’s website. More precisely, infringers are categorized into five ‘tiers’ using
a formula from Dun & Bradstreet, with tier 1 being the most likely to settle and tier 5 the least likely; the
Agency no longer pursues settlement from firms in tiers 4 and 5.7 Second, the Agency no longer added any
enforcement cost to any cases. Following these policy changes, we collaborated with the Agency to conduct
a second experiment, also for infringement cases in the U.S. and Canada.
      In the second, message experiment, we provide information about the price reduction while maintaining
the low price (i.e., with no additional $400 charge). Cases are allocated into four treatment groups and one
control group. All groups are requested to pay the same licensing fee (given the image use), although the
letter’s wording varies. The wording used for the control group is the same as in the pricing experiment; it
provides no information about the price reduction. For the treatment groups, one of four extra messages (in
boldface) is placed just below the invoiced amount. Figure 1 shows the positioning of the message in the
letter. The four messages differ by how the forgiven amount is presented, and whether a 22-day deadline is
imposed. As justification for the price reduction, all four messages acknowledge that the infringement may
have been unintentional. The four messages are:

   1. (Control group) no extra message.

   2. (Waive the Cost) Please note, we are only charging the average licensing fee for commercial use of the
        rights-managed image(s) found on your website. The Agency has incurred additional costs of $400
        per image related to the pursuit of this matter; we are currently waiving this cost, as we understand
        this unlicensed use may have been unintentional.

   3. (Waive the Cost + Deadline) Please note, we are only charging the average licensing fee for commer-
        cial use of the rights-managed image(s) found on your website. The Agency has incurred additional
        costs of $400 per image related to the pursuit of this matter; we are currently waiving this cost, as
        we understand this unlicensed use may have been unintentional. However, cases not settled before
        xx-xx-xx will be charged the additional $400 cost per image related to the pursuit of this matter.

   4. (Discount) Please note, this settlement amount is $400 per image lower than the average unauthorized
        use settlement offer. We are providing this discount, as we understand this unlicensed use may have
        been unintentional.
   7 We do not observe the formula that maps firm observables to tiers, but firms with lower annual revenues tend to have a higher
tier number.



                                                                8
    5. (Discount + Deadline) Please note, this settlement amount is $400 per image lower than the average
        unauthorized use settlement offer. We are providing this discount, as we understand this unlicensed
        use may have been unintentional. However, cases not settled before xx-xx-xx will no longer be eligible
        for this discount.

                                           Figure 1: Settlement demand letter example




Notes: A letter comprises seven pages in total, with the invoiced amount displayed on the third page. All letters in the experiments are of the same
format except for the extra message for the four treatment groups in the message experiment (as illustrated in this example).




      For both experiments, an infringer could contact the Agency to try to negotiate a lower price. Employees
in the Agency’s compliance department, “case handlers,” respond to calls from infringers and have latitude
to negotiate with them as they see fit. According to the Agency, case handlers are not instructed to treat
groups differently in either experimental period, mainly so as not to confuse the handlers. In principle, the
handlers can observe the group to which a particular case is allocated. Our interviews with the handlers,
however, suggest that they tend not to incorporate that information during conversations with infringers.


2.3     Allocation process

The Agency allocated cases to different groups weekly during each experiment. For a given week, some
cases were assigned as “trial cases,” and all other cases were assigned to a “default” group. The “default”
group is the High Price group in the pricing experiment, and it is the control group in the message experi-
ment. After cases were allocated to the trial and default groups, cases in the trial group from each combina-

                                                                         9
tion of infringer tier and price category were placed sequentially into each treatment arm.8 The number of
cases allocated as trial cases each week depended on the Agency’s overall workload. In the pricing exper-
iment, we use data from five weeks during which trials were conducted. In the message experiment, trials
were conducted every week between the end of January and the end of March 2014.
    It is not ideal that the allocation procedure did not follow a strict randomization protocol. In particular,
we do not know exactly how cases were assigned to the trial and default groups in the first step. According
to the Agency, trial cases were selected sequentially from a list of infringements generated each week by
the detection software, which had been screened to eliminate authorized uses. The Agency is not aware of
any dependence between the ordering of cases generated by this process and settlement likelihood. This
is reasonable because neither the detection technology nor the Agency’s internal authorized-use screening
team has information on the potential settlement outcomes. Nevertheless, to mitigate this issue, we conduct
balance tests on the requested amount and infringer characteristics in order to verify that the treatment and
control groups are consistent with random allocation (see table 3 below).


3     Sample, variables and descriptive results

Our dataset includes all the infringement instances for which the Agency pursued settlement during the two
experiments. The information includes the initial requested amount, characteristics of infringing use, and
settlement outcomes. The data on infringer characteristics come from Dun & Bradstreet and include annual
sales, number of employees, age, industry, and firm location.
    The final sample excludes cases as defined here. First, because the Agency stops pursuing settlement
from infringers in tiers 4 and 5 during the message experiment, we also remove these cases in the pricing
experiment, in order to make the populations of the two experiments comparable. This excludes 30 percent
of all cases, leaving 5,660 cases. We further exclude cases for which (1) the mail is undeliverable (ten
percent of the 5,660 cases); (2) the case is later closed because the infringer is able to show a valid license
or permission from the photographer (6.3 percent); (3) there is no information on the firm’s annual sales
(8.5 percent); or (4) more than six images are involved, ensuring that the maximum number of images in
all groups is the same (19 observations).9 The final sample includes a total of 4,278 cases, of which 1,983
come from the pricing experiment and 2,295 from the message experiment.
    Panel 1 in table 2 summarizes the requested amount, inclusive of the additional $400 charge when
    8 In the pricing experiment, there was also a small treatment arm in which a $100 enforcement cost was added to the licensing

fee. The Agency discontinued this price point after a short time. We exclude these observations in the current results, but including
them does not qualitatively change the basic conclusions.
    9 Our basic conclusions do not change because of any of the exclusions. Table A6 in the Online Appendix reports results using

unfiltered data (that is, without dropping cases for which the mail is returned or sales information is missing, etc).


                                                                10
applicable, and the number of images involved in each case. The median requested amount is $699. Ninety
percent of all cases involve a single image, and nearly 60 percent are in the two lowest-priced use categories
(as shown in table 1). For cases involving multiple images, the median number of images is two.


                                Table 2: Summary statistics of case and firm characteristics

                     Variables                                  N        Mean          SD        Min      Median      Max
                     Panel 1: Price and image use
                     Requested amount                         4,278      748.0       438.3      354.9      699.0     5040.0
                     Single-image case                        4,278       0.90       0.30         0          1         1
                     Image count (if a multi-image case)       437       2.49        0.85         2          2         6

                     Panel 2: Firm characteristics
                     Annual sales ($000’s)                    4,278    23165.7     423542.4       0.3      320.0     23.7M
                     Employees                                4,278     112.9       1348.5         0         5       67800
                     Age                                      4,155      17.8        21.1          0        11        271

Notes: This table summarizes the requested amount, the number of images, and the characteristics of the firms, using cases in both experiments.
Firm characteristics are provided by Dun & Bradstreet based on identifying information of the infringing firm (such as name and address).
Industry and state (province) dummies are omitted.




     Panel 2 in table 2 summarizes infringer size and age. The median firm has $320K in annual sales; the
median number of employees is five, and the median firm age is 11 years. The distribution of several firm
characteristics (e.g., annual sales) is highly skewed. Annual sales and the number of employees are strongly
correlated (the correlation is 0.92), so we use only the former to measure firm size. The top ten industries
(defined by two-digit SIC codes and not shown in table 2) are responsible for 63 percent of all cases, and
they are largely service industries. The three states with the largest number of infringers are California,
Florida, and New York.
     Table 3 compares key pre-treatment variables for different groups for the two experiments. Because
sales and age are skewed, we summarize both the mean and the median of the variables and the mean of
their log transformation. Panel (a) shows that, in the pricing experiment, there is no significant difference in
the average baseline price (i.e., the licensing-fee portion of the requested amount) or the summary statistics
of the distributions of firm size and age between the High Price and Low Price groups. Panel (b) summarizes
the same information for the control and four treatment groups of the message experiment, along with p-
values of two-sided t-tests (or median tests) comparing each treatment group to the control group. The
variables are similar between the treatment groups and the control, with the following exceptions: compared
to the control, (1) the average requested amount in the ‘Waive the Cost’ group is higher; (2) firms in the
two deadline message groups are smaller in log(Sales), even though the mean and the median of the level of
sales are not statistically different from the control; and (3) firms in the ‘Waive the Cost + Deadline’ group


                                                                       11
                                                          Table 3: Balance check


                                                             (a) Pricing experiment
           Group              N        Baseline price      Sales, $1,000        log(Sales, $)              Age           log(Age+1)
                                                         mean      median           mean          mean       median         mean
           Low Price        707            642.6         15533       324            13.1            18          11           2.5
           High Price      1,276           623.2         13797       281            13.0            17          11           2.5
           (p-value)                       (0.22)        (0.84)     (0.44)         (0.41)         (0.42)      (0.58)        (0.92)

                                                             (b) Message experiment
Group                              N          Baseline price            Sales, $1,000        log(Sales, $)              Age           log(Age+1)
(p-value, diff. to control)                (=Requested amount)        mean      median          mean           mean       median         mean
Control                            598           590.7                30614       390            13.4            19          11           2.6
Waive the Cost                     378           636.8                50682       385            13.4            19          11           2.5
                                                 (0.03)               (0.40)     (0.91)         (0.93)         (0.86)      (0.83)        (0.86)
Waive the Cost + Deadline          414           595.3                 7951       290            13.1            16          9            2.5
                                                 (0.82)               (0.16)     (0.13)         (0.03)         (0.04)      (0.17)        (0.06)
Discount                           448           588.4                10112       305            13.2            18          12           2.5
                                                 (0.90)               (0.19)     (0.13)         (0.13)         (0.48)      (0.73)        (0.85)
Discount + Deadline                457           580.2                55206       360            13.0            17          11           2.5
                                                 (0.59)               (0.61)     (0.47)         (0.01)         (0.18)      (0.59)        (0.37)


Notes: Panel (a) summarizes the baseline price (i.e., the licensing-fee portion of the total requested amount), the number of images, and firms’
basic characteristics between the two groups in the pricing experiment. Two-sided t-test p-values are reported in parentheses. Panel (b)
summarizes the same information by group for the message experiment. Two-sided t-test (or median test) p-values are between each treatment
group and the control group.




are younger.
     Consultation with the compliance team at the Agency does not identify any sources of these incidences of
imbalance. If the suggestions of imbalance here are not false positives, they are likely to make our estimates
of the treatment effects more conservative. This is because our results consistently show that settlement is
less likely for smaller and younger firms and for cases with a higher requested amount. We further verify
that the regression results without using controls (reported in table A1 in the Online Appendix) are similar
to those using controls. Both of these are also consistent with the raw data, indicating that the allocation is
not systematically correlated with observable variables.
     About 30 days after sending the first letter, the Agency sends follow-up letters unless the case has
already been settled. Eventually, cases that do not settle are sent to external law firms. For cases that settle
within our sample period (all cases are older than five months), 51 percent settle by 30 days, and 98 percent
settle by 120 days. 90 percent of the cases that are sent to external law firms are sent between 58 and 159
days after the first letter. In the main analysis, we focus on the 30-day outcomes as a clean assessment
of the interventions. Two factors confound assessments made in later time periods. First, more follow-up
letters are sent to groups that have lower initial settlement rates. These endogenously-determined follow-up



                                                                        12
actions are designed to encourage settlement and should cause the worst-performing groups to ‘catch up’
over the longer horizon. Second, software constraints at the Agency accidentally resulted in substantially
more intense follow-up for groups designated as the ‘default’ group in each experiment.10 In section 5,
we provide estimates that bound the longer-term outcomes, such as the effects of the interventions on the
probability of escalation to an external law firm.
      Table 4 summarizes 30-day outcomes. Taking the settlement probability into account, the average rev-
enue per case is $104. For settled cases, the average revenue collected is $555. Infringers negotiate a lower
settlement amount for 38 percent of settled cases, and for those cases, the median reduction is 36 percent.
The overall settlement rate is 19 percent. Broken down by firms’ responses to the initial letter, seven percent
settle directly without contacting the Agency; 27 percent contact the Agency (43 percent of which settle by
30 days); and 66 percent ignore the letter. Our analysis pools the two types of settlements together (that is,
direct settlement without contacting the Agency and settlement after making contact).

                                                       Table 4: 30-day outcomes


                                                             (a) 30-day revenues
                        Variables                                   N      Mean      SD       Min    Median      Max
                        Revenue per case                          4,278    104.2    255.8      0.0     0.0      2992.3
                        Revenue (if settled)                       803     555.2    313.4     91.0   475.0      2992.3
                        Paid a reduced amount? (if settled)        803     0.38     0.49        0       0         1
                        Negotiated reduction % (if reduced)        305     0.36     0.17      0.02    0.35       0.88

                                             (b) 30-day settlement rate and infringer response
                                     Contact/Outcome                    Settle (19%)     Not Settle (81%)
                                     Contact Agency (27%)                   12%               15%
                                     Do not contact Agency (73%)             7%               66%


Notes: Panel (a) summarizes the 30-day revenues using cases in both experiments. Revenue is coded as $0 if the case does not settle within 30
days. Panel (b) summarizes the 30-day settlement rate and detailed responses by infringers.




3.1     Descriptive results

Table 5 compares the settlement outcomes for the two price groups in the pricing experiment. On average,
the 30-day settlement rate of the Low Price group is three percentage points higher than that of the High
Price group (15.6 vs. 12.5 percent with a p-value of 0.054). Although this represents a 25 percent increase,
the difference is only marginally significant. For settled cases, the average revenue collected is $211 lower in
the Low Price group. This suggests that more extensively negotiated reductions for the higher-priced group
  10 Recallfrom Section 2.3 that the ‘default’ group was the High Price group in the pricing experiment and the control group in
the message experiment. We provide a detailed description of the Agency’s follow-up actions in Section C of the Online Appendix.


                                                                      13
offset half of the difference in the requested amount. Despite the higher settlement rate, the expected 30-day
revenue of a case is $10 lower for the Low Price group, but the difference is not statistically significant.


                                 Table 5: Price effects on settlement outcomes (raw data)


                                                           Low Price      High Price   Difference    p-value
                                All cases:
                                Settlement probability       0.156          0.125        -0.031       0.054
                                Revenue                       82.6           92.4          9.8        0.432
                                N                             707           1,276
                                Settled cases:
                                Revenue                      530.9          741.5         210.6       0.000
                                Whether discounted           0.36           0.64          0.28        0.000
                                Discount                      81.9          284.4         202.5       0.000
                                N                             110            159

Notes: This table summarizes the 30-day outcomes of the High Price and the Low Price groups in the pricing experiment.




     Table 6 reports the settlement probability for the control and treatment groups in the message exper-
iment. Table 6a shows that, for an average case, relative to the control group, adding either of the two
non-deadline messages increases the settlement probability by about nine percentage points (a 64 percent
increase); adding either of the two deadline messages improves the 30-day settlement probability by about
15 percentage points (a 107 percent increase relative to the control group); and all the improvements are
highly statistically significant.11 For each of the two different ways of presenting the forgiven amount (i.e.,
“Waive-the-Cost” and “Discount”), the difference between the deadline and non-deadline versions is about
five or six percentage points (p-values are 0.11 and 0.05, table 6b). However, given that a deadline is added
(or not), there is no significant difference between the two different presentations of the forgiven amount.
As shown in later regression results (table 9), the messages’ effects on expected revenue remain consistent
with those for the settlement probability. This is because the requested amount is the same across different
groups given the same use category, and the revenue collected per settled case is similar across groups.
     The two experiments combined show that, on average, a substantial reduction in the requested amount
generates a small increase in the settlement rate (and, consequently, a small and statistically insignificant
difference in expected revenue). In contrast, for the same reduced request, including any of the treatment
messages generates a large and statistically significant increase in the settlement rate; and, holding the rest
of the message content constant, adding a deadline alone further increases the response by a significant
amount. Although the estimates are obtained from different samples, the two sample periods are close in
  11 We report the 30-day outcomes for the deadline messages for ease of comparison.   Pre-deadline (22-day) outcomes are reported
in a later section and, in summary, show that the two deadline messages improve both the settlement rate and the expected revenue
by about 150 percent relative to the control group (0.25 versus 0.10, and $120 versus $47).


                                                                     14
                               Table 6: Message effects on settlement probability (raw data)


                                             (a) Comparing the treatment groups to the control
                     Group                             N      Settlement probability      Difference         (p-value)
                                                                                          to Control      diff. to control
                     Control                          598               0.14
                     Waive the Cost                   378               0.24                  0.09             (0.00)
                     Waive the Cost + Deadline        414               0.29                  0.14             (0.00)
                     Discount                         448               0.24                  0.10             (0.00)
                     Discount + Deadline              457               0.30                  0.16             (0.00)

                                            (b) Comparing between different treatment groups
                                                              No deadline      With deadline      Effect of a deadline       (p-value)
         Waive the Cost                                          0.24              0.29                   0.05                (0.113)
         Discount                                                0.24               0.3                   0.06                (0.046)
         Difference in presenting the forgiven amount           -0.003             -0.01
         (p-value)                                              (0.91)            (0.68)


Notes: (A) Summary of 30-day settlement probabilities for the four treatment groups and the control group in the message experiment. Two-sided
t-test p-values are between each treatment group and the control group. (B) Comparison of the settlement probabilities between different treatment
groups and p-values for these differences.




time, and the settlement rate of the Low Price group in the pricing experiment and that of the control group
in the message experiment (both add no additional charge and include no extra message) are not statistically
different from each other (0.156 vs. 0.141 with a p-value of 0.44).


4     Conceptual Framework

In this section, we propose two mechanisms that, taken together, help to explain the findings described in
Section 3.1. First, we develop a simple rational model in which the infringer trades off the disutility of paying
to settle and the expected liability risk of resisting settlement. The infringer begins with limited information
about what may happen if he does not settle immediately. These beliefs are exogenously influenced by the
experiments’ price reduction or messaging (especially through the provision of information about the price
of settling). We show that this ‘expected-payoff’ mechanism alone is sufficient to capture the basic results
of both experiments.
     Apart from providing relevant price information, the treatment messages also contain an acknowledg-
ment of possible unintentionality. We provide evidence suggesting that unintentional infringement is preva-
lent in our context. Given this nature of infringement and the fact that the monetary stakes are not large, this
acknowledgment may encourage more collaborative outcomes by shifting the frame of decision-making for
some infringers away from a pure cost-benefit analysis (as captured in the ‘expected-payoff’ mechanism).

                                                                       15
We refer to this mechanism as a ‘collaborative-mindset’ mechanism. Within the message experiment, be-
cause the two non-deadline messages provide price information and acknowledge possible unintentionality,
while the control does neither, the difference between them may be the result of both mechanisms. In the
last part of this section, we discuss possible ways to use heterogeneity in the data to clarify whether or not
the ‘collaborative-mindset’ mechanism plays an important role in encouraging settlement.


4.1     Expected-payoff mechanism

We present a two-period, single-agent decision model with incomplete information, in which the infringer
decides whether or not to settle in each period. The settlement offers for the two periods are, respectively,
p1 and p2 ; the amount requested for delayed settlement is always at least as high as that for immediate
settlement (i.e., p2 ≥ p1 ). In period 1, the infringer chooses whether to settle or to wait until period 2. If he
settles, he pays the requested amount p1 . If he waits until period 2, he calculates an expected second-period
payoff as a function of (i) his expectation of the probability of enforcement in period 2, and (ii) his expected
payoff, conditional on enforcement.12 We solve for the second component first.
      Conditional on enforcement, an infringer’s second-period payoff is
                                                              
                                                               −p if settle in period 2
                                                                  2
                                                       −πi2 =
                                                               −ε otherwise,
                                                                  2


where ε2 > 0 is the expected cost to the infringer if he does not settle in period 2. This cost could include, for
example, legal expenses, opportunity costs of time and stress, and reputational costs of being engaged in a
prolonged dispute. The infringer observes ε2 in period 2 and, thus, settles when −p2 > −ε2 . We denote the
infringer’s second-period payoff when the Agency enforces as −πi2 (p2 ) = −p2 I(ε2 > p2 ) − ε2 I(ε2 ≤ p2 ).
      In period 1, the infringer knows the distribution of ε2 , which is denoted as H(·). Thus, the infringer’s
expected second-period payoff, calculated in period 1 and conditional on enforcement, can be written as


                                       −E[πi2 (p2 )] = −(1 − H(p2 ))p2 − H(p2 )Eε2 [ε2 |ε2 ≤ p2 ].


Note that E[πi2 (p2 )] > 0 (i.e., it is costly to the infringer when the Agency chooses to enforce in period 2),
and that E[πi2 (p2 )] is increasing in p2 (i.e., it is more costly to the infringer when the requested settlement
amount is higher), all else equal.13
  12 We   assume that the infringer ignores the possibility that the Agency may be willing to negotiate to a different settlement offer
at a later stage.
                                           p
                       ∂[p2 −H(p2 )p2 + 0 2 ε2 h(ε2 )dε2 ]
                                  R
  13 E[πi (p )]0   =                                         = 1 − H(p2 ) ∈ (0, 1).
        2 2                         ∂p2




                                                                               16
    Next, we turn to the infringer’s expectation of the likelihood of enforcement in period 2. Motivated by
the context of our empirical application, we assume that an infringer’s expectation of enforcement depends
on his expectation of the Agency’s payoff from enforcing. Without precise knowledge about this payoff,
the infringer may use available price information, and in particular, the price for delayed payment, p2 , to
infer the likelihood of Agency enforcement. Denote the infringer’s expectation of the Agency’s payoff
from enforcing as v(p2 ) − εa , where εa ∼ G(·) is the Agency’s cost of pursuing settlement.We assume that
v0 (p2 ) > 0 (i.e., the Agency’s payoff from enforcement increases with p2 ). The infringer’s expectation of
the Agency’s second-period payoff is:
                                                      
                                                       v(p ) − ε if enforce
                                                           2     a
                                                πa2 =
                                                       0          otherwise.

Thus, the infringer’s expectation of the likelihood of enforcement is G(v(p2 )). This implies that the proba-
bility of enforcement increases in p2 .14
    Thus, in period 1, the infringer’s payoff function can be written as:
                                      
                                       −p                        if settle in period 1
                                          1
                               −πi1 =                                                                      (1)
                                       −βG(v(p ))E[πi (p )] + ε otherwise,
                                               2     2 2        1


where β is a standard discount factor; G(v(p2 )) is the infringer’s expectation of the probability of enforce-
ment in the second period; E[πi2 (p2 )] is his expected second-period payoff conditional on enforcement; and
ε1 ∼ F(·) reflects an infringer’s private cost of waiting until period 2. This defines the share of infringers
that settle in period 1, s1 , as


                                             s1 = F(−p1 + βG(v(p2 ))E[πi2 (p2 )]).                         (2)

    We are interested in the implications of the two experiments for the share of infringers that settle in
period 1. The experiments vary either the actual price (the pricing experiment) or the information disclosed
to an infringer about price (the message experiment). In the pricing experiment, all infringers face a single
settlement offer (either the High Price or the Low Price). Because this offer is the only available price
information, the infringer may associate it with the value of pursuing the case from the Agency’s point
of view and with the amount he may need to pay if he delays settlement until period 2. In other words,
p2 = p1 = p for infringers in both groups. To obtain the expected treatment effect of a higher settlement
  14 Equivalently,   ∂G(v(p2 ))/∂p2 = g(v(p2 ))v0 (p2 ) > 0.




                                                               17
offer, replace p2 and p1 with p in equation (2), and take the derivative with respect to p:
                                                                                                                         
          ∂s1                                                       0
              = f (−p + βG(v(p))E[πi2 (p)]) −1 + βG(v(p))E[πi2 (p)] + βg(v(p))v0 (p)E[πi2 (p)] .                                   (3)
                                                                                              
          ∂p                                  |       {z           } |          {z            }
                                                             traditional price effect (−)           threat effect (+)


Equation (3) illustrates the fact that a higher settlement offer may simultaneously encourage and discourage
immediate settlement. On the one hand, the ‘traditional price effect’ implies that an increase in the offered
price should decrease the probability of immediate settlement because the demand for settling is downward
sloping (i.e., −1 + βG(v(p))E[πi2 (p)]0 < 0).15 On the other hand, a higher price may suggest a greater
‘threat’ of escalation (i.e., βg(v(p))v0 (p)E[πi2 (p)] > 0), which, in turn, encourages immediate settlement.
These two effects offset each other and, thus, may explain why a substantial reduction in price generates
only a small difference in the observed settlement rate.
    In the message experiment, the control group continues to face a single price. In contrast, infringers
in the treatment groups receive information about two prices: they receive the same settlement offer as
the control group and, at the same time, they are informed that the offer is $400 lower than it could have
been. In other words, all four treatment groups face the same p1 as the control, but they receive a higher
p2 . The second, higher price may lead infringers to infer a higher recoupable revenue by the Agency
and, hence, a greater threat of further enforcement and a higher amount due for delayed settlement.16 To
obtain the expected effect of the treatment messages relative to the control group, consider the derivative of
equation (2) with respect to p2 :
                                                                                                                           
        ∂s1
            = f (−p1 + βG(v(p2 ))E[πi2 (p2 )])  βG(v(p2 ))E[πi2 (p2 )]0 + βg(v(p2 ))v0 (p2 )E[πi2 (p2 )] .                         (4)
                                                                                                        
        ∂p2                                      |        {z          } |               {z              }
                                                            intertemporal price effect (+)          threat effect (+)


Both terms in equation (4) are positive. In contrast to the pricing experiment, the ‘intertemporal price effect’
and the ‘threat effect’ of a higher p2 are synergistic (rather than oppositional); both effects make ‘settling in
period 1’ a more attractive option. This can explain why the messages generate a large and positive response
from infringers. Furthermore, relative to the messages without a deadline, the two messages with a deadline
should yield a stronger result, because both the intertemporal price trade-off and the increased threat are
more explicit.
  15 Even though a higher settlement offer also means a higher price in period 2, the direct effect on the disutility of paying a greater

price in period 1 dominates; that is, −1 + βG(v(p))E[πi2 (p)]0 = −1 + βG(v(p))(1 − H(p)) < 0.
  16 Even infringers who receive the treatment messages that do not include an explicit deadline may infer that the discounted offer

will no longer apply to a delayed settlement. This is consistent with findings in the marketing literature, in which researchers have
found that placing a sale sign on an item is sufficient to increase demand for the item even without changing the actual price, because
consumers expect the price to go up after the promotion period (e.g., Inman et al. (1990) and Anderson and Simester (1998)).



                                                                   18
      To summarize, pricing not only affects the infringer’s ‘demand for settlement’ directly, but also influ-
ences his belief about his potential future liability risk. According to the model, the reason that a sub-
stantially lower settlement offer alone has little effect on the settlement rate is not because price does not
matter. Rather, it is because infringers perceive the Agency as being less serious about enforcement when
the requested amount is lower. In other words, a lower request may not generate a higher settlement rate
if it simultaneously sacrifices an implicit threat of escalation. Decoupling the two prices, as the treatment
messages do in the second experiment, allows the Agency to simultaneously leverage the inducement of a
lower price today and the threat of future escalation.


4.2     Collaborative-mindset mechanism

The expected-payoff mechanism modeled in the previous section explains the small price effect from the
pricing experiment, which is cleanly identified in the data. The incremental effect of adding a deadline to
the treatment message is also cleanly identified because comparisons between the deadline and non-deadline
messages control for the rest of the message content. The expected-payoff mechanism is also sufficient to
explain this effect, as an explicit deadline strengthens both the intertemporal price trade-off and the threat.
However, within the message experiment, the non-deadline messages contain two pieces of information that
the control lacks: (i) pricing information, and (ii) acknowledgment of possible unintentionality. Thus, the
large and positive effect of these non-deadline messages may be the result of both factors.
      Table 7 shows that accidental or indirect infringement is prevalent in our data. The table summarizes
the (self-reported) reasons for infringement, which are collected from correspondence records between the
Agency and infringers that made contact during the message experiment. In 43 percent of the cases, the
infringer claims to be unaware of any infringement, or to have obtained the image online, thinking that
it was free to use. In 42 percent of the cases, an outside party is involved in designing the infringer’s
website.17 In four percent of the cases, the firm uses a previously-licensed image outside the specified
scope. While we acknowledge that the incentive for an infringer to claim unawareness may be strong, the
extent of unintentional infringement (from the infringing firm’s point of view) still seems substantial. Table 7
also shows that this phenomenon is similar across infringers of all sizes.
      Given the nature of these incidences, infringers may feel confused and frustrated when faced with en-
forcement, because they were not aware of the mistake. It is, thus, plausible that acknowledging the possible
unintentionality encourages settlement by shifting the infringer’s frame of mind away from calculating le-
  17 We define third-party involvement to include cases for which either: (1) the party who contacts the Agency is a third-party
designer, family or friend (17%); or (2) the end-user claims that a third party designed the website (25%). It is possible that some
family or friends make contact because they have a legal background. However, we group these calls with third-party designers
because anecdotal evidence suggests that friends and family who contact the Agency are usually involved in the website design.



                                                                19
                                       Table 7: (Self-reported) reason(s) for infringement


            Infringer-size quintile      N      Third-party       Unaware/obtain        Improper use        Other          Deny
                                                 involved        from the Internet       of license        reasons     infringement
            1                           154        0.41                0.47                 0.01             0.06           0.05
            2                           168        0.42                0.43                 0.01             0.05           0.08
            3                           181        0.43                0.44                 0.02             0.07           0.04
            4                           143        0.46                0.40                 0.03             0.06           0.05
            5                           176        0.37                0.45                 0.09             0.07           0.02
            Total                       909        0.42                0.43                 0.04             0.07           0.05
             Corr. with log(sales)                  -0.04               0.02                 0.17           -0.02          -0.06
             p-value                               (0.24)              (0.67)                0.00          (0.65)          (0.07)

Notes: The data are taken from correspondence records between the Agency and firms in the message-experiment sample that contact the Agency.
We include infringers that make contact at any time during the sample period, not just in the first 30 days. There is no significant difference in
annual sales, age or the number of employees between infringers that make contact (about half of the cases) and those that either ignore the letters
or settle without making contact. Twenty percent of the cases for which firms make contact do not contain enough information and, thus, are not
used in the tabulation. Size quintiles are based on annual sales, with Q1 being the smallest firms and Q5 the largest.




gal risks, which are likely to be small in such circumstances. At least two different sub-mechanisms may
be at work. First, this acknowledgement may uphold an infringer’s intrinsic motivation to correct a mis-
take, which is especially effective when the amount of the claim is small. The literature on tax compliance
has similar findings. For example, Feld and Frey (2002a,b) argue that paying tax is quasi-voluntary, and
they show that respectable treatment by the tax authorities (i.e., a presumption of innocence) dampens tax
evasion.18 The effectiveness of this acknowledgement is also consistent with findings in the bargaining liter-
ature that many people are motivated by concerns for fairness and reciprocity (e.g., Kahneman et al. (1986),
Fehr et al. (1993), and Roth (1995)). Second, the acknowledgement of unintentionality may simply make
the settlement request letter conform more closely to other standard invoices. For firms that have routines
in place for paying bills or resolving disputes, this may provide a smoother path for processing payment,
rather than invoking a costly internal legal review.


4.3     Distinguishing the two mechanisms

In this section, we discuss possible ways to utilize heterogeneity in the data to help distinguish between
the expected-payoff and collaborative-mindset mechanisms in explaining the difference between the non-
deadline messages and the control in the message experiment. In particular, we focus on two sources of
variation that generate differential responses to these messages across infringers when (i) information about
pricing or (ii) acknowledgement of unintentionality is likely to be the major driver. As we cannot directly
  18 Frey (1997) provides theoretical basis of psychological tax contract based on the interactions between incentives and the
intrinsic motivation to pay taxes (often called ‘tax morale’). Alm and Torgler (2011) and Luttmer and Singhal (2014) survey
empirical evidence for tax morale.


                                                                        20
measure infringers’ price sensitivity or their feelings about the fairness of the settlement request, the results
in this section use proxies for these underlying primitives. Our ability to convincingly distinguish between
these mechanisms is ultimately limited by the strength of these proxies. This, of course, is not a concern for
establishing the importance of the expected-payoff mechanism in explaining the infringer’s behavior as a
whole since that result derives from a clean comparison of (i) the average outcomes of the two experiments,
and (ii) the incremental effect of adding a deadline to the treatment messages.
    In our first comparison, we consider the size of the forgiven amount, which is always $400 per image,
as a percentage of the baseline licensing fee. Baseline licensing fees range from $380 to $825 per image, so
the relative size of the forgiven amount, (p2 − p1 )/p1 , varies substantially, ranging from 43 to 107 percent.
One may expect that both the intertemporal price effect and the threat effect in equation (4) are greater when
the percentage difference between p2 and p1 is larger. If so, one may expect the effect of the non-deadline
messages to increase with the percentage difference in price when the pricing information contained in the
messages is the primary driver of the result (through the expected-payoff mechanism).
    In our second comparison, we examine how the effect of the non-deadline messages varies across firms
of different sizes. As explained previously, firm size varies substantially in our data. Consistent with many
studies of demand estimation, one might expect the ‘intertemporal price effect’ to be smaller for larger
firms, as these firms have lower borrowing costs and are typically thought to be less price-sensitive. One
may also expect the ‘threat effect’ to be smaller for larger firms, as these firms are likely to have more
information than smaller firms about underlying litigation risks. For example, additional legal expertise may
lead larger firms to be less affected by small changes in communication.19 Furthermore, larger firms may
have greater resources to fight a legal battle if necessary and, hence, may be less sensitive to an increased
threat. Therefore, if the expected-payoff mechanism is the major driver of infringers’ responses to the non-
deadline messages, one may expect the size of the effect to decrease with firm size.
    In contrast, if the effect of the two non-deadline messages is driven mainly by the acknowledgment of
possible unintentionality, there is, a priori, no obvious relationship between the size of the effect and the
relative size of the forgiven amount. Similarly, it is also not obvious how the effect should vary by firm size.
Different-sized firms may react to this acknowledgment for different reasons. For example, smaller firms
may be more likely to respond to an intrinsic motivation to pay, while larger firms may be more likely to
settle due to the fact that this acknowledgement of unintentionality provides a smoother internal procedure
for processing payment. Furthermore, regardless of the reason, the magnitude of the response may be subject
to the infringer’s financial capability. Thus, even if larger firms are less susceptible to small communication
  19 Correspondence data from the Agency show that the larger is the infringing firm, the more likely it is that the person who

contacts the Agency is an internal lawyer.



                                                              21
changes, they may be more likely to respond because they face fewer binding budget constraints.
      Finally, we expect the same heterogeneity discussed above (when information about pricing is the main
driver) to also apply to the pure effect of including a deadline, because the underlying mechanism is simi-
lar.20 Therefore, we can use the effect of a deadline as a benchmark, because it can be cleanly identified in
the data. In other words, if the price information is the main driver of the effect of the two non-deadline mes-
sages relative to the control, we expect their subsample results to be consistent with those from comparing
the messages with and without a deadline.


5      Regression results

In this section, we first present the regression results, controlling for firm and case characteristics, for an
average case for both experiments. These results are consistent with the descriptive results in Section 3.1.
We then report the heterogeneity (or lack thereof) in the effects across two dimensions: (1) the size of the
infringing firm and (2) the extent of the price variation (in percentage terms) that is either induced by the
pricing experiment, or implied by the message experiment. We follow the results with a discussion of the
underlying mechanisms in light of the conceptual framework developed in Section 4. Finally, we report the
effects of the treatment messages on legal costs.


5.1     Results for an average case

Pricing experiment

Table 8 provides OLS and logit regression analyses of the effect of charging the High Price (relative to
the Low Price group) on the likelihood of settlement and revenue. The control variables in the regressions
include the baseline licensing fee; characteristics of the infringing use, including image-use category indi-
cators and number of images; characteristics of the infringer, including log(annual sales), log(age + 1), ten
‘top’ industry indicators (defined by two-digit SIC codes), a U.S. dummy, and ten ‘top’ state/province indi-
cators; and week dummies indicating when the settlement letter was mailed.21 For all regressions throughout
the paper, we use the same set of control variables and report robust standard errors, clustered by industry.
      The marginal effects of the High Price dummy are consistent with the raw data (table 5). On average,
firms appear to be not price-elastic, in the sense that the substantial reduction in the requested amount does
not result in higher expected revenue. Firms are more likely to settle if they are offered a lower price (the
   20 That is, adding a deadline simply strengthens the inter-temporal price and the threat effects relative to the two messages without

a deadline.
   21 Seventy-six firms (four percent) do not have age information. To preserve the sample size, a dummy variable indicating that

the age information is missing is included in the regressions.


                                                                  22
                                          Table 8: Price effects on settlement outcomes


                              Dependent variable                             Settle        Revenue          Revenue
                                                                                       for settled cases
                                                                             Logit            OLS              OLS
                                                                               (1)             (2)              (3)
                              High Price dummy                              -0.03*        255.84***           13.72
                                                                            (0.02)          (34.79)          (11.45)
                              Use cat 2: High res. + secondary page           0.02          -131.03            3.65
                                                                            (0.02)          (80.16)          (27.71)
                              Use cat 3: Low res. + home page                -0.03        -325.96**          -24.43
                                                                            (0.05)         (143.73)          (49.89)
                              Use cat 4: Low res. + repeat pages              0.04          -285.46           30.10
                                                                            (0.06)         (178.13)          (74.11)
                              Use cat 5: High res. + home page               -0.00          -371.27          -12.47
                                                                            (0.07)         (249.95)          (94.20)
                              Use cat 6: High res. + repeat pages             0.00          -366.29           -4.53
                                                                            (0.07)         (263.55)          (93.50)
                              Use cat 7: Multi-image cases                    0.03       -557.20***           20.58
                                                                            (0.08)         (190.23)          (99.43)
                              log(Baseline price)                            -0.04        893.66***           41.77
                                                                            (0.09)         (319.06)         (124.66)
                              Number of images                               -0.01         346.52**           17.09
                                                                            (0.04)         (156.38)          (75.92)
                              log(Annual sales)                            0.01***          23.07*          17.20***
                                                                            (0.00)          (12.63)           (3.38)
                              log(Age+1)                                   0.02**             -7.09           10.03
                                                                            (0.01)          (13.25)           (6.75)
                              Missing-age dummy                            0.10**            -97.38           46.87
                                                                            (0.04)          (99.54)          (36.44)
                              Top 10 industry dummies                           Y               Y                Y
                              Top 10 state (province) dummies                   Y               Y                Y
                              U.S. dummy                                        Y               Y                Y
                              Mail week dummies                                 Y               Y                Y

                              Price elasticity                               -0.28            0.71             0.24
                              Mean(dependent variable)
                               for the Low Price group                       0.155           530.9             82.6
                              Adj R-squared                                                  0.645            0.031
                              N                                              1983             269             1983

Notes: This table reports the results (marginal effects) from the following regressions using observations from the pricing experiment. The
dependent variables are (1) whether the case settles within 30 days; (2) the revenue for settled cases; and (3) the revenue of a case (coded as $0 if
not settled in 30 days). The independent variable is a dummy indicating the High Price group (the Low Price group is the omitted group). Baseline
price is the licensing-fee portion of the requested amount. All models report robust standard errors, clustered by industry (defined by the two-digit
SIC codes). ***, **, and * are, respectively, significance levels of 1%, 5%, and 10%.




marginal effect of High Price is -0.03 and marginally significant). However, the increase in the settlement
probability is not large enough to offset the lower revenue for the cases that do settle. As a result, the
expected 30-day revenue of an average case is $13 lower for the Low Price group, but the difference is not
statistically significant.22
  22 The   expected revenue of a case is the settlement probability multiplied by the expected revenue, conditional on settling. We


                                                                        23
      Table 8 also shows that larger firms are significantly more likely to settle and less likely to negotiate
a discount conditional on settling; thus, they are associated with a significantly higher expected revenue.
Older firms are also significantly more likely to settle, but generate only a slightly higher revenue (p-value
is 0.15). The coefficient for log(Baseline price) is not always significant, because it captures only residual
differences in the licensing after controlling for the complete set of image-use dummies (e.g., taxes that
differ by state).


Message experiment

Regression results of the message experiment are also consistent with the raw-data outcomes reported in
table 6. The 30-day settlement probability of any of the four treatment groups is 12-19 percentage points
higher than the control (column (1) in table 9), representing an increase of 85 to 135 percent. The incre-
mental effect of including a deadline on the settlement rate, holding the rest of the message constant, is six
percentage points, and the difference is statistically significant (p-value is 0.013, column (2) in table 9). For
settled cases, the conditional settlement revenue is similar across all groups (columns (3) and (4) in table 9).
In terms of the expected revenue per case (taking the settlement probability into account), the inclusion of
a non-deadline message increases expected revenue by $65, while a deadline message increases expected
revenue by $86 (columns (5) and (6) in table 9).


5.2     Results for different subsamples

Pricing experiment: comparing High Price and Low Price

Recall that, for an average case, a substantial reduction in the requested amount generates only a small
change in the settlement probability. This result also holds across different subsamples. Figure 2a plots the
marginal effects of the High Price dummy on the settlement probability by firm-size quintiles, with Q1 being
the smallest firms in terms of annual sales and Q5 the largest (this and all other regression results for different
subsamples are reported in the Online Appendix).23 For all size quintiles, the settlement probabilities are
not statistically different between the two price groups. Consequently, for all quintiles, the expected revenue
is slightly higher for the High Price group, though none of the differences are statistically significant (not
plotted here).
denote expected revenue as R(p), where R(p) = Pr(p)R̂(p); p is the requested amount; and R̂(p) ≤ p because negotiation is
                                                                       p           p       ∂R̂(p)
                                                                                       + ∂p R̂p ; that is, the price elasticity of the
                                                               ∂R(p)
allowed. The decomposition of the price elasticities is then ∂p R(p)      = ∂Pr(p)
                                                                              ∂p Pr(p)
expected revenue is the sum of the elasticity of the settlement probability and the elasticity of the expected revenue conditional
on settling. The two elasticities based on the regression results are -0.28 and 0.71, implying a positive elasticity of the expected
revenue.
   23 Firms at the 20th, 40th, 60th, and 80th percentiles have $111K, $190K, $480K and $1.7m in annual sales, respectively.




                                                                 24
                                         Table 9: Message effects on settlement outcomes


                   Dependent variable                         Settle                     Revenue                  Revenue
                                                                                    for settled cases
                                                             Logit                        OLS                     OLS
                                                        (1)          (2)              (3)         (4)       (5)         (6)
                   Waive the Cost                    0.12***                        -1.89                65.54***
                                                      (0.03)                       (17.50)                (20.54)
                   Waive the Cost + Deadline         0.18***                         7.31                86.08***
                                                      (0.03)                       (17.05)                (15.53)
                   Discount                          0.13***                        17.11                66.67***
                                                      (0.03)                       (20.21)                (16.93)
                   Discount + Deadline               0.19***                         3.72                88.54***
                                                      (0.02)                       (14.72)                (15.60)
                   Non-deadline message                          0.12***                         4.89                65.17***
                                                                   (0.03)                      (17.21)                (19.80)
                   Deadline message                              0.18***                         1.90                86.42***
                                                                   (0.03)                      (16.99)                (15.45)

                   Control variables                     Y              Y            Y           Y            Y             Y

                   Mean(dependent variable)
                    for the control group              0.14            0.14        485.2       485.2        68.1           68.1
                   Adj R-squared                                                   0.81         0.81        0.07           0.07
                   N                                   2291            2291         534         534         2295           2295

Notes: This table reports the results (marginal effects) from three sets of regressions using the message-experiment sample. The dependent
variables are, respectively, whether the case settles in 30 days; the revenue for settled cases; and the revenue of a case (coded as $0 if not settled in
30 days). In columns (1), (3) and (5), the independent variables are four dummies indicating the treatment messages (the default is the control
group). In the other columns, Non-deadline message equals one if the case belongs to either of the two non-deadline message groups; and
Deadline message equals one if the case belongs to either of the two deadline message groups. Columns (3) and (4) use cases that settle in 30 days.
In all regressions, the control variables are log(Requested amount), image count, log(Annual sales), log(Age+1), missing-age dummy, dummies
indicating the top ten industries, the top ten states (provinces), the U.S., and the mail date. All models report robust standard errors, clustered by
industry. ***, **, and * are, respectively, significant levels of 1%, 5%, and 10%.




     Figure 2b plots the marginal effects of the High Price dummy on the settlement probability by the
price-change percentage.24 The effect of the price change on settlement probability increases monotonically
in magnitude with this percentage and reaches statistical significance (p < 0.05) when the percentage is
medium or high (above 0.70). The magnitude of the effect is, respectively, three and four percentage points
when the price-change percentage is medium and high. However, even in these ranges, the effect of the
price change on expected revenue per case is statistically indistinguishable from zero.


Message experiment: comparing the non-deadline messages and the control

As shown previously, for an average case, including a non-deadline message increases the settlement prob-
ability by 12 percentage points relative to the control group. This effect is relatively flat across different
  24 Due to the presence of six discrete baseline licensing fees, we categorize 30 percent of the cases as low, 40 percent as medium,

and 30 percent as high. The separating thresholds are 0.70 and 0.90.


                                                                              25
                           Figure 2: Price effects on settlement probability for different subsamples


                                  (a) By firm size                                             (b) By price-change %


                     .4




                                                                                   .4
                     .3




                                                                                   .3
                     .2




                                                                                   .2
                     .1




                                                                                   .1
                     0




                                                                                   0
                     -.1




                                                                                   -.1
                     -.2




                                                                                   -.2
                           Q1     Q2          Q3            Q4   Q5                      Low                  Medium                  High
                                       Firm-size Quintile                                             Price-change percentage




Notes: These figures report marginal effects of the High Price dummy on 30-day settlement probability (the baseline is the Low Price group).
Q1-Q5 indicate firm-size quintiles based on annual sales, with Q1 including the smallest firms and Q5 the largest. Price-change percentage is
($400×number of images)/total licensing fee. Bands indicate 95 percent confidence intervals.




subsamples, across both firm size and the relative size of the forgiven amount. Figure 3a shows that, relative
to the control, adding a non-deadline message has an effect of at least seven percentage points for all firms,
except those in the third quintile of the firm-size distribution. Compared to firms in the first quintile, the
message effect for larger firms is not statistically different, except for firms in the top quintile, where it is 14
percentage points larger (p-value of the difference in the effect is 0.008).

        Figure 3: Effects of a non-deadline message on settlement probability for different subsamples

                                                                                                           forgiven amount
                                  (a) By firm size                                             (b) By     requested amount
                     .4




                                                                                   .4
                     .3




                                                                                   .3
                     .2




                                                                                   .2
                     .1




                                                                                   .1
                     0




                                                                                   0
                     -.1




                                                                                   -.1
                     -.2




                                                                                   -.2




                           Q1     Q2          Q3            Q4   Q5                      Low                  Medium                  High
                                       Firm-size Quintile                                        Forgiven amount / requested amount




Notes: This figure plots the marginal effect of a dummy variable that equals one if the case belongs to either of the two non-deadline message
groups (the baseline is the control group) on the 30-day settlement probability. Q1 are the smallest firms based on annual sales and Q5 the largest.
  forgiven amount
 requested amount = ($400×number of images)/total licensing fee. Reported bands reflect 95% confidence intervals. The logit regressions (reported in
table A3 in the Online Appendix) use cases in the control and the two non-deadline message groups. They include the interaction terms between
the ‘non-deadline message’ dummy and firm-size quintile indicators (or indicators for different levels of the relative size of the forgiven amount).




     Figure 3b shows that the effect of a non-deadline message is large and statistically significant, regardless


                                                                        26
of the proportion of the forgiven amount relative to the requested amount. The differences in the effects
between different ranges are small and not statistically different from zero.


Message experiment: comparing messages with and without a deadline

We evaluate the incremental impact of adding a deadline after which the price-reduction offer expires, hold-
ing the rest of the message fixed, on pre-deadline outcomes.25 The deadline is set for the 22nd day after the
first letter is mailed. In practice, the Agency did not take action immediately after the deadline; nor did it
increase the requested amount in subsequent letters. Thus, we focus on the 22-day outcome to provide the
cleanest comparison.
     For an average case, the addition of a deadline increases the 22-day settlement likelihood by 5.4 percent-
age points (the p-value is 0.007). This effect, however, differs significantly among subsamples. The effect
of a deadline on pre-deadline settlement probability is positive (roughly ten percentage points) for smaller
firms in the lowest three quintiles, but not for larger firms in the top two quintiles (figure 4a). The effects
of including a deadline for firms in the second and the third quintiles are statistically indistinguishable from
those for firms in the first quintile, while effects in the fourth and fifth quintiles are significantly smaller
(differences of ten and eleven percentage points, p-values 0.069 and 0.051).

   Figure 4: Effect of a deadline on pre-deadline (22-day) settlement probability for different subsamples

                                                                                                           forgiven amount
                                  (a) By firm size                                             (b) By     requested amount
                     .4




                                                                                   .4
                     .3




                                                                                   .3
                     .2




                                                                                   .2
                     .1




                                                                                   .1
                     0




                                                                                   0
                     -.1




                                                                                   -.1
                     -.2




                                                                                   -.2




                           Q1    Q2           Q3            Q4   Q5                      Low                  Medium                  High
                                       Firm-size Quintile                                        Forgiven amount / requested amount




Notes: This figure plots the marginal effects of a dummy that equals one if the case belongs to either of the two deadline message groups on the
pre-deadline (22-day) settlement probability, holding the rest of the message constant. The baseline is comprised of cases belonging to either of the
                                                                                                              forgiven amount
two non-deadline message groups. Q1 are the smallest firms based on annual sales and Q5 the largest. requested          amount = ($400×number of
images)/total licensing fee. Reported bands reflect 95% confidence intervals. The logit regressions (reported in table A4 in the Online Appendix)
use cases from the four treatment groups of the message experiment. They include the interaction terms between the ‘deadline message’ dummy
and firm-size quintile indicators (or indicators for different levels of the relative size of the forgiven amount).


   25 Note that comparing outcomes for the groups with and without a deadline may underestimate the stand-alone effect of adding

a deadline because infringers may already be motivated by the rest of the message to settle. One could alternatively create a second
control group in which a deadline alone is added to the control letter.




                                                                        27
      Adding a deadline is significantly more effective when the potential future price increase is larger relative
to the requested amount (figure 4b). For cases with the highest ratios, the pre-deadline settlement rate
increases by more than ten percentage points (p-value of 0.0024) relative to the non-deadline messages; and
the effect of a deadline is significantly different from that for cases with the lowest ratio (p-value of the
difference is 0.002). To summarize, the addition of a deadline is not effective for the largest firms, and firms,
on average, pay attention to the relative size of the potential price increase.


5.3     Plausible mechanisms

Recall that the model in section 4.1 captures two effects of pricing: the infringer’s demand for settlement (the
traditional price effect), and his belief about his potential future liability risk (the threat effect). Exogenous
changes in (i) the actual price, and (ii) the provision of relevant price information, change the infringer’s
expected payoffs from complying or not. The contrast between the weak response to a substantial price
reduction in the pricing experiment and the large and positive response to the messages (in particular, the
sizable effect of including a deadline) is well-explained by the model. The lack of response to the price
reduction happens because a lower request simultaneously sacrifices an implicit threat of escalation (that is,
the traditional price effect and the threat effect offset each other). In contrast, the inclusion of a deadline
appears to simultaneously strengthen the inducement of a lower price today and the signal of a willingness
to escalate in the future. This conclusion is further supported by the heterogeneity in results for different
sub-groups of infringers (see figures 2a and 4a together). While the price effect is small for all firms, adding
a deadline has a significant effect for small firms, but little effect for larger firms. If larger firms are more
price-inelastic than smaller firms and have more precise knowledge about legal risks, one expects them to
be less influenced by a future price increase and its implied threat.
      The effect of including a deadline on settlement rates also varies with the relative size of the forgiven
amount (figure 4b). The effect is significantly greater when the forgiven amount is larger relative to the
requested amount, which is consistent with a greater price inducement to settle sooner, and a larger increase
in the potential future threat.
      In contrast, the effect of the two non-deadline messages relative to the control group is pretty consistent
across different subsamples (figure 3). Recall that the two messages contain two pieces of information that
the control group lacks: (i) price information and (ii) acknowledgement of possible unintentionality. As
discussed in Section 4.3, if price information is the main driver of the effect (through the expected-payoff
mechanism), one may expect the effect of these messages to increase with firm size and the relative size of
the forgiven amount. That is, the effect should exhibit heterogeneity similar to that observed when including
a deadline. The lack of heterogeneity suggests that the expected-payoff mechanism alone is not sufficient

                                                         28
to explain this set of results. Together with the prevalence of unintentional infringement in this context, it
is reasonable to conclude that the acknowledgement of possible unintentionality plays an important role in
motivating infringers to settle.


5.4     Effects of the treatment messages on legal costs

Apart from increasing revenue for photographers, a higher settlement rate may also reduce the social costs
of resolving disputes. If the infringer refuses to settle, the case is eventually sent to an external law firm for
further collection. In this section, we provide a back-of-the-envelope calculation of the difference in legal
costs associated with escalating a case to external enforcement that is attributable to the treatment messages.
As very few cases end up in court, we do not consider the potential impact on litigation costs.
      In the message experiment, over a 120-day horizon, 50.5 percent of the cases in the control group
and 45.8 percent in the treatment groups are sent to external law firms, and the difference is statistically
significant (p-value is 0.052). As explained previously, outcomes beyond 30 days may be affected by follow-
up letters sent by the Agency. The actual difference in the probability of external enforcement is likely to
significantly underestimate the impact of the messages because substantially more letters are sent for cases
in the control group than in the treatment groups.26 Given the available information, we use the actual
difference of 4.6 percentage points as a lower-bound estimate and the difference in the 30-day settlement
rate (12.4 percentage points) as an upper-bound estimate, assuming that the short-run effect is persistent.
Thus, the messages reduce the probability of escalating to external enforcement by roughly 9.1-25 percent.
      The main law firm with which the Agency contracts in the U.S. uses the following fee structure (reported
with all details disguised for confidentiality). The Agency pays a fixed fee ($a) for each case sent. The law
firm typically adds an attorney fee of $c in the requested amount from infringers and deducts this amount
from the collected revenue for a settled case. Furthermore, the Agency also pays a contingency fee of b
percent of the remaining collected revenue for a settled case. Using this fee structure to approximate legal
costs, we first calculate a settlement rate for cases sent to external law firms (d percent) based on historical
data, consisting of infringement cases in 2011-2013, provided to us by the Agency.27 Next, we assume that
the average revenue (after deducting the attorney fee $c) for settled cases is the same as for cases settled
within 30 days of the message experiment ($505). Finally, we assume that infringers hire legal counsel for
  26 For example, 42 percent of the control group received a FedEx letter after about 30 days, while only 15 percent of the treatment

groups did (table A9 in the Online Appendix). The settlement rate of the control group does catch up after 120 days. The timing of
the start of the catchup (there is a discrete change in the slope of the cumulative settlement probability for the control group but not
for the treatment groups) is after about 40 days, consistent with the firms responding to follow-up letters.
   27 We use historical data for these statistics because enforcement through external law firms typically takes a long time, and the

time frame of our experimental sample is not long enough to capture all associated outcomes.




                                                                  29
20 percent of the cases, and that their attorney fee is also $c per case.28

                          Table 10: A back-of-the-envelope calculation of savings in legal costs


                                                                                                                Lower bound       Upper bound
      Panel 1: Assumptions
      Number of cases per month in the U.S. and Canada                                                              1,000             1,000
      Difference in the number of cases sent to external law firms                                                   46                124
         between the control and the treatment groups
      Contractual terms by the Agency’s law firm (details disguised for confidentiality):
         Fixed fee per case sent                                                                                               $a
         Attorney fee deducted from the collected revenue of a settled case                                                    $c
         Contingency fee based on remaining revenue of a settled case (after deducting $c)                                    b%
      Settlement rate for cases sent to external law firms                                                                    d%
      Average revenue per settled case after deducting the attorney fee $c                                                    505
      Percentage of infringers obtaining legal service                                                                        0.2
      Attorney fee per case charged by the infringers’ lawyers                                                                 $c

      Panel 2: Results
      Savings for the Agency (fixed and contingency fees)                                                          $866.5             $2,335
      Savings for the infringing firms                                                                             $4,347            $11,718
      Total savings in legal costs                                                                                 $5,214            $14,053

Notes: This table presents a calculation of savings in the legal costs, relative to the control group, due to the treatment messages for the population
of cases in the message experiment. Take the upper-bound estimate, for example. The savings for the Agency consist of (1) fixed fees (124 × $a),
and (2) contingency fees (124 × d% × $505 × b%). The savings for the infringing firms consist of (1) the attorney fees for firms that employ legal
counsel (124 × 20% × $c) and (2) attorney fees requested by the Agency’s law firm for firms that settle (124 × d% × $c). We observe the actual
details of the legal fees and use them for all calculations in this table, but are not allowed to report them due to confidentiality.




      For each 1,000 cases in the U.S. and Canada, the savings in legal costs are approximately $866-$2,335
for the Agency and $4,347-$11,718 for infringing firms (table 10). Total in-house enforcement revenue
(revenue obtained without the use of external law firms) per thousand cases for the control group in the
message experiment is $192,000. Thus, savings in total legal costs are between 2.7 and 7.3 percent of the
Agency’s in-house enforcement revenue. This may, in fact, underestimate the total savings in social costs
due to additional factors, such as the opportunity cost of time and the psychological costs of stress for both
parties from being entangled in prolonged disputes.


6      Conclusion

We study the effects of different enforcement methods on settlement outcomes for instances of copyright
infringement by businesses. We use a novel, proprietary dataset generated from two large-scale field exper-
iments run by a leading stock-photography agency. The experimental design avoids the confounding effects
    28 Wedo not have information about the percentage of infringers that employ legal counsel after the Agency moves a case to
an external law firm. The correspondence records between the Agency and firms that made contact show that, at the in-house
enforcement stage, infringing firms are already employing external legal counsel eight percent of the time. Once the Agency
escalates the case to outside law firms, we expect the percentage to be higher.


                                                                          30
often encountered during real price changes, and we find that, on average, a substantial reduction in the re-
quested amount alone generates only a small increase in the settlement probability. In contrast, for the same
reduced request, the addition of a message that informs infringers of the price reduction and acknowledges
the possibility of unintentional infringement has a large positive effect on settlement. Including a deadline
further improves the settlement rate. Beyond generating higher revenues for copyright owners, the higher
settlement rate resulting from the messages also substantially reduces the social costs of dispute resolution.
    Typically, one would expect a large concession in price to be effective in resolving disputes, and pricing
is often the sole focus of many bargaining models. Our findings suggest that pricing may affect bargaining
outcomes in non-obvious ways, because it can reveal information about important factors that influence a
party’s outside option (e.g., in our particular context, the copyright enforcer’s willingness to escalate the
dispute). This signaling role of pricing is similar to findings in other situations with incomplete information
(e.g., prices as signals for product quality, Wolinsky (1983)).
    Our results also suggest that, when disputes are likely to be the result of inadvertent mistakes, proactive
acknowledgment of this possibility may encourage collaborative outcomes (at least when the monetary
stakes are small). This result may be generalized to other, similar contexts. Given the representativeness
of the firms in our data, the effects that we document for digital images are likely to generalize to other
types of copyrighted materials used by businesses, such as videos, music, and designs. With regard to
consumer piracy, many contexts studied by the existing literature typically involve willful infringement
(e.g., repeat file-sharers of music and movies). There are, however, areas in which potential infringers are
unfamiliar with their legal obligations. An interesting example is the increasing use of 3D printing: many
people download designs from the Internet without being aware of its illegality (Depoorter (2014)). Beyond
copyright, inadvertent mistakes due to forgetfulness, disorganization, and limited awareness could also result
in conflicts in a wide variety of contexts that may be mitigable using such strategies.
    More generally, our results highlight the fact that communication can have an important impact on eco-
nomic outcomes in some situations. Existing evidence from the lab and field are based primarily on individ-
uals (see, e.g., Roth and Murnighan (1982) on the role of information in bargaining games; and DellaVigna
and Gentzkow (2010) for a survey of studies on persuasive communication in a variety of contexts). Our
study shows that these interventions can also influence firms. In this sense, it provides a small but important
step towards deepening our understanding of these types of mechanisms beyond individual consumers in
the broader economy.




                                                      31
References
Alm, J. and B. Torgler (2011). Do ethics matter? tax compliance and morality. Journal of Business
  Ethics 101, 635–651.

Anderson, E. and D. Simester (1998). The role of sale signs. Marketing Science 17, 139–155.

Bebchuk, L. (1984). Litigation and settlement under imperfect information. RAND Journal of Economics 15,
  404–415.

Bessen, J. E., J. Ford, and M. J. Meurer (2011). The private and social costs of patent trolls. Regulation 34,
  26–35.

Bessen, J. E. and M. J. Meurer (2006, May). Patent Litigation with Endogenous Disputes. American
  Economic Review 96(2), 77–81.

Bhattacharjee, S., R. D. Gopal, K. Lertwachara, and J. Marsden (2006). Impact of legal threats on indi-
  vidual behavior: An analysis of music industry actions and online music sharing. Journal of Law and
  Economics 49, 91–114.

Cadena, X. and A. Schoar (2011). Remembering to pay? reminders vs. financial incentives for loan pay-
  ments. Working paper.

Cohen, L., U. Gurun, and S. D. Kominers (2014, August). Patent trolls: Evidence from targeted firms. HBS
  Working Paper 15-002.

Danaher, B., M. Smith, R. Telang, and S. Chen (2014). The effect of graduated response anti-piracy laws on
  music sales: Evidence from a natural experiment in france. Journal of Industrial Economics 62, 541–553.
  forthcoming in Journal of Industrial Economics.

Danzon, P. M. and L. A. Lillard (1983). Settlement out of court: The disposition of medical malpractice
  claims. Journal of Legal Studies 12, 345–377.

DeBriyn, J. (2012). Shedding light on copyright trolls: An analysis of mass copyright litigation in the age
  of statutory damages. UCLA Entertainment Law Review 19.

DellaVigna, S. and M. Gentzkow (2010). Persuasion: Empirical evidence. Annual Review of Economics 2,
  643–669.

Depoorter, B. (2014). Intellectual property infringements & 3d printing: Decentralized piracy. Hastings
  Law Journal 65, 1483–1503.

Fehr, E., G. Kirchsteiger, and A. Riedl (1993, May). Does Fairness Prevent Market Clearing? An Experi-
  mental Investigation. Quarterly Journal of Economics 108(2), 437–59.

Feld, L. P. and B. S. Frey (2002a). The tax authority and the taxpayer: An explotary analysis.

Feld, L. P. and B. S. Frey (2002b). Trust breeds trust: How taxpayers are treated. Economics of Gover-
  nance 3, 87–99.

Fellner, G., R. Sausgruber, and C. Traxler (2013). Testing enforcement strategies in the field: Threat, moral
  appeal and social information. Journal of the European Economic Association 11, 634–660.



                                                     32
Fournier, G. M. and T. W. Zuehlke (1996). The timing of out-of-court settlements. Rand Journal of Eco-
  nomics 27, 310–321.

Frey, B. S. (1997). Not Just for the Money: An Economic Theory of Personal Motivation. Cheltenham, UK
  and Brookfield, USA: Edward Elgar.

Galasso, A., M. Schankerman, and C. Serrano (2013). Trading and enforcing patent rights. RAND Journal
  of Economics 44, 275–312.

Glückler, J. and R. Panitz (2013). Survey of the global stock image market 2012. part i: Players, products,
  business. Technical report, Heidelberg: GSIM Research Group.

Güth, W., R. Schmittberger, and B. Schwarze (1982). An experimental analysis of ultimatum bargaining.
  Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 3, 367–388.

Hallsworth, M., J. List, R. Metcalfe, and I. Vlaev (2014). The behavioralist as tax collector: Using natu-
  ral field experiments to enhance tax compliance. Working Paper 20007, National Bureau of Economic
  Research.

Inman, J. J., L. McAlister, and W. D. Hoyer (1990). Promotion signal: proxy for a price cut? Journal of
  Consumer Research 17, 74–81.

Jolls, C., C. R. Sunstein, , and R. Thaler (1998). A behavioral approach to law and economics. Stanford
  Law Review 50, 1471–1550.

Kahneman, D., J. L. Knetsch, and R. Thaler (1986). Fairness as a constraint on profit seeking: Entitlements
  in the market. American Economic Review 76, 728–741.

Kahneman, D. and A. Tversky (1979). Prospect theory: An analysis of decision under risk. Economet-
  rica 47, 263–291.

Karlan, D., M. Morten, and J. Zinman (2015). A personal touch: Text messaging for loan repayment. NBER
  Working Paper No. 17952.

Korobkin, R. and C. Guthrie (1994). Psychological barriers to litigation settlement: An experimental ap-
  proach. Michigan Law Review 93, 107–192.

Lanjouw, J. and M. Schankerman (2001). Characteristics of patent litigation: A window on competition.
  RAND Journal of Economics 32, 129–151.

Lanjouw, J. O. and M. Schankerman (2004). Protecting intellectual property rights: are small firms handi-
  capped? Journal of Law and Economics 47, 45–74.

Lantagne, S. (2004). The morality of mp3s: The failure of the recording industry’s plan of attack. Harvard
  Journal of Law & Technology 18, 269–293.

Luo, H. and J. H. Mortimer (2016, May). Copyright infringement in the market for digital images. American
  Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings 106(5), 140–145.

Luttmer, E. F. P. and M. Singhal (2014). Tax morale. Journal of Economic Perspectives 28, 149–68.

Meurer, M. (1989). The settlement of patent litigation. RAND Journal of Economics 20, 77–91.

Perez-Truglia, R. and U. Troiano (2015, March). Tax debt enforcement: Theory and evidence from a field
  experiment in the united states.

                                                    33
Priest, G. and B. Klein (1984). The selection of disputes for litigation. Journal of Legal Studies 13, 1–55.

Rachlinski, J. J. (1996). Gains, losses, and the psychology of litigation. Southern California Law Review 70,
  113–185.

Reimers, I. (2015, February). Can private copyright protection be effective? evidence from book publishing.

Roth, A. E. (1995). Bargaining experiments. In J. H. Kagel and A. E. Roth (Eds.), Handbook of Experimental
  Economics. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Roth, A. E. and J. K. Murnighan (1982, September). The Role of Information in Bargaining: An Experi-
  mental Study. Econometrica 50(5), 1123–42.

Scott Morton, F. and C. Shapiro (2014). Strategic patent acquisitions. Antitrust Law Journal 79, 463–499.

Spier, K. E. (2007). Litigation. In A. M. Polinsky and S. Shavell (Eds.), Handbook of Law and Economics,
  Chapter 4. North-Holland.

Thaler, R. H. and C. R. Sunstein (2008). Nudge: Improving Decisions About Health, Wealth, and Happiness.
  New Haven & London: Yale University Press.

Trubek, D. M., A. Sarat, W. L. Felstiner, H. M. Kritzer, and J. B. Grossman (1983). The costs of ordinary
  litigation. UCLA Law Review 31, 72–127.

Waldfogel, J. (1995). The selection hypothesis and the relationship between trial and plaintiff victory.
 Journal of Political Economy 103, 229–260.

Waldfogel, J. (2012). Copyright protection, technological change, and the quality of new products: Evidence
 from recorded music since napster. Journal of Law & Economics 55, 715–40.

Wolinsky, A. (1983). Prices as signals of product quality. Review of Economic Studies 50, 647–658.




                                                     34
Online Appendix
Appendix A. Additional Tables and Figures

            Table A1: Regression results on the settlement probability with and without using controls


                                                                             Logit model: DV = Settle
                                                                    Pricing experiment Message experiment
                                                                      (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)
                                 High Price dummy                   -0.03*     -0.03*
                                                                    (0.02)     (0.02)
                                 Waive the Cost                                           0.12***     0.11***
                                                                                           (0.03)      (0.03)
                                 Waive the Cost + Deadline                                0.18***     0.16***
                                                                                           (0.03)      (0.03)
                                 Discount                                                 0.13***     0.11***
                                                                                           (0.03)      (0.03)
                                 Discount + Deadline                                      0.19***     0.17***
                                                                                           (0.02)      (0.02)

                                 Control variables                    Y             N            Y             N
                                 Adj R-squared                       0.06         0.002         0.06          0.02
                                 N                                   1983         1983          2291          2295

Notes: This table reports the logit regression results on the 30-day settlement probability without using any controls. For comparison, the
regression results using controls are replicated in the first and the third columns (that is, the results reported in column (1) in tables 8 and 9). All
models report robust standard errors, clustered by industry. ***, **, and * are, respectively, significant at levels of 1%, 5%, and 10%.




                                                                            35
                         Table A2: Price effects on settlement outcomes for different subsamples


             Dependent variable                                     Settle                   Revenue                    Revenue
                                                                                         for settled cases
                                                                    Logit                      OLS                          OLS
                                                                (1)       (2)           (3)             (4)          (5)         (6)
             High Price dummy                                  -0.02     -0.00       155.77        324.20***        8.77        19.63
                                                              (0.04) (0.04)          (98.81)         (52.12)      (14.34)      (27.13)
             Size quintile 2 × High Price                      -0.00                  30.39                         3.11
                                                              (0.06)                (111.78)                      (28.35)
             Size quintile 3 × High Price                      -0.02                 188.53                        11.08
                                                              (0.06)                (115.43)                      (26.16)
             Size quintile 4 × High Price                      0.00                   66.22                        16.55
                                                              (0.04)                (115.06)                      (22.53)
             Size quintile 5 × High Price                      -0.02                 170.03                        -0.80
                                                              (0.05)                (106.42)                      (45.26)
             Size quintile 2                                   0.01                   80.13                        13.33
                                                              (0.06)                 (91.75)                      (31.68)
             Size quintile 3                                   0.04                    7.06                         8.78
                                                              (0.06)                 (83.24)                      (24.63)
             Size quintile 4                                   0.04                  108.86                        41.95
                                                              (0.05)                 (90.01)                      (32.48)
             Size quintile 5                                   0.06                  130.29                        92.71
                                                              (0.08)                (123.70)                      (60.51)
             Medium price-change % × High Price                          -0.03                        -89.41                     -11.95
                                                                        (0.04)                       (63.42)                    (29.47)
             High price-change % × High Price                            -0.04                        -92.44                      -0.66
                                                                        (0.04)                       (63.01)                    (32.65)
             Medium price-change %                                       0.05                        -104.84                      -1.90
                                                                        (0.05)                      (164.30)                    (61.53)
             High price-change %                                        0.13*                         -27.85                     57.20
                                                                        (0.07)                      (245.03)                   (102.86)

             Control variables                                  Y            Y         Y               Y             Y              Y
             Adj R-squared                                                           0.653           0.646         0.030          0.031
             N                                                1983       1983         269             269          1983           1983

Notes: This table reports the marginal effects of three sets of regressions using the observations in the pricing experiment, in which the dependent
variables are (1) whether the case settles in 30 days; (2) the revenue for settled cases; and (3) the revenue of a case (coded as $0 if not settled in 30
days). In all regressions, the independent variable is a dummy indicating the High Price group (the Low Price group is the default). Size quintiles
are based on annual sales, with quintile 1 including the smallest firms. Price-change percentage is defined by ($400*number of images)/licensing
fee. The controls in all regressions include log(Baseline price), image count, log(Annual sales), log(Age+1), a missing-age dummy, and dummies
indicating the top ten industries (defined by the two-digit SIC codes), the top ten states (provinces), a U.S. location, and the mail week. All models
report robust standard errors, clustered by industry. ***, **, and * are, respectively, significant at levels of 1%, 5%, and 10%.




                                                                             36
         Table A3: Comparing the two non-deadline messages and the control for different subsamples


                                                                                     Logit model: DV = Settle
                                                                                    (1)         (2)       (3)
                               Non-deadline message                              0.10***       0.07    0.11***
                                                                                  (0.02)      (0.05)    (0.04)
                               Size quintile 2 × Non-deadline message                          0.06
                                                                                              (0.09)
                               Size quintile 3 × Non-deadline message                          -0.08
                                                                                              (0.08)
                               Size quintile 4 × Non-deadline message                          0.00
                                                                                              (0.07)
                               Size quintile 5 × Non-deadline message                        0.14***
                                                                                              (0.05)
                               Size quintile 2                                                 -0.04
                                                                                              (0.06)
                               Size quintile 3                                                 0.08
                                                                                              (0.05)
                               Size quintile 4                                                 0.05
                                                                                              (0.05)
                               Size quintile 5                                                 0.00
                                                                                              (0.07)
                               Medium ratio × Non-deadline message                                       0.02
                                                                                                        (0.05)
                               High ratio × Non-deadline message                                         -0.04
                                                                                                        (0.04)
                               Medium ratio                                                              -0.03
                                                                                                        (0.06)
                               High ratio                                                                0.01
                                                                                                        (0.08)

                               Control variables                                    Y             Y            Y
                               N                                                   1420          1420         1420

Notes: This table reports logit regression results (marginal effects) using cases in the two non-deadline messages and the control groups in the
message experiment. The dependent variable is whether the case settles in 30 days. Non-deadline message equals one if the case belongs to either
of the two non-deadline message groups (the default is the control group). Size quintiles are based on annual sales, with quintile 1 including the
                                                    forgiven amount
smallest firms. Medium ratio equals one if 0.7 < requested    amount < 0.9; and high ratio equals one if the ratio is higher than 0.9. In all regressions,
the control variables are log(Requested amount), image count, log(Annual sales), log(Age+1), missing-age dummy, dummies indicating the top ten
industries (defined by the two-digit SIC codes), the top ten states (provinces), the U.S., and the mail date. All models report robust standard errors,
clustered by industry. ***, **, and * are, respectively, significant at levels of 1%, 5%, and 10%.




                                                                           37
               Table A4: Comparing messages with and without a deadline for different subsamples


                                                                            Logit model: DV = Settle (in 22 days)
                                                                               (1)        (2)            (3)
                               Deadline message                             0.05***    0.11**           0.01
                                                                             (0.02)     (0.05)         (0.03)
                               Size quintile 2 × Deadline message                        -0.04
                                                                                        (0.06)
                               Size quintile 3 × Deadline message                        0.01
                                                                                        (0.06)
                               Size quintile 4 × Deadline message                      -0.10*
                                                                                        (0.06)
                               Size quintile 5 × Deadline message                      -0.11*
                                                                                        (0.06)
                               Size quintile 2                                           0.08
                                                                                        (0.06)
                               Size quintile 3                                           0.05
                                                                                        (0.05)
                               Size quintile 4                                         0.13**
                                                                                        (0.05)
                               Size quintile 5                                        0.20***
                                                                                        (0.07)
                               Medium ratio × Deadline message                                          0.03
                                                                                                       (0.05)
                               High ratio × Deadline message                                          0.10***
                                                                                                       (0.03)
                               Medium ratio                                                             0.02
                                                                                                       (0.05)
                               High ratio                                                               0.01
                                                                                                       (0.05)

                               Control variables                               Y            Y                Y
                               N                                              1696         1696             1696

Notes: This table reports logit regression results (marginal effects) using cases in all four treatment groups in the message experiment. The
dependent variable is whether the case settles in the first 22 days. Deadline message equals one if the case belongs to either of the two deadline
message groups (the default group are cases that belong to either of the two non-deadline messages). Size quintiles are based on annual sales, with
                                                                             forgiven amount
quintile 1 including the smallest firms. Medium ratio equals one if 0.7 < requested    amount < 0.9; and high ratio equals one if the ratio is higher than
0.9. In all regressions, the control variables are a dummy indicating the discount framing, log(Requested amount), image count, log(Annual sales),
log(Age+1), missing-age dummy, dummies indicating the top ten industries (defined by the two-digit SIC codes), the top ten states (provinces), the
U.S., and the mail date. All models report robust standard errors, clustered by industry. ***, **, and * are, respectively, significant at levels of 1%,
5%, and 10%.




                                                                           38
                                         Table A5: Balance check for the ‘unfiltered’ sample

                                                              (a) Pricing experiment
Group              N       Baseline price                           Sales                                               Age
                                                            Sales, $1,000        log(Sales, $)                        Age             log(Age+ 1)
                                                 N        mean      median           mean             N        mean     median           mean
Low Price        945            662.3           896       25749       330            13.1            910        19.5       11             2.5
High Price      1,800           658.6          1,649      13020       290            13.0           1,593       18.1       11             2.5
                                (0.85)                    (0.20)     (0.41)         (0.15)                     (0.16)    (0.71)          (0.70)

                                                                   (b) Message experiment
Group                               N       Baseline price                         Sales                                             Age
                                            (= Requested                  Sales, $1,000        log(Sales, $)                     Age             log(Age+ 1)
(p-value, diff. to control)                   amount)           N       mean      median          mean             N      mean     median           mean
Control                            866          639.3          754      25420       383            13.3           756      19.2       11             2.6
Waive the Cost                     549          675.3          458      44562       348            13.4           455      19.5       11             2.6
                                               (0.15)                   (0.32)     (0.64)         (0.86)                  (0.82)    (0.88)          (0.91)
Waive the Cost + Deadline          564          612.0          493      11023       300            13.1           494      16.9        9             2.5
                                               (0.24)                   (0.28)     (0.13)         (0.07)                  (0.08)    (0.16)          (0.09)
Discount                           571          609.7          526      10071       320            13.2           528      18.2       12             2.5
                                               (0.19)                   (0.23)     (0.26)         (0.21)                  (0.42)    (0.80)          (0.75)
Discount + Deadline                577          652.6          526      48841       378            13.1           533      17.6       10             2.5
                                               (0.79)                   (0.55)     (0.89)         (0.01)                  (0.19)    (0.30)          (0.32)

Notes: This table reports the balance tests using the ‘unfiltered’ sample (that is, without dropping cases for which the mail is returned or sales
information is missing, etc). Note, however, that tier-4 and tier-5 firms in the pricing experiment are excluded to ensure that firms in the two
experiments are comparable in size. The test statistics are consistent with those reported in the paper after dropping some types of cases.




                              Table A6: 30-day settlement outcomes for the ‘unfiltered’ sample

                                                              (a) Pricing experiment
                                                              Low Price       High Price      Difference       p-value
                              Settlement probability            0.12             0.10           -0.02           (0.06)
                              Revenue for settled cases        528.09          1080.1           552.1           (0.02)
                              Revenue per case                  65.94           109.8            43.9           (0.12)
                              N                                  945            1,800

                                                             (b) Message experiment
             Group                              N       Settlement probability       Difference (compared to control)          p-value
             Control                           866              0.12
             Waive the Cost                    549              0.19                                 0.07                      (0.00)
             Waive the Cost + Deadline         564              0.25                                 0.13                      (0.00)
             Discount                          571              0.21                                 0.09                      (0.00)
             Discount + Deadline               577              0.27                                 0.15                      (0.00)

Notes: This table reports the settlement outcomes for different groups in the two experiments using the ‘unfiltered’ sample (defined in table A5).
The results are consistent with those reported in the paper after dropping some types of cases.




                                                                         39
Appendix B: The stock photography industry
The stock photography industry provides images that are readily available for licensing. On behalf of indi-
vidual photographers or organizations (such as National Geographic), stock photography agencies manage,
market and license images to business customers, such as advertising and graphic design agencies, publish-
ers and corporations.
    Rights-managed (RM) and royalty-free (RF) are two typical license types. An RM license allows the
licensee a one-time use of the image (e.g., 100 billboards in Germany for three months). For a given image,
the licensing fee depends on the specified use. A licensee who wants to use the image beyond the specified
scope must purchase a new license. In contrast, an RF license gives the licensee the right to use the image
with few restrictions after making a one-time payment. Under the RF model, some agencies price images
on an à la carte basis, while others use subscription pricing. According to a survey by Graphic Design
USA, 32, 98, and 54 percent of responding designers had licensed images under the RM, à la carte RF, and
subscription RF models, respectively, in 2011.
    Stock images are categorized as either editorial or creative, depending on whether commercial use is al-
lowed. Editorial images portray specific people, places, things and events that provide context for newspaper
and magazine articles, blog posts, and other non-commercial presentations. Editorial images cannot be li-
censed for advertising or promotional purposes because there are typically no permissions from the subjects
of these photos. In contrast, creative images are produced and staged by the photographer. Creative images
can be licensed for both non-commercial and commercial purposes because they feature generic objects, or
subjects who have consented to commercial use.
    The industry is divided into traditional (premium) and micro-stock segments. Leading agencies in the
traditional segment include Corbis Images and Getty Images; leading agencies in the micro-stock segment
are Fotolia, iStockphoto and Shutterstock. Suppliers in the traditional segment are typically professional
photographers who target customers and projects that require high-quality images. Images in this segment
are licensed under the RM or the à-la-carte RF model. Depending on the quality of the image and the spec-
ified use, the licensing fee ranges from a couple of hundred to tens of thousands of dollars.29 In addition to
facilitating transactions, agencies in this segment also provide complementary services, including searching
for images with specific themes, large-project management, rights clearance and protection against copy-
right liabilities.
    Agencies in the micro-stock segment source their images from a wide range of photographers, including
professionals and hobbyists. Images in this segment are licensed under the RF model. The price level is
significantly lower than in the traditional segment. For example, the vast majority of images on iStockphoto
(à la carte pricing) are priced between $2 and $100 per image, depending on the size of the digital file; and,
at Shutterstock (subscription pricing), the user can download up to 25 images per day for a monthly fee of
$249.




  29 The   most expensive cases usually occur because the licensed use is exclusive.


                                                                 40
Appendix C. Follow-up letters
The Agency sends three types of follow-up letters. First, a second settlement request letter is sent after about
30 days unless the case has been settled by then. Second, also after 30 days or so, an extra FedEx letter is
sent to a set of relatively large firms that have not yet responded. (The first and the second letters are sent by
USPS standard mail). Third, after 60 days, the Agency sends a final notice by email if the firm has ignored
the previous letters. Cases that do not settle (either because the firms ignore all the letters or do not settle
after making contact) are eventually sent to external law firms. In our sample, about half of all cases are sent
to external law firms, with 90 percent sent between 58 and 159 days after the initial letter.
     The proportion of cases receiving the second letter is determined by the initial settlement outcomes of
a particular group of infringers. Normally, the extra FedEx letter and the last email reminder are sent only
if the infringer ignores the settlement request letter. In these cases, a ‘case-handler’ field is coded as empty.
During the trial period, the compliance team at the Agency records the group to which a case belongs also
in the ‘case-handler’ field. However, this group information is not recorded for the group designated as
the ‘default’ group in each of the experiments (i.e., the High Price group in the pricing experiment and the
control group in the message experiment). Thus, during the trial periods, the non-default groups do not get
these two types of follow-up letters because the ‘case-handler’ field is not empty, even for infringers that
have not made contact. This is sometimes corrected, but not always.
     Table A7 reports, by group, the percentage of cases that receive the three types of follow-up letters in the
two experiments. The differences suggest that the potential upward bias for the ‘default’ group is likely to be
substantial for the message experiment. These incidences reflect the complexity and constraints that firms
face when conducting field experiments. It is, at least, fortunate that we know the exact data-generating
process, so we can discover any confounding factors.

                                                 Table A7: Follow-up letters by group


                                Pricing experiment                                 Message experiment
                                 High       Low             Control    Waive the Cost Waive the Cost Discount      Discount
                                 Price      Price                                       + Deadline                + Deadline
              Second letter     82.6%      79.6%            82.8%         72.8%           66.7%       71.7%         64.3%
              FedEx letter      5.2%         0%             41.9%         16.3%           15.6%       14.5%         14.2%
              Final email       7.9%         0%             14.1%           0%              0%         0%            0%

Notes: This table reports, by group, the proportion of cases that receive different types of follow-up letters.




                                                                          41
Appendix D. 120-day outcomes
This section reports the 120-day outcomes for both experiments. As explained in the paper, settlement
outcomes after 30 days are confounded by different intensities of follow-up letters for different groups.
Table A7 in Appendix C shows that the difference in the intensity of follow-up letters is relatively small
between the two groups in the pricing experiment and, thus, we evaluate the 120-day performance using the
actual data without further adjustment. Table A8a shows that removing the $400 per-image surcharge results
in a seven-percentage-points increase in the 120-day settlement probability. The increase in the settlement
probability, however, is not enough to outweigh the decrease in the revenue conditional on settlement ($211).
Thus, consistent with the 30-day results, the expected revenue per case is statistically similar between the
two groups (the lower-priced group generates $11 lower, but the p-value of the difference is 0.49).

                               Table A8: Price and message effects on the 120-day outcomes


                                                             (a) Pricing experiment
                                                     Low Price group       High Price group        Difference     (p-value)
                     Settlement probability               0.32                   0.25                -0.07          (0.00)
                     Revenue for settled cases           530.9                  741.5                210.6          (0.00)
                     Revenue per case                    167.9                  178.9                 11.0          (0.49)

                                                            (b) Message experiment
                       (p-value is relative          120-day settlement       120-day difference       30-day difference
                       to the control)                  probability             (lower bound)           (upper bound)
                       Control                             0.40
                       Non-deadline messages               0.40               0.00        (0.76)       0.10       (0.00)
                       Deadline messages                   0.44               0.03        (0.20)       0.15       (0.00)


Notes: This table reports the 120-day settlement outcomes for different groups in both experiments. For the message experiment, we report only
the effects on the settlement probability because the requested amount is similar across groups given the same usage and, thus, the effects on the
expected revenue per case are consistent with that on the settlement probability.



     The differences in the follow-up intensity between the control and the treatment groups, however, are
substantial in the message experiment. Table A7 in Appendix C shows that 82 percent of the control group
received the second letter, while 64-72 percent in the treatment groups did; 42 percent of the control group
received a FedEx letter, while only 15 percent of the treatment groups did; and 14 percent of the control
group received the final email reminder, while none of the cases in the four treatment groups did. According
to the Agency, the FedEx letters are, perhaps, the most powerful follow-up action because (1) they go to
relatively large firms that are more likely to eventually settle; and (2) they are hand-signed by the head of
the compliance team and sent through FedEx express, while, in contrast, all other letters are sent either
by standard USPS mail or via email and without the signature. Figure A1 plots the cumulative settlement
probability in 120 days for the five groups in the message experiment. The results show that the control group
catches up after 30 days. The timing of the start of the catchup (i.e., the discrete change in the slope for
the control group) is after about 40 days, which is consistent with the firms responding to follow-up letters.
Therefore, the actual difference in the 120-day settlement rate is likely to substantially under-estimate the


                                                                        42
effect of these messages.

                     Figure A1: Cumulative settlement probability by message (120-day)




                                                .5
                                                .45
                                    .15 .2 .25 .3 .35 .4
                                   Percentage of Settlement
                                                                                                   Control
                                                                                                   Msg: Waive CTP
                                                .1
                                                                                                   Msg: Waive CTP + Deadline
                                                .05
                                                                                                   Msg: Discount
                                                                                                   Msg: Discount + Deadline
                                                0



                                                              0   10   20   30   40   50   60    70    80   90   100   110   120
                                                                                      Number of days




    Given the available information, we provide a bound estimate for the 120-day effect of the messages,
using the actual difference as the lower bound and the 30-day difference as the upper bound, assuming that
the short-run effect is persistent. Table A8b shows that, in the message experiment, the two messages that
do not impose a deadline perform similarly to the control group after 120 days, while the two messages that
impose a deadline yield a settlement rate that is three percentage points higher than the control (p-value is
0.20). Combining these actual differences with the 30-day estimates, the 120-day effect of the non-deadline
messages is estimated to be between 0 and 10 percentage points (0-25 percent increase relative to the control
group), and that of the two deadline messages is 3 to 15 percentage points (an increase of 7.5-33 percent
relative to the control).




                                                                                       43
