                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  WHY DOES FAST LOAN GROWTH PREDICT POOR PERFORMANCE FOR BANKS?

                                         Rüdiger Fahlenbrach
                                          Robert Prilmeier
                                           René M. Stulz

                                         Working Paper 22089
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w22089


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2016




Fahlenbrach is Associate Professor at the Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), and
affiliated with the Swiss Finance Institute, Prilmeier is Assistant Professor at Tulane University, and
Stulz is the Everett D. Reese Chair of Banking and Monetary Economics, Fisher College of Business,
Ohio State University, and affiliated with NBER and ECGI. Fahlenbrach gratefully acknowledges
financial support from the Swiss Finance Institute. We are grateful for discussions with Ron Masulis.
We thank Greg Duffee and seminar participants at the University of Bristol for helpful comments.
Address correspondence to René M. Stulz, Fisher College of Business, The Ohio State University,
806 Fisher Hall, Columbus, OH 43210, stulz@cob.osu.edu. René Stulz serves on the board of a bank
and consults and provides expert testimony for financial institutions. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w22089.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2016 by Rüdiger Fahlenbrach, Robert Prilmeier, and René M. Stulz. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Why Does Fast Loan Growth Predict Poor Performance for Banks?
Rüdiger Fahlenbrach, Robert Prilmeier, and René M. Stulz
NBER Working Paper No. 22089
March 2016
JEL No. G01,G12,G21

                                             ABSTRACT

From 1973 to 2014, the common stock of U.S. banks with loan growth in the top quartile of banks
over a three-year period significantly underperforms the common stock of banks with loan growth
in the bottom quartile over the next three years. The benchmark-adjusted cumulative difference in
performance over three years exceeds twelve percentage points. The high growth banks also have
significantly higher crash risk over the three-year period. This poor performance is explained by fast
loan growth as asset growth separate from loan growth is not followed by poor performance. These
banks reserve less for loan losses when their loans grow quickly than other banks. Subsequently, they
have a lower return on assets and increase their loan loss reserves. The poorer performance of the fast
growing banks is not explained by merger activity and loan growth through mergers is not accompanied
by the same poor loan performance. The evidence is consistent with fast-growing banks, analysts,
and investors failing to properly appreciate the extent to which the fast loan growth results from making
riskier loans and failing to charge for these risks correctly.


Rüdiger Fahlenbrach                                             René M. Stulz
Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL)                 The Ohio State University
Quartier UNIL-Dorigny Bâtiment Extranef, # 211                  Fisher College of Business
1015 Lausanne                                                   806A Fisher Hall
Switzerland                                                     Columbus, OH 43210-1144
ruediger.fahlenbrach@epfl.ch                                    and NBER
                                                                stulz@cob.osu.edu
Robert Prilmeier
Tulane University
A.B. Freeman School of Business
7 McAlister Drive
New Orleans, LA 70118
rprilmei@tulane.edu
1. Introduction

    Many recent papers show that credit booms generally end poorly and are followed by poor economic

performance (e.g., Baron and Xiong (2015), Jordà, Schularick, and Taylor (2013), Reinhart and Rogoff

(2009), or Schularick and Taylor (2012)). Such a result could be explained by macroeconomic

phenomena. With this view, banks would rationally be making more loans because of good lending

opportunities without taking more risk, but the economy would unexpectedly experience a shock which

would end the credit boom and cause poor performance.1 Hence, a credit boom would be followed by

slow growth. The recent evidence by Krishnamurthy and Muir (2015) that credit spreads are low before

crises is consistent with this possibility if markets are efficient, as it indicates that investors’ expectations

of credit losses are low immediately before crises.

    Alternatively, however, it could be that the end of the credit boom is the result of poor performance of

weak loans made during the credit boom. With this view, bank lending increases because banks fail to

fully realize the risks of new loans and make loans that are riskier than they think. As the risks of these

loans materialize, poorly performing loans weaken the banks, reduce the credit supply, and lead to poor

economic performance.2 Country-level analyses such as Reinhart and Rogoff (2009) or Schularick and

Taylor (2012) do not make it possible to discriminate between the two explanations for why credit booms

end poorly.

    In this paper, we undertake a bank-level analysis that allows us to assess whether banks that

experience fast loan growth make poorer loans. We find that banks that grow quickly make loans that

perform worse than the loans of other banks, that investors and equity analysts do not anticipate this

1
  Mian and Sufi (2010) argue that such a view is consistent with the real business cycle literature which associates
credit expansions with positive productivity or technology shocks (e.g., Bernanke and Gertler (1989) or Kiyotaki
and Moore (1997)). When asset values fall, firms have lower net worth and less collateral, restricting their
borrowing and leading to lower credit growth and lower economic activity. Mian and Sufi (2009) show that this
view was also prevalent at least at the onset of the recent crisis. They refer to testimony of Alan Greenspan and Ben
Bernanke during the credit expansion, in which Greenspan and Bernanke attributed the growth in mortgage credit
and housing prices to fundamental economic improvements such as productivity and income gains. Kahle and Stulz
(2013) find evidence that a demand shock can explain both a decrease in corporate investment and the end of the
corporate credit boom during the recent crisis.
2
  Brunnermeier (2009) provides an overview of different mechanisms that led to the financial crisis, including the
lending supply channel mechanism. Gorton (2010) argues that it was not only a bank lending supply channel but
more generally a credit supply channel that contributed to the crisis. Shleifer and Vishny (2010) and Gennaioli,
Shleifer, and Vishny (2012) develop models in which financial innovation and investor sentiment lead to a fragile
banking sector.

                                                          1
poorer performance, and that these banks fail to set aside enough reserves for these loans, which is

consistent with the hypothesis that they underappreciate the risk of these loans.

    A bank can grow quickly by underpricing its loans. As a result, it will face a large loan demand and

its lending will increase if it has enough capital to support more loans. In the short-run, investors will

generally not be able to assess whether the bank’s lending is increasing because it is underpricing loans.

Eventually however, riskier loans will have a higher default rate and it will become apparent that a bank

grew by making riskier loans. Such a bank will experience increases in loan loss provisions relative to

other banks. A bank that underprices loans may be doing so because it is overoptimistic about borrowers’

future performance, in which case its concurrent loan provisions will be smaller and will not reflect that it

is making riskier loans. If a bank chooses to grow its loan portfolio by making riskier loans and properly

reserves for the greater risk, its loan loss provisions should be higher and should reflect the greater risk of

the new loans.

    We analyze a panel of U.S. publicly listed banks between 1972 and 2014. We first examine whether

high bank asset growth predicts poor future bank stock returns, following the methodology of Baron and

Xiong’s (2015) country level analysis. If banks grow quickly because they make risky loans, they will

experience higher loan losses following a period of high growth. If the banks and their investors properly

understood that the high growth was the result of riskier loans, the stock price should correctly reflect the

expectation of higher loan losses, so that high loan growth should not predict lower performance. By

analyzing a panel of banks, we focus on variation in growth across banks and eliminate the effects of

economic conditions because they are common across banks. We first examine the relation between past

loan growth measured over one and three years and future returns measured over one, two, and three

years in pooled time-series cross-sectional regressions with year-fixed effects. Dividing banks in quartiles

of loan growth, we find that banks in the top quartile of three-year loan growth have significantly lower

returns than banks in the bottom quartile for one, two, and three-year returns. We find some evidence of

underperformance when we use one-year loan growth, but it is weaker. Unlike loan growth, non-loan

asset growth does not predict future returns. Our evidence is robust to alternative econometric approaches.

The evidence is slightly stronger when we use bank fixed effects. The same results hold for returns


                                                      2
adjusted using a characteristic-based benchmark return as in Daniels et al. (1997) constructed either using

all firms or only banks. Importantly, our results hold even if we exclude all recession years from the

sample, so that our evidence cannot be attributed to macroeconomic shocks. We also explore whether our

evidence could be attributed to regional shocks, but conclude that this is not the case.

    We turn next to whether banks that grow faster make poorer loans. We first investigate the evolution

of the return on assets. We find that the fast-growing banks have much higher ROA than the banks in the

quartile with lowest growth in the formation year. However, by year 3 after formation, the order is

reversed and the banks in the fastest growing quartile have a significantly lower ROA than the banks in

the lowest growth quartile. The difference is economically important as it corresponds to roughly one-

fifth of the sample mean of ROA. Fast-growing banks experience a decrease in ROA relative to the banks

in the lowest growth quartile each year for the three years after formation.

    Examining loss provision levels, we find that banks with high growth have lower loan loss provisions

than banks with low growth in the formation year. Again, the order reverses over the next three years, so

that by year 3 after formation, the high-growth banks have significantly higher loan loss provisions than

the low-growth banks. The loan loss provisions of the high-growth banks increase significantly relative to

the loan loss provisions of the low-growth banks every year over the next three years following

formation.

    Our evidence is consistent with the view that banks that grow quickly through loan growth do not

appear to believe that they are making poorer loans than the banks that grow slowly. If they thought they

were making riskier loans and provisioned properly, they would have greater loan loss provisions in the

formation year than the banks that grow slowly, which is not the case. Using the methodology of La Porta

(1996), we also find evidence that analysts are surprised by the poorer performance of the high-growth

banks after formation, in that their forecasts are too optimistic for high-growth banks relative to low-

growth banks.

    One way for banks to grow quickly is to acquire other banks. We know from the literature that there

is evidence, albeit not unanimous, that long-run abnormal returns following acquisitions are negative

(e.g., Rau and Vermaelen (1998), Loughran and Vijh (1997), or Moeller, Schlingemann, and Stulz


                                                      3
(2005)). Consequently, it could be that our evidence simply reflects that banks that grow more merge

more and hence have lower returns because of mergers. This turns out not to be the case. First, we show

that high organic growth by itself leads to worse performance. Second, we show that the merger effect

holds separately from the organic growth effect. Lastly and most importantly for our conclusion that fast-

growing banks make riskier loans, we find that when we distinguish between organic loan growth and

loan growth through acquisitions, the evidence of riskier loans is primarily driven by organic loan growth.

In other words, high-growth banks do not appear to acquire banks with riskier loans, they make those

riskier loans on their own.

    Overall, our evidence is consistent with banks not fully appreciating the risk of the loans they are

making when they grow quickly. Such an outcome could arise because a bank is excessively optimistic

about the prospect of its loans. However, other explanations are possible as well. First, it could be that in

their push for growth, a bank’s executives set incentives that lead loan officers to make riskier loans along

dimensions that are not directly observable by the executives who monitor the risk of the loans. Second,

executives could be fully cognizant of the higher risk of the loans they are making, but might attempt to

hide that risk for better performance in the short run. While we cannot completely distinguish between

these three different explanations, the conclusions that can be drawn from our paper remain valid: Banks

do not provision enough for poorer loans after periods of strong organic credit growth, and bank investors

and analysts alike fail to understand the perils of fast loan growth.

    The asset pricing literature has provided evidence that firms that grow more have poorer returns (e.g.,

Cooper, Gulen, and Schill (2008), Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2014), Polk and Sapienza (2009), or Titman,

Wei, and Xie (2004)). Our evidence is distinct but related to that literature. First, our evidence is not

related to investment in the conventional sense. It does not involve capital expenditures that have

diminishing marginal returns. Second, though our evidence does not involve investment in production, we

are able to show that banks that grow fast make loans that have poorer performance. Third, our evidence

suggests that banks that grow fast may not know that their loans are weaker.

    Our paper is related to the strand of the literature that examines whether financial institutions made

poorer loans during the recent credit crisis. Papers documenting reduced credit quality during credit


                                                      4
expansions and subsequent bad economic outcomes prior to and during the recent crisis include

Dell’Ariccia et al. (2009), Demyanyk and van Hemert (2011), Keys et al. (2010), and Mian and Sufi

(2009) for mortgage lending and Axelson et al. (2013) for leveraged loans prior to the recent crisis.

Except for Dell’Ariccia et al. (2009), these papers generally emphasize the importance of securitization in

the decline in loan quality. Securitization plays no role in our analysis because we focus on loans that

banks keep on their books. Also contrary to these papers, we examine the loan growth of bank holding

companies and its relation to future stock returns using a time series of 40 years and not periods

immediately preceding a crisis. Greenwood and Hanson (2013) show evidence of deteriorating credit

quality during boom times for the corporate bond market over the last century. López-Salido, Stein, and

Zakrajšek (2015) show that when credit risk is aggressively priced, it tends to be followed by a

subsequent widening of credit spreads and a contraction in economic activity. Their results are also

consistent with the credit supply channel but they focus on the role of credit-market sentiment and

examine aggregate output.

    Several papers examine why banks appear at times to choose to lower their standards in making

loans. Rajan (1994) focuses on the implications of short-term incentives of bank managers. With such

incentives, managers might want to show that a bank is profitable by booking fees associated with loans

at the expense of future credit quality. Dell’Ariccia and Marquez (2006) show that increases in the

demand for loans can lead to a decrease in credit standards when screening becomes less valuable. Berger

and Udell (2004) propose an “institutional memory” hypothesis which predicts that banks decrease their

lending standards as bank personnel starts forgetting the most recent period of credit stress and loses the

loan restructuring skills acquired during that period. Examining commercial loans made by banks

between 1980 and 2000, they find support for their hypothesis and show that a bank’s commercial loan

growth increases as time passes since the bank’s last loan bust. These potential explanations for fast loan

growth associated with a decrease in credit standards can help understand fast loan growth at some banks,

but we show importantly that banks, investors, and analysts alike do not appear to understand the

increased riskiness of the loans made during a period of sharp loan growth.




                                                    5
       Finally, our paper is also related to Baron and Xiong (2015) who examine bank credit expansion at

the country level for a set of 20 developed countries between 1920 and 2012. They show that bank credit

expansion predicts poor returns in stock market and bank indices. Our study focuses on one country

instead and examines the credit growth of individual banks and its relation to loan quality and future

returns. Baron and Xiong (2015) conjecture that credit may flow to borrowers with poor credit quality

during a large expansion of bank credit but cannot test this at the country level. Our incremental

contribution is to test this conjecture using bank-level data and to abstract from the general economic

environment by focusing on high growth banks relative to low growth banks at any given point in time.

       Our paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2, we explain how we construct our sample, how we form

asset and loan growth quartiles, and present summary statistics. In Section 3, we show that high growth

banks have lower stock returns after formation. In Section 4, we investigate the hypothesis that these

banks make poorer loans. In Section 5, we show that our evidence cannot be explained by merger activity.

In Section 6, we examine the robustness of our main results, and we conclude in Section 7.



2. Sample construction, data, and summary statistics

       We now describe our sample construction, data sources, and define and summarize key independent

and dependent variables used in the analysis.

2.1.      Sample construction

The sample includes all depository credit institutions and bank holding companies for which data are

available in both the Financial Services format of Standard and Poor’s Compustat as well as in the

monthly security file of the Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP). A large number of banks are

added to the CRSP tapes in December 1972; few banks are available before that date. Consequently, our

sample period is 1972 to 2013.

       We construct our sample as follows. We search the CRSP database for all firms that have an SIC code

between 6020 and 6079 (Commercial Banks, Savings Institutions, and Credit Unions) or from 6710

through 6712 (Offices of Bank Holding Companies) at some point in the firm’s history. We then

eliminate all American Depositary Receipts (ADRs) and firms incorporated in a foreign country. We

                                                     6
exclude non-depository credit institutions, brokerages, and investment banks because we are interested in

asset and loan growth in the traditional banking industry. We also drop observations with a nominal stock

price of less than one dollar. We manually inspect the list in a final step and eliminate firms that are not

depository banks or bank holding companies (e.g. American Express, Berkshire Hathaway, GEICO,

Mellon Financial Corp, State Street).

    Some firms consistently have an SIC code outside the included range up to a certain point in time and

then switch to consistently having an included SIC code. For example, before December 2007,

Countrywide Financial is classified as a non-depository credit institution with SIC code 6162 (Mortgage

Bankers & Loan Correspondents). Afterwards, the classification changes to SIC code 6035 (Savings

Institutions). Similarly, Morgan Stanley and Goldman Sachs are investment banks before September

2008, but then become bank holding companies. For such firms, we include data only for the time period

during which they are depository institutions or bank holding companies.3

    CRSP SIC codes sometimes oscillate between two classifications. In addition, CRSP can be slow to

update the SIC classification when a change in a firm’s business occurs. To improve precision in the

above classifications, we use EDGAR searches and read firms’ business descriptions in their 10-K filings.

We use Google searches for observations that predate EDGAR. Prior to 1990, some savings & loan

associations are classified in CRSP as having SIC code 6120-6123, a code range that does not currently

exist in the SIC manual. We include these observations in our sample.

    Compustat added financial data for a large number of small banks in fiscal year 1993. Cross-sectional

differences among small banks are unlikely to affect overall credit supply beyond the local level. In

addition, including these banks would cause a structural break in our data. We examine the Compustat

data and find that the spike in observations in 1993 disappears once we exclude banks with less than $2

billion in total assets (measured in 2013 US dollars). We therefore use $2 billion in total assets as a cutoff

point for inclusion in our sample. Overall, we have 664 unique banks in our sample, with the average

bank having 12 bank-year observations.

3
 We follow the same approach for firms that switch from an included to an excluded SIC code at some point. For
example, Ocwen Financial Corp was a Savings Institution until June 2005. After that point, the company sold its
bank branches and specialized on providing servicing and origination processing solutions to the loan industry.

                                                        7
       Our empirical tests in the following sections link past loan and asset growth to subsequent one-, two-,

or three-year returns and loan-loss provisions. When a bank drops out of the sample due to a non-merger

related delisting, we drop the observations as soon as we can no longer calculate the future return. If a

bank is the target in an acquisition, we drop the target as soon as there is no complete subsequent return

available. If a bank is the acquirer, we take the past loan and asset growth of the acquirer and match it

with the returns for the surviving entity, even if the acquirer takes on the name of the target. We make an

exception to the above rules for Citigroup. In 1998, Citicorp was acquired by Travelers Group, an

insurance company, to form Citigroup. Because Citigroup is a systemically important bank, we wish to

record an uninterrupted history for this institution. Therefore, we create one unified record for Citigroup,

using Citicorp data before the merger and Citigroup data after the merger.

       Table 1 shows the number of sample banks by year. Our sample contains 131 banks in 1972 and

increases to a maximum of 223 banks in 1988. Between 1989 and the onset of the recent financial crisis,

there are about 200 banks each year in our sample. The number of banks reduces to 175 towards the end

of our sample period.

2.2.      Data sources

       We obtain accounting information from Standard and Poor’s Compustat and stock price information

from CRSP. We obtain data on earnings per share (EPS) and analyst forecasts from the Institutional

Brokers' Estimate System (I/B/E/S). Our subsequent analysis requires us to separate organic growth from

growth via mergers and acquisitions. We use the Chicago Fed M&A database to obtain information on

bank mergers and acquisitions. We use the link table from the regulatory identification numbers (RSSD

ID) to CRSP’s permanent company numbers (PERMCO) provided by the New York Fed to link the

Chicago Fed M&A database with the CRSP data. For PERMCOs not covered in the New York Fed’s file

we find the corresponding bank in the National Information Center. We use Call Reports (FFIEC031) or

FR-Y-9C data to find information on the loan portfolio and assets of targets in mergers and acquisitions.

We obtain information on failed banks from the FDIC.




                                                       8
2.3.     Summary statistics

       Table 2 shows summary statistics for our sample. For each bank in each fiscal year t, we calculate

subsequent one-, two-, and three-year returns by creating total return indices from the CRSP monthly

security file over the corresponding time horizon. If returns are missing for a certain month, we set them

to zero for that month. For example, for a bank whose fiscal year ends in December, for fiscal year 1984

the one-year return is defined as the total return index as of December 1985 divided by the total return

index as of December 1984 minus one. Thus, if a bank ceases to be traded in March of 1985, then the

one-year return for fiscal 1984 cannot be calculated. Two- and three-year returns are annualized. We

calculate non-overlapping returns to avoid problems regarding standard errors in the cross-sectional

regressions. The table shows that median returns for the sample banks are about 13% per annum.

       Loan growth is calculated using data on total loans to customers (Compustat item LCUACU). One-

year and three-year loan growth refers to a bank’s total loan growth from years t-1 and t-3 to year t,

respectively. For example, one-year loan growth for the same observation as above is calculated as the

bank’s total loans as of December 1984 divided by total loans as of December 1983 minus one. Three-

year loan growth is annualized. Average loan growth is 13.7% at the 1-year horizon, and 13.3% at the 3-

year horizon. Median 1-year (3-year) loan growth is 10.3% (11.8%). Asset growth is calculated in the

same way as loan growth. The average bank has an asset growth of about 12.6% per year, and the median

bank has a one-year asset growth of 9% and a three-year asset growth of 11%. The year t return on assets

(ROA) is expressed as a percentage and is defined as net income divided by total assets multiplied by

100. The average (median) bank has an ROA of 0.77% (0.85%). Loan loss provisions are also expressed

in percentage terms and are calculated as provisions for credit losses (PCL) divided by total gross loans

multiplied by 100. Total gross loans are defined as total loans to customers plus reserves for credit losses

(RCL). The median bank sets aside 0.44% percent of gross loans as loan loss provisions each year.

       Our analysis also requires calculating analyst forecast errors and revisions. We follow La Porta

(1996) and Livnat and Mendenhall (2006) and calculate one-, two-, and three-year standardized

unexpected earnings (SUE) as the difference between actual EPS as reported in years t+1, t+2, and t+3,

respectively, and the current median analyst forecast EPS, divided by the current stock price. To make


                                                     9
sure that analysts have information on fiscal year t data when making their forecasts, we take current

analyst forecasts and stock prices as of four months after the end of fiscal year t. For the above example

observation from December 1984, the one-year SUE is calculated as the difference between 1985 actual

EPS minus the April 1985 median analyst forecast divided by the April 1985 stock price. Table 2 shows

that average SUEs at all horizons are slightly negative; i.e. analyst forecasts for banks tend to be too

optimistic by about 2.5-3% of the stock price. The one-year analyst revision is defined as the difference

between the t+1 EPS forecast for year t+2 and the year t forecast for year t+2, divided by the year t stock

price. In the above example, this would be the difference between the April 1986 forecast for year 1986

minus the April 1985 forecast for year 1986, divided by the April 1985 stock price. The two-year analyst

revision is defined as the difference between the t+2 forecast for year t+3 and the year t forecast for year

t+3, divided by the year t stock price. Analyst forecast revisions are on average negative; the average

analyst revises her forecast down by 1.2% of the stock price over a one-year horizon and 1.8% over a

two-year horizon. Our final variable is analyst growth expectation, defined as the median analyst long-

term growth expectation as recorded in I/B/E/S. “Long-term” in this case refers to five-year earnings

growth forecasts (La Porta (1996)).

    All variables on forecast errors and revisions are calculated using adjusted I/B/E/S data. Diether,

Malloy, and Scherbina (2002) and Payne and Thomas (2003) show that adjusted I/B/E/S data are subject

to rounding errors, which could affect inference in studies using zero forecast errors as a threshold or

using the dispersion of forecast errors. An alternative to using adjusted I/B/E/S data is to use unadjusted

actual EPS as well as unadjusted forecasts and adjusting these using CRSP adjustment factors as of the

earnings announcement date as well as the forecast date. Performing these adjustments, we find a

correlation coefficient between the adjusted I/B/E/S data and the CRSP-adjusted unadjusted I/B/E/S data

of 0.998 for the sample banks. Since the additional matching results in a loss of observations and since we

are not specifically interested in studying forecast errors of exactly zero, we report results using adjusted

I/B/E/S data.

    We winsorize loan growth, asset growth, ROA, loan loss provisions, as well as analyst forecast errors

and revisions at the 1st and 99th percentile, respectively, to reduce the impact of outliers in our regression


                                                     10
analyses. The distributions of analyst forecast errors and revisions continue to exhibit significant

skewness with large outliers. We address the issue in Section 4. While we do not winsorize stock returns,

we note that results are quantitatively and qualitatively similar if we do so.

2.4.     Low growth and high growth banks

       We analyze performance and loan loss provisions of banks with different growth rates in our main

regressions. We create growth quartiles for loan and asset growth to do so, for two reasons. First, this

approach would capture non-linearities in the relation between loan growth and performance without a

priori assumptions. Second, we also estimate a portfolio approach for which it is natural to form

portfolios based on quartiles. We also show results using loan and asset growth as continuous variables.

       Figure 1 shows the median three-year loan growth for two groups of banks from 1972 to 2013. Each

year, we split the sample by past three-year loan growth into quartiles. The solid blue line shows the

median loan growth for the banks in the lowest growth quartile, and the dashed red line shows the median

loan growth for the banks in the highest growth quartile. Several interesting observations can be derived

from the figure. First, the differences between the median growth in low and high growth quartile banks

are substantial and range from a low of about 10% in the late seventies to a high of 33% in the late

nineties. Second, the consolidation of the U.S. banking sector, with a large number of interstate bank

mergers in the late nineties is evident from the figure as the median loan growth in the top quartile

approaches 40%, which is unlikely to completely stem from organic growth. We address the point that

bank growth in the high growth quartile could be mostly driven by merger activity in section 5, where we

also calculate a measure of organic growth. Third, the recessions of the early 1990s and early 2000s show

up in the figure as decreases in the median growth rates for both groups of banks. Finally, the recent

financial crisis pushed median loan growth rates for low growth banks below zero and also substantially

decreased median three-year loan growth for the fastest growing banks to below 20%.



3. Loan and asset growth and subsequent returns

       Figure 2 shows a plot of the time-series evolution of the average three-year subsequent non-

overlapping returns for two groups of banks over our sample period. The solid blue line shows the

                                                      11
average three-year subsequent stock return for banks in the lowest quartile of loan growth. The dashed red

line shows the average three-year subsequent stock return for banks in the highest quartile of loan growth.

The figure shows that for the vast majority of sample years, subsequent returns for low-growth banks

were higher than for high-growth banks, with the exception of a brief episode in the late 1990s / early

2000s.

    We now estimate more formal regressions of subsequent returns on loan growth. In Table 3, we

follow Baron and Xiong (2015) and estimate

                             𝑟𝑖,𝑡+𝑘 = 𝛽2 × 𝐼loan growth𝑖,𝑡 ∈ 𝑄2 + 𝛽3 × 𝐼loan growth𝑖,𝑡 ∈ 𝑄3

                                +𝛽4 × 𝐼loan growth𝑖,𝑡 ∈ 𝑄4 + 𝛿𝑡 + 𝜀𝑖,𝑡                                      (1)

    as well as

                          𝑟𝑖,𝑡+𝑘 = 𝛼𝑖 + 𝛽2 × 𝐼loan growth𝑖,𝑡 ∈ 𝑄2 + 𝛽3 × 𝐼loan growth𝑖,𝑡 ∈ 𝑄3

                                +𝛽4 × 𝐼loan growth𝑖,𝑡 ∈ 𝑄4 + 𝛿𝑡 + 𝜀𝑖,𝑡                                      (2)



where 𝑟𝑖,𝑡+𝑘 is the k-year ahead stock return of bank I, 𝐼loan growth𝑖,𝑡 ∈ 𝑄𝑗 is an indicator variable equal to 1

if the one-year loan growth of bank i is in the jth loan growth quartile of all banks in year t, and zero

otherwise, and the difference between equation (1) and (2) is that equation (2) contains bank fixed effects

𝛼𝑖 . We estimate these regressions for subsequent 1-year, 2-year, and 3-year returns, and estimate similar

regressions for three-year loan growth and one- and three-year asset growth. We also include year-fixed

effects 𝛿𝑡 in our regressions. Hence, any effects we observe are conditional on controlling for the general

economic environment for banks in each year. Note that while we always use non-overlapping returns for

k = 2 or 3, we have observations in every year due to new entrants into the sample. For example, for

three-year non-overlapping returns, for each bank we use the first three-year return we have available for

that bank, then the fourth one, the seventh one, and so on.4




4
 An alternative is to align all returns on the same time line. For example, for three-year non-overlapping returns,
one could limit the sample to all available observations that start in 1972, 1975, 1978, 1981, and so on. Results are
quantitatively and qualitatively similar using this alternative approach.

                                                          12
    Table 3 shows results. In each of the panels, Columns 1, 3, and 5 show results for the pooled time-

series and cross-sectional OLS regressions, and Columns 2, 4, and 6 show results from specification (2)

with bank-fixed effects. In Panel A, we see that one-year loan growth has little predictive power for 1-

year or 2-year subsequent returns. We find some predictability at the three-year subsequent return level.

Column 6 shows that in years in which banks are in the highest growth quartile relative to years in which

they are in the lowest quartile, their subsequent returns are 5.98% lower. Note that these regressions

include bank-fixed effects, i.e. effects are identified from banks that switch quartile assignments at least

once. There is sufficient time-series variation in banks’ assignments to growth quartiles. Out of the 627

(596) banks that enter the one-year (three-year) loan growth regressions, 549 (481) switch the growth

quartile at least once, and 395 (256) banks are at least once in the first and fourth growth quartile while in

the sample.

    Panel B shows the main result of the paper. The return predictability becomes much stronger once we

use three-year loan growth to predict subsequent returns. Now, we observe strong return predictability for

one-, two-, and three-year ahead returns in both the pooled and fixed effects regressions. For all six

specifications, we see that the returns are monotonically decreasing across the growth quartiles. The

higher past three-year loan growth, the worse are the returns. The effects are economically and

statistically large. For example, for the two-year subsequent returns, we observe that a bank in the highest

growth quartile has a 5.52% lower return per year than a bank in the lowest growth quartile. The within

effect is even larger with -9.11%. For three-year subsequent returns, we find in the cross-sectional

regressions reported in Column 5 that banks in the highest loan growth quartiles have 7.43% lower

returns than banks in the lowest growth quartile. Note that these returns are annualized. At the three-year

horizon, high loan growth banks therefore have more than 22% lower returns than low loan growth banks.

    Loan growth is likely correlated with asset growth for banks. Consequently, it could be that banks

perform poorly following high asset growth and loan growth just proxies for asset growth. Panels C and

D repeat the same analysis but uses asset growth instead of loan growth. We observe very similar

patterns. The return predictability is significantly higher for three-year asset growth (Panel D) than for

one-year asset growth (Panel C). Three-year asset growth has a significantly negative correlation with


                                                     13
subsequent returns at the one-year, two-year, and three-year horizon. The effect is monotonically

decreasing in growth quartiles, and economically significant. At the three-year horizon, we observe that

banks in the highest growth quartile have 6.1% lower returns per year (i.e., almost 20% for the three

years) than banks in the lowest growth quartile. Results are even stronger when including bank-fixed

effects.

    To better understand whether our results are due to loan growth or any asset growth including asset

growth unrelated to loan growth, we now analyze whether the non-loan asset growth portion has

incremental predictive power for future returns. These non-traditional business activities of banks have

regularly come under scrutiny, most recently during the financial crisis of 2007 and 2008. Many

commentators have argued that, e.g., the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act, which repealed central provisions of

the Glass-Steagall act and allowed banks to affiliate with securities and insurance firms, contributed to the

recent crisis. In Panel E, we estimate regressions of bank stock returns on a bank’s loan growth and non-

loan asset growth during the previous three years. We sort banks into quartiles for loan and non-loan asset

growth, respectively, with the lowest growth quartile serving as the base group for the regressions. The

loan growth sort and the non-loan asset growth sort are performed independently of each other. We find

that, in these regressions, the return predictability only stems from the high loan growth quartiles. The

highest non-loan asset growth quartile has coefficients of 0.0079, 0.0064, and 0.0072 at the one-year,

two-year, and three-year horizon, and is never close to being statistically significant. The estimates of

Panel E are inconsistent with the alternative hypothesis that the results in Panels A and B are driven by

asset growth rather than loan growth.

    The table also reports R2s. The R2s are large because of the time-fixed effects in our regressions.

Without those, the R2 are significantly lower (varying between 0.0029 and 0.0068 in Panel D) and more

comparable to other cross-sectional return predictability studies (e.g., Goyal and Welch (2008)).

    One possible explanation of the performance difference between high-growth and low-growth banks

is that high-growth and low-growth banks have different risks or styles. Researchers have identified

several characteristics that explain differences in realized returns. We therefore follow the strategy of

Daniel et al. (1997) and calculate portfolio returns with characteristics-adjusted benchmarks.


                                                     14
    Portfolio returns are calculated as follows. For one-year holding period returns, at the end of June of

each year t, banks are sorted into growth quartiles based on their loan growth for the previous three fiscal

years. Monthly equally-weighted returns are calculated for each growth portfolio from July of year t until

June of year t+1, when portfolios are re-sorted. We calculate adjusted returns by subtracting a

characteristic-based benchmark return from each bank’s stock return. Benchmark portfolios are

constructed following Daniel et al. (1997) (DGTW) by first sorting all stocks in the CRSP/Compustat

Merged universe into size quintiles based on CRSP breakpoints.5 Within each size quintile, we sort stocks

into quintiles based on their industry-adjusted book-to-market ratios using the Fama-French 49 industry

classifications. Within each of the resulting 25 portfolios, we then sort stocks into momentum quintiles.

We determine which of the 125 portfolios each bank belongs to and subtract that portfolio’s value-

weighted return from the bank’s stock return. We also consider adjusted returns for which the benchmark

portfolios only include banks. That is, we subtract from a bank’s return the value-weighted average of the

returns of all other banks (excluding the bank itself) that are in the same size/book-to-market/momentum

portfolio. The quintile cutoffs for these bank-only benchmark portfolios are the same as for the

benchmark that includes nonfinancial firms. For the 8.7% observations in the sample for which there is no

other bank in the same benchmark portfolio, banks are matched to the nearest benchmark portfolio,

relaxing first the momentum criterion, then book-to-market, then size. Among the initially unmatched

observations, 73% can be matched to banks that are in the same size quintile, the same book-to-market

quintile, and the immediately adjacent momentum quintile.

    For two-year and three-year holding period returns, we form portfolios with overlapping holding

periods as in Jegadeesh and Titman (1993). For example, in the case of two-year holding period returns

for loan growth portfolio number four, at the end of June in year t the portfolio buys the stocks of all

banks that are in the highest loan growth quartile at that point in time and holds these stocks for two

years. Stocks bought at the end of June of year t-1 continue to be held through June of year t+1. Stocks




5
  We use CRSP breakpoints since our sample is limited to years in which Nasdaq stocks are covered in CRSP and
thus CRSP breakpoints should be comparable across years. Results are quantitatively and qualitatively similar when
using NYSE breakpoints.

                                                        15
bought at the end of June of year t-2 are sold in June of year t. The resulting portfolios are rebalanced

monthly to maintain equal weights.

    Table 4 shows the results. The first four columns show returns for the different loan growth quartiles,

and the last column shows the returns to a strategy that goes long the highest loan growth quartile banks

and short the lowest loan growth quartile banks. There are three panels, one each for one-year, two-year,

and three-year holding period returns. Within each panel, the first row shows raw returns, the second row

DGTW-adjusted returns, and the third row DGTW-adjusted returns when the universe is restricted to

banks. All three panels show that the highest growth quartile bank portfolio has significantly lower

adjusted returns than the lowest growth quartile. The results get stronger the longer the holding period.

Focusing on Panel C which looks at the 3-year holding period returns, we find that the DGTW-adjusted

long-short portfolio generates statistically significantly negative returns of 45 basis points per month. In

other words, a portfolio of banks in the highest loan growth quartile underperforms a portfolio of banks in

the lowest loan growth quartile by 5.4% annually. If we carry out the DGTW adjustment using banks

only, we find statistically stronger, but economically slightly lower results. A portfolio of aggressively

growing banks underperforms a portfolio of slow growth banks by 36 basis points per month (4.3%

annually). Overall, our conclusions from Table 3 remain robust after using characteristic-based

benchmarks to adjust returns. High growth banks significantly underperform low-growth banks.

    We have so far sorted banks into groups by quartiles of growth. A valid question is whether we can

observe the same or perhaps even stronger patterns if we make use of all the information in the growth

distribution. In Table 5, we re-estimate the three-year growth regressions of Panels B, D, and E of Table

3, but use loan growth, asset growth, and non-loan asset growth as continuous variables instead of the

quartile indicator variables. In Panels A and B, we find that three-year loan or asset growth is

significantly negatively related to subsequent returns at all examined horizons. The economic magnitude

of the pooled regressions can be gauged as follows: The cross-sectional standard deviation of 3-year

annualized loan growth (asset growth) is equal to 0.1266 (0.1098). Hence, a one standard deviation

increase in loan growth is predicting a 0.1266 x (-0.139) = 1.76% lower one-year return. At the 3-year

horizon, we observe a 0.1266 x (-0.2016) = 2.55% lower annualized return. The within bank standard


                                                    16
deviation of loan growth is equal to 0.1060. A one standard deviation lower loan growth is predicting a

0.1060 x (-0.3184) = 3.4% lower return per year for the three-year return window. The economic

magnitudes are similar for asset growth. The effects in Table 3 are economically larger than those in

Table 5. Figure 1, which we discussed before, shows why this is the case. The difference between the

average growth rate of the fourth quartile and the average growth rate of the first quartile is more than one

standard deviation. In Panel C of Table 5, we use as our explanatory variables three-year loan growth and

three-year non-loan asset growth. We find that the coefficients on three-year non-loan asset growth are

never significant. These results support our conclusion that the relation between loan growth and poor

bank performance is not due to loan growth proxying for asset growth.

    Baron and Xiong (2015) in their country analysis also ask whether aggregate bank credit expansion

predicts an increase in the crash risk of banking and equity market indices in subsequent quarters. We also

want to understand whether, at the individual bank level, high loan growth predicts subsequent dramatic

deterioration in a bank’s market capitalization. To this end, we estimate a linear probability model and

predict the probability of a subsequent return below the fifth percentile of the sample distribution using

the bank’s three-year loan growth as a predictor. The dependent variable equals one if the bank

experiences a return below the fifth percentile over the subsequent 1-, 2-, or 3-year period, respectively,

and zero otherwise. The fifth percentiles are -45.7%, -38.1%, and -30.3% for 1-, 2-, and 3-year annualized

returns, respectively. We use the same specification as in Table 3 and sort banks into quartiles based on

loan growth during the previous three years, respectively. All regressions include time-fixed effects to

control for the aggregate economic environment. Table 6 shows the results. There is no predictability of

high loan growth for left-tail risk at the 1-year horizon. At the two- and three-year horizon, we observe in

Columns 3 and 5 that banks that are in the fourth and highest loan growth quartile have an approximately

4.6%-5.75% higher probability of experiencing a significant negative shock to their market capitalization

in the two or three subsequent years relative to low growth banks. The bank-fixed effects regressions in

Columns 4 and 6 allow the same conclusion, but now also banks in the second and third growth quartile

experience a higher crash risk relative to the time periods in which they were in the low growth quartile.

The increases in probability range from 2.25% to 5.8%. To summarize, three-year aggressive loan growth


                                                     17
not only predicts negative returns but also the chance of an extremely large shock to a bank’s market

capitalization.



4. Do high growth banks make poorer loans?

       In this section, we seek to understand the cause of the poor subsequent returns. Our analysis is similar

in spirit to, e.g., Demyanyk and van Hemert (2011) or Mian and Sufi (2009) who examine whether

financial institutions made poorer loans prior to the recent credit crisis. Both papers document that banks

made lower quality mortgage loans prior to the recent crisis which led to significantly higher defaults

during the crisis. Mian and Sufi (2009) show for example that mortgage credit growth and borrower

income growth were negatively correlated in high subprime ZIP codes.                López-Salido, Stein, and

Zakrajšek (2015) show that when credit risk is aggressively priced, it tends to be followed by a

subsequent widening of credit spreads and a contraction in economic output.

       The granularity of our analysis is in between those two studies. While we do not have information on

individual bank loans, we analyze the loan portfolios, accounting returns, and loan loss provisions of

individual banks over a time horizon of 40 years. An important additional distinction of our paper

compared to Demyanyk and van Hemert (2011) and Mian and Sufi (2009) is that our analysis deals with

loans that are retained on a bank’s books and thus cannot be explained by misaligned incentives relative

to an originate to distribute securitization model.

4.1.      Accounting returns and loan loss provisions of high growth banks

       Table 7 presents regressions of the return on assets and loan loss provisions on banks’ loan growth.

As before, banks are sorted into quartiles based on loan growth during the previous three years. Panels A

and B of Table 7 analyze levels and changes in return on assets, defined as net income / total assets, and

expressed in percent. Panel A shows that high growth banks have high concurrent accounting returns.

Relative to the low loan growth quartile banks, banks with a higher average three-year growth have about

0.21% higher profitability. The economic magnitude can be gauged by comparing the 0.21% with the

average sample ROA of 0.77%. Column 2 shows results from the bank-fixed effects regression and

comes to a similar conclusion. Compared to periods of low growth for the same bank, the concurrent

                                                       18
ROA is significantly higher after high growth episodes. Panel A shows that the positive ROA effect

reverses over the next three years. By year t+3, the high growth quartile banks have a significantly lower

return on assets, both in pooled (-0.16%) and fixed effects (-0.17%) regressions. Panel B shows the year-

over-year changes in ROA by growth quartile, with the lowest growth quartile as the reference group. The

performance of high growth banks deteriorates quickly after the high growth episodes. Column 1 shows

that the ROA already goes down in the year following the formation period. It decreases for all three

growth quartiles, with the highest drop in growth quartile 4 at -0.097%, or 12.6% relative to the sample

mean. From year t+1 to t+2 as well as from year t+2 to t+3 relative to the formation period, we again

observe large changes in the ROA for all three growth quartiles relative to the low growth base group.

Column 7 shows the total change in ROA from year t to year t+3. In this regression, we drop overlapping

observations to address concerns about standard errors, similar to the return regressions in Table 3. Over

the three post-formation years, the total drop in ROA for the highest growth quartile relative to the lowest

quartile is -0.32%, or 41.6% relative to the sample mean. Growth quartiles 2 and 3 also experience a

reduction in ROA relative to the lowest growth quartile and the drop in ROA is monotonic in the amount

of growth. Overall, the evidence of Panels A and B of Table 7 suggests that higher growing banks make

new loans that lead to losses that materialize almost immediately after the periods of high growth and last

for up to three years.

    The ROA regressions show the ex-post outcome of investments made during the aggressive growth

period. But were banks aware of the fact that they were making riskier loans? Panels C and D of Table 7

examine the question and analyze loan loss provisions expressed as percent and defined as loan loss

provisions divided by total gross loans and multiplied by 100. The loan loss provision should increase

immediately in period t if the bank is aware that it grew quickly by making riskier loans.

    Panels C and D of Table 7 show results, with Panel C showing loan loss provision levels and Panel D

year-over-year changes. It is apparent from Panel C that high growth banks had significantly lower loan

loss provisions in year t than low growth banks. The effects are economically meaningful. The coefficient

of -0.381% for the top loan growth quartile in Column 1 can be compared with the average loan loss

provision of 0.68%. Hence, relative to the sample average, a high growth bank has 56% lower loan loss


                                                    19
provisions. The evidence is not consistent with high growth banks being aware that their growth came

from riskier loans. Column 7 of Panel C shows that the picture looks very different three years after the

formation period. The high growth quartile banks have 0.174% higher loan loss provisions at that time (or

on a relative basis, 25.6%). The bank fixed effects regressions in Columns 2, 4, 6, and 8 provide similar

evidence from within bank effects. The same banks have lower loan loss provisions after high periods of

growth relative to their own periods of low growth, and the effect reverses three years after the formation

period. Panel D shows that the loan loss provisions increase very quickly after the formation period. For

the high loan growth quartile banks relative to the low loan growth quartile banks, the change from year t

to year t+1 is 0.23%, from year t+1 to year t+2 0.18%, and from year t+2 to t+3 0.12%, all statistically

significant. Growth quartiles 2 and 3 experience similar year-over-year increases in loan loss provisions

for two years after the formation period. Column 7 shows the total change in loan loss provisions from

year t to year t+3. In this regression, we again drop overlapping observations. Over the three post-

formation years, the total increase in loan loss provisions for the highest growth quartile relative to the

lowest quartile is 0.49%, or 72.1% relative to the sample mean. Growth quartiles 2 and 3 also experience

an increase relative to the lowest growth quartile and the increase in loan loss provisions is monotonic in

the amount of growth. Again, the evidence from firm-fixed effects regressions paints a similar picture.

    Overall, our evidence in Table 7 shows that at the height of the high loan growth, at the beginning of

the formation period, high growth banks had high ROA and low loan loss provisions. After periods of

high growth, the ROA of banks significantly and quickly deteriorates and loan loss provisions increase

substantially. An explanation for the ROA and loan loss provision results in period t and their evolution is

that high growth banks took riskier loans not charging fully for the greater risk. These actions would

temporarily lead to more profit and lower loan loss provisions with subsequent reversals. The evidence is

not consistent with banks keeping risk constant and charging less, as that would cause ROA to fall

immediately. A potential explanation of the ROA results combined with the loan loss provision results is

that executives in these banks did not understand that they were making riskier loans.




                                                    20
4.2.      Do equity analysts understand high loan growth banks?

       A natural question that arises from our analysis is why investors do not seem to incorporate bank

credit cycles into their valuation of banks. From the literature we reviewed in the introduction, these

patterns appear to be recurring and could easily be identified. In this section, to shed light on the question,

we follow the empirical design of La Porta (1996) who examines whether systematic errors in analyst

expectations can help explain the high returns earned by value stocks. La Porta (1996) creates measures

of systematic analyst earnings per share (EPS) forecast errors using I/B/E/S data on analysts’ earnings

forecasts. He finds that analyst expectations about future growth in earnings are too extreme and can be

profitably traded upon.

       We calculate three measures of analyst forecast errors. We first calculate standardized unexpected

earnings for the year t+x (SUEt+x) as the difference between actual earnings for fiscal year t+x and the

time t median analyst forecast for fiscal year t+x earnings, divided by the stock price as of the day of the

time t forecast. To allow analysts to incorporate all information from fiscal year t, the time t forecast is the

median analyst earnings forecast as of the fourth month after the conclusion of fiscal year t, taken from

I/B/E/S. Our second measure is analyst forecast revisions. Revisiont+1 is the difference between the time

t+1 forecast for fiscal year t+2 and the time t forecast for fiscal year t+2, divided by the stock price as of

the time t forecast. Revisiont+2 is the difference between the time t+2 forecast for fiscal year t+3 and the

time t forecast for fiscal year t+3, divided by the stock price as of the time t forecast. Finally, we analyze

not only the earnings per share forecast revision, but also the level and revision of the long-term earnings

growth rate, Et+x(g). The earnings growth rate Et+x(g) measured at time t is defined as the median analyst’s

expectation as of time t+x for the long-term growth rate of the bank’s earnings.

       The calculation procedure for SUEs and revisions produces many large outliers (see, e.g., Livnat and

Mendenhall (2006)). In Panel A, we remedy the issue by estimating median regressions. In such a

regression, we minimize the sum of the absolute residuals and not the sum of the squared residuals,

putting less emphasis on outliers. T-statistics for the median regressions are estimated using bootstrapped

standard errors. The bootstrap was performed using 500 replications each for firm clustering, time




                                                      21
clustering and no clustering. The double-clustered variance-covariance matrix (VCV) is calculated by

subtracting the unclustered VCV from the sum of the firm-clustered plus the time-clustered VCV.6

    Table 8 shows the results. The first 6 columns of Panel A of Table 8 show the standardized

unexpected earnings and indicate that equity analysts systematically overestimate future earnings per

share for high growth banks, with coefficients of -0.0013, -0.0039, and -0.0050 for the one-year, two-year

and three-year horizons, respectively. The economic magnitude of the coefficients can be gauged by

comparing the coefficients with the median analyst SUEs reported in Table 2, i.e. -0.0004 for the one-year

horizon, -0.0030 for the two-year horizon, and -0.010 for the three-year horizon. The results are strongest

statistically for the t+1 and t+2 horizons, but at least part of the reason is that few analysts give three-year

EPS forecasts (the number of observations decreases from 5,662 at the one-year horizon to 878 at the

three-year horizon). Interestingly, the bank-fixed effects regressions show even stronger results, i.e. the

same analysts give systematically too high EPS forecasts for the same banks when they grew a lot

compared to when they grew little.7 The last four columns of Panel A show that for the bank-fixed effects

regressions, analysts had to systematically revise their EPS forecasts downward for high-growth quartile

banks. The bottom four rows of Panel A show how many of the bootstrap replications used to calculate

standard errors were successful at each step. Unsuccessful replications either did not converge or

encountered a variance-covariance matrix that could not be calculated due to a lack of observations.

    Panels B and C show regression results for analysts’ long-term growth rate by bank loan growth

quartile and the revisions from one year to the next of this long-term growth rate. Results for the long-

term growth rate in Panels B and C are estimated using ordinary least squares and allowing for standard

error clustering at the bank and time levels.

    Analysts believe that bank growth is very persistent. No matter whether we estimate cross-sectional

or fixed-effects regressions, we find that analysts expect long-term earnings growth in all three loan

growth quartiles to be higher than earnings growth of banks in the lowest growth quartile, for up to three


6
  See Cameron et al. (2008) and Gow et al. (2010) for additional discussions of this procedure. Code that
implements the procedure can be found on the website of Daniel Taylor at Wharton Business School.
7
  Median regressions with bank-fixed effects frequently fail to convergence when including banks that have few
observations. To remedy this issue, we require a bank to have at least five observations available to be included in
the regressions with bank-fixed effects. Regressions without bank-fixed effects include all banks.

                                                          22
years post formation period. For growth quartile 4, analysts believe that banks can maintain 1.9% extra

long-term growth over the first quartile banks in the formation year. In the following year, long-term

growth estimates are still 1.7% higher than for low growth banks, and even in year t+3, when stock

returns have already significantly suffered, analysts still believe that long-term earnings growth will be

1.2% higher. It is evident from these numbers that the long-term earnings growth forecasts are being

revised downward. This is more formally confirmed in Panel C, in which we observe strong negative

revisions of long-term growth forecasts for banks in the highest loan growth quartile relative to banks in

the lowest quartile for one-, two-, and three-year revisions in the panel regressions.

    Overall, the results in Table 8 suggest that analysts have difficulty understanding the loan growth

patterns of sample banks. They systematically overestimate earnings as well as long-term growth rates of

earnings for banks that have grown quickly over the past three years. Our result may help explain the

negative stock returns we documented earlier. If even security market experts like analysts are unable to

correctly assess the growth potential of banks, perhaps it is not too surprising that market participants

think as well that bank growth of high growth banks is persistent and profitable.



5. Organic growth vs. growth through M&A activity

    We next analyze whether our results can be explained by the M&A activities of managers of high

growth banks. There is some evidence in the literature that managers of growth firms carry out

acquisitions with negative long-term abnormal returns. For example, Rau and Vermaelen (1998) find that

companies with low book-to-market ratios have lower long-term abnormal returns. They attribute their

findings to managers who overestimate their own ability to manage these acquisitions (cf. Roll (1986)).8

Hence, our evidence could simply reflect that banks that grow more merge more and experience lower

returns because of mergers. We separate the loan growth of sample banks into organic loan growth and

loan growth via mergers and analyze whether organic growth by itself leads to worse future stock




8
 The question of whether long-term abnormal returns to M&A activity are in fact on average negative has not yet
been settled in the literature. For an overview, see Betton, Eckbo, and Thorburn (2008).

                                                       23
performance. We also reexamine the ROA and loan loss provision results distinguishing between organic

loan growth and loan growth through acquisitions.

    We first need to create a reliable sample of the total assets and total loans of targets in M&A

transactions by sample banks to be able to calculate organic growth and growth through M&A activity.

We obtain data on mergers and acquisitions of sample banks from the M&A database of the Federal

Reserve Bank of Chicago.9 Having identified target firms, we obtain asset and loan data for the target

firms from several sources (call reports for commercial banks, FR-Y-9C reports for bank holding

companies, an FDIC list for failed banks, and 10-Ks for other sample firms). We then calculate organic

loan growth by adjusting total loan growth for the effect of mergers in the following way. For each of our

sample firms, we calculate the sum of all loans acquired in each fiscal year and calculate the organic loan

            Total loans𝑡 -Loans acquired𝑡
growth as           Total loans𝑡-1
                                            − 1. Appendix A of the paper provides details on the matching and

calculations, including a description of how to merge the different databases and of all assumptions we

made. Because the Chicago Fed’s M&A database only starts in 1976 and we require three years of loan

data to calculate growth, our sample period for the following tests is restricted to the period 1978 to 2014.

    Table 9 presents regression results of bank stock returns on banks’ organic and M&A related loan

growth, respectively, during the previous three years. As in Table 3, we provide both pooled results as

well as bank-fixed effects results. Banks are sorted into quartiles for organic growth, with the lowest

growth quartile serving as the base group for the regressions. For merger growth, all banks without a

merger in a given three-year period are included in one group which acts as the base group. The

remaining banks are sorted into terciles labeled low/medium/high merger growth. The organic growth

sort and the merger growth sort are performed independently of each other. Table 9 shows that we

continue to find strong return predictability even when we focus on organic growth. For all six

specifications in Panel A of Table 9, returns are monotonically decreasing across the organic loan growth

quartiles at all horizons. The higher past three year organic loan growth, the worse are the returns. The

effects are economically and statistically large in organic growth quartiles 2, 3, and 4. For the three-year

9
  The data are accessible online at the following address: https://www.chicagofed.org/banking/financial-institution-
reports/merger-data

                                                           24
subsequent returns, we observe that a bank in the highest organic loan growth quartile has a 6.4% lower

return per year than a bank in the lowest organic growth quartile. The within effect – comparing the same

bank when it was in the high organic loan growth quartile relative to the low growth quartile – is even

larger with an annualized return spread of -9.8%. We also observe return predictability after aggressive

external growth, but the effects appear weaker. Relative to the base group of no merger activity in the past

three years, we find that only the high merger growth group consistently exhibits lower future returns. At

the three year horizon, we observe that high merger growth banks have -3.7% lower annualized returns

relative to the no merger banks (-6.1% within effect).

    Overall, Table 9 shows that M&A activity alone cannot explain the long-term lower returns of high

growth sample banks. We find economically and statistically strong negative subsequent returns for banks

that have high organic growth rates. In unreported regressions, we also re-estimate the benchmark

adjusted returns using the Daniel et al. (1997) portfolio approach of Table 4 with organic loan growth

instead of total loan growth. For both 2-year and 3-year holding period returns, we find that the

characteristics-adjusted returns (using either all firms or banks only) of the highest organic growth

quartile are significantly lower than those of the lowest organic growth quartile. At the three-year horizon,

the difference is -0.42% per month for DGTW-adjusted returns, and -0.36% per month when using only

banks for the DGTW adjustment.

    We next ask whether the evidence of poorer loans in high growth banks we documented in Table 6

stems from organic loan growth or external loan growth. We seek to understand whether high-growth

banks acquire banks with poorer loans, or whether they make those poorer loans on their own.

    Table 10 shows results for regressions of ROA and loan loss provision levels on organic loan growth

quartiles and merger growth groups. We omit the panels documenting changes in the dependent variables

for brevity. The results of Panel A for ROA levels and growth quartiles are very similar to Table 6. In the

year in which we measure high three-year organic loan growth, high growth banks have significantly

higher ROAs than low-growth banks, and the same holds across all merger growth terciles relative to the

no merger growth base group. We find that for the banks with the highest organic loan growth, the level

of ROA deteriorates in the following years until in year t+3 after formation period, high growth quartile


                                                     25
banks have significantly lower returns on assets than the base group. Their ROA decreases from 0.25% in

year t to -0.18% in year t+3. We do not observe the same pattern after years of high merger growth.

     Panel B of Table 10 shows the evolution of the loan loss provisions by organic loan growth quartiles

and merger growth groups. We show that in the year in which we assign growth quartiles, higher loan

growth banks have fewer loan loss provisions, i.e. they either have made better loans or do not recognize

that the loans that they have made are potentially riskier. The results are economically and statistically

stronger for organic growth than growth via mergers. The economic magnitude of the effect is large.

Average loan loss provisions are -0.68%. Relative to the lowest organic growth quartile, banks in the

highest organic growth quartile have -0.44% lower loan loss provisions. The effect slowly reverses

through time so that at the end of year 3 after formation, high organic loan growth banks have

significantly higher loan loss provisions (0.17%) than low organic growth banks.

     Overall, Table 10 provides evidence that it is indeed the loans quickly growing banks make on their

own rather than the loans they acquire which are responsible for the increase in loan loss provisions and

the poorer accounting returns.10



6. Robustness of our main results

     Our analysis suggests that fast loan growth is associated with making poor loans. Because our results

hold in the cross-section, it is less likely that they can be explained by aggregate demand-side

productivity shocks. Under such an explanation, banks would be making good loans, but the economy

would unexpectedly experience slow growth which would end the credit boom and cause poor

performance. We provide two robustness checks that help further alleviate this concern. First, we repeat

our analysis but remove recession years. We obtain NBER recession indicators from the St. Louis FRED

database and, for each return regression, exclude all returns where at least part of that return occurs during

a recession. For example, one recession lasted from August 1990 to March 1991. For one-year returns, we

drop the returns for 1990 and 1991. For two-year returns, we drop the returns for 1989-1990, 1990-1991,


10
  In unreported regressions, we repeat the analyses in Table 10 for asset growth and find quantitatively and
qualitatively similar results.

                                                         26
1991-1992. For three-year returns, we drop the returns for 1988-1990, 1989-1991, 1990-1992, and 1991-

1993.

    Our results continue to hold in regressions that are similar to those in Table 3. We find that banks in

the highest loan growth quartile have 4.1% lower returns at the 1-year horizon, 5.0% lower annualized

returns at the two-year horizon, and 4.8% lower annualized returns at the three-year horizon than banks in

the lowest growth quartile. These effects are statistically significant at the 12% level for the one-year

horizon and at the 5% level for the two- and three-year horizons.

    Second, one potential concern with our results and the above test is whether they could still be driven

by local demand shocks. If most or all of the banks in the top growth quartile in each formation period

were from the same region, local demand shocks (e.g., impact of shale extraction innovation), could

explain our results. We test and alleviate such a concern by examining the distribution of the annual bank

loan growth across the four US census regions in unreported robustness checks.

    We determine a bank’s location using headquarters information from Call Reports and FR-Y-9C

reports. If the location of a bank holding company is unavailable, we take the location of the largest

individual bank held by the BHC. If neither is available, we use the Compustat header location. We assign

each bank to a US census region based on its headquarters. We then examine what percentage of banks in

a certain census region is in each of the four growth quartiles in each year. If growth and geography were

completely uncorrelated, all the percentages would equal 25%. If a local demand shock hypothesis was

the main driver of our results, we should observe that the banks in the top growth quartile in a given year

mostly are from the same census region. The average fraction of banks in the top growth quartile across

all years is surprisingly even across regions. The South has on average the highest fraction of banks in the

top growth quartile (28%), and the Midwest has the lowest fraction with 20.7%. The most uneven

distribution of banks in the top growth quartiles happened in 1986-1988, when banks from the Northeast

represented 41% to 52% of the highest growth quartile banks, and in 1972-1974, when banks from the

South represented 46% of the highest growth quartile banks. We therefore believe that the relatively even

distribution of fast growing banks across the United States regions make it unlikely that our results are

driven by local demand shocks.


                                                    27
    To err on the side of caution, in unreported regressions, we re-estimate the paper’s main results from

Table 3, Panel B forming all growth quartiles within census regions. For example, to determine which

growth quartile a Midwest bank falls into in a given year, its growth in that year is compared only to the

growth of other Midwest banks, rather than to the growth of all US banks. Results remain economically

and statistically significant. Over the three years after the formation period, annualized returns for the

highest growth quartile are lower than those for lowest growth quartile by 5.6%. Compustat added

financial data for a large number of small banks in fiscal year 1993 which we excluded in our main

regressions because cross-sectional differences among small banks are unlikely to affect overall credit

supply beyond the local level and to avoid a structural break in our data. Including these banks in our

main regressions of Table 3 weakens the economic significance by approximately 20% but does not

change the statistical significance. Estimating the regressions using only those small banks does not yield

the same return predictability after periods of large loan growth as in Table 3. Hence, our results are

driven by the larger banks with assets in excess of $2 billion.

    Table 11 addresses a different issue, survivorship bias. It examines whether a higher incidence of

delistings could help explain the return difference between high and low loan growth banks. For Table 3,

we required that a bank has returns available for the entire subsequent return period of up to three years,

i.e., we require the bank to survive for those three years. If low loan growth banks and high loan growth

banks have different probabilities of delisting in these three years, it could be that we introduce a

survivorship bias. Suppose for example that low growth banks have a higher probability of delisting in the

three years post formation period. Because of the three-year return requirement, these delisted banks

would be excluded from the sample. If poor performance causes delistings, we would only include better

performing low growth banks, helping to explain our results. Note, however, that the portfolio sorts in

Table 4 are not susceptible to this problem since they use monthly returns including delisting returns.

Nevertheless, in Panel A of Table 11, we examine whether it is in fact true that low loan growth banks

have a higher incidence of delisting and in Panel B of Table 11, we test whether our results are robust to a

different definition of future returns. In Panel B of Table 11, we define subsequent returns as follows. If a

bank only survives for two years, the three-year return equals the two-year gross return plus delisting


                                                     28
return, annualized to three years. The number of observations therefore increases because the delisted

banks now stay in the sample.

    Panel A of Table 11 shows that high growth banks indeed have a lower probability of delisting than

low growth banks. It is important to note, however, that banks rarely delist due to bankruptcies. Only 22

of the sample banks delist due to bankruptcy or liquidation. Most of the delistings are due to mergers (387

banks). Though some banks in the sample are taken over due to poor performance (e.g., Countrywide

Financial and Wachovia), this is not the typical case. In any case, Panel B of the table shows that our

results are very robust to the different definition of future returns. All our main results continue to hold

after we include more banks and their delisting returns. High loan growth banks continue to significantly

underperform low loan growth banks.

    Our final robustness check deals with the M&A results. In Table 9, we separated loan growth into

organic growth and merger growth. One of the sample selection criteria was to exclude all bank-year

observations for which target loan data for any of the bank’s merger targets were unavailable. This

excluded 541 observations. We have re-estimated the regressions of Table 9 by including these bank-

years and setting target loan data to zero. Our results are unaffected by these changes.



7. Conclusion

    We show that U.S. banks with loan growth in the top quartile of banks over a three-year period

significantly underperform banks with loan growth in the bottom quartile over the next three years. The

effects are economically large and robust to different estimation techniques. A potential explanation for

the poor stock performance is that quickly growing banks make loans that perform worse than the loans

of banks that grow slowly. We find evidence in favor of this explanation. The effects are not driven by

M&A growth.

    Several recent papers show that credit booms end poorly and are followed by poor economic

outcomes. Our paper analyzes a panel of banks located in the same country and shows that even for

individual banks periods of high growth are followed by lower future returns than periods of low growth.

Neither equity analysts nor shareholders seem to recognize these patterns. Banks themselves appear too


                                                     29
optimistic about the loans they make during high growth periods as their returns on assets decrease in the

following years and their loan loss provisions increase.




                                                    30
Appendix A. Procedures for matching the Chicago Fed M&A database to the CRSP/Compustat
database and for calculating organic asset and loan growth

The appendix provides detailed information on how we matched the Chicago FED M&A database to the
CRSP/Compustat data and how we calculate organic growth, i.e. growth that does not stem from merger
activity, for sample banks.

A. Linking mergers in the Chicago Fed M&A database to CRSP/Compustat:

    1) Extract both the individual bank mergers and holding company mergers from the database

    2) Eliminate “mergers” that are not actually mergers
       The Chicago Fed M&A database contains many mergers that are really just restructurings within
       the same bank, such as a holding company absorbing its subsidiary or merging two of its
       subsidiaries. We eliminate these non-mergers by excluding:
           a. Entries where the buyer and the target are held by the same holding company
           b. Entries where the buyer is identical to the target’s bank holding company

    3) Match the acquirer to CRSP Permcos using the New York Fed’s link table
          a. Match acquirer RSSD ID to Permco
          b. Match acquirer’s high holder ID to Permco
          c. For mergers before 1990, an older version of the NY Fed’s link table has to be used
              because the most recent version does not provide Permco links before 1990
          d. For Permcos that are missing in the NY Fed’s table, hand-collect RSSD IDs from the
              National Information Center, then perform steps a. and b. above.

B. Obtain asset and loan data for the target firms

We obtain these data from several sources. Commercial banks file call reports. Holding companies file
FR-Y-9C reports. Finance companies and other entities file 10-Ks if they are registered with the SEC.

    1) Call report data for individual banks
           a. Total assets are in RCFD2170. We divide all Call Report data by 1000 to get millions as
               in Compustat.
           b. The relevant variable for loans is RCFD2125 “Total Loans and Leases, Net”, which is net
               of unearned income and loan loss allowances. The definition coincides with the definition
               of LCUACU (“Loans/Claims/Advances - Customer – Total”) from Compustat.
           c. When RCFD2125 is not filled, we calculate it as RCFD2122 – RCFDF3123 –
               RCFD3128

    2) FR-Y-9C data for holding companies
          a. Use the same procedure outlined above using the BHCK data series
          b. FR-Y-9C data are available only from September 1986 onwards. For earlier mergers, we
             use asset and loan data for the individual banks held by the holding company (see point
             C.4 for this procedure).

    3) FDIC List of failed banks
          a. The list reports total assets at the time of failure for all failed banks. Obtaining this data is
              important as there are hundreds of failed S&Ls for which asset data cannot be found
              otherwise. Data on the failed bank’s loans are unavailable.


                                                     31
    4) Compustat data
          a. If none of the above databases has asset data for the target, we obtain data from the
             financial services view of Compustat, where possible.
          b. This step helps match publicly traded institutions registered as S&Ls, S&L holding
             companies, Federal Savings Banks, Other Domestic Entities as well as some Bank
             Holding Companies that do not file the FR-Y-9C

C. Match asset and loan data to the merger data and purge duplicate mergers

    1) Pull asset and loan data from the target’s most recent Call Report or FR-Y-9C
    2) For commercial banks and holding companies, pull high holder ID from Call Reports/FR-Y-9C
    3) Eliminate mergers where the high holder is identical to the survivor or the survivor’s high holder
    4) If an acquirer buys a bank holding company together with its subsidiary bank, the Chicago Fed’s
       database will list both transactions as mergers. Without adjusting for this fact, we would double
       count the bank’s assets. Adjustment procedure:
            a. Using high holder IDs, match each individual bank merger to its holding company
                merger where applicable
            b. If holding company asset data is available, drop the individual bank merger data
            c. If the holding company’s asset data is unavailable, but the individual bank’s asset data is
                available, drop the holding company merger data
            d. If a holding company is owned by another holding company and both are acquired, keep
                only the high holder observation.
    5) For entities that are neither commercial banks nor BHCs, high holder IDs cannot be pulled from
       call reports/holding company reports. Procedure for eliminating non-mergers and duplicates:
            a. Search for the target entity in the FDIC’s National Information Center (NIC)
            b. Find high holder ID in the NIC and flag and drop the merger as a non-merger if the high
                holder ID is identical with the acquirer or the acquirer’s high holder
            c. Flag and drop the merger as a duplicate if the high holder is being acquired by the same
                buyer at the same time
    6) Match asset data from FDIC list of failed banks to the merger data
            a. The merger data does not contain CERT numbers and the FDIC data does not contain
                RSSD ID, so we have to manually match on name and location.
            b. Of the 366 failed banks for which data is otherwise unavailable, we are able to match 360
                banks to the FDIC list.
    7) Match Compustat data on target assets and loans to the merger data
            a. Find the last available financial statement for each financial institution in Compustat
            b. Require the last available financial statement to be within two years before the merger
                date and do not allow it to be after the merger date.
            c. Perform lenient name match requiring city to be identical in both databases and manually
                inspect.
            d. Perform strict name match without requiring city to be identical and manually inspect.
                Name match has to be very close and the city in one database has to be a
                subsection/suburb of the city in the other database.
            e. Name matches also identify some mergers involving both a high holder and a subsidiary.
                Drop the subsidiary data.


D. Calculate organic loan growth and organic asset growth

    1) For each of our sample firms, we calculate the sum of all assets/loans acquired in each fiscal year


                                                    32
2) If a merger involves multiple acquirers (e.g. FDIC split up a failed bank), assume that each of the
   n acquirers buys 1/n of the bank’s assets/loans
3) Calculate adjusted loan growth for year t as

                                  Total loans𝑡 − Loans acquired𝑡
                                                                 −1
                                           Total loans𝑡−1

4) Calculate adjusted asset growth the same way




                                                33
References.

Axelson, Ulf, Tim Jenkinson, Per Strömberg, and Michael Weisbach, 2013, Borrow cheap, buy high?
Determinants of leverage and pricing in buyouts, Journal of Finance 68, 2223-2267.

Baron, Matthew, and Wei Xiong, 2015, Credit expansion and neglected crash risk, Working paper,
Princeton University.

Bernanke, Ben, and Mark Gertler, 1989, Agency costs, net worth, and business fluctuations, American
Economic Review 79, 14-31.

Berger, Allen N. and Gregory F. Udell, 2004, The institutional memory hypothesis and the procyclicality
of bank lending behavior, Journal of Financial Intermediation 13, 458-495.

Betton, Sandra, B. Espen Eckbo, and Karin S. Thorburn, 2008, Corporate takeovers, in B. Espen Eckbo
(ed.), Handbook of Corporate Finance: Empirical Corporate Finance, Volume 2, Ch. 15, 291-430,
Elsevier/North-Holland, Amsterdam.

Brunnermeier, Markus K., 2009, Deciphering the liquidity and credit crunch 2007-2008, Journal of
Economic Perspectives 23, 77-100.

Cameron, Colin A., Jonah B. Gelbach, and Douglas L. Miller, 2008, Bootstrap-based improvements for
inference with clustered errors, The Review of Economics and Statistics 90, 414-427.

Cooper, Michael J., Huseyin Gulen, and Michael J. Schill, 2008, Asset growth and the cross-section of
stock returns, Journal of Finance 63, 1609-1651.

Daniel, Kent, Mark Grinblatt, Sheridan Titman and Russ Wermers, 1997, Measuring mutual fund
performance with characteristic-based benchmarks, Journal of Finance 52, 1035-1058.

Dell’Ariccia, Giovanni, Igan, Deniz, and Luc Laeven, 2009, Credit booms and lending standards,
Working paper, Tilburg University.

Dell’Ariccia, Giovanni, and Robert Marquez, 2006, Lending booms and lending standards, Journal of
Finance 56, 2511-2546.

Demyanyk, Yuliya, and Otto van Hemert, 2011, Understanding the subprime mortgage crisis, Review of
Financial Studies 24, 1848-1880.

Diether, Karl B., Christopher J. Malloy, and Anna Scherbina, 2002, Differences of opinion and the cross-
section of stock returns, Journal of Finance 57, 2113-2141.

Gennaioli, Nicola, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, 2012, Neglected risks, financial innovation, and
financial fragility, Journal of Financial Economics 104, 452–468.

Gorton, Gary, 2010, Slapped by the invisible hand, Oxford University Press.

Goyal, Amit, and Ivo Welch, 2008, A comprehensive look at the empirical performance of equity
premium prediction, Review of Financial Studies 21, 1455-1508.


                                                   34
Gow, Ian D., Gaizka Ormazabal, and Daniel J. Taylor, (2010), Correcting for cross‐sectional and time‐
series dependence in accounting research. The Accounting Review 85, 483-512.

Greenwood, Robin, and Samuel G. Hanson, 2013, Issuer quality and corporate bond returns, Review of
Financial Studies 26, 1483-1525.

Hou, Kewei, Chen Xue, and Lu Zhang, 2014, Digesting anomalies: An investment approach, Review of
Financial Studies 28, 650-705.

Jegadeesh, Narasimhan and Sheridan Titman, 1993, Returns to buying winners and selling losers:
Implications for stock market efficiency, Journal of Finance 48, 65-91.

Jordà, Òscar, Moritz Schularick, and Alan M. Taylor, 2013, When credit bites back, Journal of Money,
Credit and Banking 45, 3-28.

Kahle, Kathleen, and René M. Stulz, 2013, Access to capital, investment, and the financial crisis, Journal
of Financial Economics 110, 280-299.

Keys, Benjamin J., Tanmoy Mukherjee, Amit Seru, and Vikrant Vig, Did Securitization Lead to Lax
Screening? Evidence from Subprime Loans?, Quarterly Journal of Economics 125, 307-362.

Krishnamurthy, Arvind, and Tyler Muir, 2015, Credit spreads and the severity of financial crises,
Stanford GSB working paper. La Porta, Rafael, 1996, Expectations and the cross-section of stock returns,
Journal of Finance 51, 1715-1742.

Livnat, Joshua, and Richard R. Mendenhall, 2006, Comparing the post-earnings announcement drift for
surprises calculated from analyst and time series forecasts, Journal of Accounting Research 44, 177-205

López-Salido, David, Jeremy C. Stein, and Egon Zakrajšek, 2015, Credit-market sentiment and the
business cycle, Finance and Economics Discussion Sereis 2015-028, Washington: Board of Governors of
the Federal Reserve System.

Loughran, Tim, and Anand M. Vijh, 1997, Do long-term shareholders benefit from corporate
acquisitions?, Journal of Finance 52, 1765-1790.

Mian, Atif, and Amir Sufi, 2009, The consequences of mortgage credit expansion: Evidence from the
U.S. mortgage default crisis, Quarterly Journal of Economics 124, 1449-1496.

Moeller, Sara B., Frederik P. Schlingemann, and René M. Stulz, 2005, Wealth destruction on a massive
scale? A study of acquiring-firm returns in the recent merger wave, Journal of Finance 60, 757-782.

Payne, Jeff L. and Wayne B. Thomas, 2003, The implications of using stock-split adjusted I/B/E/S data in
empirical research, The Accounting Review 78, 1049-1067.

Polk, Christopher, and Paola Sapienza, 2009, The stock market and corporate investment: A test of
catering theory, Review of Financial Studies 22, 187-217.

Rajan, Raghuram G., 1994, Why bank credit policies fluctuate: A theory and some evidence, Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 399-441.

                                                    35
Rau, Raghavendra, and Theo Vermaelen, 1998, Glamour, value and the post-acquisition performance of
acquiring firms, Journal of Financial Economics 49, 223-253.

Reinhart, Carmen, and Kenneth Rogoff, 2009, This time is different: Eight centuries of financial folly,
Princeton University Press.

Roll, Richard, 1986, The hubris hypothesis of corporate takeovers, Journal of Business 59, 197-216.

Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert Vishny, 2010, Unstable banking, Journal of Financial Economics 97, 306-
318

Schularick, Moritz, and Alan M. Taylor, 2012, Credit booms gone bust: Monetary policy, leverage cycles,
and financial crises, 1870-2008, American Economic Review 102, 1029-1061.

Titman, Sheridan, K. C. John Wei, and Feixue Xie, 2004, Capital investments and stock returns, Journal
of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 39, 677-700.




                                                    36
                    Median three-year loan growth for high vs. low
                               three-year loan growth
    .4
    .3
    .2
    .1
         0
   -.1




             1970         1980              1990            2000              2010
                                         Fiscal year end

                         Loan growth quartile 1            Loan growth quartile 4




Figure 1. The figure shows the time-series evolution of the median three-year loan growth for two groups
of banks. Every year, we classify banks into four groups based on loan growth quartiles. The solid blue
line shows the median three-year asset growth for banks in the lowest quartile of loan growth. The dashed
red line shows the median three-year loan growth for banks in the highest quartile of loan growth. Our
sample period is 1972 – 2013.




                                                   37
               Average three-year subsequent return for high vs. low
                              three-year loan growth
    .6
    .4
    .2
         0
   -.2
   -.4




             1970        1980              1990             2000              2010
                                        Fiscal year end

                        Loan growth quartile 1             Loan growth quartile 4



Figure 2. The figure shows the time-series evolution of the average three-year subsequent returns for two
groups of banks. Every year, we classify banks into four groups based on loan growth quartiles. The solid
blue line shows the average three-year subsequent stock return for banks in the lowest quartile of loan
growth. The dashed red line shows the average three-year subsequent stock return for banks in the highest
quartile of loan growth. Our sample period is 1972 – 2013.




                                                   38
Table 1: Number of banks per year
The table shows the number of banks that are in the sample each year. Section 2 contains a detailed
description of our sample selection procedure. A bank has to have real assets in excess of $2 billion in
order to be in the sample. Real assets are calculated as total assets in 2013 dollars using the Bureau of
Labor Statistics’ Consumer Price Index for all urban consumers.
                  # Sample Banks
1972                   131
1973                   134
1974                   143
1975                   144
1976                   143
1977                   148
1978                   164
1979                   168
1980                   171
1981                   177
1982                   182
1983                   187
1984                   185
1985                   183
1986                   183
1987                   182
1988                   223
1989                   211
1990                   212
1991                   206
1992                   205
1993                   216
1994                   216
1995                   200
1996                   201
1997                   193
1998                   212
1999                   210
2000                   207
2001                   205
2002                   215
2003                   202
2004                   211
2005                   214
2006                   218
2007                   207
2008                   198
2009                   189
2010                   180
2011                   183
2012                   180
2013                   175



                                                   39
Table 2: Summary statistics
The table shows sample summary statistics. The first seven rows show summary statistics for 1-year, 2-year, and 3-year subsequent returns as well
as asset growth and loan growth over the past one and three years, respectively. For two- and three-year returns, only non-overlapping returns are
used. All multi-year returns as well as 3-year loan growth and asset growth are annualized. The table also shows summary statistics for the return
on assets (ROA), defined as net income divided by total assets multiplied by 100, as well as loan loss provisions, defined as loan loss provisions
divided by total gross loans multiplied by 100. In addition, the table shows summary statistics for several variables related to analyst forecasts: 1-
year, 2-year, and 3-year SUE are standardized unexpected earnings for the three subsequent fiscal years, respectively, calculated as the difference
between actual earnings per share (EPS) and the current median analyst forecast EPS, divided by the current stock price. Analyst revisiont+1 is the
difference between the current median analyst forecast and the median analyst forecast 12 months later, divided by the current stock price. Analyst
revisiont+2 is the difference between the current median analyst forecast and the median analyst forecast 24 months later, divided by the current
stock price. Analyst growth expectation is the current median analyst expected long-term (five year) EPS growth rate. To allow the current fiscal
year data to become known to analysts, the current analyst forecast is taken as of the fourth month after the current fiscal year end date (for
example, for firms with a fiscal year end date of December 31, we use the median analyst forecast as of April). Loan growth, asset growth, ROA,
loan loss provisions, as well as analyst forecast errors and revisions are winsorized at the 1st and 99th percentile, respectively.


                               Observations       Mean          St. Dev.          Min.       25th perc.     Median       75th perc.      Max.
1-year return                     7914            0.1550        0.3933          -0.9848       -0.0560        0.1290        0.3495       4.2973
2-year return                     3728            0.1255        0.2900          -0.9201       -0.0277        0.1270        0.2938       1.7161
3-year return                     2365            0.1105        0.2314          -0.8277       -0.0057        0.1309        0.2491       1.0031
1-year loan growth                7330            0.1368        0.1882          -0.2063        0.0308        0.1032        0.1982       1.0081
3-year loan growth                6834            0.1332        0.1266          -0.1418        0.0531        0.1178        0.1925       0.6210
1-year asset growth               7717            0.1266        0.1674          -0.1581        0.0315        0.0932        0.1736       0.9434
3-year asset growth               7185            0.1259        0.1098          -0.1086        0.0569        0.1100        0.1749       0.5655
ROA (%)                           7910            0.7747        0.6531          -2.6099        0.5804        0.8549        1.1084       2.0429
Loan loss provisions (%)          7431            0.6779        0.7955          -0.1415        0.2426        0.4380        0.7730       4.6592
1-year SUE                        6454           -0.0268        0.1120          -0.7325       -0.0110       -0.0004        0.0050       0.1097
2-year SUE                        4790           -0.0316        0.1093          -0.6545       -0.0230       -0.0030        0.0067       0.1266
3-year SUE                         906           -0.0242        0.0631          -0.3170       -0.0356       -0.0098        0.0059       0.1390
Analyst revisiont+1               5209           -0.0124        0.0414          -0.2281       -0.0135       -0.0020        0.0038       0.0610
Analyst revisiont+2               1025           -0.0181        0.0442          -0.1953       -0.0270       -0.0075        0.0039       0.1000
Analyst growth expectation        4983           10.0350        3.0024           3.0000        8.0000       10.0000       12.0000      22.5000




                                                                           40
    Table 3: Relationship between loan and asset growth and subsequent returns
    Panels A through D present regressions of bank stock returns on a bank’s loan growth and asset growth,
    respectively. Banks are sorted into quartiles based on loan growth and asset growth during the previous
    one and three years, respectively. Indicator variables representing each quartile are included in the
    regression with the lowest growth quartile forming the base group. Panel E presents regressions of bank
    stock returns on a bank’s loan growth and non-loan asset growth during the previous three years. Banks
    are sorted into quartiles for loan and non-loan asset growth, respectively. The loan growth sort and the
    non-loan asset growth sort are performed independent of each other. The sample period is 1973 – 2014.
    The regressions include time fixed effects and, where indicated, bank fixed effects. The sample includes
    all banks whose real assets in 2013 dollars are greater than $2 billion. For regressions using subsequent
    two-year and three-year returns as the dependent variable, overlapping returns are dropped to avoid
    inflating t-statistics due to serial correlation. Standard errors allow for clustering at the bank and time
    levels. Numbers in parentheses are t-statistics. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the ten,
    five, and one percent levels, respectively.


                                          Panel A: One-year loan growth


                                 1-year returns                   2-year returns              3-year returns

                                (1)             (2)               (3)           (4)          (5)            (6)
Growth quartile 2             0.0106        -0.0037            0.0026       -0.0132      -0.0039       -0.0322**
                              (0.72)         (-0.22)           (0.24)        (-1.17)      (-0.31)        (-2.12)
Growth quartile 3             0.0092        -0.0106           -0.0035      -0.0265*      -0.0157       -0.0497**
                              (0.58)         (-0.58)           (-0.28)       (-1.90)      (-0.98)        (-2.50)
Growth quartile 4             0.0048        -0.0164           -0.0105      -0.0365*      -0.0261       -0.0598**
                              (0.26)         (-0.78)           (-0.62)       (-1.79)      (-1.35)        (-2.39)
Time FE                        Yes             Yes               Yes           Yes          Yes            Yes
Bank FE                         No             Yes                No           Yes           No            Yes
Number of observations         7330           7330              3377          3377         2096           2096
R-squared                      0.44            0.51              0.54          0.64         0.50           0.67


                                         Panel B: Three-year loan growth


                                 1-year returns                   2-year returns              3-year returns

                                 (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)           (5)            (6)
Growth quartile 2            -0.0213       -0.0410**       -0.0152        -0.0403***    -0.0286***     -0.0473***
                              (-1.29)        (-2.09)        (-1.61)         (-3.44)       (-3.15)        (-3.75)
Growth quartile 3            -0.0292      -0.0577***      -0.0277**       -0.0576***    -0.0467***     -0.0755***
                              (-1.50)        (-2.63)        (-2.27)         (-4.06)       (-3.75)        (-4.75)
Growth quartile 4           -0.0531**     -0.0812***     -0.0552***       -0.0911***    -0.0743***     -0.1088***
                              (-2.42)        (-3.15)        (-3.29)         (-4.26)       (-4.32)        (-4.81)
Time FE                         Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes           Yes            Yes
Bank FE                          No            Yes             No             Yes            No            Yes
Number of observations         6834           6834           3130            3130          2002           2002
R-squared                       0.45           0.51           0.54            0.65          0.52           0.69

                                                         41
                                      Panel C: One-year asset growth


                              1-year returns                 2-year returns            3-year returns

                              (1)            (2)             (3)           (4)         (5)           (6)
Growth quartile 2          0.0031        -0.0148         -0.0055      -0.0211*     -0.0056       -0.0201
                           (0.20)         (-0.98)         (-0.48)       (-1.74)     (-0.44)       (-1.50)
Growth quartile 3         -0.0058        -0.0229          0.0051       -0.0162     -0.0225     -0.0422***
                           (-0.31)        (-1.17)         (0.37)        (-1.12)     (-1.64)       (-2.71)
Growth quartile 4         -0.0117        -0.0275         -0.0254     -0.0488***   -0.0350**    -0.0576***
                           (-0.57)        (-1.29)         (-1.57)       (-2.71)     (-2.12)       (-2.95)
Time FE                      Yes            Yes             Yes           Yes         Yes           Yes
Bank FE                       No            Yes              No           Yes          No           Yes
Number of observations      7717           7717            3534          3534        2179          2179
R-squared                    0.43           0.50            0.53          0.64        0.49          0.68



                                      Panel D: Three-year asset growth


                              1-year returns                 2-year returns            3-year returns

                               (1)          (2)            (3)            (4)           (5)         (6)
Growth quartile 2         -0.0295**    -0.0475***      -0.0207*      -0.0446***    -0.0216**   -0.0514***
                            (-2.00)      (-2.88)        (-1.93)        (-3.06)       (-2.23)     (-3.92)
Growth quartile 3         -0.0372**    -0.0614***     -0.0359**      -0.0668***   -0.0469***   -0.0760***
                            (-2.03)      (-2.98)        (-2.57)        (-3.95)       (-3.73)     (-4.49)
Growth quartile 4        -0.0575***    -0.0821***    -0.0509***      -0.0794***   -0.0613***   -0.0895***
                            (-2.84)      (-3.37)        (-3.54)        (-4.16)       (-4.12)     (-4.64)
Time FE                       Yes          Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes         Yes
Bank FE                        No          Yes             No            Yes            No         Yes
Number of observations       7185         7185           3265           3265          2120        2120
R-squared                     0.43         0.50           0.52           0.64          0.50        0.68




                                                    42
                         Panel E: Three-year loan growth vs. non-loan asset growth


                               1-year returns              2-year returns                 3-year returns

                               (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)              (5)           (6)
Loan growth quartile 2     -0.0218      -0.0409**      -0.0157*    -0.0402***        -0.0288***   -0.0464***
                            (-1.31)       (-2.08)       (-1.73)       (-3.48)          (-3.13)       (-3.74)
Loan growth quartile 3     -0.0300     -0.0575***     -0.0286**    -0.0574***        -0.0479***   -0.0746***
                            (-1.53)       (-2.62)       (-2.46)       (-4.07)          (-3.74)       (-4.79)
Loan growth quartile 4    -0.0551**    -0.0817***    -0.0568***    -0.0916***        -0.0771***   -0.1084***
                            (-2.44)       (-3.19)       (-3.06)       (-4.10)          (-4.03)       (-4.95)
Non-loan asset growth       0.0092        0.0066        0.0077        0.0039           0.0005       -0.0109
quartile 2                  (0.82)        (0.56)         (0.79)       (0.28)            (0.06)       (-1.00)
Non-loan asset growth       0.0003       -0.0048        0.0023       -0.0041           0.0048       -0.0041
quartile 3                  (0.03)        (-0.40)        (0.23)       (-0.34)           (0.51)       (-0.35)
Non-loan asset growth       0.0079        0.0047        0.0064        0.0031           0.0072       -0.0049
quartile 4                  (0.70)        (0.40)         (0.54)       (0.22)            (0.68)       (-0.34)
Time FE                       Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes              Yes           Yes
Bank FE                        No           Yes            No           Yes               No           Yes
Number of observations       6834          6834           3130         3130              2002         2002
R-squared                     0.45          0.51          0.54          0.65             0.52          0.69




                                                    43
Table 4: Returns to portfolios sorted on three-year loan growth
Banks are sorted into quartiles based on loan growth, respectively, during the previous three years. The
table shows average monthly returns (in percent) for the resulting portfolios as well as the difference
between Quartile 4 and Quartile 1. The sample period is 1973 – 2014. Adjusted returns are calculated by
subtracting a characteristic-based benchmark return from each bank’s stock return. Benchmark portfolios
are constructed following Daniel et al. (1997) by sorting all stocks in the CRSP/Compustat Merged
universe into size, industry-adjusted book-to-market, and momentum quintiles. The table also reports
returns adjusted for a characteristic-based benchmark that includes only banks. This benchmark is formed
by matching each bank to all other banks (excluding the bank itself) that are in the same size/book-to-
market/momentum portfolio. Quintile cutoffs for this bank-only benchmark are the same as for the
benchmark that includes nonfinancial firms. For the 8.7% observations in the sample where there is no
other bank in the same benchmark portfolio, banks are matched to the nearest benchmark portfolio,
relaxing first the momentum criterion, then book-to-market, then size. Among the initially unmatched
observations, 73% can be matched to banks that are in the same size quintile, the same book-to-market
quintile, and the immediately adjacent momentum quintile. Benchmark portfolio returns are value-
weighted based on market capitalization. For holding periods of more than one year, overlapping
portfolios are formed as in Jegadeesh and Titman (1993). Numbers in parentheses are t-statistics. *, **,
and *** indicate statistical significance at the ten, five, and one percent levels, respectively.



                                              Growth quartile
                              1               2               3             4               4-1


                                     Panel A: 1-year holding period returns (per month)

     Raw returns           1.44***         1.31***         1.22***       0.92***            -0.52
                            (5.48)          (5.18)          (4.95)        (3.54)           (-1.40)
     Adjusted                0.05            -0.04           -0.12       -0.35**           -0.40*
                            (0.38)          (-0.28)         (-0.87)       (-2.20)          (-1.88)
     Adjusted               0.13*             0.08           -0.01      -0.17***          -0.29***
     (banks only)           (1.83)          (1.30)          (-0.22)       (-2.66)          (-3.15)


                                     Panel B: 2-year holding period returns (per month)


     Raw returns           1.49***         1.30***         1.18***       0.93***             -0.57
                            (5.84)          (5.16)          (4.72)        (3.53)            (-1.54)
     Adjusted                0.10            -0.05           -0.14       -0.34**           -0.45**
                            (0.76)          (-0.34)         (-1.02)       (-2.23)           (-2.18)
     Adjusted              0.19***            0.06           -0.05      -0.15***          -0.34***
     (banks only)           (3.09)          (1.07)          (-1.16)       (-2.69)           (-4.10)




                                                      44
                         Panel C: 3-year holding period returns (per month)

Raw returns    1.50***         1.30***         1.18***       0.93***             -0.56
                (5.97)          (5.14)          (4.68)        (3.50)            (-1.54)
Adjusted         0.11            -0.05           -0.14       -0.34**           -0.45**
                (0.83)          (-0.33)         (-1.03)       (-2.20)           (-2.21)
Adjusted       0.20***            0.05           -0.02      -0.16***          -0.36***
(banks only)    (3.45)          (1.01)          (-0.53)       (-3.01)           (-4.58)




                                          45
    Table 5: Results using loan and asset growth as continuous variables
    The table presents regressions of bank stock returns on a bank’s loan growth, asset growth, and non-loan
    asset growth, respectively, as well as time fixed effects and, where indicated, bank fixed effects. The
    sample period is 1973 – 2014. The sample includes all banks whose real assets in 2013 dollars are greater
    than $2 billion. For regressions using subsequent two-year and three-year returns as the dependent
    variable, overlapping returns are dropped to avoid inflating t-statistics due to serial correlation. Standard
    errors allow for clustering at the bank and time levels. Numbers in parentheses are t-statistics. *, **, and
    *** indicate statistical significance at the ten, five, and one percent levels, respectively.

                                               Panel A: Loan growth

                                  1-year returns                2-year returns                3-year returns
                                (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)
Three-year loan growth      -0.1387**      -0.2341***     -0.1394**      -0.2613***     -0.2016*** -0.3184***
                              (-2.23)        (-2.89)        (-2.50)        (-3.24)        (-3.20)        (-3.59)

Time FE                       Yes             Yes             Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes
Bank FE                        No             Yes              No           Yes             No            Yes
Number of observations        6834            6834            3130          3130           2002           2002
R-squared                     0.45            0.51            0.54          0.65           0.52           0.68

                                               Panel B: Asset growth

                                  1-year returns               2-year returns                 3-year returns
                                (1)            (2)           (3)            (4)             (5)            (6)
Three-year asset growth     -0.1621**      -0.2775***    -0.1603*** -0.2919***          -0.2116*** -0.3303***
                              (-2.57)        (-3.41)       (-2.96)        (-3.85)         (-3.43)        (-3.78)

Time FE                       Yes             Yes             Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes
Bank FE                        No             Yes              No           Yes             No            Yes
Number of observations        7185            7185            3265          3265           2120           2120
R-squared                     0.43            0.50            0.52          0.63           0.50           0.68

                                 Panel C: Loan growth vs. non-loan asset growth

                                  1-year returns                2-year returns               3-year returns
                                (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)           (5)            (6)
Three-year loan growth      -0.1510**      -0.2299**      -0.1501**      -0.2621***    -0.2233*** -0.3371***
                              (-2.04)        (-2.55)        (-2.17)        (-2.85)       (-2.85)        (-3.43)

Three-year non-loan           0.0548        -0.0222           0.0479       0.0042         0.1009         0.1011
asset growth                  (0.61)         (-0.21)          (0.48)       (0.03)         (0.96)         (0.74)

Time FE                       Yes             Yes             Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes
Bank FE                        No             Yes              No           Yes             No            Yes
Number of observations        6834            6834            3130          3130           2002           2002
R-squared                     0.45            0.51            0.54          0.65           0.52           0.68




                                                         46
    Table 6: Relationship between loan growth and the probability of left tail returns

    The table presents results from a linear probability model, predicting the probability of a return below the
    fifth percentile using a bank’s loan growth as well as time fixed effects and, where indicated, bank fixed
    effects. The dependent variable equals one if the bank experiences a return below the fifth percentile over
    the subsequent 1-, 2-, or 3-year period, respectively, and zero otherwise. The fifth percentile is -45.7%, -
    38.1%, and -30.3% for 1-, 2-, and 3-year annualized returns, respectively. Banks are sorted into quartiles
    based on loan growth during the previous three years, respectively. Indicator variables representing each
    quartile are included in the regression with the lowest growth quartile forming the base group. The sample
    period is 1972 – 2014. The sample includes all banks whose real assets in 2013 dollars are greater than $2
    billion. For regressions using subsequent two-year and three-year return periods, overlapping periods are
    dropped to avoid inflating t-statistics due to serial correlation. Standard errors allow for clustering at the
    bank and time levels. Numbers in parentheses are t-statistics. *, **, and *** indicate statistical
    significance at the ten, five, and one percent levels, respectively.



                                  1-year returns                2-year returns                 3-year returns

                                 (1)           (2)              (3)           (4)            (5)             (6)
Growth quartile 2            -0.0069         0.0086         -0.0012       0.0225**        0.0252*        0.0365**
                              (-0.88)        (0.89)          (-0.16)        (2.16)         (1.87)          (2.36)
Growth quartile 3            -0.0070         0.0062          0.0008        0.0208          0.0206        0.0347**
                              (-0.84)        (0.61)          (0.06)         (1.33)         (1.58)          (2.24)
Growth quartile 4             0.0228         0.0174         0.0464*       0.0540*        0.0575**        0.0580**
                              (1.47)         (1.00)          (1.80)         (1.70)         (2.46)          (2.42)
Time FE                         Yes           Yes              Yes           Yes            Yes             Yes
Bank FE                          No           Yes               No           Yes             No             Yes
Number of observations         6834           6834            3130           3130           2002            2002
R-squared                       0.19          0.36             0.20          0.43           0.15            0.48




                                                         47
Table 7: Relationship between three-year loan growth and profitability / loan loss provisions
The table presents regressions of bank profitability and loan loss provisions, respectively, on a bank’s loan growth as well as time fixed effects
and, where indicated, bank fixed effects. Banks are sorted into quartiles based on loan growth during the previous three years. Indicator variables
representing each quartile are included in the regression with the lowest growth quartile forming the base group. Profitability is defined as the
bank’s ROA (in percent), calculated as net income divided by total assets multiplied by 100. Loan loss provisions are defined as loan loss
provisions divided by total gross loans multiplied by 100. The sample period is 1972 – 2014. The sample includes all banks whose real assets in
2013 dollars are greater than $2 billion. Standard errors allow for clustering at the bank and time levels. Numbers in parentheses are t-statistics. *,
**, and *** indicate statistical significance at the ten, five, and one percent levels, respectively.
                                                                Panel A: ROA levels
                                        ROAt                          ROAt+1                          ROAt+2                        ROAt+3
                                   (1)         (2)               (3)           (4)               (5)            (6)            (7)            (8)
Growth quartile 2              0.2438***   0.1627***         0.1565***       0.0464           0.0451       -0.0757*        -0.0404     -0.1605***
                                 (5.71)      (5.14)            (4.55)        (1.53)           (1.15)         (-1.96)        (-1.06)        (-4.12)
Growth quartile 3              0.2882***   0.2200***         0.1803***     0.0801**           0.0386       -0.0796*        -0.0366     -0.1632***
                                 (4.90)      (4.92)            (3.94)        (2.02)           (0.75)         (-1.71)        (-0.57)        (-2.94)
Growth quartile 4              0.2133***   0.2340***          0.1034*       0.0993*          -0.0549        -0.0697      -0.1557*** -0.1739***
                                 (3.38)      (4.33)            (1.77)        (1.92)           (-0.82)        (-1.05)        (-2.64)        (-2.93)
Time FE                           Yes         Yes               Yes           Yes               Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes
Bank FE                            No         Yes                No           Yes                No            Yes             No            Yes
Number of observations            6832        6832              6687          6687             6152           6152           5644           5644
R-squared                         0.25        0.51              0.24          0.50              0.24           0.51           0.23           0.52

                                                                Panel B: ROA changes
                                    ROAt+1 - ROAt                  ROAt+2 - ROAt+1               ROAt+3 - ROAt+2               ROAt+3 - ROAt
                                   (1)            (2)             (3)            (4)            (5)             (6)           (7)           (8)
Growth quartile 2             -0.0845*** -0.1138***          -0.0868*** -0.1089***         -0.0701**       -0.0780**     -0.2181*** -0.2582***
                                (-3.14)        (-3.12)         (-3.14)        (-3.37)        (-2.39)         (-2.40)       (-3.39)       (-3.09)
Growth quartile 3             -0.0944*** -0.1238***          -0.1143*** -0.1368***          -0.0784*       -0.0868**     -0.2741*** -0.3471***
                                (-2.90)        (-3.00)         (-3.39)        (-3.64)        (-1.78)         (-2.00)       (-3.24)       (-3.19)
Growth quartile 4             -0.0968***     -0.1146**       -0.1252*** -0.1378***         -0.0926**       -0.0891**     -0.3237*** -0.3825***
                                (-2.78)        (-2.34)         (-3.08)        (-2.84)        (-2.25)         (-2.10)       (-3.48)       (-2.82)
Time FE                           Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes           Yes           Yes
Bank FE                            No            Yes              No            Yes             No             Yes            No           Yes
Number of observations           6686           6686            6151           6151           5643            5643          1969          1969
R-squared                         0.13           0.19            0.13           0.18           0.12            0.19          0.26          0.45

                                                                          48
                                             Panel C: Loan loss provision (LLP) levels

                                  LLPt                       LLPt+1                          LLPt+2                     LLPt+3
                              (1)          (2)            (3)              (4)        (5)                (6)        (7)          (8)
Growth quartile 2        -0.2943***   -0.2275***    -0.1629***         -0.0640    -0.0308             0.0831*     0.0236     0.1354***
                           (-5.28)      (-5.27)        (-3.20)          (-1.49)    (-0.63)             (1.71)     (0.52)       (2.77)
Growth quartile 3        -0.3718***   -0.3442***    -0.1672***        -0.0941*     0.0081             0.1118*     0.0725     0.1813***
                           (-5.40)      (-6.42)        (-2.81)          (-1.72)    (0.14)              (1.93)     (1.11)       (2.76)
Growth quartile 4        -0.3811***   -0.4233***     -0.1379**        -0.1276*     0.0597              0.1033   0.1739***    0.2272***
                           (-5.31)      (-6.36)        (-2.24)          (-1.91)    (0.92)              (1.34)     (2.68)       (3.08)
Time FE                      Yes          Yes            Yes              Yes        Yes                Yes        Yes          Yes
Bank FE                       No          Yes             No              Yes         No                Yes         No          Yes
Number of observations      6791         6791           6659             6659       6141                6141       5637         5637
R-squared                    0.33         0.51           0.31             0.50       0.31               0.51       0.31         0.53


                                            Panel D: Loan loss provision (LLP) changes

                               LLPt+1 - LLPt             LLPt+2 - LLPt+1               LLPt+3 - LLPt+2                LLPt+3 - LLPt
                             (1)            (2)         (3)            (4)            (5)           (6)             (7)            (8)
Growth quartile 2        0.1293***      0.1625***   0.1090***      0.1308***       0.0606         0.0678        0.3142***      0.3704***
                           (2.90)         (3.48)      (2.68)         (3.18)         (1.48)        (1.50)          (3.17)         (3.17)
Growth quartile 3        0.1859***      0.2253***   0.1594***      0.1841***       0.0798         0.0823        0.4222***      0.5181***
                           (4.22)         (4.70)      (4.06)         (4.60)         (1.49)        (1.39)          (3.39)         (3.28)
Growth quartile 4        0.2293***      0.2696***   0.1795***      0.1987***      0.1186**       0.1156*        0.4936***      0.6117***
                           (5.04)         (5.04)      (3.75)         (3.88)         (2.05)        (1.81)          (3.62)         (3.11)
Time FE                     Yes            Yes         Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes             Yes            Yes
Bank FE                      No            Yes          No            Yes             No           Yes              No            Yes
Number of observations      6641           6641        6127           6127           5634          5634            1954           1954
R-squared                   0.24           0.28        0.23           0.27           0.23          0.27            0.37           0.46




                                                                 49
Table 8: Are analysts too optimistic about banks with high three-year loan growth?
The table presents regressions of analyst forecast errors and analyst forecast revisions, respectively, on a bank’s loan growth as well as time fixed
effects and, where indicated, bank fixed effects. Banks are sorted into quartiles based on loan growth during the previous three years, that is fiscal
years t-2, t-1, and t. Indicator variables representing each quartile are included in the regression with the lowest growth quartile forming the base
group. SUEt+x are standardized unexpected earnings for year t+x, calculated as the difference between actual earnings for fiscal year t+x and the
time t forecast for fiscal year t+x earnings, divided by the stock price as of the day of the time t forecast. To allow analysts to incorporate all
information from fiscal year t, the time t forecast is the median analyst earnings forecast as of the fourth month after the conclusion of fiscal year t,
taken from I/B/E/S. Revisiont+1 is the difference between the time t+1 forecast for fiscal year t+2 and the time t forecast for fiscal year t+2, divided
by the stock price as of the time t forecast. Revisiont+2 is the difference between the time t+2 forecast for fiscal year t+3 and the time t forecast for
fiscal year t+3, divided by the stock price as of the time t forecast. E t+x(g) is the median analyst’s expectation as of time t+x for the long-term
growth rate of the bank’s earnings. The sample period is 1975 – 2014. The sample includes all banks whose real assets in 2013 dollars are greater
than $2 billion. The calculation procedure for SUEs and revisions produces many large outliers. In Panel A, we remedy this issue by estimating
median regressions. T-statistics for the median regressions are estimated using bootstrapped standard errors. The bootstrap was performed using
500 replications each for firm clustering, time clustering and no clustering. The double-clustered variance-covariance matrix (VCV) is calculated
by subtracting the unclustered VCV from the sum of the firm-clustered plus the time-clustered VCV. The table shows how many of the
replications were successful at each step. Unsuccessful replications either did not converge or encountered a variance-covariance matrix that could
not be calculated due to a lack of observations. Regressions including bank fixed effects in Panel A include only those banks for which a minimum
of five observations are available. Results for the long-term growth rate in Panels B and C are estimated using ordinary least squares and allowing
for standard error clustering at the bank and time levels. Numbers in parentheses are t-statistics. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at
the ten, five, and one percent levels, respectively.




                                                                           50
                                                        Panel A: Intermediate term forecast errors and revisions

                                       SUEt+1                       SUEt+2                         SUEt+3                  Revisiont+1                 Revisiont+2
                                 (1)            (2)           (3)            (4)             (5)           (6)         (7)             (8)         (9)            (10)
Growth quartile 2             -0.0004      -0.0016**       -0.0013      -0.0032**         -0.0020       -0.0053     -0.0003       -0.0020**     0.0008         -0.0011
                               (-0.72)        (-2.44)       (-1.22)        (-2.03)         (-0.54)       (-0.81)     (-0.60)        (-2.25)      (0.38)         (-0.33)
Growth quartile 3             -0.0007      -0.0020**      -0.0026*      -0.0060**         -0.0059      -0.0154*     -0.0003       -0.0027**    -0.0018        -0.0070**
                               (-1.15)        (-2.48)       (-1.75)        (-2.48)         (-1.40)       (-1.91)     (-0.55)        (-2.19)     (-0.77)         (-2.39)
Growth quartile 4            -0.0013** -0.0027***        -0.0039**      -0.0068**         -0.0050       -0.0133     -0.0013       -0.0032**    -0.0018         -0.0065
                               (-2.13)        (-3.06)       (-2.23)        (-2.50)         (-1.07)       (-1.20)     (-1.48)        (-2.24)     (-0.65)         (-1.52)
Time FE                          Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes             Yes           Yes         Yes            Yes         Yes             Yes
Bank FE                          No             Yes           No             Yes             No            Yes         No             Yes          No             Yes
Number of successful
bootstrap replications:
Firm clustering:               500            500            500          500               334           424         500           500          326            413
Time clustering:               500            369            500          412               395           426         500           405          414            423
No clustering:                 500            292            500          376               325           337         500           376          327            364
Number of observations         5662          5262           4275          3872              878           529        4670          4239          995            622


                                                               Panel B: Long-term growth forecast levels

                                                  Et(g)                        Et+1(g)                         Et+2(g)                     Et+3(g)
                                             (1)            (2)           (3)            (4)              (5)             (6)         (7)             (8)
         Growth quartile 2               0.3197**       0.2366**      0.3892***      0.3654***         0.2323*         0.2108*     0.2735*         0.2261*
                                           (2.32)         (2.20)        (2.58)         (2.66)           (1.73)          (1.81)      (1.86)          (1.73)
         Growth quartile 3              0.8629***      0.4211***      0.8408***      0.5071***        0.6273***        0.2235*    0.5489***         0.1770
                                           (4.40)         (2.95)        (4.46)         (3.66)           (3.49)          (1.75)      (3.12)          (1.20)
         Growth quartile 4              1.8904***      0.9190***      1.6707***      0.8285***        1.2683***      0.4064***    1.1744***      0.3781**
                                           (6.57)         (5.76)        (6.04)         (5.22)           (4.93)          (3.06)      (4.92)          (2.53)
         Time FE                            Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes              Yes             Yes         Yes             Yes
         Bank FE                             No            Yes            No            Yes               No             Yes          No             Yes
         Number of observations             4458           4458          4019           4019             3573            3573        3195            3195
         R-squared                          0.20           0.60          0.21           0.60             0.20            0.59        0.21            0.60




                                                                                     51
                                            Panel C: Revisions of long-term growth forecasts

                                Et+1(g)- Et(g)                Et+2(g)- Et+1(g)              Et+3(g)- Et+2(g)              Et+3(g)- Et(g)
                              (1)              (2)          (3)               (4)         (5)               (6)         (7)              (8)
Growth quartile 2          0.0737           0.1193     -0.1086**          -0.1181     -0.0337           -0.0197      0.1130           0.1558
                           (0.97)           (1.18)       (-2.20)           (-1.43)     (-0.37)           (-0.15)     (0.39)           (0.33)
Growth quartile 3          0.0040           0.0606    -0.1702***         -0.1967*     -0.0722           -0.0077     -0.3082          -0.1420
                           (0.05)           (0.66)       (-3.09)           (-1.79)     (-0.79)           (-0.06)     (-1.11)          (-0.36)
Growth quartile 4        -0.1621**         -0.0355    -0.3502*** -0.2915***          -0.1510**          -0.0094    -0.7300**         -0.5317
                           (-2.46)          (-0.38)      (-4.35)           (-2.95)     (-2.03)           (-0.08)     (-2.39)          (-1.24)
Time FE                      Yes              Yes          Yes               Yes         Yes               Yes         Yes              Yes
Bank FE                       No              Yes           No               Yes          No               Yes          No              Yes
Number of observations      4019             4019         3479              3479        3092              3092        1112             1112
R-squared                    0.06             0.14         0.07              0.13        0.07              0.15        0.12             0.33




                                                                   52
    Table 9: Organic growth vs. growth through mergers
    The table presents regressions of bank stock returns on a bank’s loan growth during the previous three
    years as well as time fixed effects and, where indicated bank fixed effects. The regressions distinguish
    between organic growth and growth through mergers. The sample period is 1978 - 2014. To determine
    organic loan growth, mergers and acquisitions from the Chicago Fed’s M&A database are matched to our
    sample and target loans as reported on the most recent Call Report are subtracted from the acquirer’s
    fiscal year end loans in the year in which the merger occurred. Data from the FDIC’s list of failed banks
    and from Compustat are substituted where Call Report data are unavailable. Merger-related loan growth
    is measured as target loans divided by the acquirer’s loans. If a bank acquired one or more institutions
    over the previous three years for which loan data are unavailable, the observation is dropped from the
    regressions. Banks are sorted into quartiles for organic growth, with the lowest growth quartile serving as
    the base group for the regressions. For merger growth, all banks without a merger in a given three-year
    period are included in one group which acts as the base group. The remaining banks are sorted into
    terciles labeled low/medium/high merger growth. The organic growth sort and the merger growth sort are
    performed independent of each other. Standard errors allow for clustering at the firm and time levels.
    Numbers in parentheses are t-statistics. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the ten, five, and
    one percent levels, respectively.




                                   1-year returns                  2-year returns                3-year returns

                                  (1)            (2)              (3)           (4)            (5)            (6)
Organic growth quartile 2      -0.0229       -0.0419**         -0.0182      -0.0401**       -0.0202       -0.0434***
                                (-1.58)        (-2.23)          (-1.55)       (-2.50)        (-1.43)        (-2.96)

Organic growth quartile 3      -0.0303       -0.0566**         -0.0297*    -0.0641***      -0.0404**      -0.0710***
                                (-1.59)        (-2.54)          (-1.80)      (-3.61)         (-2.53)        (-4.32)

Organic growth quartile 4     -0.0388*       -0.0655**      -0.0440**      -0.0808***     -0.0638***      -0.0977***
                               (-1.67)         (-2.29)        (-2.07)        (-2.94)        (-3.19)         (-3.34)

Low merger growth              0.0010         -0.0107          0.0132        -0.0045       0.0146**        -0.0030
                               (0.08)          (-0.90)         (1.08)         (-0.35)        (2.31)         (-0.21)

Medium merger growth           -0.0171      -0.0384***         -0.0073      -0.0303*        -0.0011        -0.0188
                                (-1.33)       (-2.58)           (-0.58)      (-1.91)         (-0.07)        (-0.92)

High merger growth           -0.0369***     -0.0627***      -0.0344**      -0.0623***      -0.0357**      -0.0610***
                               (-3.03)        (-3.88)         (-2.57)        (-3.45)         (-2.40)        (-2.71)

Time FE                         Yes            Yes              Yes           Yes             Yes            Yes
Bank FE                          No            Yes               No           Yes              No            Yes
Number of observations          5529           5529             2489          2489            1592           1592
R-squared                       0.42           0.49             0.50          0.63            0.49           0.68




                                                          53
Table 10: Relationship between organic growth, merger growth, and profitability / loan loss provisions
The table presents regressions of bank profitability and loan loss provisions, respectively, on a bank’s three-year organic loan growth, its three-
year merger growth, as well as time fixed effects and, where indicated, bank fixed effects. Organic growth and growth through mergers are defined
as in Table 9. Banks are sorted into quartiles for organic growth, with the lowest growth quartile serving as the base group for the regressions. For
merger growth, all banks without a merger in a given three-year period are included in one group which acts as the base group. The remaining
banks are sorted into terciles labeled low/medium/high merger growth. The organic growth sort and the merger growth sort are performed
independently. Profitability is defined as the bank’s ROA (in percent), calculated as net income divided by total assets multiplied by 100. Loan
loss provisions are defined as loan loss provisions divided by total gross loans multiplied by 100. The sample period is 1978 – 2014. The sample
includes all banks whose real assets in 2013 dollars are greater than $2 billion. Standard errors allow for clustering at the bank and time levels.
Numbers in parentheses are t-statistics. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the ten, five, and one percent levels, respectively.

                                                                Panel A: ROA levels
                                       ROAt                          ROAt+1                          ROAt+2                       ROAt+3
                                  (1)         (2)               (3)           (4)             (5)            (6)            (7)            (8)
Organic growth quartile 2     0.2267***   0.1546***         0.1798***     0.0744**          0.0493        -0.0761*       -0.0062      -0.1308**
                                (4.70)      (3.97)            (3.83)        (1.98)          (1.02)         (-1.86)        (-0.13)        (-2.51)

Organic growth quartile 3     0.2732***      0.2418***      0.1699***         0.0987**      0.0200        -0.0905*       -0.0923      -0.2091***
                                (4.50)         (4.24)         (3.32)            (2.03)      (0.36)         (-1.69)        (-1.22)       (-2.86)

Organic growth quartile 4     0.2491***      0.3196***       0.1334**      0.1778***       -0.0659        -0.0555      -0.1795***      -0.1799**
                                (3.56)         (4.74)          (2.30)        (3.07)         (-1.01)        (-0.75)       (-2.73)         (-2.53)

Low merger growth             0.1344***        -0.0249      0.1463***          -0.0545    0.1420***       -0.0840*      0.1722***       -0.0311
                                (4.31)          (-0.81)       (4.06)            (-1.50)     (3.54)         (-1.86)        (4.31)         (-0.75)

Medium merger growth          0.1226***        -0.0178      0.1052***         -0.0831**   0.1157***       -0.0875*      0.1351***       -0.0326
                                (3.92)          (-0.53)       (2.62)            (-2.00)     (2.72)         (-1.90)        (2.91)         (-0.73)

High merger growth              0.0810*        -0.0231        0.0653           -0.0853     -0.0187       -0.1970**        0.0326        -0.1045
                                 (1.87)         (-0.58)       (0.95)            (-1.41)     (-0.21)        (-2.43)        (0.42)         (-1.58)

Time FE                          Yes            Yes            Yes              Yes          Yes              Yes          Yes            Yes
Bank FE                           No            Yes             No              Yes           No              Yes           No            Yes
Number of observations           5529           5529           5409             5409         4905             4905         4430           4430
R-squared                        0.26           0.52           0.25             0.51         0.24             0.52         0.24           0.52

                                                                         54
                                                Panel B: Loan loss provision (LLP) levels

                                      LLPt                      LLPt+1                          LLPt+2                       LLPt+3
                                (1)          (2)          (3)            (4)            (5)                (6)       (7)              (8)
Organic growth quartile 2   -0.2994*** -0.2325***     -0.1896***     -0.0873**       -0.0461             0.0766   -0.0066         0.1255**
                              (-4.68)      (-4.83)      (-3.66)        (-2.08)        (-0.76)            (1.46)    (-0.12)          (1.97)

Organic growth quartile 3   -0.3944***   -0.3688***   -0.2062***        -0.1223**    -0.0178             0.1079    0.0540         0.1921**
                              (-5.20)      (-5.95)      (-3.27)           (-2.05)     (-0.25)            (1.57)    (0.63)           (2.16)

Organic growth quartile 4   -0.4382***   -0.5043***   -0.1751***        -0.1715**    0.0511              0.1159   0.1654**       0.2590***
                              (-5.03)      (-6.36)      (-2.62)           (-2.41)    (0.70)              (1.28)     (2.06)         (2.60)

Low merger growth            0.0773*     0.0825**        0.0569         0.1004**     0.0225              0.0603    0.0133             0.0201
                              (1.65)       (2.06)        (1.04)           (2.12)     (0.38)              (1.16)    (0.22)             (0.40)

Medium merger growth         -0.0150       0.0138        0.0083         0.0923*      -0.0170             0.0538   -0.0359             0.0016
                              (-0.41)      (0.35)        (0.18)          (1.92)       (-0.35)            (1.03)    (-0.69)            (0.03)

High merger growth          -0.1048***    -0.0604       -0.0191          0.0820      0.0385          0.1583**      0.0068             0.0933
                              (-3.04)      (-1.51)       (-0.34)         (1.43)      (0.54)            (2.26)      (0.09)             (1.31)

Time FE                       Yes          Yes           Yes              Yes         Yes                Yes       Yes                Yes
Bank FE                        No          Yes            No              Yes          No                Yes        No                Yes
Number of observations        5493         5493          5383             5383        4895               4895      4424               4424
R-squared                     0.33         0.53          0.32             0.52        0.31               0.53      0.31               0.54




                                                                   55
   Table 11: Relationship between loan growth and delistings
   Panel A present results from a linear probability model of the probability that a bank will delist within the
   next one, two or three years, respectively, depending on the bank’s loan growth and time fixed effects.
   Panel B presents regressions of bank stock returns including delisting returns on a bank’s loan growth.
   Banks are sorted into quartiles based on loan growth during the previous three years. Indicator variables
   representing each quartile are included in the regression with the lowest growth quartile forming the base
   group. The sample period is 1972 – 2014. The sample includes all banks whose real assets in 2013 dollars
   are greater than $2 billion. For regressions using subsequent two-year and three-year delistings / returns
   as the dependent variable, overlapping observations are dropped to avoid inflating t-statistics due to serial
   correlation. Standard errors allow for clustering at the bank and time levels. Numbers in parentheses are t-
   statistics. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the ten, five, and one percent levels,
   respectively.
                                         Panel A: Probability of delisting


                                   Delisted within                 Delisted within              Delisted within
                                      one year                       two years                   three years

                                   (1)             (2)              (3)           (4)            (5)           (6)
Growth quartile 2             -0.0167**        -0.0162*       -0.0462***     -0.0457***      -0.0366       -0.0318
                                (-2.35)         (-1.94)          (-2.73)       (-2.67)        (-1.62)       (-1.25)
Growth quartile 3            -0.0209***       -0.0188**        -0.0391**      -0.0376*      -0.0493*      -0.0440*
                                (-2.74)         (-2.07)          (-2.37)       (-1.76)        (-1.91)       (-1.70)
Growth quartile 4            -0.0361***      -0.0468***        -0.0438**     -0.0709***     -0.0474*     -0.0648**
                                (-5.04)         (-5.39)          (-2.41)       (-4.10)        (-1.80)       (-2.46)
Time FE                           Yes             Yes              Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes
Bank FE                            No             Yes               No           Yes             No           Yes
Number of observations           7090            7090             3548          3548           2428          2428
R-squared                         0.03            0.21             0.05          0.36           0.07          0.45


                            Panel B: Subsequent returns including delisting returns


                                   1-year returns                  2-year returns              3-year returns

                                  (1)             (2)               (3)          (4)            (5)           (6)
Growth quartile 2             -0.0105         -0.0310            0.0042      -0.0201         0.0004       -0.0169
                               (-0.63)         (-1.59)           (0.23)       (-1.03)        (0.02)        (-0.54)
Growth quartile 3             -0.0243        -0.0515**          -0.0213     -0.0437**      -0.0592**    -0.0874***
                               (-1.27)         (-2.34)           (-1.14)      (-2.48)        (-2.54)       (-2.92)
Growth quartile 4            -0.0458**      -0.0712***        -0.0558***   -0.0797***     -0.1202***    -0.1212***
                               (-2.28)         (-2.91)           (-2.76)      (-3.36)        (-4.18)       (-3.60)
Time FE                          Yes             Yes               Yes          Yes            Yes           Yes
Bank FE                           No             Yes                No          Yes             No           Yes
Number of observations          7088            7088              3459         3459           2341          2341
R-squared                        0.43            0.50              0.39         0.56           0.26          0.48




                                                         56
