NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

U.S. AND FOREIGN COMPETITION
IN THE DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
OF THE ASIAN PACIFIC RIM

Robert E. Baldwin

Working Paper No. 2208

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 1987

The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program in
International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the author
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #2208
April 1987

U.S. and Foreign Competition in the Developing
Countries of the Asian Pacific Rim

ABSTRACT

This paper examines changes since the early 1960s

in the export shares of the United States and its major
competitors in the markets of the developing, countries of the
Asian Pacific Rim (APR), defined to include Hong Kong, Korea,
Taiwan,

Singapore,

the

Philippines,

Malaysia,

Thailand,

A technique for revealing a country's
Indonesia, and China.
factor—price advantages or disadvantages in its trade with

another country is
position relative
findings are that
reniained roughly

also used to analyze the U.S. comparative cost
Among the
to the countries of the region.
the U.S. export share in the APR market has
constant over the period and that the United

States has a relative factor-price advantage with all the
developing countries of the region in physical capital and
skilled labor and a disadvantage in unskilled labor. For land
and natural resources, the picture is mixed.

The competitive performance of these developing countries in

the markets of the United States, Canada, Japan, the European
Community, Australia and New Zealand, and in the region itself is
also studied, revealing the familiar result that the developing

countries of the region and Japan have increased their market
In addition, the volume
shares significantly since the 1960s.
and distribution of U.S. and Japanese direct investment in the
Asian Pacific Rim is examined.

Robert E. Baldwin
Department of Economics
University of Wisconsin
Madison, WI 53706

• U.S. AND FOREIGN COMPETITION IN THE DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
OF THE ASIAN PACIFIC RIM
Robert E. Baldwin
1. INTRODUCTION1

The ability of the major developing countries of the Asian
Pacific Rim (APR) - Hong Kong, the Republic of Korea (henceforth
referred to as Korea), the Republic of China (henceforth referred

to as Taiwan), the Philippines, Malaysia,

Indonesia, and

Singapore, Thailand,

the People's Republic of China (henceforth

referred to as China) -

to

compete in the markets of the United

States is well-known and frequently cited by many domestic
industries as a matter for national concern. Much less

is known

about the competitive performance and potential of American
industries in the markets of the major developing countries of

the APR and interest in this matter is only beginning to
develop;' it will be the focus of this paper.

The following section provides an economic overview of the

APR by comparing the main economic characteristics

of the

countries in the region and those of the region as a whole with

other major groupings of countries.

Sincethe prospects for

exporting goods and services to the countries of the region
depend on the policies these countries follow in such matters as

1

am indebted to Jeffrey Steagall

for research

assistance in preparing the paper and also to Gary Sampson of the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development in Geneva for
providing the export and import data on the developing countries
of the Asian Pacific Rim.

1

promoting economic growth and the opening

of domestic markets,

the third section briefly describes the economic policies pursued

by each APR country in the recent past.

This section also

analyzes the success of major trading partners in penetrating the

market for imports in each country and how successful each
country has been in exporting to major foreign markets. Finally,

the trade and development policies likely to be followed in the
future in each country is briefly discussed in section three.

Section four analyzes the competitive performance of the

United States and its major competitors in the markets for
imports in three groups of APR countries: the advanced developing

countries (ADCs) of the region -

Hong Kong, Korea, Taiwan, and

Singapore; the resource-rich countries (RRCs) of the region -

the

Philippines, Malaysia, Thailand, and Indonesia; and China. It
also examines changes since the early 1960s in the shares of the
import markets in these APR country groups captured by the United

States, Canada, Japan, the European Community, Australia and New

Zealand, and other countries within the region, together with
changes in the commodity composition of exports to the APR groups

from these countries and country-groups.

A technique for

revealing the sources of a countrys comparative advantage is

used to determine the relative factor-price advantages

disadvantages the United States has in its

and

trade with the

countries of the region.

Section five briefly looks at the performance of the three

APR country groups in exporting to the United States and other
2

major foreign markets and examines changes since the early 1960s
in the share of their exports absorbed by the United States and
other countries and shifts in the commodity composition of their
exports.

Because trade and investment are

closely linked, it is

necessary to take foreign investment into account in evaluating
U.S. competitive prospects in the region. Section six examines
the volume and country distribution of

direct foreign investment

in the region by the United States and its main competitor in the

area, Japan. Changes in the relative importance of U.S. direct

investment in different sectors in the APR countries are also
studied. The final section summarizes the main conclusions of
the paper.

2. AN OVERVIEW OF ECONOMIC CHARACTERISTICS AND PERFORMANCE

2.1 The Developing Countries of APR Compared to Other gions
The tremendous market potential in the developing countries
of the Asian Pacific Rim lies simply in their being not only the

most populous but the fastest growing region of the world. The
population of the nine countries totals 1.33

billion, whereas

that of the next most populous region, South Asia, amounts to .87
billion.
Gross national product (GNP)

per capita in the nine

countries grew at a remarkable average rate of 5.75% between 1965

and 1984. In contrast, GNP per capita in the industrial market-

economy countries increased at an average rate of only 2.5%
during this period and at average rates of
3

1.9% in both South

Asia and the countries of South America (World Development Report
1986, Annex Table 1).

Table 1 compares the APR countries with a selected group of

countries outside of the area in terms of basic

economic

Except for the

characteristics and performance indicators.

Philippines, per capita income grew much more rapidly in the
developing countries of the Asian Pacific Rim

than in mature

developed countries such as the United States and West Germany

and, in most cases, even Japan, the newest
developed country.

and most dynamic

Yet, though per capita income levels in the

APR countries rank among the highest for all developing nations,
there is still a wide per capita income gap between the advanced
industrial market economies and these countries.

West Germany's

1984 per capita income, for example, is more than five times as
large as South Korea's and almost seventeen times as large as the
Philippines' per capita income in that year.

The magnitude of the APRs output and imports is also small
when compared to that of the developed countries.

The total of

all nine countries' gross domestic product in 1984 was $656
billion, only slightly more than one-half of Japan's and not much

greater than West Germany's GDP.

The difference in imports is

less striking due to the high degree of dependence on trade of

most countries in the region. Their total 1984 imports of $181
billion are roughly equal to those of Japan and of West Germany

in that year.

Thus, the major market opportunities for the

United States are still in other developed countries; the major
4

developing countries of Southeast Asia and East Asia represent an
important potential market rather than a major current one.

Compared with

other developing

regions, however, the

developing countries of the Asian Pacific Rim already rank as the

largest market. The 1984 $656 billion GDP level of the region

compares with GDP levels of $623 billion for all of South
America, Central America, and the Caribbean and of $406 billion

for South Asia, for example.

Moreover, the 1984 $181 billion

import level of the region compares with only $64 billion for
South America, Central America, and the Caribbean and $25 billion
for South Asia.

This market-size advantage is likely to widen

during the rest of the century, given the currently higher growth
rates in the Pacific Rim countries.

Table 2 shows the growth and trade experience of the APR and

selected other countries before and after the first oil crisis.

The general slowdown in growth in both the developing and
developed countries after the first oil shock is evident from the

table. It should be noted, however, that the relative decline in

growth rates has been less in the APR countries than in such
developed countries as the United States, Japan, and Germany. In

the United States, the percentage decline in the average annual
growth rate of GDP between 1965-73 and 1973-84 was 28%; in Japan,

56%; and in Germany, 57%.

The average annual GDP growth rate

actually increased in Hong Kong and Malaysia (also India) and
declined by only 18% on the average in the other seven developing
countries in the Asian Pacific Rim.
5

2.2 Diversity among the APR Countries

As shown in Table 1, there

are significant economic

differences among the developing countries of the Asian Pacific
Rim. It is usual to divide the countries into three groups, the
first comprising South Korea, Taiwan, Hong Kong, and Singapore;
the second consisting of the Philippines, Malaysia, Thailand, and

Indonesia; and the third being China. The first group is usually
designated the "newly industrializing countries" (NICs) of Asia,

a term indicating their relatively early emphasis on exportoriented industrialization. While the words, "newly industrializing," were appropriate in the ].960s and early 1970s when they

first adopted policies aimed at significantly increasing the
exports of manufactures, it seems more appropriate to use Hong
and Kraus&s (1981) term, "advanced developing countries" (ADCs),
especially since other countries of the region later also adopted
policies aimed at export-oriented industrialization.

Per capita

income in all of the ADCs is higher than in the countries of the
other two groups, though if per capita income alone is the basis

of the classification, it would seem reasonable to include
Malaysia in the first group.

There is also a significant gap

between income levels in Singapore and Hong Kong and in Taiwan
and South Korea.

The second group of four nations is usually described as the
resource-rich countries (RRCs) to indicate the much greater share

of primary products in their exports compared to the ADCs (see

Table 3)2

The

greater share of production devoted to
6

agriculture is an indication of their

greater land resources as

well as their lower per capita income

levels. Except for

Malaysia, the RRCs are less open than the ADCs of

Asia in terms

of trade's share of GDP, and these countries have pursued import-

substitution policies more vigorously than

the ADC.

Another

difference is the higher natural rate of population growth in the
RRCs than in the ADCs.3
China is unique in several respects. It is by far the most
populous country in the world and it ranks third in area. Though

it has become much more

outward-looking in recent years it

remains, as the export and import shares presented in Table 1
indicate, a very closed economy compared to other countries in
the region, although not in comparison to such countries as India

and the United States. While its GDP

growth rate since 1965

compares favorably with the RRCs', China's low per capita income
level makes the country more similar to the countries of South
Asia than to those of the Asian Pacific Rim.

2.3 Savings Investment, Foreign Debt, and Trade 4justment

A necessary, though not

sufficient, requirement for a

country to raise its growth rate is to increase its investment
and savings rates significantly.
As Table 4 shows, such an
increase has occurred in the ADCs, the RRCs and China.

In five

of the nine countries, investment as a share of GDP rose by more
than ten percentage points between 1960

and 1984, and in three

others the increase was at least five percentage points. The
1984 investment ratio in Singapore was an incredible 47 percent,
7

and it was 30 percent or more in Taiwan, Malaysia, and China.
The increase in domestic savings has been even more impressive,

especially in Singapore, Hong Kong, Taiwan, South Korea, and
Indonesia. The rate of gross domestic savings is now about 30
percent or more in six of the nine countries. The only developed

countries that can match these savings rates are Japan (31
percent) and Norway (35 percent).

An excess of domestic investment over domestic savings
indicates that savings by foreigners are financing part of a
country's investment activities. Such was the case for the ADCs
in the initial phases of their take-off to high rates of growth,

as the figures in Table 4 on the resource gap indicate.

The

large positive number for Hong Kong in 1984 indicates that
domestic savers were investing some of their savings abroad,
probably because of their uncertainty about the political future
of the colony.

A more direct indication of the extent to which a country
has relied on external sources of finance is the magnitude of its
external debt and the ratio of the external debt to the country's

GNP. The debt-service share of exports of goods and services is
a rough indicator of the degree of difficulty the country has in
meeting its external obligations.

Table 5 presents information

on these various debt indicators for the APR countries, except

for China, on which debt data are unavailable.

As with

developing countries generally, the data show a very rapid
increase in external borrowing for APR countries over the last 15
8

years.

This ability to draw upon external sources, especially

private capital markets, has been an important factor in enabling

growth to continue at high rates. It has, however, also led to

serious debt-servicing problems for some nations that borrowed
heavily and then around 1980 were suddenly faced both with much

higher real interest rates and falling prices for their export
products.

Four APR countries -

South Korea, Thailand, the

Philippines, and Indonesia - are on most lists of countries faced

with significant debt-servicing problems; debt-servicing charges
in 1984 claimed more than 15% of the foreign exchange they earned

from exporting goods and services. The drain of debt-servicing
on the foreign exchange earnings of Singapore and Hong Kong is
negligible and only about 5% for Taiwan and Malaysia.

Obviously, in order to cope with increased debt-servicing
charges, a country must generate additional foreign exchange by

improving its balance of trade.

Table 6 shows that the trade

balance of the four main indebted countries, South Korea,
Thailand, the Philippines, and Indonesia improved between 1983

and 1985. Korea, whose balance of trade has improved steadily
since 1981, achieved the most desirable type of trade adjustment

between these years -

an

expansion of imports and exports.

Thailands improved trade balance between 1983 and 1985 came
about through an expansion of exports and contraction of imports.
The recent trade adjustment in both the Philippines and Indonesia
was achieved by reducing both exports and imports.

9

3. DEVELOPMENT POLICY AND TRADE PERFORMANCE

As with most developing countries in the world, the major
economic goal of those in the ksian Pacific Rim over the last 40

years has been to increase the rate of economic development.
Their success in achieving this goal and the extent to which
their development policies involve a willingness to open their
own markets to the products of other countries largely determine
the trading opportunities of the United States and others in the
region.

This section briefly describes the nature of the

development strategies pursued by the individual APR countries
and analyzes the shifts that have taken place in the commodity
composition and geographical distribution of their exports and
imports.

It also speculates as to each country's likely future

trade and development policies.

3.1 The Advanced Developing Countries
3.1.1 Hong Kong
3.1.1.1 Trade and Development Policy

The British colony of Hong Kong is unique among developing
economies in that it has achieved its remarkable post-World War
II growth under a policy of "positive nonintervention."

Imports

and exports of both goods and capital have been completely free

from government taxes, subsidies, or other controls, and no

effort has been made to direct investment into particular
sectors. The standard tax rate on earnings and profits is the
lowest of any industrial state, being set at the level of 12.5%
10

from 1951-1966.

Until the early 1950s, Hong Kong's

prosperity was based on

re-exporting products from South China throughout the world and

serving as an entry port for foreign products

destined for the

mainland.

Two external events in the 1950s disrupted this
entrepôt role. The first was the change of government as the
Communists took control of the mainland.

Their inward-looking

policies resulted in a significant diminution in Chinas trade
with Hong Kong.

Dissatisfaction with the new government led to

massive emigration from China to Hong Kong that increased the

colony's population by almost 50% in a few years. The second
event that reduced Hong KOng's role as a trade facilitator was
the United Nations embargo imposed on China because of its role
in the Korean War.

Fortunately, the Chinese immigrants included entrepreneurs
who had both industrial experience,
especially in textiles, and

the capital necessary to establish manufacturing activities.
Utilizing the abundant supply of low-wage workers that also
became

available

through

immigration;

these

individuals

spearheaded the shift in Hong Kongs economic structure front that
of entrepôt to exporter of labor-intensive manufactured products.

The industrialization effort was also helped by the existence of

an excellent infrastructure of port,

banking, insurance, and

shipping facilities, and a long history of commercial ties with
overseas traders. Manufacturing employment increased from 82,000

in 1950 to 216,000 in 1960, while the share of re-exports in
11

total exports declined from 88% to 27% in that decade.

3.1.1.2 Trade Performance

As can be seen from Table 7, which indicates the colony's
pattern of exports and imports in 1960, 1978 and 1983, Hong Kong

has gradually diversified its manufacturing

activities and, in

particular, reduced its dependence on textiles and clothing.
Exports in the machinery and transport equipment category have
become significant.

The diversification has been due in part to

the efforts of the government, which, beginning in

the late

1970s, backed away somewhat from its hands-off policy and began
to arrange industrial support facilities and

technical services

to facilitate the shift toward more capital-intensive, high-skill
manufacturing sectors.

A more detailed breakdown of the composition of Hong Kongs

trade with its major trading partners is presented in Table 8.
Between 1963 and 1980 both the United States and Japan moderately
increased their share of the combined exports to Hong Kong by the

United States, Canada, Japan, Australia and New Zealand, the

European Community, other ADCs
China.

the RRCs in the region, and

The U.S. share increased from 16% to 18%. The countries

that increased their export share the most, however, were the
other ADCs, i.e., Taiwan, Korea, and Singapore; their share rose
from 8% to 16% between these years despite the exclusion from the

figures of exports from Taiwan to Hong Kong in 1980 (and 1984).
The European Community and the four resource-rich countries -

the

Philippines, Malaysia, Thailand, and Indonesia, were the losers
12

in. terms of export shares between 1963 and 1980.

The major change between 1980 and 1984 was the emergence of

China as a major supplier to the Hong Kong market.

In 1984

almost 30% of exports to Hong Kong came from China. Of course,
much of this reflects the re-emergence of entrepôt trade for Hong

Kong as China became more open. The U.S. market share declined

about a third between 1980 and 1984 (from 18% to

12%), due no

doubt in part to the appreciation of the dollar relative to other

major currencies after 1980. Japan's share also declined between
these years but less in relative terms than the U.S. share.

Table 8 also shows the country/region distribution of Hong
Kong's own exports between 1963 and 1984.

The share of exports

to the United States increased from 35% in 1963 to 50% in 1970

and then declined to 41% by the end of the 1970s, a decade in
which the dollar depreciated.

As the dollar appreciated in the

early 1980s, the share of Hong Kong's exports absorbed by the

United States again rose to 50%.

Remarkably, the share of

exports absorbed by Japan remained at about 4% over the entire
period.

The trend in the EC share was downward over the period

with an especially sharp fall evident after 1980.

The main factor in Hong Kong's long-term economic outlook is

the coming return of sovereignty to China in 1997. The agreement

reached in 1984 between Great Britain and China called for the
maintenance of Hong Kong's market-oriented economy for at least

50 years after 1997, but, despite this provision, there is
understandably a great deal of uncertainty about the future.
13

3.1.2 Singapore
3.1.2.1 Trade and Development Policies5

The economy of Singapore, like that of Hong Kong, was for
many years based on entrepôt trade, specifically, the processing,

repackaging, and

re-exporting of

the primary products of

Southeast Asia to other areas and the re-exporting of imported

industrial goods

to other parts of Asia.

Following the

attainment of self-government in 1959, the Singapore.governnient

adopted an industrialization strategy that has passed through
three stages: an import-substitution phase from 1960 to 1966; a

labor-intensive, export-oriented phase from 1966 to 1970; and
since 1970, a higher-technology, skill-intensive phase that is
also export-oriented (Yue, 1980).

The first phase, in which tariffs and quotas were used to

stimulate domestic manufacturing, was closely tied

to the

prospect of a Malaysian common market, including the former
Malaya, Singapore, and the Borneo states of Sabah and Sarawak.

Government officials thought that this market would be of
sufficient size for Singapore to become an efficient supplier of

manufactured products, given temporary protection.

But the

political union of the four states lasted only from 1963 to 1965,

and with Singapor&s withdrawal from the federation, the proposal
for a Malaysian common market collapsed.

Although import protection was increased to

ease the

domestic adjustments related to the country's withdrawal from the
14

federation, the development strategy shifted around 1966 to one

of attracting foreign investment to expand exports of labor-

intensive manufactures. In addition to establishing new tax
incentives

to

attract

introduced restrictive

foreign

investors, the government

labor legislation

to restrain wage

increases and maintain stable labor relations, restructured the

educational system to provide more technical
provided

a

wide

industrialists.

The

range

of

outcome

facilities
was

a

workers, and

and services to
rapid

decrease in

unemployment, an increase in the share of domestic exports in

total exports from 25% in 1965 to 38% in 1970, and a marked
acceleration of the growth rate.

As the upward pressure on wages increased due to the success

of these measures, Singapore shifted to a new development
strategy in the early 1970s, emphasizing exports of skillintensive, higher-technology products.

To stimulate the export

of these products, the government provided equity and loan
assistance to firms producing them, expanded training facilities
and gave financial support to private-sector training activities,

allocated funds for financing export bills below the prime rate,

subsidized the insurance of export activities, and undertook
extensive export-promotion programs.

Beginning in 1969, most

tariffs and quotas were reduced or abolished to enable exporting
firms to obtain needed inputs at competitive world prices, and by

the mid-1970s, Singapores level of protection was very low.

The extent

to which Singapore has relied on foreign
15

investment to increase its exports of manufactured goods is
indicated by the fact that, in 1980, export sales by wholly

foreign-owned firms constituted 72% of the economy's

total

exports of manufactured goods, export sales by joint ventures
21%, and export sales by wholly locally-owned

firms only 7%.

Another notable feature of the country's development policy is

the high rate of domestic savings, achieved by compulsory
retirement contributions by employers and employees. By 1978 the

contribution rate reached 38.5% of wages and salaries

and

contributed 22% of total national savings. The government has
used these funds to provide an infrastructure that is conducive
to development.

3.1.2.2 Trade Performance

Unlike Hong Kong, Singapore never relied on textiles and
clothing as an important export product, as Table 9 shows.

Its

industrialization via the export route has been based mainly on

oil refining and, to an increasing extent, on skill—intensive

machinery and other manufactures.

Industrialization has also

expanded the market within Singapore for high- skill, high—

technology products, as the changes in the country's import
pattern indicate.

The United States has done very well in the Singapore market
(Table 10), increasing its export share from 7% in 1963 to 21% in

a

performance that outdid the Japanese export share

increase.

The other ADCs also gained in market share, while the

1984 -

EC and, especially, the RRCs lost in relative terms.
16

On the

export side, the figures show that the shares of Singapores
exports taken by both the United States and Japan rose between
1963 and 1984, the U.S. from 13% to 27% and Japan from 8% to 12%.

As would be expected from exchange rate developments, the
increase in the share of exports going to the United States was
especially large between 1980 and 1984. Shipments to other ADCs

also increased in relative terms over the 21-year period. In
contrast, the share of Singapore's exports received by the EC
fell from 29% to 12% from 1963 to 1984.

There is no alternative for Singapore, if it is to continue

to raise its living standard, but to remain an open, exportoriented economy.

At the same time, one can expect to see a

continued shift in the composition of its exports toward higher

labor-skill products, while importing high-technology goods as
well as products where scale economies are important.

3.1.3 Korea.

3.1.3.1 Trade and Development Policies6

From 1945 to 1960 Korea followed an import-substitution
development policy, using high protective tariffs, quantitative
import restrictions, and a multiple exchange-rate system with a

generally overvalued currency to stimulate domestic production
for local markets. While growth was fairly impressive during the

1950s, it was largely induced by substantial U.S. aid following
the Korean War; 74% of Korean investment was financed by foreign

aid between 1953 and 1960. The growth rate began to decline in
17

the late 1950s as the easy import-substitution opportunities were

exploited and U.S. economic aid was reduced. The degree of
inwardness of the economy at that time is indicated by the fact
that exports of goods and services were only 3% of GDP in 1960;
by 1980 they had climbed to 36%.

A significant shift in Korean development policy toward an
outward-looking strategy occurred after the student revolution in

1960 and the military coup in 1961. The won was devalued and a
unitary exchange-rate system established, the interest rate was

permitted to

rise to

encourage domestic

savings, and a

A nunber of export

stabilization program was implemented.

incentives were introduced, including exemption from tariffs on

imported inputs

equipment for use in export

and capital

production, accelerated depreciation

on

capital facilities

employed in export production, and a lowering of direct taxes on

Exporters also had access to

income earned from exporting.

credit below the market-rate of interest, received preferential
electricity and transportation rates, and were granted generous
wastage allowances on imported inputs.

In the late 1970s another change in development policy
occurred as the government, fearing that Korea was losing its

competitive advantage in labor-intensive manufactures due to
rising real wages, began to encourage the production of capital-

intensive intermediate products. This policy shift was reversed
in the early 1980s and priority again given to export expansion
as the major engine of growth.
18

The rate of growth that followed the shift in development

strategy toward export promotion can only be described as
phenomenal. Per capita incomes rose at an average annual rate of
7% between 1960 and 1980.
During the export—led industrial

transformation, the share of manufactures in
increased from 14% in 1960 to

total exports

91% in 1983 (Table 11), and

domestic savings as a fraction of GDP rose from 1% to 30% between
1960 and 1984 (Table 4).

A feature of Korean policy of considerable concern to the
United States and other industrial countries with which Korea has
a large export surplus is the continuing high level of protection

in both the agricultural and industrial sectors that makes it
difficult for foreign suppliers to sell in the Korean market.
3.1.3.2 Trade Performance

As Table 12 indicates, the United

States' export share in

the Korean import market, after falling sharply from 49% to 31%
between 1963 and 1970, increased slightly to 34% between 1970 and

1980 and then remained constant thereafter.

Japan was the main

gainer at U.S. expense between 1963 and 1970 with its share
rising from 35% to 49%, but this share had fallen back to about
41% by 1984.

Australia and New Zealand, Canada, and the RRCs

have all gained steadily in market share throughout the 21-year
period -

The distribution of Korean exports exhibits
considerable
volatility.

Exports to

the United States, for example,

constituted 50% of all exports to the regions listed in the first
19

column in 1970, rising from 32% in 1963, then dropping to 35% in

1980, only to rise again to 46% during the period of dollar
appreciation in the early 1980s.

The share of exports sent to

Japan shows a steady decline over the entire period.

Exports to

the European Community display an upward trend.

Because the country's poor endowment of natural resources
and comparatively small size leave no

alternative for achieving

continued rapid growth but to retain the emphasis on exporting
manufactured goods, Korea is likely to remain an outward-looking

economy. Like Singapore, it can be expected to move into higherskill, more capital-intensive export production, however. At the

same time, with some prodding it

should become a better market

for high-technology goods and agricultural products.

The Republic of Korea's relations with North Korea are of
major concern to the United States.

Because of the perceived

threat of aggression from the north, the United States still

maintains military forces in South Korea and has a treaty
commitment to the country's security. The U.S. government favors

gradual reunification between North
seems little prospect for that in the

prospect for reasonably

and South Korea but there

short term.

Yet, the

peaceful relations between the two

countries in the short term seems favorable.

3.1.4 Taiwan
3.1.4.1 Trade and Development Policies7

There was great political and economic turmoil in

20

Taiwan in

the period immediately after World War II. The end of fifty
years of Japanese rule and thus the loss of the country's
traditional export market was followed by the Communists' take-

over of mainland China, the immigration of large numbers of
Nationalists from the mainland and their assumption of power in
Taiwan, and the loss of another important market in China.

The government's first response to the economic problems it
faced was to undertake a land reform program in the agricultural

sector and an import-substitution policy with high levels of
protection

for

the

manufacturing 'sector;

The Country's

adjustment efforts were assisted by a substantial inf low of
foreign aid, mainly from the United States.

Between 1951 and

1959, 37% of total investment was financed by foreign aid.

Beginning in the late 1950s and into the early 1960s, the
government 'introduced policies that changed Taiwan's development

strategy from one of import substitution to one that emphasized

the export

of labor-intensive manufactures.

The multiple

exchange'-rate system was abolished and the overvaluation of the
country's currency corrected by a series of devaluations. Import

controls were eased and tariffs reduced on many manufactured
goods.

(As in Korea, the Taiwanese government still highly

protects some domestic industries with import controls and
tariffs.)

Investment by foreigners and local residents was

encouraged by such measures as a five-year income tax holiday for

certain new industrial establishments, a sharp reduction in the
maximum business income tax, and tax exemption for undistributed
21

profits retained for investment purposes. Exporting was also

encouraged directly by rebating customs duties on imported
inputs, permitting the deduction from taxable income of an amount

equal to 2% of annual export earnings, and allowing a 10% tax
deduction for manufacturing, mining, and handicraft firms that

exported more than 50% of their output.

In addition, some

industries received direct export subsidies that were financed by

levies on domestic sales.

Low-interest loans and government

assistance in the form of marketing, managerial, and technical
services were also available for exporting activities. Beginning

in the mid-1960s, the government also established duty-and taxfree export-processing zones.

3.1.4.2 Trade Performance

As in the Korean case, the post-World War II development
policies of Taiwan transformed the country from an agricultural
to an industrial economy within a comparatively short period. In

the period 1952-54, industrial exports made up only 9% of total

exports, but in 1970 the share of industrial exports in total
exports was up to a level of 78% and by 1982, to 88%.

As

Table

13

shows, changes in the country/regional

distribution of Taiwan's imports between 1963 and 1984 are
similar to those of Korea. The U.S. share of imports into Taiwan

declined sharply from 43% to 26% between 1963 and 1970, then
increased to 33% in 1980 and remained constant thereafter. As in

the Korean case, Japan's export share rose considerably between

the first two years (from 35% to 52%), then declined to 40% by
22

1980 and remained there over the next four

The EC's

years.

export share also rose over the entire period. In contrast to

the Korean case, however, the export share of the

other ADCs

rose, while that of the RRCs fell.

Since the UNCTAD Trade Data tape does not contain exports
from Taiwan for 1980 and 1984, the country/region composition of

Taiwanese exports is only given for 1963 and 1970. These years
do show the marked shift in the direction of Taiwanese exports
toward the United States. From accounting for only 20% of these

exports in 1963, the U.S. share had increased to 44% by 1970.

The CommUnity's share rose slightly, but the most significant
other shift between these years was the fall in Japan's share
from 38% to 17%.

Like Korea and Singapore, to achieve continued rapid growth,

Taiwan has no alternative but to concentrate

on exporting

manufactured goods, but it can be expected to shift toward
higher-skill_requiring, more capital-intensive products.

As it

is pressured to liberalize its own trade barriers, Taiwan should

improve as a market

for high-technology

manufactures and

agricultural products.

There is, of course, considerable uncertainty about the
political future of Taiwan. In proposing unification, China has
offered to make Taiwan a special administrative region, following
the Hong Kong approach, and allow it to maintain its economic and
social system.

Thus far, however, no visible progress has been

made toward reunification, despite TaiWan's increasing political
23

isolation in the world.

The official position of the U.S.

government seems to be that a gradual and natural process of
unification is best and that other countries should not intervene
in this process.

3.2 The_Resource-Rich Countries

3.2.1 The Philippines
3.2.1.1 Trade

nc2&e

The development policy of the Philippines since the late
can be characterized as initially one of import
1940s
substitution, then a series of modest and short-lived efforts to

Exchange
trade and exchange-rate regimes.
controls were first introduced in late 1949 as a consequence of a
balance-of-payments crisis caused immediately by the electionrelated easy creçlit and liberal spndirtg poiicies of the
liberalize

the

government

and

more basically by the countrys overvalued

currency and pent-up demand for consumption goods.

Rather than

lifting the controls after the crisis passed, the government used

them during the 1950s to promote the development of domestic
manufacturing activities.

As often happened in developing

countries that follow this strategy, growth rates initially were

quite high, but by the late 1950s, as the

substitution

had passed,

they

had

easy stage of import

fallen significantly.

Devaluation, the elimination of most exchange controls, and

the establishment of a unified exchange-rate system occurred in
the early 1960s, but these changes were in response to charges of
24

maladministration of the controls and pressures from traditional
exporters rather than to a conscious decision to promote exports

of manufactures. High tariffs still protected the manufacturing
sector, although its growth rate fell even further in the early

1960s. An effort in the late 1960s to stimulate growth through

credit and fiscal expansion led to a new balance-of-payments
crisis and the re-introduction of exchange controls.

The 1970s began with the floating of the peso and the
passage of legislation aimed directly at stimulating exports of

non-traditional agricultural and manufactured goods.

Firms

exporting more than 50% of their output were exempt from sales or

customs taxes on materials used in

export production and

permitted to deduct part of their export revenue from taxable
income.

The government also constructed the first export-

processing zone. -

Partly

in response to these measures but

probably due more importantly to the 50% decline in real wage
costs in manufacturing between 1969 and 1974, there was sustained

growth in manufacturing exports until 1981 (Alburo and Shepherd,
1986).

The share of manufacturing exports in total exports rose

from 12% in 1970 to 44% in 1980.

Further liberalization efforts were undertaken in the early

1980s, the most important of which was the reduction of tariffs
under a new, more rational system of import protection, but the

exchange crisis of 1983, related to the countrys external debt
problems, prevented the full implementation of the measures as

exchange controls were introduced once again. Since 1984 the
25

cutoff of foreign capital, the austerity measures the government
was forced to adopt, and the political crisis in the country have
brought about a decline in real GNP.
3.2.1.2 Trade Performance

The commodity distribution of the Philippines' •exports and
imports is given in Table 14. Primary product exports other than
minerals have declined significantly between 1960 and 1983 as the

share taken by manufactured goods rose from 4% to 50%.

Due to

the greater importance of fuel imports, the share of imports of
manufactured goods fell from 75% to 65% between 1960 and 1983.

The Philippines is another case where the U.S. share of the
country's import market decreased significantly between 1963 and
1970, while Japan's share increased significantly (Table 15). The

U.S. export share rose in the 1970s and, despite the exchange
rate developments,, rose again in the 1980s.

The other major

gainers were the ADCs, whose share of the Phillippines' imports
went up from to 2% to 11% between 1963 and 1984.

In contrast,

the Japanese and EC export shares of the Philippine market fell
in both of these periods.

The country/region distribution of Philippine exports shows

a decreasing dependence on the United States as a trading
partner. The share of the country's exports sent to the United
States declined from 47% in 1963 to 27% by 1980.

The share of

exports taken by Japan rose somewhat from 1963 to 1980; the EC
share remained about the same. The most important shift was the
increase from 3% to 11% in the relative importance of the ADCs as
26

an export market between these years. This may be related to the

establjshnient of the Association of

Southeast Asian Nations

(ASEAN), since Singapore, an ADC, is an ASEAN member. Export

share of the other ASEAN members, which are RRCs, remained
roughly the same, however.

The economic history of the Philippines over the last forty

years and the present political turmoil do not

give reason to

expect the country to shift its development strategy in the
foreseeable future and focus on becoming an outward-looking
exporter of manufactured goods. Periodic attempts to liberalize

can be expected, but the conflicting economic and political
pressures within the country seem likely to result in the same
pattern of on-again, off-again government controls on trade and

development that has been seen over the last forty years. Yet,
because of the richness of its human and physical resources, the
Philippines is likely to continue to grow at a respectable rate.
U.S.

concerns

with

the

Philippines

go beyond the

historically close political and economic relationships between
the two countries. Clark Air Force Base and Subic Bay Naval Base
are the largest overseas American air and naval facilities, and
they are generally regarded as vital to a U.S. military presence
not only in the Pacific but also in the Indian Ocean and Persian
Gulf.

It would be a severe blow to U.S. military strategy if a

Philippine government forced the United States to relinquish
control over these bases. Since poor economic performance in the

Philippine economy contributes to the possibility of such an
27

outcome, the United States may wish to consider establishing

closer economic ties with the Philippines, for example, by

granting the

country

more favorable treatment under the

Generalized System of Preferences or perhaps negotiating a free
trade arrangement with the country.

3.2.2 Malaysia
3.2.2.1 Trade and Development Policies10

Peninsular Malaysia (the former Malaya) achieved political

independence In 1957; Sabah and Sarawak became independent and

part of Malaysia in 1963.

Fortunately, Malaysia already had a

per capita income that was considerably
resource-rich countries.

above the other three

As in most developing countries, the

Malaysian government began its industrialization endeavors with
import substitution fostered by moderate levels of protection and
generous fiscal incentives, such as were provided in the Pioneer
Industries Ordinance in 1958 and the broader Investment Incentive
Act in 1968.

In the late 1960s and early 1970s, a deliberate

effort was made to promote exports. This included permitting a
double deduction from taxable income for export expenses and a
further tax deduction based on Malaysian raw material and wage
costs.

Free-trade and export-processing zones, in which firms

can freely import materials and capital goods used in export

production, were also established in various parts of
country.

the

Furthermore, the government provided low-cost export

insurance, helped to keep shipping rates low, and engaged in the
28

promotion of Malaysian exports throughout the world.

The country's development efforts have been successful in

achieving an impressive degree of diversification

of both

primary-product and manufacturing activities. For example, palm
oil and timber production has increased to the point that these
sectors are now as important as the rubber and tin industries as
earners of foreign exchange.

Impressive processing activities

have been established in the palm oil and rubber sectors. The
oil and natural gas industries have also become major exportearning industries.

Textiles and apparel, electrical machinery,

and, especially, electronics products have become important
export items as well.

As can be seen from Table 16, exports of

manufactured products increased from 6% of total exports in 1960
to 22% in 1983.
3.2.2.2 Trade Performance

The Malaysian import figures for 1963 seem unreliable, due

perhaps to its political union with Singapore in that year.

Subsequent data show a steady increase in the share of the
Malaysian import market captured by the United States, this share
rising from 11% in 1970 to 16% by 1984 (Table 17). Japan's share

increased significantly between these

years, from 4% to 25%,

while the ECs share decreased significantly. Import trade with
the ADCs also rose appreciably but dropped with the other RRCs.

The country/region distribution

of

Malaysian exports

indicates that the United States gradually increased its share
between 1963 and 1980.11 Shipments to Japan, the AIDCs, and the
29

other RRCs remained about the same over the time period; those to
the EC fell in relative importance.

Malaysia has been successful in achieving an export-oriented

industrialization strategy that is based on processing its
abundant natural resources and on utilizing its abundant supply

of low-cost labor.

There would seem to be no major reasons why

this pattern will not continue, at least in the medium term.

3.2.3 Thailand
3.2.3.1 Trade and Development Policies12

The modern industrialization efforts of the government of
Thailand can be said to have begun with the establishment in 1959
of the Board of Investment, set up to promote domestic investment

with the use of tax incentives, and a new, mildly protective
customs schedule was put into effect in 1960.

The government

also influenced industrial expansion by means of entry controls
and the use of preferential credit arrangements.

was

a

development

policy

that

The net effect

to some extent favored

manufacturing industries producing for the domestic market.

With the passage of the Export Promotion Act in 1972,
greater attention was given to the promotion of manufactured
exports.

Its provisions included exemption from paying import

duties on imported materials used in production for export, the
exemption from business taxes on export-producing activities, and

a Bank of Thailand discount facility at below- market rates for
short-term export loans made by commercial banks.
30

Since 1972

exporters are also eligible for a 20% rebate on electricity
charges incurred in export production.
The Department of
Commerce began export—promoting activities in 1975.

Beginning in 1974, as the sharp increase in the price of oil

caused a deterioration in the country's balance of payments,
there was an increase in industrial import protection. Nominal
protection on import-competing manufactured goods increased from

35% to 50% between 1974 and 1978 (World Bank, 1980). Greater

increases in business taxes on imports than on comparable
domestic products, the imposition of import surcharges on certain

products, and the increased use of import controls were other
policies favoring import-substituting activities.

The debt

crisis of the early 1980s and a sharp deterioration in Thailands
terms of trade brought about further import restrictions.

3.2.3.2 Trade Performance

Despite the somewhat contradictory nature of Thailand's
recent development policies, export growth has been very high in

the last decade (Table 2), with exports of textiles and apparel,

machinery and equipment, and other manufactures continuing to
make up an increasing share of the country's total exports (Table
18).

As in a number of the other APR countries, the U.S. share of

Thailand's imports from its major trading partners decreased
between 1963 and 1970 as Japan's share increased (Table 19).

In

the Thai case, however, these share changes were not as great as

in the other cases. The pattern of a U.S. share gain and a
31

Japanese loss in the 1970s, as the dollar depreciated, and the
reverse of these changes in the 1980s, as the dollar appreciated,

also took place in Thailand. The EC share in Thailand's imports
fell steadily throughout the period. The other important change
in export shares was the increase in the ADCs share from 11% in
in exports to

1963 to 22% in 1984. The share of the other RRCs
Thailand remained about the same over the period.

The share of Thailand's exports absorbed by the United
States rose significantly from 10% to 22% between

1963 and 1984.

Shipments to the EC also increased between these years but only
from 23% to 27%. japan's share fell after 1970 from 30%

to 17%.

Interestingly, Thai exports to other RRCs and the ADC5 diminished
in relative importance over the entire period.

The Thai government's policy of modest intervention in the

market economy seems likely to continue into the foreseeable
future and to result in high growth rates and a growing degree of
export-oriented industrial diversification.

3.2.4 Indonesia
3.2.4.1 Trade and Development Policies23

Indonesia has been the least successful of the resource—rich
countries in shifting from an inward-looking policy that protects
domestic

producers

of manufactured products from foreign

competition to a strategy of promoting exports of manufactures.
The 8% share of manufactures in total exports in 1983 (Table 3)
is much lower than that for the other three RRCs.
32

The unusual

richness of its resources and especially its ability to take
advantage in export markets of the sharp oil price increase in
the 1970s may in part be responsible for this low manufacturing
share by reducing the balance-of-payments pressures for the
expansion of manufactured exports.

Four separate periods can be distinguished since Indonesia

achieved its independence in 1949: the period of constitutional
democracy (1950-57);

the "Guided Democracy" of 1958-1965; the

liberalization of the "New Order" (1966-1971); and developments

up to the present after the period of liberalization (Pitt,
1985). The first period saw sporadic attempts to dismantle the
elaborate system of foreign exchange controls and import quotas
that had existed under Dutch rule. But lobbying pressures on the

government to grant preferential import privileges to the new
class of indigenous importers and to

monopolistic organizations

of domestic industrial firms formed to

import a common raw

material tended to undermine these liberalization efforts.

The second period, 1958-1965, was marked by President
Sukarnos implementation of his concept of "guided democracy"
under which there was an aversion to free markets and foreign
capital.

The traditional Dutch trading houses were nationalized

so that by 1959 only 20% of the import trade remained in private
hands.

The government allocated all foreign exchange and, in
doing so, favored inward-oriented state enterprises.
Moreover,
the gOvernment's policy of allocating raw materials on the basis
of a firm's existing productive capacity encouraged the expansion
33

of capacity, though this capacity was under-utilized; in 1965
manufacturing as a whole operated at only between 20% and 30% of
capacity.

The period 1966-71 saw sweeping liberalization in Indonesia,

beginning with a scheme to encourage exports that permitted
exporters to sell a portion of their foreign exchange earnings at

free-market prices. The government ended the direct allocation

of foreign exchange to manufacturing firms and importers were
permitted to buy almost any good they wished.

Subsidies and

preferential credit rates to state enterprises were cut sharply.

Another important change was the enactment of a law to encourage

foreign investment by exempting firms that undertook priority
investments from taxes on as much as 60% of their profits for up
to six. years. A unified exchange-rate system was established in
1970.

In the period immediately after the liberalization phase,
the new government shifted back toward import substitution with
the increased use of quantitative import controls, including the

banning of imports of many consumer goods, an increase in
tariffs, and the introduction of numerous regulations covering
investment activities.

In 1978, however, the currency was

devalued and an export certificate scheme was introduced that
tended to subsidize exports of manufactured goods. This led to a
significant percentage increase in such exports, though starting

from a very low level. Nevertheless, the governments policies
are still biased toward capital-intensive, import-substituting
34

activities and include cumbersome regulations that discourage
exports of labor-intensive manufactures.
3.2.4.2 Trade Performance

Unlike in the other countries analyzed, the structure of

Indonesian production has not shifted significantly toward
export-oriented manufacturing. Only 7% of the country's exports

were manufactured goods in 1983 (Table 20), while the share of

fuels, minerals, and metals in exports rose from 33% to 80%
between 1960 and 1983.

The country/region composition of lndonesian imports (Table
21) shows a rise in shares from both the United States and Japan

between 1963 and 1970 and a decline in the export shares of the
ADCs, the RRCs, and the EC. In the 1970s the U.S share fell and

Japan's increased, while in the 1980s their shares remained
unchanged. In contrast, the share of imports from the Community
increased in the 1980s.

Imports from the ADCs dropped sharply

from 19% to 5% between 1963 and 1970 but remained roughly
constant thereafter.

Indonesian exports to both the United States and Japan rose
significantly in the 1970s, while exports to the EC and the ADCs

fell appreciably during this period. In the period of the l980s

covered in Table 21,

the percentage

distribution of the

destination of Indonesian exports remained roughly the same.

As in the Philippines, there do not seem to be any strong
reasons to expect that Indonesia will change its development
strategy from that of recent years. Strong vested interests have
35

been created that favor an inward-looking industrialization
strategy, and they are likely to continue to prevail in the

political

decision-making process determining development policy

into the foreseeable future.

3.3 China
3.3.1 Trade and Development Policies14

Undoubtedly, the

developing country in the APR whose

policies are of greatest potential significance to the United

States and other competitors in the region is China. The
modernization reforms initiated in

the

late

1970s could

eventually transform the Chinese economy into both a major
competitor and market in the area and the world.

But the

possibility of a return to Maoist economic policies, involving

autarky and a de-emphasis

on the

acquisition of Western

technology, cannot be ruled out.

China's current trade policies are aimed at increasing
exports in order to pay for the capital equipment, intermediate

inputs, and

advanced technology needed for industrial and

agricultural modernization. One means of stimulating exports has

been the establishment of Special Export Zones in which Western
know-how, managerial skills, and capital can be combined in joint

ventures with low-wage Chinese labor.

As Table 22 indicates,

the share of exports of manufactures in total exports equaled 57%

in 1983, with textiles and clothing being the most important
export category.

Among the country's primary product exports,
36

crude petroleum and petroleum products have become increasingly
important.

Encouraged by government policy, foreign investment in China

exceeded $3.5 billion by 1985, but firms doing business in China

face many difficulties, including arbitrary tax •and tariff
charges,

inadequate

supplies

of

skilled

labor,

poor

transportation and communication facilities, and the resistance
of vested interests to the economic reforms.

3.3.2 Trade Performance

After U.S. trade with China opened up, the United States
quickly became an important supplier, furnishing by 1980 about a
quarter of China's imports from its major market-oriented trading

partners (Table 23). The U.S. share dropped to 18% by 1984,
perhaps reflecting the overvalued dollar. Japan's share rose

from 11% in 1963 to 43% by 1984, and the ADCs became more
important as exporters to China over the period, whereas the

shares of exports supplied by the EC and Australia and New
Zealand declined between these years.

Chinese export figures are only available for 1984 on the
UNCTAD Data Tape. The 42% share going to Hong Kong indicates the
importance of that colony as an entrepôt for China. Japan is the

next largest recipient of Chinese goods at 27% and the United

States and the European Community each absorbed about 12% in
1984.

It seems much too early to predict, even in the medium term,

what China's future role in the world trading and foreign
37

investment system will be.

4. THE COMPETITIVE PERFORMANCE OF THE UNITED STATES AND ITS
MAJOR COMPETITORS IN THE APR MARKET
In

the

preceding

section

the major country/region

distribution of the imports and exports of each of the nine
developing countries in the Asian Pacific Rim was examined. As
is apparent from this analysis, no single pattern emerges as to

how well the United States has competed in the area. In three
markets - Singapore,

Malaysia, and China, the share of U.S.

exports in total exports from the Countries' major trading
partners was greater in 1984 than in 1963.

In four countries-

the Philippines, Hong Kong, Indonesia, and Thailand, this export

share declined but by six percentage points or less.

In two

countries, Korea and Taiwan, the U.S. share of exports dropped by
more than ten percentage points over the period.

Interestingly,

except for Hong Kong, Korea and Taiwan ship a larger proportion
of their exports to the United States than any other countries in
the group.

In only two countries, Hong Kong and China, is there a more

than 5% decline in the U.S. export share between 1980 and 1984,

when the dollar appreciated significantly.

Indeed, the U.S.

export share rose between these years in the Philippines,
Singapore, and Malaysia.

During 1970, however, when the dollar

depreciated against the major currencies, the U.S. share of the

export market increased in Korea, Taiwan, Thailand, Malaysia,

Furthermore, in all of these

Singapore, and the Philippines.
38

countries the share of exports supplied by the United States was

higher in 1984 than in 1970.

In four countries - Thailand,

Korea, the Philippines, and Taiwan, the U.S. competitive position
worsened between 1963 and 1970.

(Data are not available for

these two years for China and Malaysia.)

Table 24 indicates the importance of developing countries of

the APR as an export market for the United States.

(Also see

Naya, 1986.) The shares of total U.S. exports going to the ADCs,

the RRCs, and China all increased between 1968 and 1982, the
combined share for all three rising from 6.5% in 1968 to 13.1% in
1982.

If one adds Japan's share of U.S. exports to these

figures, which increased between 1968 and 1982 from 8.5% to 9.9%,
the combined exports of the United States to the major developing

and developed countries of the APR constituted 15.0% of all U.S.
exports in 1968 and 23.0% in 1982.

There is no doubt that the

Asian Pacific Rim is becoming a major area of export interest to
the United States.

Table 25 examines the success in trade of the United States

relative to its major competitors in the import markets of
developing countries of the APR, not on an individual-country
basis but in the ADCs and the RRCs as groups of countries, and in

China. The competitive record of the United States is shown to
be a mixed one.

The U.S. export share in the import market of

the ADCs in the area remained at around 20% between 1963 and 1984
-

20%

in 1963, 18% in 1970, and 21% in both 1980 and

1984,

whereas its share of the goods exported by the major suppliers to
39

the four RRCs dropped steadily from 24% in 1963 to 16% in 1984.15

In contrast, after U.S. trade with China was opened, the U.S.
share of the Chinese market rose to 27% by 1980, then declined to
18% in 1984.

For the region as a whole, the trend in the •U.S. export

share was slightly upward, moving down from 21.6% in 1963 to
19.0% in 1970 but then rising to 23.5% in 1980 and remaining
almost unchanged at 23.2% in 1984, despite the sharp appreciation

of the dollar. The significance of this upward trend in export
performance in the APR market can be appreciated by noting that
the U.S. share in world exports declined between 1963 and 1984,
falling from 14.6% in 1963 to 13.6% in 1970 and 11.0% in 1980 and
then rising slightly to 11.2% in 1984.

The most successful competitor in the APR market was Japan.
Its shares of total exports to the ADCs, the RRCs, and China from
the countries listed in the first column of Table 25 rose for all

three between 1963 and 1984.

By 1984 Japan was their largest

supplier, supplying 30% of the ADCs' import market, 26% of the

RRCs' import market, and 43% of China's imports from the
countries listed.

The main loser in competition for sales in

these markets was the European Community; its export shares
declined steadily in all three parts of the APR market over the
21-year period.

An important change in the markets of developing countries
that is only beginning to be appreciated (e.g., see Ahmad, 1985)

is that the more advanced developing countries are beginning to
40

be important suppliers of manufactured goods to other developing
countries.

This is clearly occurring in the APR market. As

Table 25 shows, the export share of the ADCs in their own import

market increased from 8% in 1963 to 12% by 1984, while their

export share in the RRCs market rose from 1% to 10% between
these years.

The less industrially advanced RRCs did not

participate in this trend, however; their shares to the ADCs and
to other RRCs declined over the period.

Another aspect of the growing importance of the market for

international goods in the developing countries of the APR is

that total exports to these countries by the United States,
Canada, Japan, Australia, New Zealand, the European Community, as
well as by the countries of the region to each other, amounted to
2.97% of world exports in 1963, 3.56% in 1970, 4.74% in 1980, and
5.85% in 1984.

Changes in the commodity composition of U.S. exports to the
ADCs, the RRCs, and China between 1968 and 1982 are indicated in

the first part of Table 26.

The comparative advantage of the

United States in agricultural products and high-technology goods
is evident.

As would be expected, agricultural imports are more

important for the resource-scarce ADCs and China than for the
RRCs.

For both the ADCs and the RRCs, exports of machinery have

grown significantly in relative importance over the period, from

21% for the ADCs in 1963 to 34% in 1982 and from 30% to 49% for
the RRCs between these years. The relative decline in exports to

China of machinery between 1975 and 1982 may reflect special
41

circumstances. Another commodity class that gained somewhat in

relative importance

over the period is chemicals, whereas

transportation equipment declined.

Further insight into which

categories

of

goods the

competitors in the APR market have been successful n exporting

can be gained by utilizing Krause's (1982) breakdown of goods
into four groups: natural resource-intensive, unskilled labor-

intensive, technology-intensive, and human capital-intensive.
Table 25 divides the exports to the APR of the United States and

its competitors into these four categories.

As would be

predicted under the factor-proportion theory of international
trade, the commodity groups in which the United States has the

largest market

share

natural resource-intensive and

are

technology-intensive. In trade with the ADCs, the U.S. export
share increased modestly over the 1963-1984 period for both types

of goods. For the RRCs, the U.S. export share declined for
natural resource products -

a not-unexpected result -

and also

for technology-intensive products, though less than in the other
product categories. U.S. performance in the import market of the
APR countries declined, as expected, for labor-intensive products

and also,

rather surprisingly, for human capital-intensive

products. As Table 27 indicates, the fastest growing category of

exports to ADCs and RRC5 was, except for the 1980-84 period,
technology-intensive goods.

The United States

is in the

fortunate position of specializing in commodities for which
market demand is growing rapidly.
42

Another picture of the nature of U.S. exports, utilizing the

U.S. Department of Conunerce (1976) breakdown of all goods into
those that are technology-intensive and non-technology-intensive,

is presented in Table 28. The analytical assumption behind this

division is, of course, that temporary differences among countries in developing and introducing new technological knowledge

are the basis for differences in the commodity composition of
trade.

Though not always explicit, the ability to create new

technology and undertake innovation depends, in turn, on there
being high levels of research and managerial•skills. The table

shows that over the 1968-1982 period the United States has
shifted the composition of its exports to every country or region

toward high-tech goods. Imports from every region have moved in
this direction, but the percentage by which technology-intensive

exports to the world by the United States exceed technologyintensive imports was still about the same in 1982 as in 1968.

Consistent with the factor-proportion theory, Table 25 shows

that the main U.S. competitor in the APR, Japan, gained marketshare position over the period in the ADCs, the RRCs, and China
in technology-intensive and human capital-intensive goods, while

it lost in the labor-intensive category.

The EC lost in every

category between 1963 and 1984, whereas the ADCs gained in export

shares within their own market in every category, registering an
especially impressive gain in the high-technology group.

A technique developed by Hilton (1983) provides still
another means of revealing the comparative-cost position of the
43

United States vis-à-vis the countries of the Asian Pacific Rim.
It involves regressing the ratio of U.S. exports to U.S. imports

to a country by commodity on the cost shares of capital,
unskilled labor, skilled labor, land, and other natural resources

in the individual commodities. The coefficients on the various

factor shares are a measure of the differences in relative
factor-prices between the United States and the other country.

If, for example, the coefficient on a particular factor is
positive, this implies that the relative price of the factor is
lower in the United States than in the other country. A negative
in the other

sign means that the factor is relatively cheaper

country and, thus, that the other country has a comparative
advantage in producing goods in which that factor
relatively large proportion of production costs.

constitutes a
-

The results of regressing bilateral export/import ratios for
the United States and the countries of the APR for (in most
cases) over 200 commodities on a five-fold division of factor
shares for these commodities are presented in Table 29.

For all

the countries listed, the United States has a relative factorprice advantage in skilled labor and a disadvantage

in unskilled

labor. Furthermore, for all countries except Indonesia (and that

coefficient is not significant at the 10% level or better), the

United States

has a comparative factor-price advantage in

physical capital.

As expected, the United States

has a

comparative advantage in land—intensive and natural resourceintensive products vis-à-vis Hong Kong, Taiwan, and Korea.
44

The

land coefficient has the wrong (but not significant) sign for

Singapore, while the negative sign on the natural resource
coefficient reflects Singapore exports of refined petroleum.

The four resource-rich countries, Malaysia, Thailand, the
Philippines, and Indonesia, all have a factor-price advantage in

both land and natural resources relative to the United States.
The U.S. trade pattern with Japan reveals that the United States
has a relative factor-price advantage in natural resources, land,
and capital and a disadvantage in unskilled labor. Interestingly,
though not quite significant at the 10% level, the coefficient on

skilled labor indicates that Japan has a comparative price
advantage in this factor, too.

5. EXPORT PERFORMANCE OF THE DEVELOPING COUNTRIES OF THE APR

Although this

paper is

primarily concerned with the

performance of the United States and its competitors in the APR

market, data has also been collected on the performance of the
developing countries of the region in the markets of the United

States, Canada, Japan, Australia and New Zealand, the European
Community, and in the region itself.

Analysis of the trade of

the individual countries in section 3 revealed that every country
except the Philippines shipped a larger proportion of its exports

to the United States at the end of the period covered (usually
1984) than in the beginning (usually 1963).

In most cases, the

increase was very significant. In contrast, the share of exports

from Korea, Taiwan, the Philippines, and Thailand to Japan
45

declined over the period, while the export shares from Hong Kong
and Malaysia to Japan remained unchanged. Only the export shares

of Indonesia and Singapore to Japan rose. The share of exports
taken by the EC declined for Malaysia, Indonesia, and Hong Kong,

remained about

the same

for Singapore,

Taiwan, and the

Philippines, and increased for Korea and Thailand.

The relative position of the APR countries as sources of

imports for the United States is given in Table 24. The
developing countries of the region supplied 6.5% of all U.S.
imports in 1968, 10.7% in 1968, and 14.7% in 1982. The share of
the ADCs in these figures rose from 53% in 1975 to 63% in 1982.

Adding Japans import share to the shares of the developing
countries brings

the figures to 19.1%, 22.7%, and 30.5%,

respectively, in the three years.

The U.S. export share to the developing countries of the APR

rose 6.5 percentage points between 1968 and 1982, while the U.S.

import share from these countries increased 8.2 percentage
points.

The U.S. export share to Japan rose 1.2 percentage

points, and the U.S. import share from Japan rose 3.2 percentage
points in the same period.

The most important category of imports into the United
States from the ADCs and China is textiles and apparel (Table
26).

The proportion that these goods make up of total U.S.

imports from the ADCs is declining, but textiles and apparel have

become more important in U.S. imports from China. Oil and gas
was the main import from the RRCs in the early part of the period
46

covered, but by 1982 the 30% share for this category was matched

by a 30% share for imports of electrical
machinery.

and electronic

Electrical and electronic products are also an

important category of imports from the ADCc.

The change in composition of U.S. imports from
developing countries

the APR

toward more complex products such as

electrical and electronic machinery is also

apparent from Table

28, which divides all imports into technology-intensive and nontechnology-intensive goods.

As this table indicates, imports

from all the countries or regions listed

are becoming more

technology-intensive.

6. DIRECT INVESTMENT IN THE APR COUNTRIES

Achieving a market position abroad by means of direct
foreign investment., in addition to exporting goods, has become an

increasingly important element in corporate stategy over the last

25 years.

Table 31 indicates the extent to which U.S. and

Japanese companies have pursued this strategy

in the APR

countries. Although total Japanese dirct investment in the ADCs
and RRCs combined is nearly $2 billion more than U.S. investment,

American investment in the ADCs is greater than Japans, $4.2
billion versus $3.5 billion. In view of Japan's lack of natural

resources, it is to be expected that Japanese direct investment
in the RRCs is greater. Japan's investment in oil-rich Indonesia

alone amounted to 46% of its total investment in the APR. Korea
and Hong Kong were Japan's next most important direct investment
47

markets.

Hong Kong followed by Indonesia and the Philippines

were the most important U.S. investment markets in the area.

Tables 32 and 33 provide additional information on U.S.
direct investment.

Table 32 indicates the share of total world

U.S. direct investment received by individual APR countries and
industries in these countries. U.S. direct investment in the APR

is a small but rapidly growing proportion of total U.S. direct
investment, its share of total U.S. direct investment rising from

3.6% in 1977 to 6.7% in 1984. The shares in each country except

the Philippines increased between these years. The most impor—
tant APR countries for U.S. direct investment in 1977 (and, as

seen in Table 31, also in 1980) were, in order of relative
importance, Hong Kong, Indonesia, and the Philippines. In 1984
the ranking was Indonesia, Hong Kong, and Philippines/Malaysia.

U.S. investment in the region is focussed more on the
primary and service sectors than on manufacturing, which absorbed

only 3.6% of total U.S. manufacturing investment abroad in 1984,

whereas the shares were 8.7% for petroleum, 10.7% for banking,

6.4% for trade, and 4.7% for banking.

Indonesia and Malaysia

were the major countries in which U.S. petroleum investments were
made.

U.S. investment in service activities went mainly into

Hong Kong, Singapore, and the Philippines.

Table 33 shows the industry distribution of U.S. direct

investment in each country in 1977 and 1984.

Except for

Indonesia, there has been a relative shift away from investment
i.n primary-product

sectors and toward manufacturing and/or
48

service activities. In Korea and Taiwan the relative importance
of U.S. manufacturing investment declined between 1977 and 1984,
perhaps reflecting their advancing industrialization.

of investment

in manufacturing

The share

increased significantly in

Malaysia and Singapore and remained about the same in Hong Kong
and the Philippines. Service activities investment increased in
relative terms in Korea, Hong Kong, and the Philippines.

7. CONCLUSIONS

A number of conclusions can be drawn from this analysis of
the economic performance of the United States and its competitors

in the developing countries of the Asian Pacific Rim, defined to

include Singapore, Hong Kong, Taiwan, Korea, the Philippines,
Malaysia, Thailand, Indonesia, and China.

First, and perhaps

most important, is that the APR is a rapidly growing, though
still small, international market for goods and services and
foreign direct investment.

Exports to the countries of the

region by their major trading partners, defined as the United
States, Canada, Japan, the European Community, Australia and New

Zealand, and the APR countries themselves, amounted to 3.0% of
total world exports in 1963 and 5.8% in 1984. The area also has
become relatively more important as a market for U.S. exporters,
the share of total U.S. exports going to the APR rising from 6.5%

in 1968 to 13.1% in 1982. If Japans share of U.S. exports is
added to these figures, the share of U.S. exports taken by the
developed and developing countries of the APR moved from 15.0% in
49

1968 to 23.0% in 1982.

The United States has performed quite well in competing with

the other major trading partners (defined as in the preceding
paragraph) of the APR countries. The U.S. export share of this
market rose from 21.6% in 1963 to 23.5% in 1980 and remained near

that level in 1984, despite the appreciation of the dollar

relative to the currencies of Japan, the countries of the
European Community, and other U.S. competitors in the region

after 1980. Within the region, the U.S. gained slightly in
market share in the markets of the ADCs (defined as Hong Kong,
Korea, Taiwan, and Singapore), moving from 20% in 1963 to 21% in
1984, but lost in the RRCs (defined as the Philippines, Malaysia,

Thailand, and Indonesia), falling from a 24% share in 1963 to a
16% share in 1984.

In the Chinese market the United States had

no market position in 1963, but by 1984 the U.S..share of China's
imports from its major trading partners was 18%.

The major competitor of the United States in the region is

Japan. In 1984 japan's share of the ADCs' market was 30%, as
compared to the U.S. share of 21%, and the Japanese share of the

RRCs' market was 26% compared to the U.S. share of 16% in that
year.

Japan supplied 43% of China's imports from its major

trading partners in 1984, whereas the United States supplied only
18%.

Japan has also been the most successful competitor over the
period in terms of gains in market shares.

In 1963, for example,

the U.S. and Japanese shares of imports into the ADCs and RRCs
50

from their main trading partners were about the same, whereas, as

noted above, in 1984 Japanese market shares exceeded the U.S.
shares by about ten percentage points. The biggest loser in the

competition for market shares has been the European Community.
The ECs shares of the market for foreign goods in the ADCs and

RRCs were only slightly below those of Japan and the United
States in 1963, but they are now below the ADCs as suppliers to

the ADCs themselves and to the RRCs.

The rapid growth in the

market shares achieved by the ADCs is one of the most important

developments in the area.

It must be recognized that these

countries are beginning to supply an increasing proportion of the

market for manufactured goods in the APR.

China, too, is now

taking an appreciable part of this market.

The various methods used to reveal the comparative-advantage

position of the United States in'the region indicate, as would be

predicted from the factor-proportion theory of international

trade, that the United States has a competitive advantage in
commodities utilizing relatively large capital and skilled labor

factor shares.

Furthermore, in the resource-scarce ADCs, the

United States has a comparative advantage in land-intensive and
other natural resource-intensive commodities. The United States
tends to be at a disadvantage in producing labor-intensive goods
in the entire market and in land-intensive and natural resourceintensive goods in the RRCs.

One observes the results of these basic factor conditions in

the commodity composition of U.S. exports to the region, that
51

tend to be concentrated in natural resource-intensive goods, such
as agricultural products, and in technology-intensive goods, that

require relatively high professional and managerial
market successfully.

skills to

It is in these that the United States is

competing most successfully against its export rivals in the APR
market.

One would expect this pattern to continue, though it

must be recognized that not only Japan but the ADCs and RRCs are

shifting into the high-tech area.

The United States must

continually upgrade its level of high-tech products to maintain
its market positions in the APR market and other world markets.

Market opportunities

for the United States depend on

economic and political conditions in the countries of the region

as well as on U.S. competitive abilities. It seems that the
present APR governments will continue to pursue export-oriented
economic policies.. There is, however, some political uncertainty
stemming from outside pressures in Hong Kong and Taiwan, and from

both outside and inside pressures in Korea. It is conceivable but
unlikely that these pressures could bring government changes that

would reduce market opportunities in these countries. Even with

the present governments in Korea and Taiwan, the United States
needs to apply pressure for the removal of their import barriers.

There is considerable political uncertainty in another
important market for U.S. goods, the Philippines. One would
expect economic policies to continue as they have with alternate

cycles of liberalization and control, resulting in a moderate
rate of growth. But there is also the possibility of a political
52

shift resulting not only in more inward-looking economic policies

but in the removal of U.S. military bases from the country. In

Indonesia there are also strong political interests favoring
import-substitution over export-promotion policies.

Unlike the

ADCs, resource-rich countries like Indonesia and the Philippines

are not forced to promote exports of manufactures to produce a
politically acceptable growth rate.

Thailand and Malaysia are

not only rich in resources but have adopted policies to utilize
their

abundant

supplies

of unskilled

labor to produce

manufactured goods for export. They should continue to do well,
but like the other countries must be pressured to open their own
markets to a greater extent.

While this paper has been mainly concerned with the export
opportunities of the United States and others in the APR market,

data have also been collected on the performance of the APR
countries in world export markets. The picture that emerges is a

familiar one.. The developing.countries of the APR have sent an
increasing share of their exports to the United States, in many
cases a significantly larger share. In 1984 the U.S. trade with

the RRCs was roughly in balance, but the U.S. incurred a
merchandise deficit of over $6 billion with the ADCs. The shares

sent to Japan have generally declined or, in a few cases,
remained about the same. For the EC the share changes are mixed
- some

rising, some staying the same, and others declining.

Textiles and apparel are the most important category of
imports from the ADCs and China, but products requiring higher
53

skills,

particularly

electrical

machinery

products, are becoming more significant.

and electronic

Oil and gas have long

dominated the RRCs pattern of exports to the United States, but

in recent years electrical

and

electronic

products have

challenged their position as the most important export category.

Clearly, the APR countries

are increasing

the degree of

complexity of their export product mix.

The 1980 volume of direct investment by the United States in
the ADCs was greater than Japan's, but Japanese direct investment

in the entire region was greater than that of the United States.

The United States is, however, increasing the share of its total
investment going to the region, though this share is still quite
small, growing from 3.6% in 1977 to 6.7% in 1984.

Oil and gas

and service activities, such as banking and trade, are the

sectors in the APR that receive the largest share of world
investment.

Services and manufacturing are the sectors in which

investment in the developing countries of the Asian Pacific Rim
is growing most rapidly.

54

1. Henceforth, in this paper "APR" will refer only to the
developing countries of the Asian Pacific Rim; Japan is not included.

2. The high proportion of primary product exports for Singapore
reflects the large imports of crude petroleum and re-exports of
refined petroleum products.

3. Hong Kong's rate of population increase is

relatively high

because of immigration.

4. The account of Hong Kong's trade and development policies is
based on Lin and Mok (1985), Chen (1984), Lin and Ho (1981), and
Cooper (1986).

5. The account of Singapore's trade and development policies is

based on Yue (1980, 1985), Wong (1981), Roberts (1985), and
Cooper (1986).

6. The account of Korea's trade and development policies is based

on Frank (1975), Nam (1981), Hong (1977), Balassa (1986), and
Cooper (1986).

7. The account of Taiwans trade and development policies is
based on Liang and Liang (1981), Kuo and Eel (1986), Ranis and
Schive (1986), Balassa (1981), and Cooper (1986).

55

8. The account of the Philippines' trade and development policies

is based on Bautista (1980), Baldwin (1975), Alburo and Shepherd
(1986), and Niksch (1986).

9. Philippine export data for 1984 are not yet on the UNCTAD

Trade

Data tape.

10. The account of Malaysia's trade and development policies is
based on Ariff (1980), Lim (1984), and Niksch (1986).
11. There are no export figures yet

on the UNCTAD Trade Data tape

for 1984.

12. The account of Thailand's trade and development policies is

based on Akrasansee (1977, 1980), World Bank (1980), Ajanant
(1984), and Niksch (1986).

13. The account of Indonesia's trade and development policies is

based on Rosendale (1977), Anwar (1980), World Bank (1981), and
Pitt (1985).

14. The account of China's trade and development policies is
based on Hardt and Boone (1986) and Ahearn (1986).

15. In interpreting the percentages in the table, note that the
1980 and 1984 figures do not include trade data on Taiwan.

56

REFERENCES

Ahearn, Raymond J. (1986), "Asian-Pacific Economic Development:

The Long-Term

Historical Perspective

(1960-Present)."

In

Economic Changes in the Asian Pacific Rim: Policy Prospectus.
Washington, D.C.: Congressional Research Service.

Ahmad,

Jaleel

(1985), "South-South

Implications for the North."

Trade in Manufactures:

Paper presented at conference,

International. Trade and Exchange Rates in the Late Eighties,
Facultes TJniversitaires Notre-Dame De La Paix, Namur, Belgium,
June 6-8, 1985.

Ajanant, Juanjai (1984), "Trade Patterns and Trends of Thailand."

Paper presented at conference, Global Implications of the Trade
Patterns' of East and Southeast Asia, Kuala Lumpur,

January 4-6,

1984.

Akrasanee,

Narongchai

(1977), "Industrialization and Trade

Policies and Employment Effects in Thailand."

In Narongchai

Akrasanee, Seiji Naya, and Vinyr Vichit-Vadakan (eds.), Trade and

Employment in Asia and the Pacific.

Manila: Council for Asian

Manpower Studies.

(1980), "Economic Development of Thailand and ASEAN
Economic Cooperation,

with Special

Reference to Commodity

Problems." In Ross Garnaut (ed.), ASEAN in a Changing Pacific and

World Economy. Canberra: Australian National University Press.

Alburo, Florian and Geoffrey Shepherd (1986), Trade
Draft study prepared for a

tion: The Philippine Experience.
World Bank research project.

Anwar, M. Arsjad (1980), "Trade Strategies

and Industrial

Development in Indonesia." In Ross Garnaut (ed.), ASEAN in a

Changing Pacific and World Economy.

Canberra: Australian

National University Press.

Ariff, Mohaméd (1980), "Malaysia's Trade and Industrialization

Strategy: With Special Reference to ASEAN Industrial Coopera-

tion." In Ross Garnaut (ed.), ASEAN in a Chaiging Pacific and
World Economy. Canberra: Australian National University Press.

Balassa, Bela (1981), The Newly Industrializing Countries in the
World Economy. New York: Pergamon Press.

(1986), "The Role of Foreign Trade in the Economic

Development of Korea." In Walter Galenson (ed.), Foreign Trade
and Investment: Economic Devepment in the Newly Industrializing
Asian Countries. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.

Baldwin, Robert E. (1975), Foreign__Trade Rgimes and Economic
Development: The Philippines.

New York: National Bureau of

Economic Research.

Bautista, Romero M.

(1980), "Trade Strategies and Industrial

Development in

the Philippines: With Special Reference to

Regional Trade." In Ross Garnaut (ed.), ASEAN in a Changing

Pacific and World Economy.

Canberra: Australian National

University Press.

Beals, Ralph E. (1984), "Trade Patterns and Trends of Indonesia."

Paper presented at conference, Global Implications of the Trade
Patterns of East and Southeast Asia, Kuala Lumpur, January 1984.

Chen, Edward K. Y.

(1984), "Hong Kóngs Trade Patterns and

Trends." Paper presented at conference, Global Implications of

the Trade Patterns of East and Southeast Asia, Kuala Lumpur,
January 1984.

Cooper, William H. (1986), "Export-Led Development: The East
Asian NICs." In Economic Changes in the Asian Pacific Rim: Policy

Prospectus. Washington, D.C.: Congressional Research Service.

Frank, Charles R., Jr.

(1975),

"

Foreign Trade Regimes and

Economic Development: Republic of Korea." In Trade Strategies for

Economic Development: The Asian Experience.

Manila: Asian

Development Bank.

Hardt, John P. and Jean Boone (1986), "PRC Modernization and
Openness -

A New LDC and Socialist Model for the Pacific." In

Economic Changes in the Asian Pacific Rim: Policy Prospectus.
Washington, D.C.: Congressional Research Service.

Hilton, R. Spence (1983), "Commodity Trade and Relative Returns
to Factors of Production." Journal of International Economics,
16, 259—270.

Hong, Wontack (1977), "Trade and Employment in Korea." In
Narongchai Akrasanee,

Seiji Naya, and Vinyr Vichit-Vadakan

(eds.), Trade and Employment in Asia and the Pacific. Manila:
Council for Asian Manpower Studies.

Krause, Lawrence B.

(1982), U.S. Economic. Policy Toward the

Association of Southeast Asian Nations --

Meeting the Japanese

Challenge. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution.

Kuo, Shirley W. and John C. H. Fei (1986), "Causes and Roles of

Export Expansion in the Republic of China." In Walter Galenson
(ed.), Foreign Trade and Investment: Economic Development in the

Newly Industrializing Asian Countries. Madison: University of
Wisconsin Press.

Liang, Kuo-Shu and Ching-Ing H. Liang (1981), "Trade Strategy and

Exchange-Rate Policies in Taiwan." In Wontack Hong and Lawrence

B. Krause (eds.), Trade and Growth of the Advanced Developing
Countries in the Pacific Basin. Seoul: Korean Development Inst.

Lim, Chee Peng (1984), "Changes in the Malaysian Economy and

Trade Trends and Prospects." Paper presented at conference,
Global Implications of the Trade Patterns of East and Southeast

Asia, Kuala Lumpur, January 4-6, 1984.

Lin, Tzong Biau and Victor Mok (1985), "Trade, Foreign Investment, and Development in Hong Kong." In Walter Galenson (ed.),
Foreign Trade and Investment: Economic Development in the Newly

Industrializing Asian Countries.

Madison:

University of

Wisconsin Press.

and Yin Ping Ho (1981), "Export-Oriented Growth and

Industrial Diversification in Hong Kong." In Wontack Hong and

Lawrence B. Krause (eds.), Trade and Growth of the Advanced

Developing Countries in the Pacific Basin.

Seoul: Korea

Development Institute.

Nam, Chong Hyun (1981), "Trade, Industrial Policies, and the
Structure of Protection in Korea." In Wontack Hong and Lawrence

B. Krause (eds.), Trade and Growth of the Advanced Developing

Countries in the Pacific Basin.

Seoul: Korean Development

Institute.

Naya, Seiji (1986), "Trade and Investment Opportunities in the

NICs and ASEAN Countries and the Role of the United States."

Presented at a Symposium on U.S. Pacific Relations, Joint
Economic Committee of the U.S. Congress, Washington, D.C.,
December 11, 1986.

Niksch, Larry A. (1986), "Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines,

and Thailand."

In Economic Changes in the Asian Pacific Rim:

Policy Prospectus.

Washington, D.C.: Congressional Research

Service.

Pitt, Mark M. (1985), The Timing and Sequencing •of a Trade
Liberalization Policy: Indonesia. Draft study prepared for World
Bank research project.

Ranis, Gustav and CM Schive (1986), "Direct Foreign Investment
in TaiWan's Development." In Walter Galenson (ed.), Foreign Trade
and Investment: Economic Development in the Newly Industrializing

Asian Countries. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.

Roberts, Bee-Yan (1985), The Timing and Sequencing of a Trade

Liberalization Policy: The Case of Singapore.

Draft study

prepared for World Bank research project.

Rosendale, Phillis (1977), "Trade and Employment in Indonesia."

In Narongchai Akrasanee, Seiji Naya, and Vinyr Vichit-Vadakan
(eds.), Trade and Employment in Asia and the Pacific. Manila:
Council for Asian Manpower Studies.

U.S. Department of Commerce, Office of Economic Research, Staff
Economic Report (1976), "Alternative Measurements of TechnologyIntensive Trade," OER/ER-17, (September).

Wong, Kum Poh (1981), "The Financing of Trade and Development in

the ADCs: The Experience of Singapore." In Wontack Hong and
Lawrence B. Krause (eds.), Trade and Growth of the Advanced
Developing Countries

in the

Pacific Basin. Seoul: Korean

Development Institute.

World Bank (1980), Thailand: Industrial Development Strategy in
Thailand. Washington, D.C.: World Bank.

World Bank (1981), Indonesia: Selected Issues of Industrial
Development and Trade Strategy. Washington, D.C.: World Bank.

Yue, Chia Slow (1980), "Singapor&s Trade

and Development

Strategy, and ASEAN Economic Co-operation, with Special Reference

to the ASEAN Common Approach to Foreign Economic Relations." In

Ross Garnaut (ed.), ASEAN in a Changing Pacific and World
Economy. Canberra: Australian National University Press.

(1986), "The Role of Foreign Trade and Investment in
the Development of Singapore." In Walter Galenson (ed.), Foreign
Trade and Investment: Economic Development in the Newly

alizing Asian Countries. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.

3,288

India

2.3

749

9

260

1.6

October 1985, and Country Tables, April 1985.

15

23

23

11,740

153

134

338

26

14

6

11

14

31

26

171

170

216

25

22

1.7

Asian Development Bank, Key Indicators of DMCs of ADB, Supplement,

1986.

162

182

1.3

16

Sources: World Bank, World Development Report,

7,687

Australia

11,130

2.7

613

0

61

249

West Germany

10,360

4.7

1,255

1.0

120

372

Japan

15,390

1.7

3,635

1.0

237

United States 9,363

310

4.5

281

1.4

1,929

9,561

China

540

4.9

81

2.3

159

1,919

Indonesia

5

660

2.6

33

2.7

53

300

Philippines

7

860

4.2

42

2.2

50

514

Thailand

16

1,980

4.5

29

2.4

15

330

Malaysia

29

2,110

6.6

83

1.5

40

98

South Korea

30

3,050

29

29

24

7.0

57

1.6

19

35

Taiwan

7,260

Imports 1984
$)

(billion

6

13

28

14

6

9

27

15

17

55

35

56

90

133

(percent)

Exports Share
in GDP, 1984

GOODS TRADE
Exports 1984
(billion $)

INDICATORS

28

6.2

7.8

GNP per capita GNP per
growth 1965-84 capita
84 ($)
(average annual
percent rate)

INCOME

BASIC ECONOMIC

6,330

31

2.4

Hong Kong

5

1

Singapore

1

Size Growth Rate GDP 1984
1973-84
(billions
(mile.)
of $)
(percent)

POPULATION

18

Sq. Kms.)

(Thous.of

AREA

1.3

1.

3

Table

9

13

25

11

9

17

18

26

48

37

45

94

161

in GDP, 1984
(percent)

Imports Share

Table 2.

SAVINGS AND INVESTMENT RATES

Gross Domestic Investment as Share of GDP
(percentages)

Gross Domestic Savings Resource Gap
as Share of GDP
(percentages)
(percentages)

1960

1984

1960

1984

Singapore

11

47

3

43

Hong Kong

19

24

1

29

-18

5

Taiwan

20

22

13

33

-7

12

South Korea

11

29

1

30

-10

1

Malaysia

14

31

27

32

13

1

Thailand

16

23

17

21

1

-2

Philippines

16

18

16

18

0

0

8

21

8

20

0

-1

China

25b

30

25

30

0

0

United States

18

19

19

16

1

-3

Japan

34

28

34

31

0

3

West Germany

27

21

29

23

2

2

Australia

29

21

25

19

-4

-2

India

17

24

14

22

-3

-2

Indonesia

1960
-8

1984
-4

a 1965
Sources: World Bank, World Development Rept, 1979.
World Bank, World Development Report, 1986.

Asian Development Bank, Key Indicators of Developing Country Member
Countries of ADB, 1984.

Asian Development Bank, ADB Annual Report, 1985.

EXTERNAL PUBLIC AND PRIVATE DEBT

Table 3.

Total Long-Term Debt
Disbursed & Outstanding
(millions of dollars)

Singapore

1970

1984

152

1,911a

2a

270a

l,195b

6,147c

Hong Kong

Taiwan

South Korea 1,972

Total Long-Term Debt Service
as Percentage of Exports of
Goods and Services

29,990

1970
.6

—

20.3

Malaysia

39O

11,846a

3.6

Thailand

726

10,936

14.0

Philippines 1,494

14,135

Indonesia

26,683

a

b
°

2,904

Long-term public and
External public debt

External

1984

7.5°

13.8

4•3c
15.8
5.ld

21.5
17.9
19.0

publicly guaranteed debt
outstanding, 1971

public debt outstanding, 1981

'1982, long-term public and publicly guaranteed debt

External public debt outstanding
Sources: World Bank, World Development Report, 1984.
World Bank, World Development Report, 1986.

Asian Development Bank, y Indicators of Developing
Member Countries of ADB, April 1984.

Table 4.

GROWTH RATES OF GDP AND FOREIGN TRADE
GDP
(percentages)

1965-73 1973-84

Exports
(percentages)

Imports
(percentages)

1965-73 1973-84

1965-73 1973—84

Terms of
Trade
(1980=100)
1982 1984

Singapore

13.0

8.2

11.0

7.1

9.8

7.1

100

101

Hong Kong

7.9

9.1

11.7

12.9

10.6

9.3

110

109

Taiwan

7.9

93a

23.7k

16.7c

17.gb

13.5a

—

—

10.0

7.2

31.7

15.1

22.4

9.7

100

100

Malaysia

6.7

7.3

8.0

7.5

4.4

8.9

85

93

Thailand

7.8

6.8

6.9

10.4

4.4

5.9

77

81

Philippines

5.4

4.8

4.2

5.6

3.0

2.3

89

101

Indonesia

8.1

6.8

11.1

1.4

14.0

10.5

105

101

7.8

6.6

-

10.1

-

10.2

106

10].

2.3

6.8

2.3

9.4

3.8

106

112

South Korea

China

.

Unithd States
Japan

.9.8

4.3

14.7

7.5

14.9

1.6

103

109

West Germany

4.6

2.0

10.7

4.5

11.3

3.9

97

96

Australia

5.6

2.4

9.3

3.0

6.8

3.4

98

95

India

3.9

4.1

2.4

3.3

-5.7

5.4

104

107

a

1973-83

b 1960-70
c 1970-77
Sources: World Bank, World Development Report, 1979.

World Bank, World Development Report, 1986.

Asian Development Bank, Key Indicators of Developing Member
Countries of ADB, 1984.

COMMODITY STRUCTURE OF PRODUCTION AND TRADE
(percentage shares)

Table 5.

PRODUCTION, 1984

EXPORTS, 1983

Agricul- Industry Services Primary Manufactures
Goods
ture

IMPORTS

Primary Manufactures
Goods

Singapore

1

39

60

44

56

44

56

Hong Kong

1

22

78

8

92

25

75

6a

94a

Taiwan
South Korea

14

40

47

9

91

49

51

Malaysia

21

35

44

78

22

28

72

Thailand

20

28

52

68

32

36

64

Philippines

25

34

41

49

51

40

60

Indonesia

26

40

34

92

8

38

62

China

36

44

23

43

57

34

66

United States

4

43

54

30

70

37

63

Japan

3

41

56

3

97

77

23

West Germany

2

46

52

13

87

42

58

77

23

20

80

47

53

50

50

Australia
India
a

35

27

38

1982

Source: World Bank, World Development Report, 1986.

Table 6.

MERCHANDISE TRADE OF FOUR INDEBTED COUNTRIES
IN THE ASIAN PACIFIC RIM, 1981-1985
(Billions of dollars, exports (f.o.b.), imports (c.i.f.))
Korea

Philippines

Thailand

Indonesia

1981

Exports

21.1

5.7

7.0

22.3

Imports

26.1

8.5

9.9

13.3

Balance

4.9

-2.8

-2.9

9.0

Exports

21.9

5.0

7.0

22.3

Imports

24.3

8.3

8.6

16.9

Balance

-2.4

-3.3

-1.6

5.4

Exports

24.5

4.9

6.4

21.1

Imports

26.2

8.0

10.3

16.3

Balance

-1.7

-3.1

-3.9

4.8

Exports

29.2

5.3

7.4

21.9

Imports

30.6

6.4

10.4

13.9

Balance

-1.4

-1.1

-3.0

8.0

Exports

30.3

4.6

7.1

19.7

Imports

31.1

5.5

9.2

10.2

Balance

-.8

-.9

-2.1

9.5

1982

1983

1984

1985

Source: International Trade, 1984-85, Table A-4, and International Trade,
1985-86, Table A-14, both from General Agreement on Tariffs and
Trade (GATT).

Table 7.

STRUCTURE OF HONG KONG'S MERCHANDISE TRADE,
1960, 1978, AND 1983
(percentage distribution)

Exports

Fuels, minerals
and metals

Other
primary
commodities

Other
Textiles & Machinery &
Manufac—
Clothing
Transport
tures
Equipment

1960

5

15

45

4

31

1978

1

2

•46

15

36

1983

2

6

33

22

36

Imports

Food

Fuel

Other
primary
commodities

Machinery
& Transport
Equipment

Other
Manufactures

1960

27

3

16

10

44

1978

15

5

7

19

54

1983

12

7

6

21

54

Source: World Bank, World Development Report, 1981.
World Bank, World Development Report, 1986.

Table 8

DISTRIBUTION OF HONG KONG'S IMPORTS FROM AND EXPORTS TO
SELECTED COUNTRIES OR REGIONS, 1963, 1970, 1980, AND 1984
(in percentages)
1963

1970

1980

1984

Imports Exports Imports Exports Imports Exports Imports Exports
U.S.

16.5

35.0

19.4

50.3

18.3

40.7

12.1

50.1

Canada

1.9
29.3

3.0
4.3

1.0
34.2

3.7
4.7

1.0
•33.8

3.2
4.2

0.6
28.0

3.6
4.2

0.0

4.9

3.6

4.4

2.7

3.9

1.8

3.5

31.2

43.9

25.6

29.2

21.3

36.3

ADCs

8.4

11.1

4.3

16.5

5.1

22.9
3.7

RRCs

8.4

0.4
7.8
0.2

4.8

2.3
0.2

6.1

3.4
2.8

13.4
11.8
2.2
29.7

100.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

Japar
Au trail a
& N. Z.

European

Community

Chin&

Source: UNCTAD Trade Data tape.

2.6
9.0

Table 9

STRUCTURE OF SINGAPORES MERCHANDISE TRADE,
1960, 1978, AND 1983
(percentage distribution)

Exports
Fuels, minerals
and metals

Other
primary
commodities

Textiles & Machinery & Other manu—
factures
Transport
Clothing
Equipment

1960

1

73

5

7

14

1978

31

23

5

25

16

1983

31

13

4

31

22

Imports

Food

Fuels

Other
primary
commodities

Machinery Other manu& Transport factures
Equipment

1960

21

15

38

7

21

1978

10

24

9

29

23

1983

7

31

6

30

26

Source: World Bank, World Development Report, 1981.
World Bank, World Development Report, 1986.

Table 10.

DISTRIBUTION OF SINGAPORE'S IMPORTS FROM AND EXPORTS TO
SELECTED COUNTRIES OR REGIONS, 1963, 1970, 1980, AND 1984
(in percentages)
1963

1970

1984

1980

Imports Exports Imports Exports Imports Exports Imports Exports
U.S.

13.3

12.9

18.9

18.2

17.8

21.7

26.9

1.8

0.6

2.0

1.0

0.9

0.6

1.0

16.0

7.7

24.3

13.0

24.0

10.8

28.1

11.8

5,7

6.9

5.5

5.].

3.6

7.9

4.2

5.3

29.9
6.3

17.7
5.3

29.6
9.6

15.0
3.9

15.5

16.0

11.9

ADCs

25.0
1.6

15.1

5.1

12.3

RRCs

44.2

32.8

33.3

18.8

34.1

29.5

16.2

29.2

2.0

7.7

1.2

100.0

100.0

100.0

7.3

Canada
Japan

Australia
& N. Z.

European

Community

China

-

100.0

-

0.9
100.0

100.0

Source: UNCTAD Trade Data tape.

2.5
100.0

100.0

Table 11
STRUCTURE OF KOREA'S MERCHANDISE TRADE,
1960, 1978, AND 1983
(percentage distribution)

Exports

Fuels, minerals
and metals

Other
primary
commodities

Textiles & Machinery & Other manufactures
Clothing
Transport
Equipment

1960

30

56

8

1978

1

10

32

2].

36

1983

3

6

25

32

34

6

Imports

Other
primary
commodities

Machinery Other manu& Transport factures
Equipment

Food

Fuels

1960

10

7

25

12

46

1978

8

16

17

33

26

1983

8

27

14

29

22

Source:

World Bank, World Development Report, 1981.
World Bank, World Development Report. 1986.

Table 12

DISTRIBUTION OF KOREA'S IMPORTS FROM MD EXPORTS TO
SELECTED COUNTRIES OR REGIONS, 1963. 1970, 1980, AND 1984
(in percentages)
1963

1980

1970

1984

Imports Exports Imports Exports Imports Exports Imports Exports

U.S

49.5

32.5

31.].

50.7

33.7

35.2

33.5

46.4

Canada

0.7

0.3

1.1

2.5

3.3

2.6

3.2

3.8

Japan

34.7

34.5

49.4

29.8

40.4

23.0

41.2

20.2

1.8

0.3

0.9

1.0

3.9

1.9

5.3

1.9

European
Community

7.1

9.3

9.4

8.6

10.0

20.8

10.].

14.5

ADC S

4.0

18.4

2.5

5.9

2.3

9.9

2.2

8.9

RRCs

1.8

4.5

5.2

1.3

6.0

6.3

4.1

3.9

100.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

Au stra ii a

& N. Z.

China

Source: UNCTAD Trade Data tape.

Table 13

DISTRIBUTION OF TAIWAN'S IMPORTS FROM AND EXPORTS TO
SELECTED COUNTRIES OR REGIONS, 1963, 1970, 1980, AND 1984
(in percentages)

1980

1970

1963

Imports Exports Imports Exports Imports Exports Imports Exports

43.1

19.9

25.7

44.2

33.0

1.1

2.1

1.3

3.9

1.6

34.7

38.4

51.7

16.7

40.4

-

5.0

1.2

3.0

1.6

3.4

-

European
Community

7.1

10.2

8.7

11.0

9.8

10.4

ADC S

2.4

20.5

3.3

15.6

5.3

5.6

RRC S

6.4

7.3

6.0

6.6

6.1

-

2.8

China

0.0

0•.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

U.S.

Canada
Japan
Au str a ii a

& N. Z.

Source: UNCTAD Trade Data tape.

31.7

—

3.5

—

40.7

100.0

-

0.0

Table 14
STRUCTURE OF THE PHILJIPPINES MERCHANDISE TRADE,
1960, 1978, AND 1983
(percentage distribution)

Exports

Fuels, minerals
and metals

Other
primary
commodities

Textiles & Machinery & Other manu—
factures
Clothing
Transport
Equipment

1960

10

86

1

0

3

1978

14

52

6

2

26

1983

13

36

7

5

38

Imports

Food

Fuels

Other
primary
commodities

Machinery Other manu& Transport factures
Equipment

1960

15

10

5

36

34

1978

8

21

7

27

37

1983

8

27

5

21

39

Source: World Bank, World Development Report, 1981.
World Bank, World Development Report, 1986.

Table 15

DISTRIBUTION OF THE PHILIPPINES' IMPORTS FROM AND EXPORTS
TO SELECTED COUNTRIES OR REGIO4S, 1963, 1970, 1980, AND 1984
(in percentages)

1984

1980

1970

1963

Imports Exports Imports Exports Imports Exports Imports Exports
46.4

46.6

30.3

42.7

34.3

26.6

38.6

2.9

0.1

2.4

0.2

1.6

1.0

1.0

22.1

28.0

38.0

40.5

29.1

32.7

24.5

2.8

0.3

4.5

0.4

4.2

2.1

3.2

17.4

21.7

17.7

14.0

2.9
0.0

2.2
4.6

20.6
11.0

RRCs

2.4
5.6

8.7
6.7

4.6

11.8
10.9
4.3

China

-

-

-

1.0

5.4

100.0

100.0

U.S.

Canada
Japan
Au stra ii a

& N. Z.

Europe an

Community
ADCs

100.0

Source: UNCTAD

Trade

100.0

100.0

Data tape.

0.4

9.6
6.9

-

-

100.0

100.0

Table 16
STRUCTURE OF MALAYSIA'S MERCHANDISE TRADE,
1960, 1978, AND 1983
(percentage distribution)

Fuels, minerals
and metals

Other
primary
commodities

Textiles & Machinery & Other manufactures
Clothing
Transport
Equipment

1960

20

74

1978

27

52

2

11

8

1983

35

43

2

14

6

6

Imports

Food

Fuels

Other
primary
commodities

Machinery
& Transport
Equipment

Other manufactures

1960

29

16

13

14

28

1978

17

13

7

34

29

1983

9

14

5

44

28

Source:

World Bank, World Development Report, 1981.
World Bank, World Development Report. 1986.

Table 17

DISTRIBUTION OF MALAYSIAS IMPORTS FROM AND EXPORTS TO
SELECTED COUNTRIES OR REGIONS,

1963, 1970, 1980, AND 1984

(in percentages)

1984

1980

1970

1963

Imports Exports Imports Exports Imports Exports Imports Exports
U.S.

-

12.6

10.7

14.9

14.4

18.3

15.6

Canada

0.4

2.0

2.3

2.2

0.9

0.5

1.2

Japan

4.4

24.7

3.6

21.0

23.1

25.7

24.8

2.6

2.5

11.6

3.0

6.2

2.0

4.3

European
Community

16.7

248

42.4

23.2

15.7

19.8

11.8

ADCs

66.4

28.8

22.6

30.3

35.2

27.9

36.6

RRCs

9.2

4.1

6.6

3.6

4.3

3.6

3.7

-

0.1

-

1.4

-

1.8

1.7

100.0

100.0

Au stra ii a

& N. Z.

China

100.0

100.0

100.0

Source: UNCTAD Trade Data tape.

100.0

100.0

Table 18

STRUCTURE OF THAILANDS MERCHANDISE TRADE,
1960, 1978, AND 1983
(percentage distribution)

Exports

Fuels, minerals
and metals

Other
primary
commodities

Textiles & Machinery & Other manufactures
Clothing
Transport
Equipment

1960

7

91

0

0

2

1978

11

64

10

3

12

1983

6

62

1].

6

15

Imports

Food

Fuels

1960

10

11

11

25

43

1978

4

21

9

31

35

1983

4

24

8

29

35

Other
primary
commodities

Machinery Other manu& Transport factures
Equipment

Source: World Bank, World Development Report, 1981.
World Bank, World Development Report, 1986.

Table 19

DISTRIBUTION OF THAILANtYS IMPORTS FROM AND EXPORTS TO
SELECTED COUNTRIES OR REGIONS, 1963, 1970, 1980, AND 1984
(in percentages)

U.S.

1984

1980

1970

1963

Imports Exports Imports Exports Imports Exports Imports Exports
22.4
15.7
15.3
19.1
15.0
14.8
9.6
18.7

Canada

0.5

0.0

0.7

0.1

2.1

0.4

1.2

1.5

34.6

25.6

44.9

29.5

33.6

18.9

36.7

17.0

Japan

1.9

0.3

3.6

0.5

3.2

1.3

2.6

2.3

European
Community

28.7

22.9

24.3

22.2

18.0

32.6

15.9

26.9

ADCs

11.6

26.3

9.6

23.1

18.8

18.0

22.2

19.2

RRCs

1.5

14.9

1.7

9.3

4.9

10.7

1.4

7.].

-

-

-

2.4

3.8

3.1

100.0

100.0

100.0

Au st rail a

& N. Z.

China

-

100.0

100.0

100.0

Source: UNCTAD Trade Data tape.

100.0

100.0

Table 20
STRUCTURE OF INDONEsIA'S MERCHANDISE TRADE,
1960, 1978, AND 1983
(percentage distribution)

Exports

Fuels, minerals
and metals

Other
primary
commodities

1960

33

67

1978

72

26

1983

80

12

Textiles & Machinery
Clothing & Transport
Equipment

Other manufactures

0

1

1

1

1

6

Imports

Food

Fuels

Other
primary
commodities

Machinery Other manu& Transport
Equipment

factures

1960

23

5

10

17

45

1978

18

9

6

36

31

1983

8

25

5

35

28

Source:

World Bank, World Development Report, 1981.
World Bank, World Development Report, 1986.

Table 2].

DISTRIBUTION OF INDONESIA'S IMPORTS FROM AND EXPORTS TO
SELECTED COUNTRIES OR REGIONS, 1963, 1970, 1980, AND 1984
(in percentages)
1984

1980

1970

1963

Imports Exports Imports Exports Imports Exports Imports Exports
21.8

-

28.2

15.9

17.3

20.9

16.8

22.4

Canada

0.2

-

1.7

0.0

2.2

0.1

3.].

0.2

Japan

20.7

-

34.5

37.9

42.8

52.5

43.0

51.7

0.8

3.9

3.9

5.3

2.1

4.0

2.4

European
Community

29.2

23.2

18.4

22.3

6.9

26.8

5.3

ADCs

19.3

5.2

20.8

5.2

15.9

4.3

15.9

RRCs

7.6

3.0

2.8

4.6

1.3

0.6

1.8

China

-

-

0.0

-

-

0.9

0.0

100.0

100.0

U.S.

Au stral i a

& N. Z.

100.0

-.

100.0

Source: iJNCTAD Trade Data tape.

100.0

100.0

100.0

Table 22
STRUCTURE OF CHINA'S MERCHANDISE TRADE,
1978 AND 1983
(percentage distribution)

Exports

Fuels, minerals
and metals

Other
primary
commodities

Textiles & Machinery & Other manufactures
Clothing
Transport
Equipment

1978

13

38

24

3

22

1983

22

21

19

6

32

Imports

Food

Fuels

Other
primary
commodities

Machinery Other manu& Transport factures
Equipment

1978

17

0

43

18

22

1983

15

1

18

19

47

Source: World Bank, World Development Report, 1981.
World Bank, World Development Report, 1986.

Table 23

DISTRIBUTION OF CHINAS IMPORTS FROM AND EXPORTS TO
SELECTED COUNTRIES OR REGIONS, 1963, 1970, 1980, AND 1984
(in percentages)

1984

1980

1970

1963

Imports Exports Imports Exports Imports Exports Imports Exports

-

26.5

-

17.9

12.1

10.1

5.2

-

5.5

1.3

42.3

35.5

-

43.0

26.9

38.6

9.9

6.5

5.1

1.3

29.1

33.8

19.0

17.4

11.5

1.2
0.3

2.0
1.6

4.2
2.7

9.7
1.1

42.7

-

-

0.0

-

Canada

18.5

-

Japan

11.9

-

U.S.

AU st ra ii a

& N. Z.

European
Community
ADCs

RRCs

China

100.0

-

-.

100.0

Source: UNCTAD Trade Data tape.

-

-

100.0

-

100.0

3.9

100.0

Table 24
DISTRIBUTION OF U.S. EXPORTS TO AND IMPORTS FROM
SELECTED REGIONS, 1968, 1975, AND 1982
(in percentages)

All Goods
1968
Exports Imports

1975

Exports Imports

1982
Exports Imports

ADC s

3.7

3.4

4.6

5.7

7.1

9.3

RRC s

2.8

3.1

3.].

4.8

4.6

4.5

0.3

O;2

1.4

0.9

China
South Asia

3.1

1.2

2.0

0.7

1.1

0.7

27.0

25.7

23.5

18.0

24.2

17.8

Other Western Europe

4.6

4.2

3.6

3.1

3.4

3.2

Japan

8.5

6

8.8

12.0

9.9

15.8

European Community

12 .

Australia/New Zealand

• 2.9

1.4

2.1

1.4

2.6

1.2

Canada

23.5

26.8

20.1

22.5

15.4

18.8

Rest of World

23.9

21.6

31.9

31.6

30.3

27.8

Source: Trade data bank of author.

Table 25.

SHARES OF THE UNITED STATES AND SELECTED FOREIGN COMPETITORS
IN EXPORTS TO APR COUNTRIESa
(in percentages)

1980b

1984b

ADCs RRCs China

ADCs RRCs China

1970

1963

ADCs RRCs China

ADCs RRCs China

Total Exports from All Row Countries

16

18

2

1

6

36

30

26

43

4

7

3

3

5

12

14

19

11

13

17

2

12

30

4

12

35

10

7

2

23

8

3

11

4

1

0

-

0

0

-

10

2

20

24

0

18

20

0

21

16

27

21

1

1

18

1

2

10

1

1

5

22

21

12

33

30

42

28

26

3

2

39

3

5

10

3

17

20

29

14

22

39

ADCsC

8

23

1

10

15

RRCSC

29

9

0

21

ChHa

0

0

-

0

U.S.

Canada
Japan

Aust.&N.Z.
EC

Natural Resource-Intensive Exports from All Row countriesd
21

22

0

20

27

0

20

13

52

23

13

28

1

3

26

1

2

28

2

3

12

4

3

20

7

7

2

13

13

9

8

7

7

10

6

11

Aust.&N.Z.

6

3

55

5

9

27

5

10

15

9

8

19

EC

7

8

14

7

10

26

5

5

4

6

5

11

ADCsC

9

34

2

8

19

5

13

40

3

13

47

7

RRCsC

49

23

0

46

20

4

50

22

6

24

12

4

China

0

0

-

0

0

-

0

0

11

6

U.S.

Canada

Table 25. (cont.)

SHARES OF THE UNITED STATES AND SELECTED FOREIGN COMPETITORS
IN EXPORTS TO APR COUNTRIESa

1963

1970

AOCs RRCs China

1980b

_______________

ADCs RRCs China ADCs RRCs China

ADCs RRCs China

Labor—Intensive Exports from All Row Countriesd
U.S.

11

20

0

6

13

0

7

7

22

5

7

6

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

1

0

0

1

0

49

33

35

53

37

40

42

23

47

31

24

37

1

0

0

1

1

0

1

1

1

1

1

0

Canada
Japan

Aust. & N.Z.
EC

21

8

59

12

13

60

12

8

8

9

8

4

ADCsC

13

37

6

26

33

2

27

56

21

18

54

51

RRCsC

5

2

0

2

3

0

10

4

2

4

4

1

China

0

0

-

0

0

-

0

0

-

32

2

Technology-Intensive Exports from All Row Countriesd
U.S.

23

30

0

24

20

0

27

22

15

25

20

22

1

0

0

0

2

0

1

1

1

1

1

1

35

23

32

43

34

56

39

32

50

40

32

44

1

1

0

1

2

0

1

1

0

1

1

0

33

32

68

23

33

44

17

20

30

15

17

23

ADCsC

2

12

0

6

8

0

8

22

5

11

28

9

RRCSC

5

1

0

2 -

1

0

7

2

0

4

1

0

China

0

0

-

0

0

-

0

0

-

3

0

-

Canada
Japan
Aust. & N.Z.
EC

Table 25. (cont.)

SHARES OF THE UNITED STATES AND SELECTED FOREIGN COMPETITORS
IN EXPORTS TO APR COUNTRIESa

Human Capital-Intensive Exports from All Row countriesd

—

1963
ADCs RRCs China

14

U.S.

17

1970

1980b

1984b

ADCs RRCs China

ADCs RRCs China

ADCs RRCs China

0

9

9

0

9

4

4

9

3

1

1

1

2

0

1

0

59

Canada

0

1

0

0

0

0

Japan

47

41

43

59

50

71

63

51

70

2

1

6

3

6

0

3

3

5

Aust. & N.Z.

—

1

47

79

2

2

26

24

51

16

18

29

13

11

17

16

13

15

ADCSC

4

16

0

9

16

0

8

28

1

7

32

2

RRCsC

7

1

0

3

1

0

3

2

1

2

1

0

China

0

0

-

0

0

-

0

0

—

4

1

-

EC

ash
b

of total exports of countries listed.
.

.

Data for Taiwan are not included in the 1980 and 1984 figures, since the United
Nations no longer recognizes Taiwan as a separate country and therefore UN
agencies no longer collect data on Taiwan.

CThe shares of the ADCs and RRCs in their own regions measure trade within these
regions.

dlhe commodity breakdown into goods that are natural resource-intensive,
unskilled labor-intensive, technology-intensive, and human capital-intensive is
adapted from Krause (1984).

Source: UNClAD Trade Data tape.

Table 26

DISTRIBUTION OF MAJOR U.S. EXPORTS TO AND IMPORTS FROM APR
COUNTRIES, 1968, 1975, AND 1982k
(in percentages)

Exports
ADCs

1968
RRCs

23

14

26

11

28

18

10

51

1975

China

ADCs

SIC Industries

Agricultural
-Crops (1)

1982

RRCs China

ADCs RRCs China

Food & kindred
products (20)

9

13

7

2

0

5

3

1

Lumber & wood
products (24)

1

0

0

0

0

1

0

7

Chemicals

8

8

7

12

2

10

11

22

industries (33) 2

2

3

5

19

2

2

3

7

4

4

4

13

5

4

0

1.3

24

16

29

30

18

22

5

Elect. & electronic
9
machinery (36)

6

14

17

1

16

27

2

13

10

9

1

7

9

1

16

13

11

6

18

22

8

Primary metal
Fabricated metal
products (34)
Machinery, exc.
electrical(35)

Transportation

equipment (37) 13
All other
products

15

Source: Trade data bank of author.
-

An industry is included if the export or export share of the industry is

at least 5% in any region in any of the three years.

Table 26 (cont.)

Imports
1968

ADCs
SIC Industries
Agricultural
—Crops (1)

RR China

ADCs

1975
China
RR

1982

ADCs RR China

0

15

0

2

5

0

3

1

AgriculturalLivestock (2)

1

0

0

0

6

0

0

1

Forestry (8)

1

16

0

7

0

0

5

0

Oil & gas (13)

0

5

0

41

0

0

30

8

Food & kindred
products (20)

4

27

4

17

4

1

7

5

Textile
products (22)

10

1

8

1

22

3

1

10

Apparel (23)

26

3

24

3

7

22

6

28

Lumber & wood
products (24)

10

6

5

2

3

2

2

3

Chemicals (28)

0

0

0

0

12

0

0

6

Petroleum
products (29)

0

0

1

5

0

1

3

18

6

0

6

0

0

4

0

1

Leather & leather
2
products (31)

0

3

0

1

10

1

3

18

3

6

29

4

3

3

Rubber & misc.
plastic
products (30')

-

Primary metal

industries (33) 0
Electrical &
electronic

0

0

23

10

1

23

30

1

7

1

3

9

1

3

11

2

3

7

8

14

5

7

19

7

8

machinery (36) 16
Miscellaneous

mfg.(39)
All other
products

Table 27

COMPARATIVE GROWTH RATES BY FACTOR-INTENSITY BREAKDOWNS OF EXPORTS
TO APR COUNTRIES, 1963-1970, 1970-1980, AND 1980-1984
(average annual growth rates in percentages)
1963-1970
ADCs

RRCs

China

Natural resource-intensive

18.6

9.8

4.9

Unskilled labor-intensive

35.2

4.8

17.3

Technology- intensive

36.8

18.3

45.1

Human capital-intensive

27.7

17.-9

15. 6

1970-1980
ADC S

RRC s

China

Natural resource-intensive

72.5

74.8

97.3

Unskilled labor-intensive

37.9

43.3

168.3

Technology-intensive

91.6

82.7

107.0

Human capital-intensive

76.5

62.0

56.6

1980-1984
ADC S

RRC s

China

Natural resource-intensive

-1.3

-0.5

-5.7

Unskilled labor-intensive

21.6

4.3

17.4

Technology-intensive

7.8

2.7

11.5

Human capital-intensive

0.5

-2.2

12 .

7

Exports by the U.S., Canada, Japan, Australia and New Zealand, the
European Community, the ADCs, the RRCs, and China.
Source: UNCTAD Trade Data tape.

Table 28
COMPOSITION OF U.S. EXPORTS TO AND IMPORTS FROM SELECTED REGIONS
BY TECHNOLOGY INTENSITY, 1968, 1975, AND 1982
(in percentages)
Technology- Intensive Goods
1968
Exports Imports

1982

1975

Exports Imports

Exports Imports

ADCs

38

15

41

26

42

27

RRCs

24

0

40

25

52

54

China

14

6.

53

4

South Asia

30

0

42

1

42

4

European Community

42

13

41

17

47

20

Japan

32

26

33

25

37

30

Australia/New Zealand 41

1].

40

21

41

29

Canada

19

4

16

5

23

11

World

31

13

31

16

37

20

Non-Technology-Intensive

ADCs

62

85

59

74

58

73

RRCs

76

100

60

75

48

46

86

94

47

96

China
South Asia

70

100

58

99

58

96

European Community

58

87

59

83

53

80

Japan

68

74

67

75

63

70

Australia/New Zealand

59

89

59

79

59

71

Canada

81

96

85

95

77

89

World

69

87

69

84

63

80

Source: Trade data bank of author.

Table 29

ESTIMATED ORDER OF RELATIVE FACTOR-PRICE DIFFERENCES BETWEEN
THE UNITED STATES AND SELECTED COUNTRIES OR REGIONS, 19782

Capital Unskilled
Labor

Singapore 423

-3.50

4.81

-.96 -89.61

(3.11)

(-.22) (—2.02)

(3.07)

-5.39
(-5.02)

4.63
(3.12)

14.88
(3.47)

3.10

-9.40

10.74

(2.07)

(-8.25)

6.99
(4.68)

3.76
(2.42)

-8.52
(-6.98)

7.63
(4.86)

4.05 116.26
(1.03) (2.37)

236

4.44
-9.36 -128.82
(1.81) (—1.70) (—1.48)

139
157

Hong Kong 4.39

Korea
Malaysia
Thailand

-6.36

2.49

-6.33
-4.03)

10.29

-5.36
(—3.71)

10.03
(4.78)

-4.92
(-2.86)

13.27 -12.52 -201.86
(4.77) (-2.75) (-2.27)

(1.25)

Indonesia - .05
(-.02)

China
Japan

121.80
(3.15)
(2:55)

(—3.31)

(4.82)

-4.34
(-.96)

14.50

-2.97

-.04

(—.61)

(.02)

4.26

-6.81

5.67

8.45

-7.50

(-6.55)

(4.07)

(2.64)

(—.18)

3.35
(2.26)

-4.30

68)

•

240

(—.14)

(3.30)

(-3 .

240

(.13)

7.56

Philippines 2.39

ASEAN

9.71

(2 .92)

(1.19)

All

* Observations

Resources

(—2.97)

(2.88)

Taiwan

Skilled Land Natural
Labor

6.69
-5.51 -92.68
(4.26) (-1.36) (-2.00)

.47
(.11)

-6.45

10.84

5.45 -183.90

(-1.96)

(2 .82)

(.89) (-1.22)

5.42
(4.57)

-4.12
(-4.30)

-1.92
(-1.51)

18.29 130.50
(6.04) (3.18)

193
109

274
242
89
281

Source: Trade data bank of author.
1

1

The t statistic is in parentheses under each coefficient.
A t statistic of 1.67 is significant at 10%.

Table 30

DISTRIBUTION OF TOTAL EXPORTS OF APR COUNTRIES TO THE UNITED STATES
AND OTHER SELECTED COUNTRIES AND REGIONS, 1963, 1970, 1980, AND 1984
(in percentages)
1970

1963

ADCs

RRCs

China

ADCs

RRCs

18.5

19.0

-

37.0

17.9

1.7

0.8

2.8

0.7

11.2

20.9

11.9

25.0

3.8

1.1

2.8

1.7

EC

23.8

18.9

18.2

14.6

ADCs

12.3

31.6

15.1

33.8

RRCs

28.1

7.2

11.3

5.5

0.3

0.0

0.5

0.4

100.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

United States
Canada
Japan
Australia & NZ

China

China

1984

1980

ADCs

RRCs

China

16.4

34.4

18.7

12.1

1.7

0.3

2.4

0.4

1.3

10.5

31.8

10.9

36.8

26.9

3.7

1.6

2.8

2.0

1.3

EC

18.9

12.3

13.4

8.4

11.5

ADCs

16.7

31.0

14.2

27.9

42.7

RRCs

22.1

5.6

19.2

4.9

3.9

100.0

100.0

iTh

100.0

United States
Canada
Japan

Australia & NZ

ADCs

RRCs

24.6

Source: UNCTAD Trade Data tape.

China

Table 31.

OUTSTANDING DIRECT INVESTMENT, 1980
(million $)

Investment
Investment ifl:

Japan

by:

United States

Japan

Amount

Amount

6,274

-—

United States

8,878

South Korea

587

1,137

Taiwan

510

370

Hong Kong

1,969

1,095

Indonesia

1,334

4,424

618

650

Philippines

1,244

615

Singapore

1,196

936

360

396

Subtotal: ASEAN

4,752

7,021

ADMEa

7,818

9,623

213,460

36,497

Malaysia

Thailand

World Total
a

ADME stands for Advanced Developing Market Economies.

Source: Hugh Patrick, "The Asian Developing Market Economies -- How They Have
Affected and Been Affected By the United States-Japan Economic

Relationship." Paper presented at conference, The United States,
Japan, and Southeast Asia: The Issues of Interdependence, Maui,
Hawaii, December 14-18, 1983.

Table 32.

PERCENTAGE COUNTRY SHARES OF ALL U.S. FOREIGN
DIRECT INVESTMENT IN AN INDUSTRY, 1977

All
Industries

Mining

Petr. Total

Food

Cheni.

Prim.
Metal
Fab.

Mfg.

Country

Mach.
exc.
Elect.
Eoot.

*

0.2

0.0

0.0

0.8

0.7

0.3

0.0

0.6

0.1

0.0

0.6

0.1

0.8

0.1

0.2

0.1

0.0

0.0

0.2

a

0.3

0.1

0.8

0.0

a

0.3

0.0

0.1

0.3

0.2

0.4

0.0

0.0

1.6

0.0

1.0

0.3

0.1

0.4

a

0.1

1.1

2.6

0.2

0.0

0.3

a

0.1

a

0.1

0.1

0.1

0.6

*

1.0

0.5

1.8

Singapore

0.4

0.0

0.8

0.2

Thai land

0.2

0.1

a

Korea

0.3

0.0

Ta i wan

0.2

Hong Kong

0.9

trdones I a

0.7

a

Malaysia

0.3

Philippines

Transp. Other
Eqpt.

Trade

Mfg.

Bank— Finance
ing

except
Bankina

Other
Industries

Indonesi a

*

a

0.1

0.2

0.0

a

Malaysia

*

0.1

a

0.2

0.0

0.2

Philippines

a

a

0.5

2.1

0.1

0.7

0.0

0.1

0.4

1.1

0.1

0.5

h: ii and

*

0.1

a

0.6

0.0

0.1

Korea

a

0.0

a

0.4

0.1

0.1

0.1

0.1

0.1

0.8

0.0

0.0

*

a

2.2

3.0

0.8

2.5

51 nçjapore

Ta i wan

Hong Kong

* Indicates
a

Elect.
Eqpt.

an amount between -$500,000 and +$500,000.

Suppressed to avoid disclosure of data on individual companies.

Source: U.S. Department of Commerce, U.S._Direct_InvetmL94_j,
Washington, D.C., April 1981.

Table 32. (cont.)

PERCENTAGE COUNTRY SHARES OF ALL U.S. FOREIGN
DIRECT INVESTMENT IN AN INDUSTRY, 1984

All

Mining

Petr. Total

Industries

Food Cheni

Mfg.

Country
________

Prim.
Metal
Fab.

exc.
Elect.

1.9

a

6.1

0.2

0.1

0.2

a

Malaysia

0.5

0.0

1.1

0.4

a

0.1

Philippines

0.5

0.0

a

0.5

1.1

Singapore

1.0

0.0

0.8

1.1

a

Thailand

0.4

0.2

a

a

Korea

0.4

0.0

a

0.2

Taiwan

0.4

0.0

0.2

Hong Kong

1.6

0.0

0.5

Transp. Other
Eqpt.

0.0

0.0

0.3

0.1

a

3.1

0.8

0.4

0.0

a

0.5

1.2

a

5.2

0.0 02

a

0.0

a

0.5

0.0

a

a

1.0

0.5

0.2

0.6

D

a

1.8

0.7

0.2

0.7

0.9

a

2.0

Trade

Mfg.

Bank- Finance
ing

except
Banking

Other
Industries

a

0.2

0.2

0.0

a

Malaysia

a

0.2

0.3

0.1

a

a

Philippines

a

a

0.2

2.0

a

a

Singapore

a

a

1.0

1.6

0.5

0.8

Thailand

a

a

0.2

0.4

0.0

a

Korea

0.3

0.1

0.4

1.6

a

a

Taiwan

0.2

a

0.4

0.9

0.0

0.1

Hong Kong

0.0

a

3.7

3.9

4.2

4.7

a

Elect.
Eqpt.

Egpt.

Indonesia

Indonesia

Mach.

Suppressed to avoid disclosure of data on individual companies.

Source: U.S. Department of Commerce, U.S. Direct Investment Abroad, 1977,
Washington, D.C., April 1981.

Table 33.

PERCENTAGE INDUSTRY DISTRIBUTION OF A COUNTRY'S TOTAL
DIRECT INVESTMENT FROM THE UNITED STATES, 1977

Mining

Petr. Total

Food Chem. Prim.

Mfg.

Metal

Mach.
exc.

Elect.
Eqpt.

Elect.

Country

Egpt.

________
Indonesia

0.9

74.8

9.9

0.2

3.0

a

0.0

1.3

Malaysia

0.0

a

18.5

0.6

3.2

0.4

0.9

9.9

Philippines

0.0

32.6

37.9

11.9 10.5

1.7

0.1

4.1

Singapore

0.0

45.0

20.5

1.0

0.6

5.4

2.9

8.7

Thailand

2.5

a

21.5

3.8

3.8

1.7

0.0

4.6

Korea

0.0

a

41.5

2.0 22.8

0.3

a

4.3

Taiwan

0.0

6.2

68.7

3.5 19.7

0.4

1.2

34.0

Hong Kong

0.0

20.4

15.1

0.4

a

1.2

4.4

Transp.
Eqpt.

0.0

Indonesia

3.8

Other
Industries

Trade

Banking

Finance
except
Banking

a

0.9

0.8

0.5

a

Other
Mfg.

Malaysia

a

3.2

a

1.7

0.4

3.0

Philippines

a

a

9.1

11.1

3.1

6.2

Singapore

0.2

1.7

14.5

9.5

3.5

7.2

Thailand

0.0

7.6

a

11.4

2.5

3.4

a

1.3

a

4.3

2.8

2.3

Taiwan

2.7

6.9

8.5

13.9

1.9

0.8

Hong Kong

0.0

a

28.2

10.0

12.3

13.9

Korea

a

Suppressed to avoid disclosure of data on individual companies.

Source: U.S. Department of Commerce, U.S. Direct Investment Abroad, 1977,
Washington, D.C., April 1981.

Table 33. (cont.)

PERCENTAGE INDUSTRY DISTRIBUTION OF A COUNTRY'S TOTAL

DIRECT INVESTMENT FROM THE UNITED STATES, 1984

Mining

Petr. Total

Food Chem. Prim.

Mfg.

Metal
Fab.

Country

Mach.
exc.
Elec.
EaDt.

Elec.

Eqpt.

a

88.3

3.4

0.3

0.9

a

0.0

0.6

Malaysia

0.2

62.4

32.1

a

2.5

0.8

a

23.2

Philippines

0.0

a

37.4

8.8

15.0

1.9

0.4

a

Singapore

0.0

24.0

45.4

a

4.3

3.4

a

20.4

Thai land

1.1

a

a

0.2

4.8

a

0.0

a

Korea

0.0

a

25.6

5.7

1.1

a

a

10.2

Taiwan

0.0

12.8

56.0

1.9

15.6

0.0

a

19.1

Hong Kong

0.0

9.2

16.6

0.5

3.8

1.4

I ndones i a

Transp. Other
Eqpt.

Indonesia

0.0

Trade

Mfg.

Banking

Finance
except
Bankinq

4.7

Other
Industries

a

1.2

0.7

0.2

a

Malaysia

a

3.6

8.3

1.6

a

a

Philippines

a

a

4.6

22.0

a

a

Singapore

a

a

13.7

9.4

3.2

4.3

Thailand

0.0

a

7.9

5.7

0.2

a

Korea

3.5

2.6

13.2

26.1

a

a

Taiwan

3.1

a

14.5

13.8

0.7

2.2

Hong Kong

0.0

a

30.0

13.5

15.7

15.1

a

Suppressed to avoid disclosure of data on individual companies.

Source: Survey of Current Business, August 1985, p. 36.

