NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TAX POLICY TOWARD LOW-INCOME FAMILIES
Hilary Hoynes
Jesse Rothstein
Working Paper 22080
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22080

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2016

We are very grateful to staff at the Tax Policy Center, and particularly Elaine Maag for providing
us with simulations of the Urban Brookings Tax Policy Center Microsimulation model. We thank
Claire Montialoux, Audrey Tiew and Darian Woods for excellent research assistance. Portions of
this paper draw heavily on Nichols and Rothstein (2015) and Hoynes and Patel (2015). We are
grateful for helpful comments to Alan Auerbach, Louis Kaplow, Jim Hines, Len Berman, Diane
Schanzenbach, Bob Greenstein, Chye-Ching Huang, and participants in the “Economics of Tax
Policy” conference held in Washington, DC on December 3-4, 2015. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Hilary Hoynes and Jesse Rothstein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Tax Policy Toward Low-Income Families
Hilary Hoynes and Jesse Rothstein
NBER Working Paper No. 22080
March 2016
JEL No. H24,H53,I38
ABSTRACT
In this paper, we review the most prominent provision of the federal income tax code that targets
low-income tax filers, the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC), as well as the structurally similar
Child Tax Credit (CTC). We frame the paper around what we see as the programs’ goals:
distributional, promoting work, and limiting administrative and compliance costs. We review
what is known about program impacts and distributional consequences under current law,
drawing on simulations from the Tax Policy Center. We conclude that the EITC is quite
successful in meeting its three goals. In contrast, most of the benefits of the CTC go to higher
income households. In addition to analyzing current law, we assess possible reforms that would
reach groups – for the EITC, those without children; for the CTC, those with very low earnings –
who are largely missed under current policy.

Hilary Hoynes
Richard & Rhoda Goldman School of Public Policy
University of California, Berkeley
2607 Hearst Avenue
Berkeley, CA 94720-7320
and NBER
hoynes@berkeley.edu
Jesse Rothstein
Goldman School of Public Policy
and Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley
2607 Hearst Avenue
Berkeley, CA 94720-7320
and NBER
rothstein@berkeley.edu

I.

INTRODUCTION
The tax code focuses on high-income families because that is where the money is. The

bottom 40% of tax filing units – those with incomes below $39,370 – earned just 14% of pre-tax
income in 2013 (Tax Policy Center 2013). Under any even slightly progressive tax schedule this
group would contribute very little revenue.
But the tax code is used to pursue purposes and objectives other than revenue collection.
Today, the two most prominent provisions of the federal income tax code that target low-income
tax filers, the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) and the less prominent but similar Child Tax
Credit (CTC), are explicitly redistributive, designed to transfer money to families rather than tax
it away from them.
The EITC is a tax credit available to lower-income families with positive earned income.
Importantly, it is refundable: Many recipients’ incomes are too low to generate substantial tax
obligations, so with the EITC their liabilities are negative and they receive refund checks from
the Internal Revenue Service. In 2013, 87 percent of the total tax expenditure of the EITC took
the form of tax refunds (Internal Review Service 2015a).
Since its introduction in 1975, the EITC has grown to become a central element of the
U.S. social safety net (Bitler, Hoynes and Kuka 2016). In 2013, the EITC reached 28.8 million
tax filers at a total cost of $68 billion. Almost 20 percent of all tax filers and 44 percent of filers
with children receive the credit. The maximum credit in 2015 is $6,242 for families with three
children, $5,548 for those with two children, $3,359 for those with one child, and $503 for those
without children – this can be as much as 45% of a family’s pre-tax income. Overall, the average
credit amount for families with children is a substantial $3,063 (Internal Review Service 2015a).
The program dwarfs traditional cash welfare (Temporary Assistance for Needy Families, or

1

TANF), which reached only 1.6 million families in 2013, an almost 70 percent decline since
1994.
The CTC is more recent, introduced in 1997. It is structurally similar to the EITC, but
more universal in design and less targeted on lower-income families. In 2015, it is available to
families with incomes as high as $150,000 for married couples ($115,000 for singles), with the
maximum credit available at incomes as high as $110,000 for married couples ($75,000 for
singles). The CTC is not inflation adjusted, so these parameters are generally fixed in nominal
terms from one year to the next; the nominal maximum credit has been unchanged at $1,000 per
child since 2003. Although this is much smaller than the maximum EITC, the CTC’s broader
reach across the income distribution means that total expenditures are comparable ($56 billion
for the CTC vs. $68 billion for the EITC in 2013).
The CTC, unlike the EITC, is not fully refundable. This has limited its value to lowincome families. But in 2009, the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act greatly expanded
the refundability of the CTC, making the schedule similar to the EITC’s. This expansion was
originally a temporary one, but has recently been made permanent.
In this paper, we review the roles of the EITC and CTC, what is known about their
impacts and distributional consequences, and the possibilities for reform. We begin in Section II
by discussing the goals of the programs and in Section III we review their structure and history.
Section IV discusses the economics of in-work tax credits like the EITC and CTC. Section V
evaluates what we know about how the programs affect these objectives. In Section VI we
discuss possible reforms that might help further the program goals set out in Section II. In
Section VII we conclude.

2

II.

FRAMING: WHAT ARE THE OBJECTIVES OF THESE TAX PROVISIONS?
The EITC and CTC are best seen not as taxes but as transfer programs that happen to be

administered through the tax code. As we see it, they have three primary goals. First, all meanstested transfer programs are designed in part to achieve distributional objectives. In the case of
the EITC, these are to transfer funds to low- and moderate-income families, and particularly to
those with children. The CTC’s distributional aims are less clear, given its high phase-out point –
the target is clearly the broad middle class rather than just the lowest-income families. It may be
better thought of as a “universal child benefit,” aimed at horizontal equity between families with
and without children. Differing schedules by family type are a long-standing feature of the U.S.
tax system, and distinguishing by the number of children may make sense if, for example, the
marginal utility of consumption declines more slowly the larger is the family.2
The two other main goals are what distinguish the EITC and CTC from other transfer
programs. Each aims to encourage work (though as we discuss below this is not true for all
families) and to limit the high administrative costs associated with other transfer programs that
require very labor-intensive eligibility screening.
The EITC is quite successful at all three goals. Almost three-quarters its benefits go to
families with annual incomes below $25,000, roughly the 24th percentile of the income
distribution (Internal Review Service 2015a; DeNavas et al. 2015), and EITC payments lift
millions of families out of poverty each year. The evidence indicates that the program has
substantially raised the labor force participation rates of single mothers, by perhaps five to eight

2

The dependent exemption would seem to be able to accomplish this, without need for the CTC. Like the
CTC, the dependent exemption phases out as income rises. The primary differences between the two are
that the CTC is (partially) refundable and that it distinguishes between children and other dependents.

3

percentage points (though there is also evidence of smaller negative effects on married women’s
participation and on the intensive margin). Finally, the tax system has many administrative
advantages over a welfare bureaucracy, and has proved to be an efficient means of distributing
the EITC. As we discuss below, however, there are nontrivial rates of noncompliance with the
EITC, particularly on dimensions that are not well tracked by existing third party reporting).3
The CTC is much less studied. It performs much less well at transferring income to the
neediest families, and is likely less effective at encouraging work as well. But like the EITC it is
quite inexpensive to administer, and its redistribution to the middle and upper middle parts of the
income distribution is apparently also valued by policymakers.
Nevertheless, although these provisions generally do a good job of meeting their
objectives, neither is perfect. In Section IV we discuss some options for reforming the programs
that might be considered.

III.

CURRENT POLICIES AND RECENT REFORMS
To be eligible for the EITC, a taxpayer – or tax filing unit – must have earned income

during the tax year.4 The value of the credit is determined by a benefit schedule with three
regions, known as the “phase-in,” “flat” (or “plateau”), and “phase-out.” In the phase-in region,
the credit increases by a share of each additional dollar earned. Once the credit reaches its

3

There are also drawbacks to tax-based administration, however. Two are that tax refunds are generally
paid only once a year and relatively easily captured by for-profit firms via fees for tax preparation or high
interest rates on tax refund anticipation loans. The now-defunct Advance EITC program allowed for more
gradual payment, but take-up was extremely low (even in experiments designed to target information and
default effects; see IRS and U.S. Department of the Treasury 1999; Jones 2010; U.S. Government
Accountability Office 2007). Recent reforms have dramatically reduced the prevalence of tax refund
anticipation loans
4
Earned income is the sum of wages, tips, salary, union strike benefits, some disability payments, and net
self-employment earnings (IRS and U.S. Department of the Treasury 2013).

4

maximum value, the taxpayer is in the second, “flat” region, where additional earnings do not
affect the credit value. In the final region, the credit declines with each additional dollar of
earnings (or, adjusted gross income, or AGI, if that is higher) until it is zero.
The exact parameters of the schedule vary by filing status and by the number of
qualifying children, but the basic shape is the same. Figure 1 displays the schedule in 2015 as a
function of earned income for single taxpayers with no, one, two, and three or more children.
The Figure makes clear that the credit for families with children is much different than that for
childless families, and we start with the former. The phase-in or subsidy rate is substantial at 34
(or 40 or 45) percent for those with one (or two or three) children, while the phase-out rate is
much lower, at 15.98 (21.06) percent for those with one (two or more) children. Maximum
benefits range from $3,359 for families with one child to $6,242 for those with three or more.
Single taxpayers with incomes above $39,131 (with one child), $44,454 (with two children), or
$47,747 (with three or more children) are ineligible for the credit.5 The credit for families
without children is much less generous, with phase-in rate of 7.65, a maximum credit of $503
and a maximum allowable income of $14,820.
Importantly, the EITC is refundable: if the credit exceeds a taxpayer’s tax liability, he or
she receives the difference as a refund. Typically, families with earnings below $20,000-$25,000
will owe very little income tax, so the bulk of the EITC will arrive as a refund even when
withholding is zero.6

5

Unmarried taxpayers with dependents are termed head of household filers. In this paper, we typically
refer to this group as “single filers with children” or “single parents with children.”
6
For example, a single parent with two children enters the first bracket (with a 10 percent marginal tax
rate) at gross earnings of $22,000.

5

As elsewhere in the tax code, there are many complexities and special cases, not all
illustrated in Figure 1. Married couples, for example, have slightly different schedules – with
longer “plateau” segments and higher phase-out points – than do single filers with the same
number of children (as illustrated by the dotted lines in the figure). Defining qualifying children
is also difficult, and qualification for the EITC differs from that for the dependent exemption.7
Finally, the schedule is slightly more complex for families with unearned income. When
earnings place the family in the plateau or phase-out ranges and adjusted gross income (including
unearned income) exceeds earned income, the credit is based on the latter.
The current EITC schedule reflects substantial growth over time. Figure 2 shows how the
maximum credit has evolved for families of different sizes. After the program’s introduction in
1975, inflation gradually eroded the real maximum benefit. The 1987 expansion of the EITC,
passed as part of the Tax Reform Act of 1986, increased the generosity of the credit and indexed
the credit schedule to inflation. The most prominent change was the 1993 expansion, enacted as
one of President Bill Clinton’s signature initiatives – it introduced a credit for families without
children for the first time, and greatly increased the credit for families with two or more children.
Elsewhere in the figure, one can see smaller expansions in the early 1990s, as well as the
introduction of a separate three-child schedule in 2009. This last change was part of the 2009
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act (ARRA) and was originally set to expire at the end of
2010, but has since been extended through 2017. Table 1 shows the specific credit parameters for
selected years.

7

A qualifying child for the EITC is younger than 19 (or younger than 24 and a full time student), lives
with the taxpayer for more than half the year, has a valid social security number, and is not claimed as a
dependent by another taxpayer (IRS and U.S. Department of the Treasury 2013). In some circumstances,
a grandchild can qualify.

6

The Child Tax Credit (CTC) has a similar form to the EITC, with a phase-in, flat and
phase-out structure and a schedule that differs somewhat across family types.8 However, the
structure of the two programs is otherwise different. The CTC depends only on adjusted gross
income (AGI), not on earnings. The phase-in and phase-out rates are 15% and 5%, much smaller
in magnitude than the EITC. The maximum credit is $1,000 per qualifying child and unlike the
EITC the credit is fixed nominally and does not change each year with prices. Importantly, the
CTC schedule has an extremely large flat (plateau) range. For two-child tax units, it ranges from
$13,333 to $75,000 if single and to $110,000 if married. As a consequence, families with quite
high incomes can receive positive CTCs. For example, married couples with three children (who
face the most generous schedules) are ineligible for the EITC if their earnings exceed $53,267,
but can receive the CTC with incomes as high as $170,000. Table 2 shows specific CTC
parameters for different family types.
Another major difference is that the CTC, unlike the EITC, is not fully refundable. The
refundable portion of the CTC is known as the Additional Child Tax Credit (ACTC), and is
limited to 15% of earned income above a fixed threshold. This threshold was $11,500 (in
nominal dollars) in 2007, preventing most low income families from receiving meaningful
CTCs. But in 2009, ARRA reduced the threshold to $3,000 (again nominal). This allowed more
taxpayers to claim the Additional Child Tax Credit and increased the amount of refundable
credits, making the low-income portion of the schedule more similar to the EITC. Like the threechild EITC provision of ARRA, the reduced CTC threshold was originally set to expire at the
end of 2010, but it was made permanent in late 2015.

8

The relevant family type distinctions differ somewhat from the EITC: Only children 16 and under (at the
end of the tax year) qualify for the CTC, and it is available to married taxpayers who file separately (who
cannot receive the EITC).

7

Figure 3 augments the EITC schedule for single (head-of-household) taxpayers with two
children, as illustrated in Figure 1, with additional areas representing the portions of the CTC
that are used to offset other taxes and refunded under the 2014 schedule.9 The figure also shows
(in an area labeled as “forfeited”) the portion of the credit that is forgone by very low income
families for whom the refundability limit is binding. This makes clear that the refundable portion
of the CTC serves in large part to expand the EITC, serving approximately the same income
range but increasing the benefit. By contrast, the portion of the CTC that offsets other tax
liabilities rises much higher in the income distribution, not even beginning to phase out until
income is double or more of the maximum value under the EITC.
Figure 4 shows tax expenditures on the EITC and CTC over time, in real 2014 dollars
and including both tax refunds and foregone tax revenues. The EITC expanded from about $5
billion per year in the 1980s to nearly $50 billion in the mid-1990s, and has grown gradually
since then. EITC expenditures were just shy of $70 billion in 2013. The CTC was introduced in
1997, but has grown extremely rapidly since then – since 2003, its total cost has been
comparable to the EITC.
An often-voiced concern about means-tested transfer programs is that they can create
high effective marginal tax rates (MTRs) as they phase out, and that the constellation of
overlapping programs can create an extremely complex budget constraint. Figure 5, taken from
Steuerle and Quakenbush (2015), shows the combined value of the EITC, the CTC, and other
tax- and universally-available benefit provisions affecting low-income families (the Child and
Dependent Care tax credit; the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program, SNAP; Medicaid;

9

The calculations are for a family with no unearned income or itemized deductions that does not receive
the Child and Dependent Care Credit.

8

the Children’s Health Insurance Program, CHIP; and health insurance premium assistance under
the Affordable Care Act).10 We assume here that families participate in all of the available
programs, where in fact there is substantial non-participation in each. The tax provisions are at
the bottom, with transfers and health programs above them. Three things are of note here. First,
the cash value of Medicaid and SNAP benefits (formerly known as food stamps) is much larger
than that of the EITC for a family with income below $25,000 (though families may not value
health insurance at its full cost). Second, despite this, the overall trapezoid shape created by the
EITC schedule, with negative marginal tax rates (i.e., a positive slope in Figure 5) at low
incomes and positive marginal tax rates (a negative slope) at higher levels, shows through
despite all of the other programs that are layered on top of it. Third, the EITC serves a population
that is also targeted by other means-tested transfers, where the CTC serves a much higherincome population that is unlikely to be receiving other transfers.
Figure 6 provides another look at the interaction among programs. Here, we plot the net
effective marginal tax rate (EMTR), again assuming 100 percent take-up of the tax and transfer
programs. In the figure, the solid line shows the EMTR for all tax and benefit programs, the
dashed line shows the EMTR generated by federal income taxes (EITC, CTC, and the ordinary
income tax) and the dotted line shows the EMTR for the EITC and CTC alone. (This figure is
also taken from Steuerle and Quakenbush (2015) but we modify it by adding the third series.)
Again, we see that other programs shift the marginal tax rate schedule around, but that the basic

10

The figure shows the programs in Colorado. It would be qualitatively similar in other states, but
Medicaid differs across states both in its value and in its reach into the income distribution (for states that
did not take up the Affordable Care Act Medicaid expansion).

9

pattern of negative, zero, then positive MTRs created by the EITC and CTC carries through to
the overall schedule.11
The U.S. EITC has parallels in programs in place in many other developed countries
(OECD 2011). One that is often discussed is the United Kingdom’s Working Families Tax
Credit (WFTC; see, e.g., Blundell and Hoynes 2004). Like the EITC, it is available only to those
who work. A key design difference is that the WFTC does not have a phase-in negative marginal
tax rate; rather, it is available only to those who meet minimum weekly hours requirements.
Enumerating the universe of EITC-like programs (often referred to as “In-Work Tax
Credits”) in other countries is difficult, as similar tax structures can appear quite different
depending on how the different portions are labeled. (Consider, for example, the “program”
consisting of the combination of payroll taxes, the EITC, and the TANF and food stamps benefit
phase-outs.) There is a great deal of heterogeneity in implementation (see Nichols and Rothstein
2015; OECD 2011), in part reflecting different weights placed on the three goals we outline
above. The OECD (2011) classifies programs into those that are more targeted (this group
includes the U.S., UK, France) and those that are more universal with low or no phase-out (this
group includes Denmark, Sweden, and the Netherlands). The U.S. program stands out as more
generous and as having one of the largest phase-in rates.

11

The figure shows average MTRs over $5,000 income ranges, to smooth over spikes in MTRs when
taxes and benefits change discretely. This smoothing obscures the zero MTR in the plateau region of the
combined EITC and CTC schedule – the $15,000 to $20,000 range includes a portion of the phase-out
range as well.

10

IV.

THE ECONOMICS OF IN-WORK TAX CREDITS
We discuss labor supply incentives under the EITC; those created by the CTC are

generally similar, though we discuss a few relevant differences below.
The EITC generates labor supply incentives on the intensive and extensive margins that
differ depending on marital status.12 Among single parents, who represent 60 percent of EITC
filers and 74 percent of total EITC tax expenditures, the EITC increases the returns to entering
employment for those outside of the labor force, leading to an increase in labor supply on the
extensive margin. The phase-in marginal tax rates are large in magnitude, currently -34 percent
for those with one child, -40 percent for those with two children and -45 percent for those with
three or more children. This leads to sizable increases in the first-hour net-of-tax wage (though a
small portion of this is offset by other taxes, most notably payroll taxes, and by phase-outs in
other transfer program schedules), and thus to large incentives to enter work. Even for those
whose potential earnings are beyond the phase-in, the EITC increases the net-of-tax wage for
entering work so long as potential earnings are below the end of the phase-out range. Figure 7
illustrates the canonical budget constraint and income-leisure tradeoff under the EITC.
The effects of the EITC on the intensive margin, for those already in the labor market, are
less unambiguously work-promoting. In the phase-in region, the EITC increases the net-of-tax
wage; the effect on the intensive margin is ambiguous due to a positive substitution effect and a
negative income effect. On the other hand, in the phase-out region, both substitution and income
effects create a consistent incentive to reduce labor supply, while in the flat region the
substitution effect is zero but the pure income effect also is predicted to reduce labor supply.

12

This discussion draws from our prior work including Eissa and Hoynes (2006a), Hoynes and Patel
(2015) and Nichols and Rothstein (2015).

11

Because the EITC is based on family income, the credit leads to a somewhat different set
of incentives for married taxpayers. Overall, as with singles, we would expect higher rates of
“family” employment (participation by at least one family member) for married couples, as a
result of the credit being tied to work. But individual participation incentives can be more
complex, particularly for secondary earners. Consider a sequential labor supply decision, where
one spouse chooses his/her labor supply (non-strategically) before the other. The primary earner
faces the same labor supply incentives as does a single filer, discussed above. However, suppose
the primary earner earns enough to take the family into the phase-out range on his/her own. In
this case the second mover can only reduce the family’s credit by working, and the EITC thus
reduces net returns to labor market participation. Importantly, though, the effective positive tax
rate here is smaller in magnitude than the negative rate faced by single parents: It can never be
bigger than the EITC phase-out rate (currently maxing out at 21.06 percent), and will often be
much smaller.
As this makes clear, there are two unambiguous pro-work incentives in the EITC: Single
parents and married couples (jointly) are encouraged to work rather than to remain out of the
labor force. This is perhaps not surprising, as it is exactly this intended response that motivated
the design of the program. But for other groups (secondary earners) and at other margins (hours
of work rather than annual participation) the incentives can work in the opposite direction,
discouraging rather than encouraging work.
The broad EITC structure can be seen as an efficient way to redistribute income and
encourage work. Saez (2002) shows that the optimal income tax schedule can take an EITC-like
form when labor supply is more elastic at the extensive than at the intensive margin. However,
Saez’s model, like most other optimal tax models, abstracts from the United States’ family-based

12

tax system. It is difficult to understand the positive tax rate that secondary earners face on the
first dollar of earnings as anything other than a necessary consequence of implementing the
EITC within such a system.13 (Other countries typically tax at the individual level.)
The self-employed face additional incentives not captured by the above discussion. These
mostly relate to reporting – where wage and salary earnings are reported to the IRS by the
employer (on the Form W-2 earnings report), self-employed workers report their own earnings
with limited third party verification, and may be able to change the amount of earnings reported
without changing their actual labor supply. Additionally, many self-employed workers make
accounting decisions about how to allocate business income between earnings and profits, and
may have some latitude about the costs they deduct from business earnings. Those in the phaseout range of the EITC schedule, and even some with earnings above the end of that range, can
face an incentive to hide or reclassify some earnings in order to maximize their credit (this would
also reduce federal income taxes).
By contrast, those in the phase-in range face incentives to raise their reported earnings.
This is because the EITC phase-in rate is higher, in absolute value, than the additional payroll
(and ordinary income) taxes that would need to be paid on additional reported earnings. Similar
incentives apply to those choosing between formal and informal (i.e., under the table) work – the
EITC raises the return to being paid formally, though it can also incentivize shifting a portion of
compensation under the table for those in the phase-out range. Most IRS enforcement efforts are

13

Berlin (2007) and Kearney and Turner (2013) propose reforms that would move toward an individualbased system.

13

focused on identifying under-reporting, and a taxpayer who over-reported her self-employment
income in order to increase her EITC may be hard to detect.14
Labor supply predictions under the CTC are similar, but more muted given the smaller
credit amount. The general shapes of the two credits are similar, each with phase-in, flat, and
phase-out regions. However, the “flat” portion of the CTC is very large and the phase-out rate is
low, only 5 percent, and comes in at relatively high income levels—among families with two
children the phase-out region starts at $110,000 for married couples and $75,000 for single
parents and ends at $150,000 and $115,000, respectively.
The incentive to participate in the labor market under both the EITC and the CTC is
based on the (negative) average tax rate at potential earnings. The CTC never creates an average
tax rate smaller than -13.04% (this is for three-child families), and for most potential workers it
is larger than this. (The combined ATR of the two programs in combination can be much more
negative, but this is driven by the EITC.) Thus, while the CTC shares the EITC’s proparticipation incentive, the CTC’s contribution is likely to be small. The secondary earner and
intensive margin incentives are less important as well, given the long reach of the program.
The EITC and CTC also create incentives surrounding other decisions that would affect
the tax credit, most notably marriage and fertility. These are not explicit goals of the programs,
and indeed the incentivized behavior is often counter to what we might hope to promote, but are
inherent in a credit administered through the family-based tax system and tied to the presence
and number of children. In particular, the EITC creates incentives for low-income one-earner
couples to legally marry, while for low-income two-earner couples the incentive is to avoid

14

Consider, for example, a self-employed individual in the phase-in range who chooses not to claim a
business expense deduction to which she would otherwise be entitled, as doing so would reduce her net
earnings and thus her EITC. It is not clear that this would be preventable even if detected.

14

marriage or separate. The substitution effects are fairly clear here, but there may also be income
effects at work, possibly in the opposite direction: Increased financial resources due to the EITC
and CTC may free some women from the pressure to enter into unpromising marriages. On net
then, the EITC and CTC, like ordinary income taxes, create marriage penalties for some and
marriages bonuses for others. Additionally, because the credits increase with the number of
children, they may incentivize additional births.
Given the distributional goal of the credits, it is useful to consider their expected effects
on the distribution of income. We distinguish two types of effects: the direct and indirect effects
of the programs on net disposable income. The direct effect is simply the EITC or CTC payment,
which of course raises after-tax and transfer income. The indirect effect comes from any induced
change in pre-tax earnings and other family income. For those induced to enter the labor market,
increases in earnings increase family income (a positive indirect effect), but this may be partly
offset by reductions in other income sources, such as cash welfare and SNAP. For those already
in the work force, the indirect effect is likely to be negative, but for plausible elasticities much
smaller than the positive direct effect.
There is another indirect effect as well, not yet discussed. Specifically, the EITC may
affect pre-tax wages. Since the negative effective tax rate encourages increased labor force
participation, standard tax incidence models suggest that the credit will be shared between the
buyers and sellers of labor (Rothstein 2008, 2010; Leigh 2010). This occurs through a reduced
pre-tax wage, allowing employers of EITC recipients to capture a portion of the money spent on
the EITC (and, as a side effect, creating a transfer from non-EITC workers competing in the
same labor markets as the recipients to their employers). This fact was not prominent in early

15

discussions of the EITC but concerns about incidence have become more prominent as the EITC
has expanded in the presence of relatively low minimum wages.
It is useful to relate back to the credit schedule to consider where in the income
distribution we expect to see these direct and indirect gains. Figure 8 provides some of this
information by illustrating the 2015 EITC in income/poverty space for six groups defined by
marital status and number of children. In each figure, the x-axis is pre-tax earnings (or AGI) and
the y-axis is after tax income (earnings plus the EITC), expressed as a percent of the poverty
threshold. Consider a single parent with two children working full time at the federal minimum
wage (this group is in Figure 8e). Pre-tax earnings would be $15,080, or about 75% of the
poverty line. But this family would be in the plateau region of the EITC, with a credit of $5,548
that would bring post-EITC income to 103% of the poverty line. Seen somewhat differently, a
family with earnings as low as $14,542 -- placing it just above the top of the EITC phase-in
region – would be at 72% of the FPL without the EITC but would be lifted to the poverty line by
the EITC. Figure 8f shows that a married couple family with two children with earnings of
$18,702 (in the flat region) would be at 77 percent of the FPL without the EITC but would be
lifted out of poverty by the EITC. By contrast, the credit for the childless (panels a and b) is
sufficiently ungenerous that all recipients remain in poverty even when their credits are counted
as income.

V.

WHAT DO WE KNOW ABOUT HOW WELL THE PROGRAMS ACCOMPLISH

THEIR OBJECTIVES?
We organize our assessment of the available evidence around the three goals that we
discussed above: distributional, encouragement of work, and limiting of noncompliance and

16

administrative costs. We begin in Section V.A by presenting empirical estimates of the
distributional effects, neglecting behavioral adjustments. We then review the empirical literatures
measuring behavioral effects on labor supply (and other outcomes) in Section V.B and
noncompliance in Section V.C. There is much more direct evidence regarding the EITC, which
has a much higher public profile, than about the CTC, so our discussion focuses on the former. In
the final subsection, V.D, we present the available evidence on what is missed by the static
perspective – on the distributional impacts of the programs once indirect effects operating
through labor supply and other changes that influence pre-tax income are included.

V.A.

Static distributional effects
Median family income in 2014 was $53,657, the 20th percentile was $21,432, and the 40th

percentile was $41,186 (DeNavas-Walt and Proctor 2015). Comparing these figures to Figure 8
shows that a large fraction of families have incomes that are both (a) not too far from the poverty
line and (b) in the range where the EITC can have a substantial effect. This suggests that the
EITC has the potential to have important effects on after-tax poverty and income distributions,
even before considering any indirect effects operating through labor supply channels.
We rely on two sources in assessing the static distributional effects of the EITC and CTC.
The first is the Census Bureau’s calculations for the new Supplemental Poverty Measure
(SPM).15 The SPM resource measure includes taxes and both cash and non-cash benefits,
allowing for a simple static calculation as to the anti-poverty effects of the EITC and CTC
covering the whole population of tax filers and non-filers alike. In 2014, the SPM poverty rate

15

Official poverty is based on pre-tax cash income. Thus, the direct (or static) impact of the EITC on
official poverty is zero by construction. The SPM is designed, in part, to capture the effects of tax and
other policies on poverty that are missed by the official poverty measure.

17

was 15.3 percent, but the Census Bureau calculates that it would have been 18.4 percent without
the EITC and CTC (Short 2015). The effect on child poverty is even larger: The SPM poverty
rate for those under 18 years of age was 16.7 percent, but would have been 23.8 percent without
the refundable tax credits. Based on these numbers, the EITC and CTC can be credited with
lifting 9.8 million people, including 5.2 million children, out of poverty. The effects on total
poverty are far larger than those of any other single program except Social Security, and the
effects on child poverty are the largest without exception.
Of course to gain these benefits, a family has to take-up EITC benefits (file taxes and
request the EITC). In the past decades, take-up rates for families with children have been steady
at 80% or more (Scholz 1994; Plueger 2009) fairly high compared to other programs serving low
income families (Currie 2006). The expansions to childless taxpayers, who have lower take-up
rates, has led to a decline in the overall take-up rate estimated to be 75% in 2005 (Plueger 2009).
The second approach limits attention to tax filers, as represented in the Statistics of
Income Public Use File distributed by the IRS. We begin by illustrating the potential reach of
the two programs. Figures 9 and 10 show the pre-tax income distribution of tax filers in 2009
(the most recent year available), inflated to 2014 dollars and presented by marital status (married,
single) and number of children (zero, 1, 2, 3 or more).16 Figure 9 is for single filers and Figure 10
is for married. The income tabulations include all tax filers, not just EITC or CTC recipients.17
Overlaid on each figure are the EITC and CTC schedules. Several observations can be drawn
from these figures. First, they illustrate the variation in the generosity of the schedule across the
16

In this and future figures, tax filers are divided by the number of children claimed as exemptions. This
generally corresponds to the number of qualifying children for the EITC and CTC, though there are
exceptions.
17
We limit the sample in each case to those returns with earned income between $1 and $200,000 and
indicate in figure notes the share of total filers for that demographic group that are excluded from the
histogram (those filers with earned income that is <=0 or >$200,000).

18

eight groups. The credits are substantially larger for families with children than for those without
children and the credits are larger for families with larger children. Second, they show that the
potential reach of the EITC, particularly among single parents, is very high. Only 30% of singles
with one child and 18% of singles with two children have earnings higher than the top of the
phase-out range (compared to 75% and 76% for married families with one and two children,
respectively). Third, they show that the CTC extends to very high income levels, and the
majority of both single and married parents qualify for substantial benefits.
Next, we move from the potential reach to the actual use of the programs – not all
families are eligible, and while take-up rates are high they are not complete. We use the Tax
Policy Center’s (TPC) microsimulation model, applied to the same Statistics of Income file, to
measure the distribution of EITC and CTC benefits under current law. We discuss these current
law findings in the next paragraphs. In a later section, we use the same approach to examine the
distributional impacts of alternative policies.18
To illustrate the benefits of current law EITC and CTC, we use the TPC simulations to
zero each out in turn. By comparing the resulting estimates to those obtained using the actual
policies, we can estimate the distribution of the benefits from each. By design, the TPC
simulations assume that pre-tax income and earnings, as well as all other characteristics (e.g.,
number of children) are unaffected by counterfactual tax rules, so only capture the static effects
of the current policies. We discuss the implications for the full dynamics effects below.
Figure 11 summarizes the EITC and CTC in terms of their distribution across family
types (as well as also showing the distribution of total tax filers across these groups). Over 60%
of EITC benefits go to head-of-household filers (i.e., to single parents), but this group receives

18

We thank Elaine Maag and the TPC tax model team for providing us with these simulations.

19

only 40% of CTC benefits. This is due to the CTC’s high income limits, which allow over half of
the benefits to flow to married couples (many dual-earners); this group gets less than one-quarter
of EITC benefits. Not surprisingly, childless single and married filers get few benefits under
either policy.19
Figure 12a plots the distribution of EITC and CTC benefits across the income
distribution, pooling tax filers of all different family types. The x-axis shows bins of 2015 filingunit income. There are three sets of bars: The first plots the share of total tax units in each
income group; the second the share of total EITC benefits that accrue to each income group; and
the third the share of total CTC benefits received by each income group. As context for these
shares, note that the total cost of the EITC in 2015 is estimated by the TPC model at $69 billion,
while the CTC is $55 billion.20 The line graph illustrates the share of total income accounted for
by each income group – not surprisingly, the highest income categories account for a much
larger share of income than of filing units or of program benefits.
The EITC series in Figure 12a shows the distributional goal of the program is well met –
nearly 60% of the benefits go to filers with income below $30,000. The CTC is less successful in
this regard – only one-fifth of benefits go to families with incomes below $30,000. At the other
end of the spectrum, 57% of CTC benefits but only 11% of EITC benefits go to filers with
incomes over $50,000; over 20% of CTC benefits go to families with incomes above $100,000
The remaining panels in Figure 12 show the distribution across both family type and
income, distinguishing among married couples with children (Figure 12b), married couples

19

Both CTC and EITC bars are non-zero for the “single” and “joint no children” groups. There are some
circumstances in which a filer can receive the EITC or CTC while not claiming child exemptions.
20
The CTC series here includes both credits that are used to offset income tax liabilities and credits issued
as refunds, but not those that are forfeited because they exceed the refundability limit.

20

without children (Figure 12d), single filers with children (Figure 12c) and single filers without
children (Figure 12e). For each subgroup, we display the relevant series (tax units, pre-tax
income, EITC benefits, CTC benefits) as shares of the total (all filers) amount. Comparing the
EITC bars to the tax unit bars in these figures, it is clear that much of the variation in EITC
benefits across married- and single-parent families, as seen in Figure 11, is a reflection of income
distributions within each group. There are roughly 15% more married-with-children returns as
head-of-household returns, but the latter are 3.7 times as likely to have incomes below $40,000.
CTC payments are much less sensitive to income, so are more concentrated in married-couple
families.
One limit to the redistributive power of the EITC is not reflected in Figure 12: Most of
the benefits are distributed as tax refunds in the spring. If families are credit constrained – as
many EITC recipients likely are – then an annual lump-sum payment has a smaller effect on the
household’s welfare than would one that is more evenly distributed, and thus the EITC is a less
effective redistribution policy than it appears based on annual income distributions. The Advance
EITC program allowed recipients to receive their credits throughout the year, but take-up was
extremely low (under 1%) and the IRS eventually cancelled the program. Its failure does not
seem to be due to lack of information or even default effects: Experiments that inform recipients
about the program and to overcome default behavior had only minor impacts on take-up (IRS
1999; Jones 2010). This could indicate that recipients prefer their EITC payments as lump-sums,
perhaps seeing the program as a form of forced saving (see the discussion in Nichols and
Rothstein 2015). But the preferences of EITC recipients in this regard are not well understood.

21

V.B.

Behavioral Effects
A significant body of research examines the behavioral effects of the EITC, much of it

exploiting significant expansions in the tax acts of 1986, 1990, 1993, and 2009. There have even
been several comprehensive reviews of the literature (e.g., see Hotz and Scholz 2003; Eissa and
Hoynes 2006a; Nichols and Rothstein 2015). Rather than recapitulate those reviews, here we
provide only a brief summary of the main findings in the literature.
The main focus of the empirical literature regarding the EITC, particularly in the early
years, was to quantify and explore the main pro-work aspect of the program: the incentive it
creates for single parents to participate in the labor force. In practice, this meant analyses of
employment decisions (at the extensive margin) of low educated single mothers. Most studies
take a quasi-experimental approach leveraging the variation across tax year and family size in the
federal credit, essentially using women with no children or women with just a single child as
controls. (A smaller set of papers uses variation in state EITCs, which add on to the federal
credit.) The 1993 expansion provides a particularly attractive policy reform because it represents
the largest expansion of the credit in its history (see Figures 2 and 4) and the expansion for
women with two or more children was much larger than the expansion for women with one child
(thus allowing for a comparison among single women with children, comparing those with two
or more children to those with one child).
Across all of the different types of comparisons, the evidence nearly universally points to
a significant positive effect of the EITC on the labor force participation (or employment) of
single women with children. For example, Eissa and Liebman (1996) find labor force
participation increased by 2.8 percentage points for single women with children, relative to
single women without children after the EITC expansion of 1986. Over a longer period, Meyer

22

and Rosenbaum (2001) find that the EITC raised labor force participation by 7.2 percentage
points for single women with children relative to those without children between 1984 and 1996.
Hoynes and Patel (2015) find that the 1993 expansion increased employment by 6.1 percentage
points, with larger effects for women with two or more children. Using the approach in Chetty,
Guren, Manoli and Weber (2013), the extensive margin elasticities for these studies range from
0.30 to 0.45 (Hoynes and Patel 2015).21
The changes in employment, particularly for the 1993 expansion, are evident in the basic
unconditional trends. This is illustrated in Figure 13 (based on Nichols and Rothstein 2015,
Figure 8b) where we use the March Current Population Survey and plot the percent of single
women (those with zero, one or two or more children) working at all during the year for each
year from 1976 to 2013. The figure illustrates that for the two decades before 1993, the annual
employment rate for unmarried women with children was substantially below that for single
women without children. By 2000, the gap narrowed substantially, with an especially dramatic
increase for single women with two or more children (who experienced a larger EITC
expansion). Since then, employment rates show a decline for all groups, likely reflecting adverse
macroeconomic conditions.
Figure 14, taken from Figure 7 in Hoynes and Patel (2015), illustrates the quasiexperimental estimates of the EITC from the 1993 expansion controlling for other
contemporaneous effects such as welfare reform and the strong labor market (Blank 2001). The
figure plots event time coefficients and 95 percent confidence intervals for single women with

21

These elasticities are with respect to the net of tax wage, taking account of other taxes. It is more
common in the EITC literature to report elasticities with respect to gross earnings plus the EITC (or,
equivalently, with respect to the EITC average tax rate). These are higher, in the 0.7-1.0 range. See Chetty
et al. (2013), Appendix B.

23

two more children and with one child, both compared to single women without children. The
omitted year is 1993 (the year prior to the policy expansion). The graph also displays the change
in the real average maximum credit across the groups (dashed line, right axis) to give some
guidance as to how the EITC is changing over time and across groups. The figure shows that
differential labor supply increases after 1993 closely follow the pattern of EITC expansions—
women with children increase their employment relative to women without children, with larger
effects for women with two or more children.22
This graph makes quite clear that the EITC has a large positive effect on single mothers’
labor force participation. This conclusion is consistent across studies: Estimated extensive
margin effects are quite robust across different time periods (including studies identified from
pre-1993 expansions) and using different identification approaches (including more structural
approaches or using state EITC expansions). There are fewer studies of married couples, but the
available evidence shows that the EITC leads to small reductions in the employment of married
women, consistent with the predictions above, and there is little evidence of any effects on men
(Eissa and Hoynes, 2004, 2006b).
A second question concerns the EITC’s effect on the intensive margin. Estimates based
on quasi-experimental approaches like that illustrated in Figure 14 show little sign of meaningful
effects (Hotz and Scholz 2003; Nichols and Rothstein 2015). However, standard difference-indifferences research designs are not ideally suited to this question due to the confounding effects
of composition – the large extensive margin effects mean that the composition of the working
population is different between the pre- and post-EITC period.

22

It also shows that in the years prior to the expansion employment was trending similarly across the
groups, validating the use of women without children as controls.

24

In the past decade, the EITC literature has re-focused on the intensive margin using other
methods. Saez (2010), which looks for “bunching” in the income distribution around the kinks in
the EITC schedule, was one of the first in this vein. Like other bunching studies that have
followed, Saez found little sign that families in the phase-out range reduce their labor supply to
maximize their credits, but did find evidence that workers in the phase-in range adjust to increase
their credits (Saez 2010; see also Chetty, Friedman, and Saez 2013; Chetty and Saez 2013;
Mortenson and Whitten 2015). Most of this effect derives from self-employed workers, who
generally self-report their earnings without independent verification on the part of the IRS. It is
thus difficult to determine whether it is a real behavioral effect or a change in reporting. Chetty,
Friedman and Saez (2013) use earnings distributions of families in the year after the birth of a
child to look for intensive margin responses. They find that the intensive margin elasticity is
small on average, around 0.14, though they argue that this is attenuated due to a lack of
information about the incentives that families face.
There are a handful of studies that examine the effect of the EITC on marriage (e.g.,
Ellwood 2000; Rosenbaum 2000; Herbst 2011; Michelmore 2014). The empirical evidence is
largely inconclusive, though it generally points to small effects. There is less evidence on the
effects of the EITC on fertility (Baughman and Dickert-Conlin 2009) but again the results
suggest small effects. Finally, though somewhat outside the scope of this paper, there is a recent
and growing literature that uses the increase in after-tax income generated by the EITC to
examine impacts on downstream outcomes. The credit has been found to lead to increases in
infant health (Baker 2008; Baughman 2012; Hoynes, Miller, and Simon 2015; Strully et al.
2010), maternal health (Evans and Garthwaite 2014), children’s cognitive outcomes (Dahl and
Lochner 2012; Chetty, Friedman, and Rockoff 2011) and educational attainment (Michelmore

25

2013; Manoli and Turner 2014). These are generally interpreted as income effects, though it is
possible that a portion of each effect is directly related to increased maternal employment.
In sum, the evidence on behavioral effects shows that the EITC leads to substantial
increases in employment for single mothers, concentrated among less-skilled women and among
those with more than one child. There is also evidence of small reductions in employment for
secondary earners in married couples, but little evidence of any induced changes in male labor
supply. Though there is less evidence on the intensive margin of labor supply, the available
evidence suggest at most small responses. There is little evidence that the EITC has much of an
effect on marriage or fertility.

V.C.

Compliance
Over-claiming of the EITC has been a persistent concern with the program. The most

recent IRS study (Internal Revenue Service 2014a), based on audited 2006-2008 returns, found
an overclaiming rate between 28.5% and 39.1% of all EITC dollars claimed (the range derives
from assumptions about taxpayers who did not participate in the audit).23 There are two primary
sources of noncompliance—misclaiming of qualifying children and income misreporting.
Qualifying child violations occur in 30% of returns with over-claims, but represent over
half of over-claimed dollars. The EITC’s qualifying child rules are complex, and – despite recent
changes aimed at harmonization – differ from those for child exemptions. IRS Publication 596
lists a multitude of examples in which many economists would have trouble identifying who was
eligible to claim the credit, and many situations in which multiple filers could claim different

23

The IRS is able to disallow some overclaims, so the overpayment rate is lower – around 24% in recent
years. Moreover, the rates of overclaiming may be overstated in the administrative data, as filers who
request reconsideration of credit denials succeed in overturning nearly half of IRS rulings (National
Taxpayer Advocate 2004).

26

credits with choices over who claims qualifying children.24 The optimal choice is often hard to
determine. Greenstein and Wancheck (2011) conclude that “EITC overpayments most
commonly result from misunderstanding of how to apply the EITC's intricate rules regarding
who may claim a child, especially in changing family situations involving separated, divorced, or
three-generation families.” Although definitions have been changed to better align with those
used elsewhere in the tax code and the IRS has increased its efforts to verify children’s identity
(by, e.g., requiring reporting of the child’s social security number on the tax form), misreporting
of qualifying children remains high.
The other major category of over-claiming, income misreporting, is more common but
results in smaller overpayments, on average. About two-thirds of returns with overclaims
misreport income. Incorrect reporting of self-employment income is the primary source of
income misreporting (in part reflecting the lack of second party verification that is available for
wage and salary income).
Another source of evidence related to reporting or noncompliance comes from the
“bunching” studies discussed above. In the original Saez study (Saez 2010), since replicated by
others (e.g. Chetty et al. 2013), there is substantial evidence of bunching at the end of the phasein region, at the first EITC kink. Chetty and Saez (2013) found something similar as the result of
an information treatment at H&R Block: The provision of information about the tax schedule led
families to move toward the first kink point. There is no sign of bunching at the second kink

24

Residency test failures are the most common in the over-claiming audits, suggesting that many noncustodial parents claim a child who should have been claimable only by the custodial parent. Enforcement
is challenging for the IRS, as many components of the qualifying child definition are not readily
observed.

27

point (between the plateau and the phase-out range), nor of a hollowing out of the density at the
third (at the end of the phase-out range), though the standard model would predict all three.
As Saez points out, the total marginal tax rate, combining the EITC and other taxes (e.g.,
payroll taxes), is generally negative in the phase-in range, implying that a filer with earnings
below the first kink point would come out ahead by reporting to the IRS higher earnings than
he/she actually had. Saez (2010) and others find that the bunching at the first kink point is
entirely driven by the self-employed, who likely have a fair amount of latitude over how much
income to report. Thus, Saez suggests that the bunching he observes likely reflects decisions to
report casual earnings (from, e.g., babysitting) that would not have been reported to the IRS in
the absence of the EITC, though it is also possible that some of it reflects a true intensive margin
response or reporting income that was not actually received in order to maximize the value of the
EITC.

V.D.

Dynamic distributional effects
The above evidence suggests that the labor supply impacts of the EITC are large,

particularly on the participation decisions of single parents, and may have important implications
for the distributional impacts of the policy. Unfortunately, there is little evidence that quantifies
the distributional effects of the EITC taking account of the full behavioral responses.
A handful of studies estimate the effect of the EITC on income or poverty (Bollinger,
Gonzalez, and Ziliak 2009; Grogger 2003; Gunderson and Ziliak 2004; Hoynes and Patel 2015).
This literature shows that the direct (EITC payment) and indirect (through earnings net of
changes in other income) channels combine to lead to large effects of EITC on income. For
example, Hoynes and Patel (2015) use difference-in-difference (DD) and parameterized DD
models to estimate the effects of the EITC on the distribution of after tax and transfer income

28

relative to poverty among single mothers with less than a college education. They find that the
1993 expansion led to a 7.9 percentage point increase in the share of families with children with
after tax and transfer income above poverty. They estimate similar models for the propensity to
have after tax and transfer income above various income to poverty thresholds. Figure 15 (taken
from Figure 11 in Hoynes and Patel 2015) provides their core results. They find that the EITC
has little effect on the very lowest income groups (below 75% of poverty), likely reflecting low
labor market attachment of families in this range. Between 75% and 150% of the poverty line,
the effects of the EITC are large and statistically significant; they then fall to zero by 250%
poverty.
Hoynes and Patel then use these results to compare the static distributional effects of the
EITC (direct effect only) to the dynamic distributional effects (direct and indirect effects). They
find that for their sample of single mothers with children ignoring the indirect effects of the
EITC (increased earnings net of changes in other income) leads to significant underestimates of
the distributional effects. For example, they find that the total effect of the EITC removes 2.4
million children from poverty compared to 1.2 million when considering only the direct effect.
Another dimension of dynamic effects has to do with tax incidence, the effect of the
EITC on pre-tax wages. As we discussed above, the standard incidence model predicts that the
EITC should, to some degree, reduce pre-tax wages. These effects would be felt by EITCeligible and non-eligible workers (who mix in the workplace) alike. Such general equilibrium
effects are difficult to estimate using credible research designs, especially given the widespread
use of the variation by tax year and number of children (e.g. OBRA 93), as wage effects would
be common to all family types in the same year. Leigh (2010) exploits the introduction of state
level EITCs in a DD framework, essentially relying on the assumption that employers do little

29

substitution of workers across states. He finds that a 10% increase in the EITC leads to a 5%
(2%) reduction in pre-tax wages for high school dropouts (high school graduates) and no effect
on the wages of college graduates. Rothstein (2010; see also Rothstein 2008) takes a simulation
approach by relying on previous estimates of demand and supply elasticities to calibrate a
calculation of the distributional effects of the EITC. He finds that $1 in EITC payments leads to
$0.09 worth of increased labor supply but a $0.27 decline in worker pre-tax incomes—the
difference, $0.36, is transferred to employers through reduced pre-tax wages. As a consequence,
after-tax income rises by only $0.73.
Although none of the evidence is airtight, it appears that employers of low-wage labor
capture a meaningful share of the credit through reduced wages and that this comes to some
extent at the expense of low-skill workers who are not eligible for the credit (due, e.g., to not
having children). The implied effects are large enough to have quantitatively important
implications for the EITC’s distributional impacts – a crude calculation based on Rothstein’s
(2010) results suggests that static calculations could overstate the transfer to recipients by as
much as one-third, and that dynamic calculations like Hoynes and Patel’s (2015) overstate it by
as much as one-half (based on the ratio of Rothstein’s (2010) wage-constant effect on after-tax
income, $1.09, to the net effect inclusive of wage responses, $0.73). But this remains an understudied topic, and the effective confidence intervals around these estimates are large.

VI.

POTENTIAL REFORMS
The above evidence indicates that the EITC is doing a good job of meeting its objectives:

It successfully targets low-income working families, bringing many of them out of poverty; it
has meaningful positive effects on labor force participation, with small or zero negative effects

30

on the intensive margin and for secondary earners; and, while there is evidence of substantial
overclaiming, the dollar amounts are not that large, and errors seem to relate in large part to
qualifying child definitions. The CTC, while less studied, is clearly less effective on at least the
distributive and labor supply dimensions.
But although the EITC is doing well on all three margins, it would be possible to
improve. The concern most commonly voiced about the EITC is that it largely fails to reach
childless workers (including non-custodial parents). For the CTC, an important concern is that it
misses too many low-income families, certainly before but even after the 2009 expansion to its
refundability (West, Boteach, and Vallas, 2015).
To illustrate the possibilities for reform, we consider potential changes aimed at
addressing these concerns. First, we examine expansions of the childless EITC, both President
Obama’s proposal to double this credit and a more ambitious expansion designed to bring the
childless EITC to rough parity (in family-need-adjusted terms) with that available to families
with children. Second, we assess the impact of the recent reduction of the earnings threshold for
refundability of the CTC, and consider reducing it further.

VI.A.

The childless EITC
Because historically the EITC was seen (at least by some) as an alternative to cash

welfare for families with children, it was initially unavailable to childless adults and remains
comparatively limited for them. But views of the purpose of the EITC have evolved and it is now
seen, at least in part, as a way of compensating for the erosion of real wages paid to low-income
workers. This does not provide much rationale for excluding childless workers, and so there is
increasing interest in expanding this portion of the credit. In 2015, President Obama proposed a
substantial expansion – roughly doubling the generosity of the childless credit, as well as

31

extending the plateau and phase-out ranges to higher income levels. But even this proposal, if
enacted, would leave the childless credit much smaller than that available to families with
children.
We compare three versions of the childless EITC: Current law, the Obama
Administration proposal, and with a more aggressive proposal of our own invention. The latter is
designed to set the maximum credit for a single childless adult to the same level as for a single
adult with one child, after adjusting for the different needs of one- and two-person families using
a standard equivalence scale. We keep the phase-in range the same as in current law, and solve
for the needed phase-in rate; this turns out to be nearly identical (33.8% vs. 34%) to that for onechild families under current law. We set the plateau for single adults to have a width of $5,000,
very similar to its width under Obama’s proposal and to the plateau for multiple-child families
under current law. Following the schedule for families with children, we extend the plateau range
by $5,500 for married couples. We set the phase-out rate to match the current one-child schedule
(15.98%).
Figure 16 illustrates the schedules under the three alternatives, with the one-child single
schedule shown as well for comparison. Either of the alternatives to current policy would better
serve the purpose of redistributing more money to low-income families, and would do more to
encourage labor force participation, than does the current schedule. They would likely reduce
over-claiming: although childless individuals and couples would face the same incentives as do
those with children to over-report self-employment income, the great incentive that families
currently face to mis-claim qualifying children would be much reduced and, in many cases,
nearly eliminated. The expanded credit would also lead to changes in incentives for marriage.
Couples without children would face similar incentives as those we discussed above for couples

32

with children (marriage penalties for two earners and marriage subsidies for one earners), and
marriage penalties for two earner couples with children would increase. The existing research,
however, suggests these changes in marriage penalties (and subsidies) will not translate to
meaningful changes in marriage.
We use the Urban-Brookings TPC Microsimulation model to quantify the cost of these
changes. Table 3 shows the results: The Obama proposal would increase the number of
recipients of the childless credit by over 60%, reaching higher into the income distribution, and
more than double the average credit. The more generous, equivalence-scaled expansion would
raise the number of recipients by 127% and nearly quintuple the average credit. Clearly, each of
these represents a dramatic expansion of the program: The Obama expansion would transfer an
additional $4.6 billion to low-income childless families, more than tripling the cost of the
childless EITC, while the more generous expansion would transfer an additional $18.3 billion
(each on top of the $68.5 billion cost of the EITC under current law).25 To reiterate, this is a
static simulation and there is no response of labor supply modelled here, either on the extensive
(we would expect more filers) or intensive margin. Such responses would increase the cost of
each alternative, though likely not dramatically.
Of course, the above schedules are not the only option for expanding the EITC for
taxpayers without children. One alternative that has received some attention is an expansion of
eligibility for non-custodial parents, conditioned on the payment of child support and designed to
create incentives to do so (Primus 2006). New York and Washington DC have implemented noncustodial parent credits, and a regression discontinuity evaluation of the New York program

25

The Obama administration estimates the cost of the Obama proposal to be $60 billion over ten years
(Executive Office of the President and U.S. Treasury Department 2014).

33

shows positive effects on both employment and child support payment (Nichols, Sorenson, and
Lippold 2012).

VI.B. CTC refundability threshold
Prior to 2009, the lowest income filers were effectively ineligible for the CTC, as they
had no income tax liability and CTC refunds were limited to 15% of earnings in excess of
$11,500 (in 2007). The refundability threshold was reduced to $3,000 in 2009, a provision that
was made permanent in late 2015. We use the TPC microsimulation model to illustrate the
importance of this expansion in the credit. The first set of bars in Figure 17 show the distribution
of the additional $10.4 billion in 2015 CTC payments that resulted from the 2009 reduction of
the threshold, large relative to the total cost of $56 billion.26 (Once again, this is a static analysis
that does not account for changes in labor supply behavior.) As shown in Figure 17, nearly all –
over 70% -- of the additional benefits flow to families with incomes below $30,000. This shows
that the increase in the CTC’s refundability dramatically changed the program, making it much
more progressive.
One might be interested in further increasing the progressivity of the CTC, which remains
much more regressive than the EITC. The second series in Figure 17 explores a further
expansion of CTC refundability, obtained by reducing the threshold all the way to zero (from
$3,000). This would make the CTC structure nearly identical to the EITC’s (albeit with a much
longer plateau region). Using the TPC simulation, we find that this policy (proposed by West,

26

This simulation, along with the others, is for tax year 2015. We set the threshold for refundability under
the pre-2007 policy at $13,850 (2015 dollars), adjusted for inflation from the 2001 threshold of $10,000
(nominal).

34

Boteach, and Vallas 2015) would cost $2.2 billion (a 4% increase over current law), and again
nearly all benefits would flow to the lowest-income families.27

VI.C. Other reforms: Labor supply, compliance and timing
Neither of the above proposals are designed primarily to improve the EITC’s labor
supply impacts, though here too there are reasons to be dissatisfied with the status quo. As
discussed above, the EITC has large positive effects on labor force participation among single
parents, with little if any negative effect on hours of work of those who would work in any case.
But for married couples the labor supply impacts are not so positive: Eissa and Hoynes (2004)
document a negative effect on the labor supply of married women, many of whom are secondary
earners and who therefore would qualify for a larger EITC if they did not work than if they did.
Unfortunately, there are few good options for avoiding this problem. It is merely an
example of the marriage penalties that are inherent in any progressive, family-based tax system,
and like other marriage penalties is quite difficult to avoid. Berlin (2007) proposes making the
EITC depend on individual rather than family earnings. Holt and Maag (2009) propose replacing
the EITC and CTC with a worker credit, based on individual earnings, and a child credit based
on family earnings. This would eliminate the second worker penalty, but would represent an
enormous change in the U.S. tax system and would cost tens of billions of dollars. A more
incremental proposal comes from Kearney and Turner (2013), who would create a secondary
earner deduction that would reduce the second worker penalty and effectively extend the EITC
schedule for two-earner families.

27

Maag (2015) explores the implications of changes in the CTC refundability threshold, as well as other
potential changes to the program, in more detail.

35

In terms of compliance, the major issues concern over-claiming of qualifying children
and mis-reporting of self-employment income. The first would be addressed by the expansion of
the childless credit. The second is more difficult. California, which introduced its own EITC in
2015, disallows self-employment income from EITC calculations. TPC’s model indicates that
the total effect of adopting a similar rule at the Federal level would be to reduce EITC
expenditures by $11 billion. As this is far in excess of any plausible estimate of the amount of
overpayment due to income misreporting, it is clear that the primary effect would be to deny the
credit to many of the intended recipients. It might be better to tighten up enforcement around
self-employment income, while recognizing that not all misreporting can be prevented.
Another way to improve the performance of the EITC vis-à-vis our three objectives is to
increase the take-up rate. The estimated 75% take-up rate, while high relative to other parts of
the social safety net, still leaves room for improvement. We know that take-up is lower among
those eligible for smaller credits, notably childless taxpayers and those with very low earning
levels (Plueger 2009). A challenge with increasing take-up for this group is that it
disproportionately includes those not filing a tax return (and often not legally required to).
Recent evidence based on experimental designs and IRS partnerships shows that informational
mailers can lead to significant increases in take-up (Bhargava and Manoli 2015; Guyton et al.
2016).
A final type of change to consider would be one aimed at distributing EITC and CTC
payments more gradually rather than as annual lump sums, as this is a persistent limitation of the
EITC as an anti-poverty program. Unfortunately, the wake of the failure of the Advance EITC
program, we are not aware of good proposals to do so. Much more needs to be understood about

36

the role that EITC payments play in their recipients’ lives (see, e.g., Halpern-Meekin et al. 2015)
in order to inform welfare-improving changes of this type.

VII.

CONCLUSION
In this paper, we examine the state of tax policy for families with children. We focus on

the two most important provisions, the Earned Income Tax Credit and the Child Tax Credit. We
discuss these two programs within the lens of the three presumed goals of the programs:
distributional, encouragement of work, and limiting of administrative costs and noncompliance.
To discuss these three goals, we use tax data and quantify the static distributional features of the
programs. We also summarize the existing research to assess how the programs meet the other
two goals.
We conclude that the EITC well meets all three of these goals. The policy provides
substantial increases to income for low to moderate income families. A large body of research
shows that the first-order behavioral effect of the policy is to increase employment among single
mothers with children. Married couples also benefit from the program, though the policy does
induce modest reductions in secondary earner employment. Administrative costs are low,
particularly compared to the public assistance alternatives to the EITC. Compliance remains an
issue, with complicated rules for claiming children and incentives to overreport self-employment
income (though it is not clear that noncompliance is any worse than for other redistribution
programs). The CTC looks much less favorable within this lens. The credit is not targeted, with a
large share of the expenditures extending way above median income groups. However, the 2009
expansion of the credit, making the CTC refundable at low earnings levels, is highly targeted and
effectively represents an expansion of the EITC.

37

We also discuss and simulate proposals to reform the EITC that would improve one or
more of the three program goals. Expansions of the childless EITC would be quite progressive,
but also expensive. Limitation of the use of self-employment income to qualify for the EITC
would reduce the program’s cost, but would also exclude a group that is likely as deserving as
traditional employees. Finally, the recent reduction of the refundability threshold for the CTC
dramatically improved the program’s redistributive value. A further reduction all the way to zero
would be less costly, with equally progressive distributional impacts.

References
Baker, Kevin. 2008. “Do Cash Transfer Programs Improve Infant Health: Evidence from the
1993
Expansion
of
the
Earned
Income
Tax
Credit.”
https://economics.nd.edu/assets/24011/baker_paper.pdf.
Baughman, Reagan A. 2012. “The Effects of State EITC Expansion on Children’s Health.” The
Carsey Institute at the Scholars’ Repository Paper 168.
Baughman, Reagan A., and Stacy Dickert-Conlin. 2009. “The Earned Income Tax Credit and
Fertility.” Journal of Population Economics 22 (3): 537–63.
Berlin, Gordon L. 2007. “Rewarding the Work of Individuals: A Counterintuitive Approach to
Reducing Poverty and Strengthening Families.” The Future of Children 17 (2): 17–42.
Bhargava, Saurabh and Dayanand Manoli. 2015. “Psychological Frictions and the Incomplete
Take-Up of Social Benefits: Evidence from an IRS Field Experiment,” American
Economic Review 105(11):3489-3529.
Bitler, Marianne P., Hilary Hoynes, and Elira Kuka. 2016. “Do In-Work Tax Credits Serve as a
Safety Net?” Forthcoming, Journal of Human Resources.
Blank, Rebecca. 2001. “Declining Caseloads Increased Work: What Can We Conclude about the
Effects of Welfare Reform?” Economic Policy Review 7(2):25-36. 2001.
Blundell, Richard, and Hilary W. Hoynes. 2004. “Has ‘In-Work’ Benefit Reform Helped the
Labor Market?” In Seeking a Premier Economy: The Economic Effects of British
Economic Reforms, 1980–2000, edited by David Card, Richard Blundell, and Richard B.
Freeman, 411–59. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Bollinger, Christopher, Luis Gonzalez, and James P. Ziliak. 2009. “Welfare Reform and the
Level and Composition of Income.” In Welfare Reform and its Long-Term Consequences
for America’s Poor, edited by James P. Ziliak, 59-103. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.

38

California Department of Health Care Services. 2015. Federal Poverty Levels. Sacramento:
Medi-Cal Eligibility Division. http://www.dhcs.ca.gov/services/medical/eligibility/Documents/ACWDL2015/ACWDL15-14.pdf.
California State Legislature. 2015. Assembly Bill No. 43. 2015-2016 Regular Session.
http://www.leginfo.ca.gov/pub/15-16/bill/asm/ab_00010050/ab_43_bill_20150212_amended_asm_v97.pdf
Chetty, Raj, John Friedman, and John Rockoff. 2011. New Evidence on the Long-Term Impacts
of Tax Credits. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Internal Revenue Service.
Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman, and Emmanuel Saez. 2013. “Using Differences in Knowledge
Across Neighborhoods to Uncover the Impacts of the EITC on Earnings.” American
Economic Review 103 (7): 2683–721.
Chetty, Raj, Adam Guren, Day Manoli and Andrea Weber. 2013. “Does Indivisible Labor
Explain the Difference between Micro and Macro Elasticities? A Meta-Analysis of
Extensive Margin Elasticities,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2012 27: 1-56.
Chetty, Raj, and Emmanuel Saez. 2013. “Teaching the Tax Code: Earnings Responses to an
Experiment with EITC Recipients.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 5
(1): 1–31.
Congressional Research Service. 2014. “The Child Tax Credit Current Law and Legislative
History.” https://www.fas.org/sgp/crs/misc/R41873.pdf.
Currie, Janet. 2006. “The Take-up of Social Benefits,” in Alan Auerbach, David Card, and John
Quigley (eds). Poverty, the Distribution of Income, and Public Policy, (New York:
Russell Sage).
Dahl, Gordon B., and Lance Lochner. 2012. “The Impact of Family Income on Child
Achievement: Evidence from the Earned Income Tax Credit.” American Economic
Review 102 (5): 1927–56.
DeNavas-Walt, Carmen and Bernadette D. Proctor. 2015. Income and Poverty in the United
States: 2014, Current Population Reports P60-252. Washington, DC: U.S. Census
Bureau.
Eissa, Nada, and Hilary W. Hoynes. 2004. “Taxes and the Labor Market Participation of Married
Couples: The Earned Income Tax Credit.” Journal of Public Economics 88 (9): 1931–
58.
———. 2006a. “Behavioral Responses to Taxes: Lessons from the EITC and Labor Supply.” In
Tax Policy and the Economy, vol. 20, edited by J. M. Poterba, 74–110. Cambridge,
Mass.: MIT Press.
———. 2006b. “The Hours of Work Response of Married Couples: Taxes and the Earned
Income Tax Credit.” In Tax Policy and Labor Market Performance, edited by Jonas
Agell and Peter Birch Sorensen. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Eissa, Nada, and Jeffrey B. Liebman. 1996. “Labor Supply Response to the Earned Income Tax
Credit.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 11(2): 605–37.
Ellwood, David T. 2000. “The Impact of the Earned Income Tax Credit and Social Policy
Reforms on Work, Marriage, and Living Arrangements.” National Tax Journal 53 (4,
part 2): 1063-105.
Evans, William N., and Craig L. Garthwaite. 2014. “Giving Mom a Break: The Impact of Higher
EITC Payments on Maternal Health.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 6
(2): 258–90.

39

Executive Office of the President and U.S. Treasury Department. 2014. The President’s
Proposal
to
Expand
the
Earned
Income
Tax
Credit.
https://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/docs/eitc_report.pdf.
Greenstein, Robert, and John Wancheck. 2011. Earned Income Tax Credit Overpayment and
Error Issues. Washington, D.C.: Center on Budget and Policy Priorities.
Grogger, Jeffrey. 2003. “The Effects of Time Limits, the EITC, and Other Policy Changes on
Welfare Use, Work and Income Among Female-Headed Families.” The Review of
Economics and Statistics 85(2): 394-408.
Gunderson, Craig and James Ziliak. 2004. “Poverty and Macroeconomic Performance Across
Space, Race, and Family Structure.” Demography 41(1): 61-86.
Guyton, John, Day Manoli, Brenda Schafer and Michael Sebastiani. 2016. “Reminders and
Recidivism: Evidence from Tax Filing and EITC Participation among Low-Income
Nonfilers.” Working paper, University of Texas.
Halpern-Meekin, Sarah, Kathryn Edin, Laura Tach and Jennifer Sykes. 2015, It's Not Like I'm
Poor: How Working Families Make Ends Meet in a Post-Welfare World, Berkeley:
University of California Press.
Herbst, Chris M. 2011. “The Impact of the Earned Income Tax Credit on Marriage and Divorce:
Evidence from Flow Data.” Population Research Policy Review 30: 101–28.
Holt, Stephen and Elaine Maag. 2009. “Considerations in Efforts to Restructure Refundable
Work-Based Credits.” Urban Institute Working Paper.
Hotz, V. Joseph, and John Karl Scholz. 2003. “The Earned Income Tax Credit.” In Means-tested
transfer programs in the United States, edited by Robert A. Moffitt, 141–197. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Hoynes, Hilary W., Doug L. Miller, David Simon. 2015. “Income, the Earned Income Tax Credit
and Infant Health,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 7(1): 172–211.
Hoynes, Hilary W., and Ankur Patel. 2015. “Effective Policy for Reducing Inequality? The
Earned Income Tax Credit and the Distribution of Income.” Unpublished Working Paper,
July.
Internal Revenue Service (IRS). 2009. “2009 Tax Model File.” Statistics of Income Division
(SOI). http://users.nber.org/~taxsim/gdb/.
———. 2014a. “Compliance estimates for the Earned Income Tax Credit claimed on 2006-2008
returns.” Research, Analysis & Statistics Report Publication 5162.
———. 2014b. “Revenue procedure 14-61.” https://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-drop/rp-14-61.pdf.
———. 2014c. “Table 1: Individual income tax returns: Selected income and tax items for Tax
Years 1999 - 2012.” http://www.irs.gov/uac/SOI-Tax-Stats-Historical-Table-1.
———. 2014d. “. Table 3.3 All returns: Tax liability, tax credits, and tax payments.” Publication
no. 1304. http://www.irs.gov/file_source/pub/irs-soi/12in33ar.xls.
———. 2015a. “Individual Income Tax Returns, Preliminary Data, 2013.” Statistics of Income
Bulletin, Spring. https://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-soi/soi-a-inpd-id1505.pdf.
———. 2015b. “Table 2.5.” Statistics of Income Division Publication 1304.
http://www.irs.gov/uac/SOI-Tax-Stats---IndividualInternal Revenue Service (IRS), and U.S. Department of the Treasury. 1999. “Advanced Earned
Income Tax Credit: 1994 and 1997 notice study: A report to Congress.” Washington
D.C.: IRS.
———. 2013. “2013 EITC Income Limits, Maximum Amounts and Tax Law Changes.”

40

http://www.irs.gov/Individuals/2013-EITC-Income-Limits,-Maximum-Credit—
Amounts-And-Tax-Law-Changes.
Jones, Damon. 2010. “Information, preferences and public benefit participation: Experimental
evidence from the Advance EITC and 401(k) savings. American Economic Journal
2(2):147-163.
Kearney, Melissa S., and Lesley J. Turner. 2013. “Giving Secondary Earners a Tax Break: A
Proposal to Help Low- and Middle-Income Families.” The Hamilton Project Discussion
Paper 2013-07, December.
Leigh, Andrew. 2010. “Who Benefits from the Earned Income Tax Credit? Incidence Among
Recipients, Coworkers and Firms.” The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy 10
(1).
Maag, Elaine. 2015. “Reforming the Child Tax Credit How Different Proposals Change Who
Benefits.” Urban Institute.
Manoli, Day, and Nick Turner. 2014. “Cash-on-Hand and College Enrollment. Evidence from
Population Tax Data and Policy Nonlinearities.” NBER Working Paper 19836.
Meyer, Bruce D., and Dan T. Rosenbaum. 2001. “Welfare, the Earned Income Tax Credit, and
the Labor Supply of Single Mothers.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 116 (3):
1063–114.
Michelmore, Katherine. 2013. “The Effect of Income on Educational Attainment: Evidence from
State Earned Income Tax Credit Expansions.” SSRN Working Paper 2356444.
———. 2014. “EITC and Union Formation: The Impact of Expected Spouse Earnings.” Cornell
University Working Paper.
Mortenson, Jacob A, and Andrew Whitten. 2015. “How Sensitive Are Taxpayers to Marginal
Tax Rates? Evidence from Income Bunching in the United States.”
http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/Papers.cfm?abstract_id=2719859.
National Taxpayer Advocate. 2004. National Taxpayer Advocate 2004 Annual Report to
Congress. Volume 2. Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) Audit Reconsideration Study.
Washington, D.C.: Internal Revenue Service.
Nichols, Austin and Jesse Rothstein. 2015. “The Earned Income Tax Credit.”
http://eml.berkeley.edu/~jrothst/workingpapers/nichols-rothstein-Sep2015.pdf
Nichols, Austin, Elaine Sorensen, and Kye Lippold. 2012. The New York Noncustodial Parent
EITC: Its Impact on Child Support Payments and Employment. Washington, D.C.: The
Urban Institute.
OECD. 2011. “Taxation and employment 2011.” OECD Tax Policy Studies No. 21.
Primus, Wendell. 2006. “Improving Public Policies to Increase the Income and Employment of
Low-Income Nonresident Fathers.” In Black Males Left Behind, edited by Ronald B.
Mincy, 211-48. Washington, D.C.: Urban Institute Press.
Pomerleau, Kyle. 2014. “2015 Tax Brackets.” Tax Foundation, October 2.
http://taxfoundation.org/article/2015-tax-brackets.
Plueger, Dean, 2009. “Earned Income Tax Credit Participation Rate for Tax Year 2005.
Washington, D.C.: Internal Revenue Service, 151–95.
Rosenbaum, Dan T. 2000. “Taxes, the Earned Income Tax Credit, and Marital Status.” 19992000 ASPE Census Bureau Small Grants Sponsored Research Conference.
Rothstein, Jesse. 2008. “The Unintended Consequences of Encouraging Work: Tax Incidence
and the EITC.” Princeton University Working Paper.

41

Rothstein, Jesse. 2010. “Is the EITC as Good as an NIT? Conditional Cash Transfers and Tax
Incidence.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 2 (1): 177–208.
Saez, Emmanuel. 2002. “Optimal Income Transfer Programs: Intensive Versus Extensive Labor
Supply Responses.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 107 (3):1039-1073.
———. 2010. “Do Taxpayers Bunch at Kink Points?” American Economic Journal: Economic
Policy 2 (3): 180–212.
Scholz, John Karl. 1994. “The Earned Income Tax Credit: Participation, compliance, and
antipoverty effectiveness. National Tax Journal 47 (1): 64–87.
Short, Kathleen. 2015. “The Research Supplemental Poverty Measure: 2014.” U.S. Census
Bureau Current Population Report P60-254.
Steuerle, Eugene and Caleb Quakenbush. 2015. Marginal Tax Rates and 21st Century Welfare
Reform. Washington, D.C.: Urban Institute.
Strully, Kate W., David H. Rehkopf, and Ziming Xuan. 2010. “Aspects of Prenatal Poverty on
Infant Health: State Earned Income Tax Credits and birth weight.” American Sociological
Review 75 (4): 534–562.
Tax Policy Center. 2013. “Baseline Share of Federal Taxes by Filing Status; by Cash Income
Percentile, 2013.” http://www.taxpolicycenter.org/numbers/displayatab.cfm?
DocID=3806.
———. 2014. “Real federal spending on EITC, CTC and welfare: FY1975-2011.”
http://www.taxpolicycenter.org/taxfacts/displayafact.cfm?Docid=266.
———. 2015a. “Earned Income Tax Credit: Number of Recipients and Amounts of Credit,
1975-2012.” http://www.taxpolicycenter.org/taxfacts/displayafact.cfm?Docid=37
———. 2015b. “Earned Income Tax Credit Parameters , 1975-2015.”
http://taxpolicycenter.org/taxfacts/displayafact.cfm?Docid=36.
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). 2014. “Table 24. Historical Consumer Price Index for All
Urban Consumers (CPI-U), 74. December to December changes.” CPI Detailed Report
December 2014. http://www.bls.gov/cpi/cpid1412.pdf.
U.S. Census Bureau. 2015. “CPS 2015 Annual Social and Economic Supplement (ASEC).”
https://www.census.gov/cps/data/.
U.S. Government Accountability Office (GAO). 2007. Advanced Earned Income Tax Credit:
Low Use and Small Dollars Paid Impeded IRS’s Efforts to Reduce High Noncompliance,
Report No. GAO-07-1110. Washington, D.C.: U.S. GAO.
U.S. Government Publishing Office (GPO). 2011. 26 U.S.C. 24 – Child Tax Credit.
Urban-Brookings Tax Policy Center. 2015. Microsimulation Model (version 0515-1).
http://www.urban.org/research/data-methods/data-analysis/quantitative-dataanalysis/microsimulation/tax-policy-center-microsimulation-model.
West, Rachel, Melissa Boteach, and Rebecca Vallas. 2015. Harnessing the Child Tax Credit as a
Tool to Invest in the Next Generation. Washington D.C.: Center for American Progress.

42

Figure 1. EITC schedule, by number of children and marital status (2015 tax year)

Source: Internal Revenue Service (2014b).

Figure 2. Real maximum EITC credit over time, by number of children

Source: Based on data from Tax Policy Center (2015b).

Figure 3. Combined EITC and CTC schedules for heads of households with 2 children

Notes: Figures reflect a head-of-household filer with two children who qualify under dependent exemption, EITC,
and CTC rules but have zero Child and Dependent Care Tax credit eligibility. The “CTC Forfeited” area reflects the
family’s CTC eligibility that cannot be received due to the limit on the portion of the CTC that is refundable.
Sources: Based on data from GPO (2011), Pomerleau (2014), Steuerle and Quakenbush (2015), and Tax Policy
Center (2015b).

Figure 4. Annual cost of the EITC and CTC (Millions of 2014 dollars)

Notes: Each series includes both tax refunds and credits that offset tax liabilities.
Sources: Based on data from Internal Revenue Service (2014d, 2014c, 2015b), Tax Policy Center (2014, 2015a),
and U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (2014).

Figure 5. Tax and transfer benefits for universally available programs, by income (single
adults with 2 children, 2015)

Notes: Estimated value of tax and transfer beneﬁts for a single parent with two children living in Colorado.
Calculations assume that both children qualify for dependent exemptions, the EITC, the CTC, and the Child and
Dependent Care Tax Credit. Premium assistance credit excludes the value of penalties paid by employers on the
beneficiaries' behalf and the value of additional cost-sharing subsidies. Health coverage and quality of services
provided varies by source: Medicaid and CHIP beneﬁts are more comprehensive and have less cost-sharing than
those in the exchange. Medicaid and CHIP also pay providers for services at lower rates than private insurers.
Source: Based on data from Steuerle and Quakenbush (2015).

Figure 6. Effective marginal tax rates, by income (single adults with 2 children)

Notes: Average effective marginal tax rates facing a single parent with two children living in Colorado. See notes to
Figure 5. The effective marginal tax rate is averaged over $5,000 income bins and is calculated using changes in net
income after taxes and transfers given changes in total compensation (including employer share of payroll taxes).
Source: Based on data from Steuerle and Quakenbush (2015).

Figure 7. EITC budget constraint

Figure 8. Pre-EITC and post-EITC income and poverty, 2015 tax year

Notes: Solid vertical lines indicate the locations of EITC kink points; see Table 1 for exact values. Dashed vertical
lines indicate the pre-tax income at which a family reaches the poverty line, with and without the EITC. In panel a,
these are at pre-tax earnings of $11,770 without EITC or $11,518 with EITC; in panel b, they are at $15,930 and
$15,565, respectively.
Sources: Based on California Department of Health Care Services (2015), California State Legislature (2015), and
Tax Policy Center (2015b).

Figure 9. Distribution of earnings by filing status and number of children

Notes: Graph displays EITC and CTC schedules from 2014, along with 2009 income distributions adjusted to 2014
dollars. Incomes less than or equal to zero or above $200,000 are not shown; notes under each panel indicate the
share of filers in each category. The sample excludes married couples filing separately, filing units receiving social
security but without children, and those filing late. The left y-axis in panel (a) differs from the left y-axis in panels bd. Panels a, b, c, and d represent 47%, 8%, 4%, and 1% of all filing units, respectively.
Source: Authors’ calculations from 2009 Tax Model files created by the Statistics of Income Division of the IRS.

Figure 10. Distribution of earnings by filing status and number of children

Notes: Graph displays EITC and CTC schedules from 2014, along with 2009 income distributions adjusted to 2014
dollars. Incomes less than or equal to zero or above $200,000 are not shown; notes under each panel indicate the
share of filers in each category. The sample excludes married couples filing separately, filing units receiving social
security but without children, and those filing late. Panels a, b, c, and d correspond to 18%, 7%, 8%, and 5% of all
filing units, respectively.
Source: Authors’ calculations from 2009 Tax Model files created by the Statistics of Income Division of the IRS.

Figure 11. Distribution of 2015 EITC and CTC benefits across filing types

Note: Filers are classified as with or without children based on the presence or absence of child exemptions, which
may not correspond to qualifying children under the EITC and/or CTC. Married filing separately returns (1.7% of
the total) are not shown.
Source: Based on data from Urban-Brookings Tax Policy Center Microsimulation Model (version 0515-1).

Figure 12. Distribution of 2015 EITC and CTC benefits and total pre-tax income across
filing types and income group

Note: Tax units, pre-tax income, and EITC benefits are each expressed as shares of their respective total over all tax
filing units, across all filing statuses and income levels. Filers are classified as with or without children based on the
presence or absence of child exemptions, which may not correspond to qualifying children under the EITC and/or
CTC. Married filing separately returns (1.7% of the total) are not shown separately but are included in panel (a).
Source: Based on data from Urban-Brookings Tax Policy Center Microsimulation Model (version 0515-1).

Figure 13. Employment rates of unmarried women over time, by number of children

Note: Sample consists of unmarried women aged 19-44.
Source: Authors’ analysis of the Current Population Survey Annual Social and Economic Supplement (U.S. Census
Bureau 2015).

Figure 14. Event time estimates of the effect of the 1993 EITC expansion on the
employment of single women with children

Notes: The sample includes single women, ages 24 through 48 with some college education or less from the 1992
through 1999 Current Population Survey Annual Social and Economic Supplement. Coefficients are estimates from
an event study model with single women without children as the control group and 1993 as the omitted year. The
dashed lines show the change in maximum EITC benefits for the treatment minus the control for each year. Vertical
bars show 95% confidence intervals, adjusted for clustering at the state level.
Source: Figure 7 from Hoynes and Patel (2015).

Figure 15. Difference-in-difference estimates of the effect of the 1993 EITC expansion on
the distribution of after tax and transfer income as a share of the federal poverty threshold

Notes: The sample includes single women, ages 24 through 48 with some college education or less from the 1992
through 1999 Current Population Survey Annual Social and Economic Supplement. Each dot and whisker represents
a single regression estimate and 95% confidence interval (adjusted for clustering at the state level). Each model is a
difference-in-difference model comparing women with children to women without children, before and after 1993.
The dashed line is the weighted change in EITC benefits for families with children versus those without children
across the 1993 EITC expansion.
Source: Figure 11 from Hoynes and Patel (2015).

Figure 16. Childless EITC schedules under current law and proposed alternatives

Note: Solid lines show the schedule for single and head-of-household filers; dotted lines for married filers. Dollar
values expressed in 2015 dollars.
Source: Based on Executive Office of the President and U.S. Treasury Department (2014), updated to 2015, and
authors’ tabulations.

Figure 17. Distributional effect of changes to CTC refundability thresholds

Notes: Distribution of tax benefits for each change are expressed as shares of total CTC expenditures in 2015.
Source: Based on data from Urban-Brookings Tax Policy Center Microsimulation Model (version 0515-1).

Table 1. Earned Income Tax Credit parameters, 1975-2015 (selected years), in 2014 dollars

Calendar year
2015
No children
One child
Two children
Three children
2014
No children
One child
Two children
Three children
2009
No children
One child
Two children
Three children
2003 [1]
No children
One child
Two children
1996
No children
One child
Two children
1995
No children
One child
Two children
1994
No children
One child
Two children
1993
One child
Two children
1992
One child
Two children
1991
One child
Two children
1990
1989
1988
1987
1985–86
1979–84
1975–78

Credit
rate
(percent)

Minimum
income for
maximum
credit

Phaseout range
Maximum
credit

Phaseout
rate
(percent)

Beginning
income

Ending
income

7.65
34.00
40.00
45.00

6,580
9,880
13,870
13,870

503
3,359
5,548
6,242

7.65
15.98
21.06
21.06

8,240
18,110
18,110
18,110

14,820
39,131
44,454
47,747

7.65
34.00
40.00
45.00

6,582
9,874
13,866
13,866

504
3,357
5,546
6,240

7.65
15.98
21.06
21.06

8,238
18,112
18,112
18,112

14,821
39,120
44,448
47,740

8.44
37.51
44.13
49.65

6,587
9,875
13,869
13,869

504
3,358
5,548
6,242

7.65
15.98
21.06
21.06

8,242
18,117
18,117
18,117

14,829
39,129
44,460
47,753

10.09
44.85
52.76

6,582
9,880
13,863

504
3,360
5,545

7.65
15.98
21.06

8,231
18,111
18,111

14,813
39,132
44,442

7.65
34.00
40.00

6,583
9,875
13,869

504
3,357
5,548

7.65
15.98
21.06

8,237
18,112
18,112

14,821
39,123
44,454

7.65
34.00
36.00

6,578
9,883
13,862

504
3,360
4,990

7.65
15.98
20.22

8,231
18,114
18,114

14,809
39,141
42,794

7.65
26.30
30.00

6,585
12,758
13,869

504
3,355
4,161

7.65
15.98
17.68

8,231
18,107
18,107

14,815
39,104
41,641

18.50
19.50

13,148
13,148

2,433
2,563

13.21
13.93

20,697
20,697

39,104
39,104

17.60
18.40

13,146
13,146

2,315
2,419

12.57
13.14

20,699
20,699

39,107
39,107

16.70
17.30
14.00
14.00
14.00
14.00
11.00
10.00
10.00

13,141
13,141
13,140
13,137
13,133
13,134
11,288
14,679
17,635

2,194
2,273
1,839
1,839
1,839
1,838
1,242
1,468
1,764

11.93
12.36
10
10
10
10
12.22
12.5
10

20,705
20,705
20,703
20,695
19,887
14,949
14,675
17,615
17,635

39,110
39,110
39,099
39,087
37,543
33,337
24,834
29,358
35,270

Notes: Beginning in 2002, the values of the beginning and ending points of the phase-out range were increased for
married taxpayers filing jointly. The values for these taxpayers were $1,000 higher than the listed values from 20022004, $2,000 higher from 2005-2007, $3,000 higher in 2008, $5,000 higher in 2009, $5,010 higher in 2010, $5,080
higher in 2011, $5,210 higher in 2012, $5,340 higher in 2013, $5,430 higher in 2014, and $5,520 higher in 2015.
Source: Based on data from Tax Policy Center (2015b) and U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (2014).

Table 2. Child Tax Credit parameters, 1997-2015, in 2015 dollars

Non-time-varying parameters (in nominal dollars)
Phase-in rate
15%
Phase-out rate
5%
Beginning of phase-out range
Head of Household
75,000
Married, Filing Separately
55,000
Married, Filing Jointly
110,000
End of phase-out range
1 child
2 children 3 children
Head of Household
95,000 115,000
135,000
Married, Filing Separately
75,000
95,000
115,000
Married, Filing Jointly
130,000 150,000
170,000
Time-varying parameters (in 2015 dollars)
Max. Credit per Child
Refundable Component
Year
Threshold
Rate above
($ Nominal) ($ 2015)
Threshold
($ Nominal)
Threshold
1997
500
742
n/a
n/a
n/a
1998
400
584
n/a
n/a
n/a
1999
500
717
n/a
n/a
n/a
2000
500
695
n/a
n/a
n/a
2001
600
808
10,000
13,461
0.1
2002
600
795
10,350
13,714
0.1
2003
1,000
1,295
10,500
13,603
0.1
2004
1,000
1,266
10,750
13,613
0.15
2005
1,000
1,228
11,000
13,510
0.15
2006
1,000
1,182
11,300
13,357
0.15
2007
1,000
1,156
11,750
13,578
0.15
2008
1,000
1,108
8,500
9,421
0.15
2009
1,000
1,106
3,000
3,319
0.15
2010
1,000
1,090
3,000
3,271
0.15
2011
1,000
1,064
3,000
3,193
0.15
2012
1,000
1,038
3,000
3,113
0.15
2013
1,000
1,020
3,000
3,061
0.15
2014
1,000
1,005
3,000
3,014
0.15
2015
1,000
1,000
3,000
3,000
0.15
Sources: Based on Congressional Research Service (2014) and U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (2014).

Table 3. Childless filer proposals
Parameters
Eligible ages
Recipient filing units (millions)

By income (in $1,000s)
Less than 10
10-20
20-30
30-40
40-50
50-75
75-100
All
Total cost for childless families
(billions of $)
Incremental cost over current law
(billions of $)

Current Law
25-64
6.6
Avg. credit
Fraction
among
receiving
recipients
19%
$322
13%
$281
5%
$238
2%
$303
2%
$339
1%
-0%
-6%
$284

Expanded Proposal
21-66
10.9
Avg. credit
Fraction
among
receiving
recipients
24%
$594
22%
$667
12%
$488
4%
$539
3%
$659
1%
-0%
-9%
$597

Equivalence Scaled
21-64
15.1
Avg. credit
Fraction
among
receiving
recipients
24%
$1,402
23%
$1,778
29%
$1,058
15%
$764
4%
$1,176
2%
$1,111
0%
-13%
$1,339

$1.9

$6.5

$20.2

-

$4.6

$18.3

Notes: "Fraction receiving" columns represent the number of recipients of the childless credit divided by the number
of tax filers without child exemptions. Average credits not reported for cells where 1% or fewer of filers receive the
credit.
Sources: Based on data from Urban-Brookings Tax Policy Center Microsimulation Model (version 0515-1). Cols 34 based on data from Executive Office of the President and U.S. Treasury Department (2014), updated to 2015.

