                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          POPULATION POLICY:
           ABORTION AND MODERN CONTRACEPTION ARE SUBSTITUTES

                                         Grant Miller
                                       Christine Valente

                                      Working Paper 22085
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22085


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2016




The authors thank the Center for Research on Environmental Health and Population Activities for
their assistance in collecting Comprehensive Abortion Care Center Data and to the Family Health
Division of the Ministry of Health and Population of Nepal for granting access to Technical
Committee for Implementation of Comprehensive Abortion. Christine Valente gratefully
acknowledges funding from ESRC grant No. RES-000-22-3740. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research. Corresponding author: Christine Valente, christine.valente@bristol.ac.uk

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Grant Miller and Christine Valente. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Population Policy: Abortion and Modern Contraception are Substitutes
Grant Miller and Christine Valente
NBER Working Paper No. 22085
March 2016
JEL No. J13,N35

                                          ABSTRACT

There is longstanding debate in population policy about the relationship between modern
contraception and abortion. Although theory predicts that they should be substitutes, the existing
body of empirical evidence is difficult to interpret. What is required is a large-scale intervention
that alters the supply (or full price) of one or the other – and importantly, does so in isolation
(reproductive health programs often bundle primary health care and family planning – and in
some instances, abortion services). In this paper, we study Nepal’s 2004 legalization of abortion
provision and subsequent expansion of abortion services, an unusual and rapidly-implemented
policy meeting these requirements. Using four waves of rich individual-level data representative
of fertile-age Nepalese women, we find robust evidence of substitution between modern
contraception and abortion. This finding has important implications for public policy and foreign
aid, suggesting that an effective strategy for reducing expensive and potentially unsafe abortions
may be to expand the supply of modern contraceptives.


Grant Miller
CHP/PCOR
Stanford University
117 Encina Commons
Stanford, CA 94305-6019
and NBER
ngmiller@stanford.edu

Christine Valente
University of Bristol
8 Woodland Road
Bristol, BS8 1TN
christine.valente@bristol.ac.uk
    1. Introduction

        There is longstanding debate in reproductive health circles about the relationship

between modern contraception and abortion use.                     Over several decades, population

scholars have documented concomitant increases in both contraceptive prevalence and

abortion rates around the world in settings as diverse as Cuba, South Korea, Bangladesh,

Singapore, Netherlands, Denmark, and the United States (Noble and Potts 1996; Rahman et

al. 2001; Marston and Cleland 2003). This phenomenon is commonly attributed to rapid

reductions in desired fertility, which in turn increase demand for all methods of birth

control (Marston and Cleland 2003).

        However, theory predicts that holding demand for birth control constant (and

absent absolute moral or religious constraints), women (couples) 1 should use modern

contraceptives and abortion interchangeably – that is, they are substitutes (Westoff et al.

1981; Kane and Staiger 1996; Bongaarts and Westoff 2000; Westoff 2000; Rahman et al.

2001; Marston and Cleland 2003). 2 A relative increase in the affordability, availability, or

acceptability of one should lead women wishing to regulate their fertility to substitute




1 Because we study married women in a patriarchal society, the choice of contraception is likely to be the
result of intra-household bargaining. We do not theoretically or empirically distinguish individual
preferences from the choices that result from this bargaining process. However, our reduced-form estimates
isolate important – and policy relevant – parameters of interest. Recognizing this point, we refer to
contraceptive decisions as women’s decisions for simplicity throughout the paper.
2 A separate strand of economic theory, which studies the response of risk-taking behavior to perceived

changes in the consequences of a bad outcome (e.g., increased automobile safety, availability of treatment for
a medical condition), suggests an additional mechanism through which women who do not want to become
pregnant may reduce contraceptive use when access to abortion improves. There is indeed evidence that
reducing the cost of a bad outcome may increase risk-taking in other health areas. Examples are Peltzman
(1975) on the effect of automobile safety on dangerous driving, Dilley et al. (1997) on HIV treatment and risk-
taking among men who have sex with men, and Peltzman (2011) on the effect of medical breakthroughs (e.g.,
new treatments for heart disease) on offsetting behavior (e.g., obesity).

                                                      2
away from the other. 3 Since the mid-1990s (as declining fertility rates have plateaued),

global contraceptive prevalence has continued to rise, while abortion rates have declined –

a relationship consistent with substitution.

        Debate about the relationship between contraception and abortion has fundamental

implications for public policy and foreign aid. Importantly, if modern contraceptives and

abortions are substitutes, then an effective strategy for reducing expensive and potentially

life-threatening abortions may be to boost the supply 4 of modern contraceptives. Two

recent analyses of the United States’ “Mexico City Policy” (MCP) suggest that by reducing

funding for family planning programs, the MCP may have actually reduced the availability

of modern contraceptives relative to abortion and thus increased abortion rates (Bendavid

et al. 2011, Jones 2011). 5

        Understanding the trade-off between contraception and abortion would also shed

light on ways to prevent maternal deaths. Research on the determinants of maternal

mortality worldwide suggests that unsafe abortion plays a quantitatively important role. In

Latin American and Caribbean countries, a systematic review found that unsafe abortion

accounts for roughly 50% more maternal deaths than better-known complications like

sepsis (Khan et al. 2006). The World Health Organization estimates that 13% of maternal


3 The theoretical discussion of the tradeoff between contraception and abortion among demographers has
tended to focus on the effect of changing contraceptive prevalence on the abortion rate (e.g., Bongaarts and
Westoff 2000). In the economics literature, the tradeoff is understood as going both ways (see Kane and
Staiger 1996 for a discussion of the effect of a change in the cost of abortion on contraceptive use). The
difference stems from the economic modeling of contraceptive choices as depending on the cost of
contraception relative to the cost of not using contraception, which in turn depends on the cost of abortion
(see Section 4).
4 Changes in supply include both changes in availability and changes in the full price of contraception

(monetary, social, and emotional price). For brevity, we refer to these changes collectively as ‘supply’ changes
throughout.
5 First announced in Mexico City in 1984 by President Reagan’s administration, the ‘Mexico City Policy’

requires all non-governmental organizations operating abroad to refrain from performing or counseling
women about abortion as a means of fertility control as a condition for receiving U.S. federal funding.

                                                       3
deaths worldwide are linked to unsafe abortion (WHO 2010). Given concerns about under-

reporting, existing evidence is also suspected to underestimate mortality from unsafe

abortion (Gerdts et al. 2013).

       What is needed to establish whether or not the use of modern contraceptives and

abortions are complements or substitutes is a large-scale intervention that alters the

supply of either one or the other – and importantly, does so in isolation. To date, finding

such cases has been challenging because real-world reproductive health programs

generally deliver a bundle of services together, making it difficult to disentangle the effect

of supply of modern contraceptives or abortion from other program components. As a case

in point, the well-known Matlab Family Planning Experiment bundled the provision of

modern contraceptives with the provision of both abortion services (menstrual regulation)

and child health services, making it difficult to isolate the effect of contraceptive supply

(Rahman et al. 2001; Miller and Singer Babiarz 2013).

       This paper studies an unusual policy change well-suited to assessing the

relationship between the use of modern contraceptives and abortion. Starting in March

2004, Nepal legalized the provision of abortion by selected existing health service

providers. In addition to its scale, what distinguishes this policy is that in doing so, Nepal

did not expand the supply of modern contraceptives, bundle the legalization of abortion

with changes in the provision of any other type of service, or expand the health care

workforce. We utilize unusually rich individual-level data representative of fertile age

Nepalese women collected in four waves both before and after the legalization of abortion

to estimate how the use of modern contraceptives (and other reproductive behaviors)

responded to this policy.


                                              4
          We find that the addition of a legal abortion center in one’s district is associated

with a 2.6% decrease in the odds of using any contraceptive [OR:0.974, 95% CI:

(0.961;0.987)], implying that a move from zero to the mean number of centers post-

legalization was associated with a reduction in contraceptive prevalence of 2 percentage

points - 6% of the pre-legalization prevalence rate. Decomposing this effect among

traditional contraceptive methods (such as withdrawal and the rhythm method), female

sterilization, and reversible modern methods, we find that the decrease occurs principally

among reversible modern methods.



   2. Background

   2.1.      Global and Regional Trends

          Globally, contraceptive use and abortion rates have been inversely related over the

past several decades. Contraceptive prevalence has increased steadily over the past twenty

years, rising from 54.8% to 63.3% between 1990 and 2010 (Alkema et al. 2013).

Simultaneously, there has been a steady decline in abortion rates, falling from 35 to 28

abortions per 1,000 women on average worldwide between 1995 and 2008 (Sedgh et al.

2012).      These global trends are of course consistent with substitution of modern

contraception for abortion, but a number of potentially important confounding factors have

also been at work over time (changes in desired fertility, for example).

          The inverse relationship between abortion and contraception is particularly evident

in formerly socialist Eastern European countries. Under communism, abortion was a major

(if not the principal) method of birth control across much of Eastern Europe and Central




                                               5
Asia (Frejka 1983). 6 After the collapse of communism, abortion rates declined steeply with

the diffusion of modern contraceptives during the 1990s (Westoff et al. 1998; Westoff

2000; Pop-Eleches 2010) again suggesting that contraception and abortion may have been

used interchangeably.

             On the other hand, concomitant increases in both contraceptive prevalence and

abortion rates have been observed in a variety of countries further back in time, including

Cuba, South Korea, Bangladesh, Singapore, the Netherlands, Denmark, and the United

States (Noble and Potts 1996; Rahman et al. 2001; Marston and Cleland 2003). Bongaarts

and Westoff (2000) and Marston and Cleland (2003) suggest that these simultaneous

increases may occur during transitions to lower fertility if the supply of modern

contraceptives fails to keep pace with the reduction in desired fertility. Then, as desired

fertility plateaus, substitution between modern contraceptives and abortion should

become more evident (Marston and Cleland 2003). This is consistent with global trends

since the mid-1990s, as the worldwide decline in fertility decelerated (World Development

Indicators 2014).



      2.2.      Previous Estimates of Substitution between Abortion and Contraception

             Many studies of the relationship between contraception and abortion in developing

countries are limited to informal analyses of their co-movement. Only a handful of studies

have attempted to estimate the causal relationship between the two. Two recent studies

investigate changes in abortion and contraceptive use induced by the Mexico City Policy

(MCP). Bendavid et al. (2011) compare changes in abortion and contraceptive use over


6   The Soviet Union was the first country to legalize abortion in 1920.

                                                         6
time in countries highly exposed to the Mexico City Policy (MCP) relative to less exposed

countries. The authors find that more exposed countries experienced slower increases in

contraceptive prevalence and higher increases in abortion after the re-enactment of the

MCP, suggesting that reduced contraceptive supply may have increased the incidence of

abortion. Jones (2011) compares abortion rates among women in Ghana during periods in

which the MCP is both enforced and not enforced. She finds that rural women are more

likely to have an abortion during periods of enforcement, which she links to the increased

number of unwanted pregnancies following the reduction in contraceptive supply under

the policy.

         Rahman et al. (2001) analyzes changes in abortion linked to the Matlab Family

Planning Experiment intervention. The authors show that abortion rates fell in treatment

villages relative to control villages between 1979 and 1998 (despite increasing secular

trends in both contraceptive use and abortion). However, the experimental treatment

bundled menstrual regulation 7 services together with the provision of modern

contraceptives between 1977 and 1983 (donors then stopped supporting this component

of the program). Most of the relative decline in abortion in treatment areas occurred

around 1983 – and so is plausibly due to the end of abortion services. Antenatal and child

health services were also bundled together with the provision of modern contraceptives

beginning in 1978 (Phillips et al. 1984), making it difficult to disentangle the independent

contribution of contraceptive supply from improvements in child survival. 8



7 The term “menstrual regulation” refers to manual vacuum aspiration procedures carried out after a missed
period but before pregnancy is clinically confirmed.
8 For instance, Phillips et al. (27) find that contraceptive prevalence is independently correlated with some of

the maternal and child health components of the Matlab programme, and that the sign of the correlation
varies with the type of intervention.

                                                       7
           Evidence from wealthy countries is also thin. Ananat and Hungerman (2012) find

that the availability of oral contraceptives starting at age 16 is associated with a reduction

in the probability of reporting having had an abortion between ages 16 and 19. Glasier et al.

(2004) find no change in abortion rates in Scottish communities following free distribution

of advance emergency contraception to women ages 16-29. Finally, Durrance (2013)

analyzes the diffusion of emergency contraception through pharmacies in the state of

Washington, finding no change in the abortion rate.



    3. The Nepalese Natural Experiment

    3.1.      The Legalization of Abortion in Nepal

           Prior to 2002, Nepalese women who terminated their pregnancies faced

imprisonment for infanticide. 9 On September 27, 2002, the King of Nepal signed a bill

legalizing abortion prior to the twelfth week of pregnancy, prior to the eighteenth week in

cases of rape or incest, and at any gestational age with appropriate medical advice (to

protect the health of the mother or in cases of severe birth defects, for example) (MOHP,

WHO & CREHPA 2006). When this law was enacted, however, Nepalese reproductive

health providers were neither permitted nor adequately trained to begin offering safe

abortion services. Consequently, there was very little increase in abortion, if any, following

this law in 2002 (Valente 2014).

           Nepal’s first legal abortion services were offered in March 2004, and the number of

health centers registered to provide them grew rapidly over time, rising to 141 in June


9Although imprisonment was not a common outcome among women who had an abortion, among the small
population of female inmates in Nepalese prisons (405 in 1997), a substantial proportion is believed to have
been convicted on abortion-related charges (Ramaseshan 1997).

                                                      8
2006 and 291 by February 2010. To place this expansion into context, the number of

registered abortion providers grew from none to nearly twice as many providers per capita

as in the United States by 2010 – over a period of just six years. 10 This large-scale policy

change has been hailed by advocates as a success, and, according to observers, “Nepal's

experience making high-quality abortion care widely accessible in a short period of time

offers important lessons for other countries seeking to reduce maternal mortality and

morbidity from unsafe abortion” (Samandari et al. 2012, p.1).

        Under the policy, senior gynecologists from central and regional hospitals as well as

from some NGO and private clinics were trained to become both the first legal abortion

providers as well as safe abortion trainers themselves. With the aim to result in rapid

national scale-up, training then cascaded from regional and zonal hospitals to public

district hospitals (Samandari et al. 2012). The private sector (primarily Marie Stopes

International and the Family Planning Association of Nepal) also “fill(s) an important niche

in urban areas” (Samandari et al, 2012) and is less prevalent in rural areas – which were

home to 83% of the Nepalese population according to the 2011 population census. As a

result, more populous districts, districts in the more accessible regions of the country, and

urban areas were more likely to have legal abortion services in early years. 11




10 291 abortion centers in 2010 relative to a total Nepal population of 26.49 Million reported in the 2011
Nepalese population census implies one center per 91,031 inhabitants. In the United States, there were 1,793
abortion providers in 2008 (Guttmacher Institute 2013) relative to a total population of 305 Million
(Population Reference Bureau 2008), implying one provider per 170,106 inhabitants.
11 In addition, Nepal experienced a Maoist insurgency in 1996, which led to a 10-year low- to medium-

intensity conflict, peaking in 2002. Conflict areas between 2004 and 2006 may have also experienced slower,
less intense increases in the supply of legal abortion. If areas in which abortion supply grew more slowly had
pre-existing trend differences in contraceptive use, this could bias our estimates. In Section 7, we show that
our results are robust to allowing for more populous districts, districts in more accessible regions of the
country, and urban areas to experience differential time trends in contraception – as well as to controlling for
conflict intensity.

                                                       9
        Although illegal abortions have always been available to some degree, legalization

greatly reduced the effective (quality-adjusted) full price. The cost of a legal abortion

ranges from Rs800 to Rs2000 (USD11.33 to USD28.33) (MOHP & CREHPA 2006) relative to

mean annual income Rs51,978 in 2004 (Central Bureau of Statistics 2004, p.37).

Government policy stipulates that poor women are entitled to abortion services free of

charge, but eligibility criteria have not been clearly defined, and in practice, they tend not

to receive any preferential treatment (CREHPA 2007, Samandari et al. 2012). Comparisons

to the cost of illegal abortions are difficult; five case studies in MOHP et al. (2006) report

considerable variation (Rs200, Rs500, Rs700, Rs3000, Rs8000). However, legal abortions

are much safer, reducing the likelihood of maternal death and post-abortion complications

requiring expensive medical care (MOHP et al. 2006). 12 Consistent with legalization

reducing the effective (quality-adjusted) price on an abortion, Valente (2014) shows that

having a legal abortion center nearby at the start of a pregnancy reduces the probability of

carrying the pregnancy to term by 8.1 %. 13

        In contrast to abortion, contraception services are available free of charge through

government facilities (and at a subsidized price through social marketing organizations like

PSI – and at full price in private facilities) (Shrestha et al. 2012). Condoms, pills, and

injectables are provided by all levels of government facilities and providers, while IUDs and

implants can be obtained in selected hospitals, primary health centers, and health posts

(Shrestha et al. 2012). In the latest Demographic and Health Survey (DHS 2011), 55%




12MOHP et al. (2006) reports that costs for post-abortion emergency care can range from Rs2000 to Rs5000.
13This figure is based on a binary definition of proximity to a legal abortion centre corresponding to the
median distance to the nearest legal abortion centre (28.6 kilometers). Various robustness checks for
different definitions of access to a legal abortion centre are presented in Valente (2014).

                                                   10
(47.5%) of sterilized women (men) were sterilized in a government hospital or clinic, while

19.4% (32.5%) were sterilized through a government-run mobile clinic.

            A unique feature of Nepal’s legalization of abortion is its narrow focus. In particular,

it was not accompanied by a meaningful increase in the supply of modern contraceptives,

an expansion of the reproductive health workforce, or improvements in the provision of

other health services. Instead, pre-existing reproductive health care providers were trained

and licensed to offer abortion services as part of their existing practices. 14 This feature of

Nepal’s policy change allows us to isolate changes in the use of modern contraceptives

linked directly to expansions in abortion supply (that are not attributable to simultaneous

changes in either health service delivery or contraceptive supply that often accompany

such changes in abortion policy as in, e.g., Pop-Eleches (2010)). 15



     3.2.      Trends in Modern Contraceptive Use and Abortion in Nepal

            Figure 1 shows the contraceptive prevalence and abortion rates in Nepal over time.

After a rapid, sustained, increase in the use of modern contraceptives from the late 1970s

until the mid 2000s (from only 2% to 48%), contraceptive prevalence then plateaued with

the legalization of abortion in 2004 (Figure 1 Panel 1). As in other countries, this pattern of

co-movement is consistent with substitution (and occurred during a period of declining



14 A survey of Comprehensive Abortion Care (CAC) providers conducted in 2009 revealed that only 8 of 139
surveyed providers introduced new contraceptive services or maternal and child health services at around
the same time as they started providing abortion services (Valente 2014).
15 Of course, most abortion clients receive post-abortion contraceptive counselling (MOHP & CREHPA 2006).

This could lead us to underestimate the extent of the substitution away from contraception if women who use
abortion services are more likely to use contraception after having had an abortion. However, the results of
our statistical analysis are virtually unchanged when excluding women who report having had an abortion
within one year of the survey, thus suggesting that post-abortion changes in contraceptive use are not
influencing our findings (full results are available on request).

                                                    11
fertility, with Nepal’s total fertility rate falling from 4.6 in 1996 to 2.6 in 2011 (MOHP et al.

2012)).

       However, these aggregate trends may reflect changes in contraceptive use unrelated

to the legalization of abortion. A better test of whether or not the plateauing of

contraceptive prevalence is linked to Nepal’s increase in abortion supply would use

district-level variation in the magnitude of abortion supply. Figure 2 shows the

concentration of legal abortion center across Nepal’s districts, illustrating that there is

substantial geographic variation. Splitting Nepal’s 75 districts into terciles of legal abortion

center concentration in 2010, Figure 1 Panel 2 shows that plateauing in contraceptive

prevalence is greater in districts with higher concentrations of legal abortion centers.

Figure 1 Panel 2 also shows that areas with fewer abortion centers initially had lower

contraceptive prevalence rates. Our estimation strategy accounts for these baseline

differences across districts (due to both observable and unobservable, time-invariant

factors), assuming that there are no time-varying omitted variables correlated with both

the increase in legal abortion centers and contraceptive use. In Section 7, we report a

number of robustness tests showing that our results are unlikely to be driven by time-

varying omitted variables.



   4. Conceptual Framework

       Before turning to our data and methods used to estimate the relationship between

abortion supply and contraceptive use in Nepal, we first present a simple conceptual

framework to clarify the hypothesis tested in this paper.




                                               12
        To fix ideas, consider the choice between using contraception and not using

contraception faced by a woman (couple) who does not want to have a child now (Figure

A2). Define 𝐶𝑖 , a dummy variable equal to one if woman 𝑖 uses contraception, and zero

otherwise; 𝐴𝑖 is a dummy variable equal to one if woman 𝑖 has an abortion, and zero

otherwise. Finally, define 𝑝𝑓 , the probability of failure of the contraceptive method used by

the woman (and so 0 < 𝑝𝑓 < 1).                For simplicity, we assume that, in the absence of

contraception, the woman becomes pregnant with probability one. Assuming a strictly

positive probability of less than one does not change the qualitative implications of the

model, nor does allowing for imperfect predictions of the probabilities of becoming

pregnant with and without contraception. 16 If a woman uses contraception, then with

probability 1 − 𝑝𝑓 , she does not become pregnant and therefore never aborts. With

probability 𝑝𝑓 , she becomes pregnant and either aborts or not. If a woman decides to not

use contraception, then she becomes pregnant and either aborts or not.

        Now define the costs (financial and psychological) attached to using contraception

as 𝑐 𝑐 , the direct costs attached to having an abortion as 𝑐 𝑎 , and the net present value of the

costs attached to having an unwanted child as 𝑐 𝑢 , which are all allowed to vary across

women. Conditional on being pregnant with an unwanted pregnancy, woman 𝑖 aborts if




16The only difference when assuming a probability of becoming pregnant in the absence of contraception
inferior to one is that inequality (1) becomes: 𝑐𝑖𝑐 < 𝑝𝑝 (1 − 𝑝𝑓 )min (𝑐𝑖𝑎 , 𝑐𝑖𝑢 ), where 𝑝𝑝 is the probability of
becoming pregnant in the absence of effective contraception, and 𝑝𝑓 is the probability of becoming pregnant
despite using contraception when contraceptive protection is needed (which is the case with probability 𝑝𝑝 ).
Allowing women to hold erroneous beliefs in terms of 𝑝𝑝 and 𝑝𝑓 changes the ranges of costs over which
women decide to use contraception or not, but does not alter the qualitative conclusions of the model about
the effect of a decrease in the cost of abortion relative to contraception.

                                                        13
and only if 𝑐𝑖𝑎 < 𝑐𝑖𝑢 . Woman 𝑖 will use contraception if and only if her expected cost from

using contraception is lower than that from not using contraception, i.e., if and only if 17:

                                          𝑐𝑖𝑐 < (1 − 𝑝𝑓 )𝑐𝑖𝑎 𝑖𝑓 𝑐𝑖𝑎 < 𝑐𝑖𝑢
                                          𝑐𝑖𝑐 < (1 − 𝑝𝑓 )𝑐𝑖𝑢 𝑖𝑓 𝑐𝑖𝑎 ≥ 𝑐𝑖𝑢

In summary, a woman will use contraception if and only if:

                                       𝑐𝑖𝑐 < (1 − 𝑝𝑓 )min (𝑐𝑖𝑎 , 𝑐𝑖𝑢 )      (1)

         Our hypothesis is that when a legal, safe, and affordable abortion center opens in a

woman’s district of residence, 𝑐𝑖𝑎 decreases while all the other parameters of the model

remain constant, and hence min (𝑐𝑖𝑎 , 𝑐𝑖𝑢 ) either decreases or stays the same. Therefore,

given that 1 − 𝑝𝑓 is positive, inequality (1) becomes less likely to hold and fewer women

use contraception, resulting in substitution of abortion to contraception.

         Previous studies estimating the trade-off between contraceptive use and abortion

generally analyze how abortion use responds to changes in contraceptive supply. This

approach relies heavily on the accuracy of abortion reporting, which is known to be poor in

survey data (Jones and Forrest 1992). In contrast, our study investigates how the use of

modern contraceptives responds to the provision of legal abortion centers. In doing so, we

provide a test of whether or not women decide not to use contraception up-front when it is

less difficult/costly to have an abortion (rather than whether or not they are less likely to

have an abortion ex-post when the supply of contraceptives increases).




17Note that when 𝑐𝑖𝑎 < 𝑐𝑖𝑢 , the expected cost of using contraception is: 𝑝𝑓 (𝑐𝑖𝑐 + 𝑐𝑖𝑎 ) + �1 − 𝑝𝑓 �𝑐𝑖𝑐 = 𝑝𝑓 𝑐𝑖𝑎 + 𝑐𝑖𝑐
and the cost of not using contraception is 𝑐𝑖𝑎 . When 𝑐𝑖𝑎 ≥ 𝑐𝑖𝑢 , the expected cost of using contraception is:
𝑝𝑓 (𝑐𝑖𝑐 + 𝑐𝑖𝑢 ) + �1 − 𝑝𝑓 �𝑐𝑖𝑐 = 𝑝𝑓 𝑐𝑖𝑢 + 𝑐𝑖𝑐 and the cost of not using contraception is 𝑐𝑖𝑢 .

                                                          14
     5. Data and Methods

     5.1.      Data on Nepalese Women and Legal Abortion Centers

            To measure modern contraceptive use among Nepalese women, we use four waves

from the Nepalese Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS), two pre-legalization and two

post-legalization (Demographic and Health Surveys of Nepal 1996-2011).                          Collecting

nationally representative data from fertile-age women (defined as ages 15-49) in 1996,

2001, 2006, and 2011, these surveys provide the best available information about

reproductive behavior among Nepalese women. Each wave includes a household survey

(collecting general information about household composition and socio-economic

characteristics), and an individual survey administered to all fertile-age women (including

questions about current and retrospective fertility regulation practices over the preceding

four or five years – as well as complete retrospective fertility histories detailing all

pregnancies, including those that did not end in a live birth). We restrict the sample to

married women (because the 1996 and 2001 surveys only included married women), but

we also assess the robustness of our results to alternative approaches. 18 Our pooled

sample across these four survey waves includes 32,098 women. 19




18 For example, we also restrict our sample to women ages 25 and above, among whom marriage is nearly
universal – 97.3% of respondents ages 25 and above in the 2006 and 2011 were married at the time of
interview. Focusing on married women is consistent with the composition of legal abortion service clients in
Nepal. A survey carried out by CREHPA in 2006 indicates that nearly 98% of clients were or had been
married, close to 60% were between 20 and 29 years old (only 5% were under 20), and less than 7% had no
living child (23%, 40%, and 31%, had one, two, and three or more living children, respectively) (MOHP &
CREHPA 2006). An international comparison of legal abortion service client characteristics suggests that the
characteristics of Nepalese clients are generally comparable to those observed in other less developed
countries (Bankole et al. 1999, MOHP & CREHPA 2006).
19 40,622 women were interviewed in total (8,429 in 1996, 8,726 in 2001, 10,793 in 2006 and 12,674 in

2011). After dropping 2,175 women who are not usual residents of the household in which they are observed,
6,348 unmarried women interviewed in 2006 and 2011, and one woman whose level of education is missing,
we obtain the final sample of 32,098.

                                                    15
        A brief note about the use of contemporaneous data (from survey years only) versus

retrospective contraceptive history data (for years prior to the survey year, as recalled by

respondents in survey years) is warranted.                     An important virtue of using only

contemporaneous data is that it minimizes measurement error in reported use of modern

contraceptives. 20 The drawbacks of using only contemporaneous data are the possibility of

lower statistical power (because of smaller sample sizes) and less flexibility to examine the

evolution of contraceptive use over time relative to the expansion of legal abortion centers.

Although we cannot be certain about how much measurement error exists in the

retrospective recall data about contraceptive use, studies of contraceptive history recall

error suggest substantial limitations in the use of such recall data (Strickler et al. 1997,

Beckett et al. 2001). 21 Beyond contraceptive use, more recent research suggests that the

quality of recall data deteriorates very rapidly and that the length of the recall period

influences self-reported morbidity and use of health services in ways not previously

demonstrated (Das et al. 2012). 22 Given these concerns, the availability of an unusually

large number of DHS waves for our analysis (four), and the fact that we have adequate

power to examine the correlation between trends in contraceptive use and the intensity of



20 The question asked in the DHS is “Are you currently doing something or using any method to delay or avoid
getting pregnant?,”
21 Strickler et al. (1997) and Beckett et al. (2001) compare contraceptive use by the same woman for the same

periods of time – but reported at two different survey dates – and find that there are substantial
inconsistencies at the disaggregated level. Specifically, Strickler et al. (1997) find that, among Moroccan
women reporting at least one period of contraceptive use, only 45.1% reported periods of use and non-use in
the same order in two different surveys, and only 29.3% reported the same sequence and length of
contraceptive use. Similarly, when comparing individual reports of contraceptive use in contemporaneous
and recall data for Malaysia, Beckett et al (2001) obtain a Kappa coefficient of only 0.38. In the presence of
misclassification (e.g., reporting not using contraception when in fact using and vice-versa), Hausman et al.
(47) show that estimates are inconsistent and their precision can be overstated.
22 Note that recall error for the variables examined by Das et al. (2012) – which include visits to the doctor

and self-medication – is very relevant to recall error in contraceptive use, but less so for more salient events
such as the birth of a child.

                                                      16
abortion supply (as shown in Section 6), we focus on contemporaneous data in our

analysis.

        We use the total number of legal abortion centers in each district, month, and year

to measure the intensity of abortion supply.                We constructed this measure using

administrative records from the Nepalese Technical Committee for Implementation of

Comprehensive Abortion Care (TCIC 2010) containing exact registration dates for each

legal abortion facility authorized before February 2010. We then assign intensity of

abortion supply to each individual woman in our pooled DHS sample at the district-month-

year level (according to her interview date). 23

        Table 1 reports descriptive statistics both for our pooled sample and separately for

each survey year. The first row reports the mean number of legal abortion centers in the

woman’s district in each survey wave. The intensity of abortion supply varies considerably

both across survey waves and across districts within each post-legalization wave. On

average, women interviewed in 2006 had 2.72 centers in their district (s.d.: 2.997), and this

number rises to 6.34 (s.d.: 6.702) by 2011.

        The next eight rows then summarize modern and traditional contraception and

abortion. Modern contraceptive use increases between each survey wave until 2006 (from

27% in 1996 to 46% in 2006) but then ceases to rise between 2006 and 2011. Among

modern methods, the most common is female sterilization, but reversible methods account

for most of the increase in contraceptive prevalence between survey waves. In 1996, 2%




23By definition, an abortion center is only legal if it is “listed” with the Technical Committee for
Implementation of Comprehensive Abortion Care (TCIC), and the data used here are based on the list of all
facilities included on the TCIC list up to February 2010.

                                                   17
of women report ever having an abortion, 24 rising to 8% by 2011. Desired fertility also

declined across survey waves. For example, the average “ideal” number of children fell

from 2.95 in 1996 to 2.24 in 2011. 25



     5.2.      Statistical Methods

            We estimate logit models of the following general form for woman i in district d

observed in survey s:



                                          ′
            𝑃𝑟(𝑦𝑖𝑑𝑠 = 1) = 𝐹(𝛼0 + 𝛼𝐶𝑑𝑠 + 𝑋𝑖𝑑𝑠 𝜷 + 𝛿𝑑 + 𝜑𝑠 )                 (2)



Where 𝐹(𝑧) = 𝑒 𝑧 /(1 + 𝑒 𝑧 ) is the cumulative logistic distribution. Here 𝑦𝑖𝑑𝑠 is a

dichotomous indicator for various measures of contraceptive use (equal to 1 if woman i

reports using a given method of contraception, and 0 otherwise), 𝐶𝑑𝑠 is the number of legal

abortion centers in the district at the time of the survey, 𝑋𝑖𝑑𝑠 is a vector of individual

characteristics (urban dummy, age, religion dummies, education attainment dummies), 𝛿𝑑

is a vector of district dummy variables, 𝜑𝑠 is a vector of (3) DHS wave dummies (equivalent

to year dummy variables). 26 We estimate equation (2) using survey weights and allowing


24  For each pregnancy in the pregnancy history of the woman, she is asked whether the baby [was] “born
alive, born dead, or lost before birth”; then when the pregnancy ended and how long it lasted; and then only
“did you [the respondent] or someone else do something to end this pregnancy?”. The sequence of questions
is the same for the four surveys, but the variables available changed in 2011. Before 2011, we count as an
abortion any pregnancy not ending in live birth for which the woman either says that something was done to
end the pregnancy or refuses to answer the last question. In the 2011 survey, the dataset does not contain the
necessary raw data to apply the exact same rule, but contrary to the previous surveys, provides a
classification of pregnancies as live birth/stillbirth/miscarriage/abortion based on the same survey
questions.
25 Panel C shows that our sample is a predominantly rural and with low levels of education (especially among

women) that increase rapidly across study waves.
26 Note that C is coded using abortion facility data as of February 2010 for the 2011 DHS wave since the
               ds
administrative records we have had access to end in February 2010.

                                                     18
for error correlation of an arbitrary nature within district. Equation (2) implements a

`difference-in-difference’ estimation strategy in which 𝛼 captures the effect of each legal

abortion center in a woman’s district on contraceptive use, controlling for baseline

differences in contraceptive use between districts (𝛿𝑑 ) and time trends common to all

districts (𝜑𝑠 ). The validity of our estimates thus relies on the assumption of no meaningful

differences in pre-existing fertility regulation trends across districts with varying increases

in the supply of legal abortions. In Section 7, we report evidence consistent with this

assumption.



     6. Results

        The first six columns of Table 2 report odds ratios estimates of the effect of the

number of legal abortion centers (α) for various indicators of contraceptive use (shown at

the top of each column) obtained by estimating Equation (2). The first column shows

results for use of any form of contraception (modern or traditional): the addition of a legal

abortion center in a woman’s district of residence is associated with a 2.6% reduction in

the odds of using any contraceptive [OR: 0.974, 95% CI: (0.961;0.987)]. 27 This odds ratio

corresponds to a decrease in the probability of using any form of contraception of 0.5

percentage points per legal abortion center [95% CI: (-0.007;-0.002)], a 2 percentage point

reduction from the pre-legalization mean of 35% associated with four legal abortion

centers – the mean number of centers in the two post-legalization survey waves). 28




27 This and the other point estimates of interest in Table 2 are nearly unchanged when the linear age variable
is replaced with seven 5-year age categories. Results are available on request.
28 Marginal effects reported in the paper are computed at the mode of all categorical covariates, the mean of

maternal age, and the mean number of abortion centers per district in the two post-legalization surveys.

                                                     19
        Columns (2) and (6) report separate estimates for use of any modern and any

traditional method of contraception (respectively). 29                 The odds of using modern

contraceptives decrease by 2.6% with an additional abortion center, while the odds ratio

for use of traditional methods is indistinguishable from one [OR: 0.974, 95% CI: (0.960;

0.989) and OR: 0.992, 95% CI: (0.978; 1.006), respectively]. Taken together, these results

suggest that when a legal abortion facility opens in a woman’s district, she reduces her use

of modern contraceptives, while traditional contraception remains unchanged. Analyzing

the effect of an additional abortion center on modern contraceptive use by age group, we

find the largest decrease in contraceptive use among the 15-19 and the 30-34 age group,

while the effect is statistically significant for all groups up to ages 35-39 (Table A1).

        Columns (3), (4), and (5) of Table 2 then analyze how substitution away from

modern contraception with the opening of legal abortion centers varies between

sterilization and reversible modern methods. 30 Column (3) shows that an additional

abortion center is associated with a 2.2% reduction in the odds of female sterilization [OR:

0.978, 95% CI:(0.957; 0.999)], implying a 0.23 percentage point decrease in the prevalence

of female sterilization. On the contrary, we find that abortion centers have no effect on

male sterilization (Column (4)). The estimated change in odds of using reversible modern

methods reported in Column (5) is similar to that of using female sterilization, declining by

2.4% with each additional legal abortion facility [OR: 0.976, 95% CI:(0.968;0.984)]. 31


29 Traditional methods such as withdrawal and the rhythm method are only used by 4% of women in our
pooled sample, but their use has increased over time, from 2% in 1996 to 7% in 2011.
30 Among reversible modern methods, condoms may require more negotiation with male partners. Repeating

our estimation separately for condom use (OR: .989 ; 95% CI: .979; 1.0004) and for other reversible methods
(OR:.976; 95% CI: .967;.984), we find a larger association for other reversible modern methods, although the
difference between them is not statistically significant.
31 Odds ratios on the other covariates generally have the expected signs: the indicators for each DHS survey

capture the overall trends in contraceptive use described in Section 5.1, and confirm that urban, better

                                                    20
        If our interpretation of the estimates in the first six columns of Table 2 is correct, the

expansion of legal abortion centers should also be associated with an increase in the

probability that women abort (although an effect on contraceptive use may be detected

before the effect on abortion is realized). The seventh column of Table 2 reports results

obtained by re-estimating Equation (2) using a dichotomous indicator for whether or not a

woman reports ever having an abortion (defined as a pregnancy that did not result in a live

birth and for which someone has done something to end the pregnancy). Each additional

legal abortion center in a woman’s district is associated with a 1.3% increase in odds of

ever having an abortion, which is statistically significant at the 90% level (OR: 1.013; 95%

CI: 0.998; 1.029), and implies a 4 %-increase relative to the pre-legalization proportion

reporting ever having an abortion for four legal abortion centers. Because the likelihood of

ever having an abortion partly depends on the number of past pregnancies, we confirm

that the estimates in column (7) are not driven by changes in fertility by using the share of

pregnancies aborted by the respondent as the dependent variable (estimating a linear

specification by ordinary least squares).             Column (8) shows that the abortion center

estimate is again positive and statistically significant (linear coefficient: 0.0019; 95% CI:

0.0015;0.0022).




educated, and older women are more likely to use contraception. Coefficients on religious affiliation variables
are also reasonable (e.g., Muslims are significantly less likely to use contraception than Hindus). It is
interesting to note that the education gradient is very steep for traditional methods but much less so for use
of any type of contraception.

                                                      21
   7. Assessment of Robustness and Extensions

   7.1 Testing for Pre-Existing Trend Differences

       Although our ‘difference-in-difference’ estimation framework accounts for baseline

differences in contraceptive prevalence across districts, it assumes that districts with

varying concentrations of abortion facilities had parallel trends in contraceptive prevalence

prior to the legalization of abortion. To test whether or not the number of abortion centers

was targeted to districts with pre-existing trend differences in contraceptive prevalence,

we conduct two related “placebo experiments”.

       In the first, we assign a district-level measure of the future number of abortion

centers (the number of centers at the time of next survey) to each woman in the 1996 and

2001 DHS waves (i.e., before any legal abortion center opened). Re-estimating Equation

(2) using future number of abortion centers in lieu of the current number of centers, Table

3 reports estimates for the parameter 𝛼 ′ in the equation
                                    ′
𝑃𝑟(𝑦𝑖𝑑𝑠 = 1) = 𝐹(𝛼0′ + 𝛼 ′ 𝐶𝑑𝑠+1 + 𝑋𝑖𝑑𝑠 𝜷′ + 𝛿𝑑′ + 𝜑𝑠′ ).   Consistent with our assumption of

‘parallel trends,’ none of these estimated odds ratios are significantly different from 1 (nor

is the estimate for future number of abortion centers estimated by ordinary least squares

in Column (8) significantly different from zero).

       The second placebo experiment repeats the first with two differences: it also uses

data from the 2006 DHS wave, and it includes both current and future number of legal

abortion facilities (because some centers were operating in 2006).            Table 4 shows

estimates for future and current number of legal abortion facilities, again suggesting that

current contraceptive prevalence and past abortion behavior are not correlated with future

abortion supply. Overall, these results suggest no targeting of abortion centers to districts


                                                22
with pre-existing trend differences in contraceptive prevalence – and are consistent with

our interpretation of Table 2 showing evidence that abortion and the use of modern

contraceptives are substitutes.



   7.2 Other Robustness Tests

       For completeness, we also estimate variants of equation (2) using recall data

contained in the 2006 and 2011 DHS fertility histories and report our results in Table A2.

Our specifications use woman-month observations from April 2000 to February 2010 and

excludes women who were sterilized or whose husbands were sterilized by March

2004 ; 𝐶𝑑𝑠 is replaced by 𝐶𝑑𝑚 , the number of legal abortion centers in the district for each

month and year. We find a negative, statistically significant relationship between the

number of abortion centers in a woman’s district and her odds of reporting use of any

contraceptive method, confirming our inferences from contemporaneous data (Column 1).

This estimate is robust to controlling for linear, quadratic or cubic district-specific trends

(Columns 2, 3, and 4, respectively). When adding a placebo treatment variable equal to the

number of abortion centers in the district 12 months in the future, the result persists, and

the effect of the placebo treatment variable is statistically insignificant (Column 5).

       We then investigate the robustness of our main results to addressing a variety of

other potential concerns:

           1. First, we control for a number of additional regressors in Panel A of Table 5.

              Specifically, we control for respondents’ ideal number of children; number of

              conflict casualties in the year preceding the survey in respondents’ districts

              (per 1991 district population, the year of the last pre-conflict population


                                              23
                 census); whether or not respondents report having heard a family planning

                 message on the radio in the last month; whether or not respondents were

                 visited by a family planning worker in the previous 12 months; whether or

                 not respondents had heard of AIDS; and socio-economic status (measured by

                 quintile in the distribution of household asset ownership). Our conclusions

                 do not change after we include these additional controls. 32

             2. Second, in Panel B, we restrict the sample analyzed in Panel A to women who

                 were not sterilized and whose husbands were not sterilized as of March

                 2004. The results confirm the sign, significance, and magnitude of the main

                 estimates for all modern contraception and for temporary methods. 33

             3. Third, in Panel C, we further scale the number of abortion centers by district

                 population (as of 2001, the date of the last pre-legalization population

                 census). Our estimates become more imprecise (the standard errors nearly

                 double), but the negative association between legal abortion centers and the

                 prevalence of any modern contraception – and specifically temporary

                 methods – remains statistically significant. 34




32 We also estimate the robustness test shown in Table 5, Panel A including both the number of children born
to a woman and whether or not a woman had a job in the past 12 months. The resulting estimates change
very little (and insignificantly so) when including these additional covariates. These results are available
upon request.
33 Note that in this restricted sample, by definition, there is no variation in sterilization status in the 1996 and

2001 DHS (as those sterilized by 1996 or 2001 are dropped from the sample), so that we can only use the
2006 and 2011 DHS surveys for the analysis of the sterilization outcomes. The findings on sterilization
outcomes using only the last two surveys suggest a statistically insignificant decrease in female sterilization,
and a marginally significant increase in male sterilization (but the total effect on modern contraception is still
significantly and consistently negative overall).
34 Although results are less precise, the number of abortion centers per inhabitant is very similar to our main

measure of program treatment: the number of abortion centers. The correlation between these two variables
is 0.71.

                                                        24
            4. Fourth, in Panels D, E, and F, we explicitly allow time trends to vary by pre-

                legalization district population (Panel D), region (Panel E), rural/urban

                location (Panel F), and wealth quintile (Panel G). 35 More populous districts,

                districts in the more accessible regions of the country, and urban areas

                experienced earlier/more intense expansions of legal abortion supply.

                Additionally, private providers are more prevalent in urban areas, and these

                private providers may be more responsive to local demand than public

                facilities. The two main national health and population programs in place

                during the relevant period (the Nepal Family Health Program during 2001-

                2006 and the Nepal Health Sector Program Implementation Plan during

                2004-2009) also aimed to prioritize the poor and those living in remote

                areas (MOHP et al., 2012). Interacting DHS wave and initial population,

                region, urban location, and wealth quintile in Panels D, E, F, and G show that

                our conclusions are unchanged when allowing for systematic trend

                differences in contraceptive use by these characteristics.

        Finally, we explore the robustness of our conclusions to a variety of weighting,

functional form, and sample considerations and find that our results are robust to using

unweighted- rather than weighted logit models (Panel A of Table 6), to replacing our logit

specification with a linear probability model (Panel B of Table 6), to excluding each DHS

survey in turn to investigate if our conclusions depend on any individual survey (Table




35A region is defined as the interaction between an economic region (of which there are five in Nepal) and an
ecological belt (terai, hill or mountain), with 13 regions defined in the DHS.

                                                     25
7) 36, and to limiting the sample to all women ages 25-49 instead of restricting our sample

to married women (Table 8). 37



     7.3 Consideration of Changes in Temporary Modern Methods vs. Sterilization

        The results presented so far suggest that the increase in the supply of legal

abortions affected the use of temporary modern contraceptive methods, but its effect on

new sterilizations is less clear. One plausible explanation for reductions in the cost of

abortion to affect temporary contraception but not sterilization can be understood by

returning to our conceptual framework in Section 4. Re-arranging Inequality (1) by

dividing each side by 1 − 𝑝𝑓 and allowing for more than one type of contraceptive method

denoted by m, woman i will choose the contraceptive method with the lowest perceived
                                        𝑐
                                       𝑐𝑖𝑚
ratio of cost to success rate (               ) as long as the value of this ratio is less than min (𝑐𝑖𝑎 , 𝑐𝑖𝑢 ).
                                      1−𝑝𝑓𝑚


If changes in abortion supply only affect the decisions of women for whom the perceived

                                𝑐𝑖𝑐
ratio of cost to success (            ) is higher for sterilization than for temporary methods, the
                               1−𝑝𝑓


relevant trade-off is between temporary methods and no contraception. This could be the

case if women who face a high cost of having an abortion (regardless of whether or not it is

legally and safely provided – due to moral considerations or high transport costs, for



36 The only outcome for which the conclusions vary when individual DHS surveys are excluded is male
sterilization, which significantly increases with an additional abortion center if we exclude the 1996 survey,
and significantly decreases if we exclude the 2011 survey, whereas it has a statistically insignificant effect if
we include all four surveys or exclude the 2001 or 2006 surveys. We therefore conclude from the results in
Table 7 that there is no robust evidence of a change in male sterilization, as in the main analysis.
37 We also repeated the analysis excluding the capital Kathmandu, which has the largest number of abortion

facilities of all districts. The estimated odds ratios are very similar to those obtained with the whole sample,
but estimates become much less precisely estimated due to the loss in variation in our abortion supply
variable, and therefore most odds ratios become statistically insignificant. Full results are available on
request.

                                                          26
example) were also more likely to have a lower perceived cost-to-success rate of

sterilization relative to temporary methods. If this were the case, then legal abortion

centers would not decrease 𝑐𝑖𝑎 sufficiently to affect min (𝑐𝑖𝑎 , 𝑐𝑖𝑢 ) for women who would

choose sterilization over temporary methods.



   8. Conclusion

       Although scholars have written extensively about the relationship between the use

of modern contraceptives and abortion – and have generally reported an inverse

relationship between the two, the causal relationship between the two has been difficult to

isolate. A key difficulty is the fact that reproductive health programs often alter many

aspects of service delivery simultaneously – expanding the reproductive health workforce,

bundling together new contraception and abortion services, and improving the quality of

health services generally. Even the famous Matlab family planning experiment integrated

the provision of modern contraceptives with the provision of both abortion services

(menstrual regulation) and antenatal and child health services, making it difficult to isolate

the effect of contraceptive supply.

       This study analyzes the relationship between contraceptive use and abortion during

the rapid scale-up of legal abortion services across Nepal – a “natural experiment” in which

abortion services were not accompanied by changes in contraceptive supply or other

potentially confounding health policy changes. Using four DHS survey waves (two before

and two after legalization) and an official census of all legal abortion centers, we find that

each legal abortion center in a woman’s (couple’s) district of residence was associated

with a 2.6% reduction in the odds of using any contraceptive. For the mean number of


                                             27
centers per district in the post-legalization period (four), our estimates imply that Nepal’s

expansion of abortion supply was associated with a 2 percentage point decline in the use of

contraceptives – a 6% decrease relative to the pre-legalization mean. 38 This decline in

contraceptive use occurs among modern (but not traditional) methods and is driven most

robustly by changes in the use of reversible modern methods (primarily injections and, to a

lesser extent, condoms and the pill). Our direct assessments of the “parallel trends”

assumption underlying our difference-in-difference study design also strengthens the

interpretation that our estimates provide evidence of true substitution between use of

modern contraceptives and abortion.

        We emphasize two important policy implications of our findings. First, policies

aiming to reduce the full cost of abortion (financial, social, psychological, etc.) should be

accompanied by measures to also reduce the full cost of contraceptive use (broadly defined

to include social and psychological costs) if policymakers wish to avoid substitution from

contraception to abortion. Second, in demonstrating a trade-off between contraception and

abortion, our findings also suggest that reductions in the cost of contraception may reduce

the incidence of abortion.




38The effect estimated here is based on the variation over time in local availability of abortion centers across
districts. It may therefore be an underestimate of the true substitution effect because women may be able to
travel to abortion centers located outside their district (e.g., in the capital Kathmandu).

                                                      28
References

Alkema, Leontine, Kantorova, Vladimira, Menozzi, Clare & Biddlecom, Ann (2013) National,
regional, and global rates and trends in contraceptive prevalence and unmet need for
family planning between 1990 and 2015: a systematic and comprehensive analysis. The
Lancet 381(9878):1642-1652.

Ananat, Elizabeth Oltmans & Hungerman, Daniel M. 2012. The Power of the Pill for the
Next Generation: Oral Contraception's Effects on Fertility, Abortion, and Maternal and Child
Characteristics. The Review of Economics and Statistics 94(1):37-51.

Bankole, Akinrinola, Singh, Susheela and Haas, Malcolm (1999). Characteristics of women
who obtain induced abortion: A worldwide review. International Family Planning
Perspectives, 25(2):68-77.

Beckett, M., Da Vanzo, J., Sastry, N., Panis, C. & Peterson, C. (2001) The quality of
retrospective data: an examination of long-term recall in a developing country. Journal of
Human Resources 36(3): 593-625.

Bendavid, Eran and Avila, Patrick and Miller, Grant (2011) United States aid policy and
induced abortion in sub-Saharan Africa. Bulletin of the World Health Organization
89(12):873-880c.

Bongaarts J, and Westoff CF (2000). The potential role of contraception in reducing
abortion. Stud Fam Plann 31: 193-202.

Central Bureau of Statistics (2004), Nepal Living Standards Survey 2003/2004 Statistical
Report Volume Two.

Das, Jishnu, Hammer, Jeff. and Sánchez-Paramo, Carolina (2012) The Impact of Recall
Periods on Reported Morbidity and Health Seeking Behavior. Journal of Development
Economics 98(1): 76-88.

Dilley, James W and Woods, William J and McFarland, William (1997) Are advances in
treatment changing views about high-risk sex? New England Journal of Medicine
337(7):501-502.

Demographic and Health Surveys of Nepal (1996, 2001, 2006, 2011). Electronic Databases.
Measure DHS.

Durrance, Christine Piette (2013) The Effects of Increased Access to the Morning-After Pill
on Abortion and STD Rates. Economic Inquiry 51(3):1682-1695.

Frejka, Tomas (1983) Induced Abortion and. Fertility: A Quarter. Century of Experience in
Eastern Europe. Population and Development Review 9(3): 494-520.



                                            29
Gerdts, Caitlin and Vohra, Divya and Ahern, Jennifer (2013) Measuring Unsafe Abortion-
Related Mortality: A Systematic Review of the Existing Methods. PloS one 8(1):e53346.

Glasier, Anna, Karen Fairjurst, Salley Wyke, Sue Ziebland, Peter Seaman, Jeremy Walker,
and Fatim Lkha (2004). Advanced Provision of Emergency Contraception Does not Reduce
Abortion Rates. Contraception 69, 361-366.

Guttmacher Institute (2013). Facts on Induced Abortion in the United States.
http://www.guttmacher.org/pubs/fb_induced_abortion.pdf. Last accessed 01/11/2013.

Hausman, J.A. , Abrevaya, Jason, and Scott-Morton, F.M. (1998) Misclassification of the
dependent variable in a discrete-response setting. Journal of Econometrics 87(2):239-269.

Henshaw, Stanley K., Singh, Susheela and Haas, Taylor (1999) The incidence of abortion
worldwide. International Family Planning Perspectives 25(1):44-48.

Jones, Kelly (2011). Evaluating the Mexico City Policy: How US foreign policy affects
fertility outcomes and child health in Ghana. IFPRI Discussion Paper 01147.

Jones, E. F., & Forrest, J. D. (1992). Underreporting of abortion in surveys of US women:
1976 to 1988. Demography, 29(1), 113-126.

Kane, Thomas J. and Staiger, Douglas (1996). Teen Motherhood and Abortion Access, The
Quarterly Journal of Economics; 111(2): 467-506.

Khan, Khalid S and Wojdyla, Daniel and Say, Lale and Gülmezoglu, A Metin and Van Look,
Paul FA (2006) WHO analysis of causes of maternal death: a systematic review. The lancet
367(9516):1066-1074.

Marston, Cicely and Cleland, John (2003) Relationships between Contraception and
Abortion: A review of the evidence. International Family Planning Perspectives 29(1):6-13.

Mauldin, W. Parker and Segal, Sheldon J. (1988) Prevalence of Contraceptive Use: Trends
and Issues. Studies in Family Planning 19(6):335-353.

Miller, Grant and Singer Babiarz, Kim. 2013. Family Planning: Program Effects, in Irma Elo
and Andrew Foster (eds.), International Encyclopedia of Social and Behavioral Sciences,
Elsevier Press, Forthcoming.

MOHP & CREHPA (2006), Nepal Comprehensive Abortion Care (CAC): National Facility-
based Abortion Study 2006, Ministry of Health and Population (Nepal), Center for Research
on Environment, Health and Population Activities (Nepal) and IPAS (USA).

Ministry of Health and Population (MOHP) [Nepal], New ERA, and Macro International Inc.
(2007). Nepal Demographic and Health Survey 2006. Kathmandu, Nepal: Ministry of Health
and Population, New ERA, and Macro International Inc.



                                           30
Ministry of Health and Population (MOHP) [Nepal], New ERA, and ICF International Inc.
(2012) Nepal Demographic and Health Survey 2011. Kathmandu, Nepal: Ministry of Health
and Population, New ERA, and ICF International, Calverton, Maryland.

MOHP, WHO & CREHPA (2006), Unsafe Abortion: Nepal Country Profile, Ministry of Health
and Population (Nepal), World Health Organization (New Delhi) and Center for Research
on Environment, Health and Population Activities (Nepal).

Noble, Jeanne and Potts, Malcolm (1996). The fertility transition in Cuba and the Federal
Republic of Korea: the impact of organised family planning. Journal of Biosocial Science,
28:211-225.

Peltzman, Sam (1975) The effects of automobile safety regulation. The Journal of Political
Economy 83(4):677-725.

Peltzman, Sam (2011) Offsetting Behavior, Medical Breakthroughs, and Breakdowns.
Journal of Human Capital 5(3):302-341.

Phillips, J. F., Simmons, R., Chakraborty, J., & Chowdhury, A. I. (1984). Integrating health
services into an MCH-FP program: lessons from Matlab, Bangladesh. Studies in family
planning, 15(4), 153-161.

Pop-Eleches, C. (2010) The Supply of Birth Control Methods, Education, and Fertility:
Evidence from Romania. Journal of Human Resources 45(4):971-997.

Population   Reference   Bureau  (2008).      World     Population            Data    Sheet.
http://www.prb.org/pdf08/08WPDS_Eng.pdf. Last accessed 01/11/2013.

Rahman, Mizanur, DaVanzo, Julie, and Razzaque, Abdur (2001) Do better family planning
services reduce abortion in Bangladesh? The Lancet 358(9287):1051–1056.

Ramaseshan, G. (1997) Women imprisoned for abortion in Nepal: Report of a forum Asia
fact-finding mission. Reproductive Health Matters 5(10):133-138.

Samandari, G., Wolf, M., Basnett, I., Hyman, A. , Andersen, K. (2012) Implementation of legal
abortion in Nepal: a model for rapid scale-up of high-quality care. Reprod. Health 9(7):1–11.

Sedgh, Gilda, Singh, Susheela, Åhman, Elisabeth , Henshaw, Stanley K, &Iqbal H Shah
(2007). Induced abortion: estimated rates and trends worldwide. The Lancet
370(9595):1338-1345.

Sedgh, Gilda, Singh, Susheela Henshaw, Stanley K, & Bankole, Akinrinola (2011). Legal
Abortion Worldwide in 2008: Levels and Recent Trends. International Perspectives on
Sexual and Reproductive Health 37(2):84–94.




                                             31
Sedgh, Gilda, Singh, Susheela, Shah, Iqbal H, Åhman, Elisabeth , Henshaw, Stanley K, &
Bankole, Akinrinola (2012) Induced abortion: incidence and trends worldwide from 1995
to 2008. The Lancet 379(9816):625-63.

Shrestha, D.R, Shrestha, A. and Ghimire, J. (2012). Emerging challenges in family planning
programme in Nepal. Journal of Nepal Health Research Council, 10(21):108-112.

Strickler, Jennifer A. , Magnani, Robert J. , McCann, H. Gilman, Brown, Lisanne F. and Rice,
Janet C. (1997) The Reliability of Reporting of Contraceptive Behavior in DHS Calendar
Data: Evidence from Morocco. Studies in Family Planning 28(1):44-53.

Technical Committee for Implementation of Comprehensive Abortion Care (TCIC) (2010).
Legal Abortion Centers Database (March 2004-February 2010).

United Nations (2004) Levels and Trends of Contraceptive Use as Assessed in 2002. United
Nations: New York.

Valente, Christine (2014) Access to abortion, investments in neonatal health, and sex-
selection: Evidence from Nepal. Journal of Development Economics 107:225-243.

Westoff, Charles F., DeLung, Jane S., Goldman, Noreen and Darroch Forrest, Jacqueline
(1981) Abortions Preventable by Contraceptive Practice. Family Planning Perspectives
13(5):218-223.

Westoff, Charles F., Almaz T. Sharmanov, Jeremiah Sullivan, and Trevor Croft. (1998).
Replacement of Abortion by Contraception in Three Central Asian Republics. Calverton , MD :
The Policy Project and Macro International.

Westoff, Charles F. (2000). The Substitution of Contraception for Abortion in Kazakhstan in
the 1990s. DHS Analytical Studies No. 1. Calverton, Maryland: ORC Macro.

World Development Indicators (2014). Total fertility rates in various countries, 1960-2011.
Online Database. The World Bank. http://databank.worldbank.org/data/home.aspx. Last
accessed 21 January 2014.

WHO (2010) Unsafe abortion: global and regional estimates of the incidence of unsafe
abortion and associated mortality in 2008. WHO, Geneva, Switzerland.




                                            32
                                           Figures

Figure 1: Abortion and Contraception Trends in Nepal
Panel 1




Panel 2




Sources: Panel 1: abortion: Sedgh et al. (2011); contraception: 1970-1987 from Mauldin and Segal
(1988), 1990-1995 from United Nations (2004), and 1996-2011 from MOHP (2012). Panel 2:
authors’ calculations based on Demographic and Health Surveys of Nepal (1996-2011)
(contraception) and Technical Committee for Implementation of Comprehensive Abortion Care
(2010) (abortion facilities).


                                              33
Figure 2: District-level Coverage of Abortion Centers




Source: Technical Committee for Implementation of Comprehensive Abortion Care (2010).




                                                 34
                                                                                        Tables
Table 1 – Summary Statistics
                                                     (1)                       (2)                        (3)                     (4)                         (5)
                                                   DHS 1996                  DHS 2001                   DHS 2006                DHS 2011                    Pooled
                                            mean       sd      N      mean      sd        N      mean      sd      N     mean       sd       N     mean      sd        N
Panel A: abortion supply and contraception
Number of Legal Abortion Centers in District
of Residencea                                0.00     0.000   7496     0.00    0.000    7842       2.72    2.997    7776     6.34    6.702    8984    2.45   4.689    32098
Any Method                                   0.29             7496     0.41             7842       0.50             7776     0.51             8984    0.43            32098
Modern Method                                0.27             7496     0.37             7842       0.46             7776     0.44             8984    0.39            32098
Traditional Method                           0.02             7496     0.04             7842       0.04             7776     0.07             8984    0.04            32098
Modern Method Other than Sterilization       0.09             7496     0.14             7842       0.20             7776     0.21             8984    0.16            32098
Female Sterilization                         0.13             7496     0.16             7842       0.19             7776     0.16             8984    0.16            32098
Male Sterilization                           0.06             7496     0.07             7842       0.07             7776     0.08             8984    0.07            32098
Ever Had an Abortion                         0.02             7496     0.02             7842       0.04             7776     0.08             8984    0.04            32098
Share of Pregnancies Abortedb                0.00     0.041   6798     0.00    0.039    7138       0.01    0.074    7204     0.03    0.111    8228    0.01   0.075    29368
Panel B: Fertility preferences
Ideal Number of Children                     2.95     1.059   7337     2.65    0.879    7712       2.43    0.830    7762     2.24    0.788    8960    2.55   0.927    31771
Panel C: Covariates
Urban                                        0.08             7496     0.10             7842       0.15             7776     0.13             8984    0.12            32098
Age                                          30.58 8.968      7496     30.95 8.897      7842      31.47 8.923       7776     31.68 8.600      8984   31.20 8.847      32098
Hindu (excluded category)                    0.87             7496     0.85             7842       0.86             7776     0.85             8984    0.86            32098
Buddhist                                     0.06             7496     0.07             7842       0.08             7776     0.08             8984    0.07            32098
Muslim                                       0.05             7496     0.05             7842       0.04             7776     0.04             8984    0.04            32098
Christian                                    0.00             7496     0.01             7842       0.01             7776     0.02             8984    0.01            32098
Other Religion                               0.01             7496     0.02             7842       0.01             7776     0.01             8984    0.02            32098
No education (excluded cat.)                 0.80             7496     0.72             7842       0.63             7776     0.49             8984    0.65            32098
Primary Education                            0.11             7496     0.15             7842       0.17             7776     0.19             8984    0.15            32098
Secondary Education                          0.08             7496     0.12             7842       0.18             7776     0.27             8984    0.16            32098
Tertiary Education                           0.01             7496     0.01             7842       0.02             7776     0.06             8984    0.03            32098
Statistics weighted using survey weights. Sample of married women aged 15-49 who usually reside in the household. Source: Authors' calculations using Demographic and Health
Surveys of Nepal (1996-2011) for all variables except number of legal abortion centers in district of residence, which is based on data from Technical Committee for Implementation of
Comprehensive Abortion Care (2010). aNumber of legal abortion centers in district of residence coded using abortion facility data as of February 2010 for the 2011 DHS wave since the
administrative records we have had access to end in February 2010. b Defined only for women with at least one pregnancy

                                                                                         35
Table 2 – Effect of Availability of Legal Abortion Centers on Contraceptive Use and Self-Reported Abortions
                               (1)               (2)              (3)             (4)              (5)             (6)              (7)             (8)
                                                                                                Modern
                                                                                                                                                Share of all
                                              Modern            Female           Male        Method Other      Traditional     Ever Had an
                          Any Method                                                                                                           pregnancies
                                              Method         Sterilization   Sterilization        than           Method          Abortion
                                                                                                                                                  aborted
                                                                                              Sterilization
Number of Abortion
                           0.974***          0.974***          0.978**           0.999         0.976***           0.992           1.013*         0.002***
Centers in District
                            (0.0065)         (0.0072)          (0.0109)        (0.0106)         (0.0041)        (0.0071)         (0.0080)        (0.0002)
DHS 2001                   1.759***          1.678***         1.339***           1.184         1.886***         1.552***           0.879         -0.002**
                            (0.1112)         (0.0977)          (0.0817)        (0.1226)         (0.1452)        (0.2408)         (0.1302)        (0.0007)
DHS 2006                   2.343***          2.293***         1.699***           1.105         2.681***         1.421**         1.900***           0.000
                            (0.2003)         (0.1962)          (0.2224)        (0.1670)         (0.2289)        (0.2276)         (0.3310)        (0.0017)
DHS 2011                   2.656***          2.410***         1.591***           1.289         2.987***         2.099***        3.216***         0.007***
                            (0.2303)         (0.2249)          (0.2330)        (0.2110)         (0.3140)        (0.3676)         (0.5636)        (0.0025)
District Dummies
                               Yes              Yes               Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes
Included?
Maternal
characteristics                Yes              Yes               Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes
included?
Observations                 32098             32098            31620           32078            32098           31657            31371            29368
No. of districts                75               75                72              74              75               70               70              75
(Pseudo) R-squared           0.1102           0.1014            0.1982          0.1604           0.0971          0.0818           0.1327          0.0626
Mean value of
                              0.431            0.388             0.158           0.068            0.163           0.044            0.043           0.015
dependent variable
Maternal characteristics: urban residence, age, religion dummies (Hindu (omitted), Buddhist, Muslim, Christian or Other), education dummies (no education
(omitted), primary education, secondary education, tertiary education). Columns (1) to (7) report odds ratios from a logit model. Column (8) presents coefficients
from a linear regression including a constant (coefficient not reported here). District-correlated robust standard errors in parentheses. Regressions weighted using
survey weights. Sample of married women aged 15-49 who usually reside in the household. Excluded religious category is "Hindu", excluded education category is
"No education". Some observations are dropped in Columns (3), (4), (6), and (7) due to lack of variation in the value of the dependent variable within district.
Observations for women who have never had any pregnancy are dropped in Column (8) since the share of aborted pregnancies is not defined for these women.
Source: Authors' calculations using Demographic and Health Surveys of Nepal (1996-2011) and Technical Committee for Implementation of Comprehensive
Abortion Care (2010). *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.



                                                                                36
Table 3 - Control Experiment 1: Effect of Availability of Future Legal Abortion Centers Before Any Center Opened
                          (1)                (2)                (3)             (4)              (5)             (6)              (7)             (8)
                                                                                              Modern
                                                                                                                                              Share of all
                                          Modern              Female           Male        Method Other      Traditional     Ever Had an
                     Any Method                                                                                                               pregnancies
                                          Method           Sterilization   Sterilization        than          Method          Abortion
                                                                                                                                                aborted
                                                                                            Sterilization
 Number of               1.011              1.004              1.000           0.928            0.994           0.986           0.967           -0.000
 Abortion Centers
 at Next Survey        (0.0386)           (0.0341)           (0.0220)        (0.0453)         (0.0190)        (0.0355)         (0.0243)        (0.0002)
 Date

  Observations           15338              15338            14324           15338              15310            14601          12994            13936
  No. of districts         72                 72               61              72                 71               63             50               72
  (Pseudo) R-
                         0.1243            0.1219            0.1698          0.1640             0.1198          0.0800          0.0749           0.0207
  squared
  Mean value of
  dependent              0.352              0.319             0.149           0.062             0.116            0.034           0.019            0.005
  variable
Output omitted for the following variables: three dummy variable for DHS 2001, district fixed-effects, and controls for urban location, age at interview,
religion, and education summarized in Table 1 Panel C. Columns (1) to (7) report odds ratios from a logit model. Column (8) presents coefficients from a
linear regression including a constant (coefficient not reported here). District-correlated robust standard errors in parentheses. Regressions weighted
using survey weights. Sample of married women aged 15-49 who usually reside in the household. Some observations are dropped in Columns (3), (4),
(6), and (7) due to lack of variation in the value of the dependent variable within district. Observations for women who have never had any pregnancy
are dropped in Column (8) since the share of aborted pregnancies is not defined for these women. Source: Authors' calculations using Demographic and
Health Surveys of Nepal (42) – DHS 1996 and 2001 only – and Technical Committee for Implementation of Comprehensive Abortion Care (2010). ***
p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.




                                                                           37
Table 4 - Control Experiment 2: Effect of Availability of Future Legal Abortion Centers Over and Above the Effect of Current Availability
                            (1)                (2)                (3)              (4)              (5)              (6)               (7)          (8)
                                                                                                 Modern
                                                                                                                                                Share of all
                                            Modern              Female            Male        Method Other      Traditional       Ever Had an
                        Any Method                                                                                                              pregnancies
                                            Method           Sterilization    Sterilization        than           Method           Abortion
                                                                                                                                                  aborted
                                                                                               Sterilization
 Number of Abortion
                         0.928***           0.921***           0.909**            0.969            0.966            1.043             1.057        0.001
 Centers
                         (0.0257)           (0.0291)           (0.0374)         (0.0783)         (0.0223)         (0.0469)          (0.0609)     (0.0009)
 Number of Abortion        1.020              1.022              1.035            0.970            1.001            0.982            0.958*       -0.000
 Centers at Next
                         (0.0173)           (0.0177)           (0.0235)         (0.0372)         (0.0104)         (0.0231)          (0.0245)     (0.0004)
 Survey Date

 Observations              23114            23114             22343            23063            23114            22730             22260         21140
 No. of districts             75               75               68                73              75                69               66            75
 (Pseudo) R-squared        0.1215           0.1173           0.1971            0.1546          0.1144            0.0692           0.1003         0.0318
 Mean value of
                            0.400            0.366            0.161             0.063           0.146             0.035            0.026         0.008
 dependent variable
Output omitted for the following variables: two dummy variables for DHS 2001 and 2006, district fixed-effects, and controls for urban location, age at
interview, religion, and education summarized in Table 1 Panel C. Columns (1) to (7) report odds ratios from a logit model. Column (8) presents
coefficients from a linear regression including a constant (coefficient not reported here). District-correlated robust standard errors in parentheses.
Regressions weighted using survey weights. Sample of married women aged 15-49 who usually reside in the household. Some observations are
dropped in Columns (3), (4), (6), and (7) due to lack of variation in the value of the dependent variable within district. Observations for women who
have never had any pregnancy are dropped in Column (8) since the share of aborted pregnancies is not defined for these women. Source: Authors'
calculations using Demographic and Health Surveys of Nepal (42) – DHS 1996, 2001, and 2006 only – and Technical Committee for Implementation of
Comprehensive Abortion Care (2010). *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.




                                                                           38
Table 5: Robustness Checks
                          (1)               (2)               (3)              (4)                (5)               (6)             (7)               (8)
                                                                                               Modern
                                                                                                                                                 Share of all
                                         Modern             Female             Male        Method Other        Traditional     Ever Had an
                      Any Method                                                                                                                 pregnancies
                                          Method         Sterilization     Sterilization         than            Method         Abortion
                                                                                                                                                   aborted
                                                                                             Sterilization
                                             Panel A: Include further controls (see notes below table for details)
Number of              0.980***          0.980***           0.983*             1.001          0.981***             0.996          1.014*          0.002***
Abortion Centers       (0.0055)          (0.0062)          (0.0100)          (0.0089)          (0.0041)          (0.0074)        (0.0073)         (0.0002)

                                                                                                                                                    29063
Observations             31762            31762             31288             31743            31762             31325            31045

    Panel B: Further controls + restrict sample to non-sterilized couples as of March 2004 (results in Columns (3) and (4) restricted to DHS 2006 and 2011)
Number of              0.973***            0.970***           0.987             1.141*         0.977***            0.994              1.011         0.002***
Abortion Centers       (0.0058)            (0.0067)         (0.0265)          (0.0833)         (0.0044)          (0.0073)           (0.0076)        (0.0002)

                                                                                                                                                    23214
Observations             25890            25890             12095             12026            25890             25517            25264

                                         Panel C: As Panel B + Scale number of abortion centers by district population
Number of                 0.983            0.976*            1.001           1.063*           0.982**             1.007            1.012          0.001***
Abortion Centers        (0.0106)          (0.0122)         (0.0238)         (0.0380)          (0.0083)          (0.0134)         (0.0104)         (0.0004)

                                                                                                                                                    23214
Observations             25890            25890             12095             12026            25890             25517            25264

                                          Panel D: As Panel B + Allow for time trends to vary by district population
Number of              0.965***          0.955**            0.991              1.102          0.979**             1.015          1.030**          0.002***
Abortion Centers       (0.0125)          (0.0173)         (0.0366)           (0.0932)         (0.0083)          (0.0156)         (0.0142)         (0.0004)

                                                                                                                                                    23214
Observations             25890            25890             12095             12026            25890             25517            25264
                                                                             39
                                                Panel E: As Panel B + Allow time trends to vary by (13) region
 Number of              0.965***         0.960***            0.941             1.142          0.971***           1.009            1.018          0.002***
 Abortion Centers       (0.0077)         (0.0094)          (0.0491)          (0.1005)         (0.0094)         (0.0128)         (0.0166)         (0.0003)

                                                                                                                                                  23214
 Observations            25890             25890            12095             12026             25890             25517          24898

                                           Panel F: As Panel B + Allow time trends to differ in rural and urban areas
 Number of              0.977***         0.976***            0.994             1.142            0.977***            0.993       1.017**          0.001***
 Abortion Centers       (0.0059)         (0.0063)          (0.0245)          (0.0950)            (0.0050)         (0.0086)      (0.0084)         (0.0003)


 Observations            25890             25890            12095             12026             25890             25517          25264            23214

                                                Panel G: As Panel B + Allow time trends to differ by wealth quintile
 Number of              0.986**            0.986*             0.974            1.149*          0.984***            0.994          1.011          0.001***
 Abortion Centers       (0.0068)          (0.0072)          (0.0264)          (0.0965)          (0.0044)         (0.0088)       (0.0082)         (0.0002)

 Observations            25890             25890            12095             12026             25890             25517          25264            23214

Output omitted for the following variables: three dummy variables for DHS 2001, 2006, and 2011, district fixed-effects, and controls for urban location, age
at interview, religion, education, ideal number of children, control for the number of conflict casualties in the year preceding the survey (per district
population as of 1991, the last pre-conflict population census), for whether or not the woman reports having heard a family planning message on the radio
in the last month, whether she was visited by a family planning worker in the previous 12 months, whether she has heard of AIDS, and for the SES group to
which she belongs (as measured by the her quintile in the distribution of household living standard). Columns (1) to (7) report odds ratios from a logit
model. Column (8) presents coefficients from a linear regression including a constant (coefficient not reported here). District-correlated robust standard
errors in parentheses. Regressions weighted using survey weights. Sample of married women aged 15-49 who usually reside in the household. Some
observations are dropped in Columns (3), (4), (6), and (7) due to lack of variation in the value of the dependent variable within district. In Panels B to F,
Columns (3) and (4) exclude observations for 1996 and 2001, since by definition there is no variation in sterilization status in these surveys after dropping
those sterilized before March 2004. Observations for women who have never had any pregnancy are dropped in Column (8) since the share of aborted
pregnancies is not defined for these women. Source: Authors' calculations using Demographic and Health Surveys of Nepal (42) – DHS 1996 and 2001 only
– and Technical Committee for Implementation of Comprehensive Abortion Care (2010). *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.
                                                                              40
Table 6: Further Robustness Checks
                          (1)              (2)             (3)              (4)              (5)             (6)             (7)              (8)
                                                                                          Modern
                                                                                                                                         Share of all
                                        Modern            Female           Male       Method Other       Traditional     Ever Had an
                      Any Method                                                                                                         pregnancies
                                        Method         Sterilization   Sterilization        than          Method          Abortion
                                                                                                                                           aborted
                                                                                        Sterilization
                                                            Panel A: Unweighted regressions
 Number of             0.968***         0.967***         0.979**           0.987         0.972***           0.995           1.003         0.002***
 Abortion Centers      (0.0058)         (0.0063)         (0.0096)        (0.0109)         (0.0043)        (0.0067)        (0.0067)        (0.0002)

 Observations            32098           32098            31620           32078            32098           31657           31371            29368

                                                           Panel B: Linear probability model
 Number of             -0.005***       -0.005***        -0.002**           0.000         -0.003***         -0.000         0.003***
 Abortion Centers       (0.0016)        (0.0018)        (0.0011)         (0.0008)         (0.0007)        (0.0004)        (0.0006)

 Observations              32098           32098          32098            32098            32098            32098             32098
Output omitted for the following variables: three dummy variables for DHS 2001, 2006 and 2011, district fixed-effects, and controls for urban location,
age at interview, religion, and education summarized in Table 1 Panel C. See also Notes under Table 2. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.




                                                                          41
Table 7: Robustness of the Effect of Abortion Centers to Excluding One Survey at a Time
                     (1)                (2)                (3)              (4)               (5)                 (6)               (7)         (8)
                                                                                           Modern
                                                                                                                                           Share of all
                                     Modern            Female               Male        Method Other         Traditional       Ever Had an
                  Any Method                                                                                                               pregnancies
 Excluded                            Method         Sterilization       Sterilization        than              Method            Abortion
                                                                                                                                             aborted
 data                                                                                    Sterilization
    DHS 1996       0.975***          0.977***          0.980*              1.024*         0.977***               0.993           1.024**    0.002***
                    (0.0065)         (0.0073)         (0.0120)            (0.0140)         (0.0048)            (0.0093)          (0.0097)    (0.0002)
                      24602           24602            24228               24202            24602               24238             24056       22570
    DHS 2001         0.976**         0.976**           0.979*               0.993         0.977***               0.990            1.013*    0.002***
                    (0.0110)         (0.0107)         (0.0122)            (0.0158)         (0.0055)            (0.0076)          (0.0080)    (0.0002)
                      24256           24256            23846               23902            24256               23529             23684       22230
    DHS 2006       0.974***          0.974***          0.981*               0.996         0.974***               0.990             1.004    0.002***
                    (0.0070)         (0.0077)         (0.0109)            (0.0111)         (0.0043)            (0.0074)          (0.0079)    (0.0002)
                      24322           24322            23858               24322            24322               23810             23422       22164
    DHS 2011       0.957***          0.951***          0.953*            0.924***         0.968***               1.016             0.986       0.000
                    (0.0123)         (0.0144)         (0.0239)            (0.0245)         (0.0104)            (0.0212)          (0.0260)    (0.0005)
                      23114           23114            22343               23063            23114               22730             22260       21140
Output omitted for the following variables: two dummy variables indicating DHS waves, district fixed-effects, and controls for urban location, age at
interview, religion, and education summarized in Table 1 Panel C. See also Notes under Table 2. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.




                                                                           42
Table 8 – Robustness of the effect of abortion centers to including all interviewed women age>=25 instead of restricting 2006 and 2011 surveys to ever-
married women
                            (1)               (2)               (3)               (4)            (5)             (6)              (7)             (8)
                                                                                              Modern
                                                                                                                                             Share of all
                                           Modern             Female             Male      Method Other     Traditional      Ever Had an
                      Any Method                                                                                                             pregnancies
                                           Method          Sterilization     Sterilization      than          Method           Abortion
                                                                                                                                               aborted
                                                                                            Sterilization
 Number of              0.977***          0.979***            0.979*             1.001       0.977***           0.988            1.007        0.002***
 Abortion Centers        (0.0051)          (0.0060)          (0.0106)          (0.0099)       (0.0044)        (0.0078)         (0.0092)        (0.0003)


 Observations             25174            25174             24843           25150            25174            24848            24454           24268
 No. of clusters             75              75                72               74               75              70               69               75
 Pseudo R-squared         0.0665           0.0618            0.1607          0.1177           0.1006          0.0828            0.1259          0.0736
 Mean Y                    0.479           0.435             0.196            0.085            0.155           0.045            0.050            0.016
Output omitted for the following variables: three dummy variable for DHS 2001, district fixed-effects, and controls for urban location, age at interview,
religion, and education. Columns (1) to (7) report odds ratios from a logit model. Column (8) presents coefficients from a linear regression including a
constant (coefficient not reported here). District-correlated robust standard errors in parentheses. Regressions weighted using survey weights. Sample of
women aged 25-49 who usually reside in the household, irrespective of their marital status. Excluded religious category is "Hindu", excluded education
category is "No education". Some observations are dropped in Columns (3), (4), (6), and (7) due to lack of variation in the value of the dependent variable
within district. Observations for women who have never had any pregnancy are dropped in Column (8) since the share of aborted pregnancies is not
defined for these women. Source: Authors' calculations using Demographic and Health Surveys of Nepal (1996-2011) and Technical Committee for
Implementation of Comprehensive Abortion Care (2010). *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.




                                                                            43
                                         Appendix

Figure A1: Abortion and Contraception Trends in Former Communist Countries with Complete
Abortion Data




Sources: Abortion: 1975-1996 from Henshaw et al. (1999), 1996-2003 from Sedgh et al. (2007).
Contraception: 1970-1987 from Mauldin and Segal (1988), 1990-2000 from United Nations
(2004). Contraception figures for 1970-1987 labeled “Czech Republic” are aggregate figures for
Czechoslovakia.




                                             44
Figure A2: Analytical Framework

                    1 − 𝑝𝑓        no pregnancy   A=0

            C=1
                     𝑝𝑓
                                  pregnancy      A=0

            C=0                                  A=1




                                        45
Table A1: Results by age group
                                         Dependent variable: =1 if Modern Method, 0 otherwise
                      (1)               (2)             (3)               (4)              (5)                (6)              (7)
Age Group:           15-19             20-24           25-29             30-34            35-39              40-44            45-49

Number of           0.948***         0.971***          0.977***          0.956***          0.974*            1.000            0.994
Abortion
Centers             (0.0170)          (0.0076)         (0.0076)          (0.0078)         (0.0146)         (0.0109)          (0.0150)

Observations           2578              5868              6415           5435               4678             3852              2982
Output omitted for the following variables: three dummy variables for DHS 2001, 2006 and 2011, district fixed-effects, and controls for
urban location, age at interview, religion, and education summarized in Table 1 Panel C. See also Notes under Table 2. *** p<0.01, **
p<0.05, * p<0.10.




                                                                    46
Table A2: Results Obtained Using Recall Data
                                   Dependent Variable: =1 if any method, 0 otherwise
                                                                      District-Specific Trends
                                                 (1)             (2)                 (3)           (4)           (5)
                                              Baseline      Linear Trends        Quadratic        Cubic     Placebo Test
                                                                                  Trends         Trends

  Number of Abortion Centers                     0.977***       0.970***          0.969**        0.984**      0.965**
  in the woman’s district                        (0.0045)       (0.0111)          (0.0143)       (0.0082)     (0.0138)
  Number of Abortion Centers 12 months later                                                                    1.008
                                                                                                              (0.0120)

  District Dummies                                   Yes          Yes             Yes          Yes           Yes
  Covariates                                         Yes          Yes             Yes          Yes           Yes
  Observations                                     923886      923886           923886       923886        757050
Sample of married women interviewed in the 2006 and 2011 DHS surveys who were not sterilized and whose
husbands were not sterilized prior to March 2004. Period included: April 2000 (start of the calendar period for the
2006 DHS) to February 2010 (last month for which we have data on registration of abortion centers). Output omitted
across all columns for the following variables: a dummy variable for DHS 2011, district fixed-effects, month/year
dummies (e.g., May 2008), and controls for urban location, age at interview, religion, and education. The sample in
Column (5) is smaller as it excludes the last 12 calendar months for which we have data on current abortion centers but
not future abortion centers. Source: Authors' calculations using Demographic and Health Surveys of Nepal (42) – DHS
1996 and 2001 only – and Technical Committee for Implementation of Comprehensive Abortion Care (43). *** p<0.01,
** p<0.05, * p<0.10.




                                                                            47
