NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MACROECONOMIC-DRIVEN PREPAYMENT RISK AND THE VALUATION OF
MORTGAGE-BACKED SECURITIES
Mikhail Chernov
Brett R. Dunn
Francis A. Longstaff
Working Paper 22096
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22096

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2016

We are grateful for the comments and suggestions of Vineer Bhansali, Nina Boyarchenko,
Michael Brennan, Karen Chaltikian, Andrea Eisfeldt, Stuart Gabriel, James Gammill, David
Langor, David Lucca, Xiaoxian Luo, Carolina Marquez, Ravi Mattu, Emmanuel Vallod, Victor
Wong, and seminar participants at Blackrock, Boston College, Emory University, The Fink
Center for Finance and Investments, Georgetown University, Georgia Institute of Technology,
the University of British Columbia, the Spring 2015 Journal of Investment Management
Conference, and UCLA. All errors are our responsibility. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Mikhail Chernov, Brett R. Dunn, and Francis A. Longstaff. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Macroeconomic-Driven Prepayment Risk and the Valuation of Mortgage-Backed Securities
Mikhail Chernov, Brett R. Dunn, and Francis A. Longstaff
NBER Working Paper No. 22096
March 2016
JEL No. G12,G13
ABSTRACT
We introduce a reduced-form modeling framework for mortgage-backed securities in which we
solve for the implied prepayment function from the cross section of market prices. From the
implied prepayment function, we find that prepayment rates are driven not only by interest rates,
but also by two macroeconomic factors: turnover and rate response. Intuitively, turnover
represents prepayments for exogenous reasons like employment-related moves, household
income shocks, and foreclosures, while rate response reflects frictions faced by borrowers in
refinancing into a lower rate. We find that the empirical turnover and rate response measures are
both significantly related to macroeconomic measures, suggesting that these factors represent a
source of systematic risk. Consistent with this, we find that implied prepayments are substantially
higher than actual prepayments, providing direct evidence of significant prepayment risk premia
in mortgage-backed security prices. We analyze the properties of the prepayment risk premium
and find that it is almost entirely due to compensation for turnover risk. We also find evidence
that mortgage-backed security prices were significantly affected by Fannie Mae credit risk and
the Federal Reserve's Quantitative Easing Programs.
Mikhail Chernov
UCLA
Anderson School of Management
110 Westwood Plaza, Suite C-417
Los Angeles, CA 90095
mikhail.chernov@anderson.ucla.edu
Brett R. Dunn
UCLA
110 Westwood Plaza
Los Angeles, CA 90095
Brett.Dunn.1@anderson.ucla.edu

Francis A. Longstaff
UCLA
Anderson Graduate School of Management
110 Westwood Plaza, Box 951481
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
and NBER
francis.longstaff@anderson.ucla.edu

1. INTRODUCTION

A mortgage-backed security is a securitized claim to the principal and interest
payments generated by a pool of ﬁxed-rate mortgages. Mortgage-backed securities have traditionally been issued either by agencies such as Fannie Mae, Freddie
Mac, and Ginnie Mae, or by private issuers. Agency mortgage-backed securities
have the attractive feature that the timely payment of principal and interest is
backed by either an implicit or explicit government guarantee. As of June 2015,
the total notional amount of agency mortgage-backed securities outstanding was
$7.171 trillion, making this market one of the largest sectors of the global ﬁxed
income markets.1
Given the importance of the market, it is not surprising that much research
has been devoted to the issue of how mortgage-backed securities should be valued.
The ﬁrst generation of pricing models treated mortgage prepayments as the result
of a borrower attempting to maximize the value of an implicit interest rate option.
Key examples include Dunn and McConnell (1981a, 1981b) and Brennan and
Schwartz (1985). The second generation of pricing models is based on detailed
econometric models of historical prepayment behavior. In these models, interest
rate paths are simulated (under the risk-neutral measure) and the econometric
prepayment model (estimated under the actual measure) is used to specify the
cash ﬂows along each interest rate path. Key examples include Schwartz and
Torous (1989, 1992, 1993) and Richard and Roll (1989).
These types of models, however, have a number of important drawbacks. For
example, prepayments are driven exclusively by interest rate changes in these
models. Thus, by ruling out other possible sources of prepayments, the only
risk premium allowed in these models is an interest rate risk premium—there is
no scope for a separate prepayment risk premium. Furthermore, these models
tend to produce prices that often diverge signiﬁcantly from market prices, and
can only be reconciled by introducing ad hoc “option-adjusted spreads” into the
framework.
This paper presents a reduced-form framework for the valuation of mortgagebacked securities. This framework diﬀers fundamentally from previous work
in that we solve for the implied prepayment function rather than imposing an
external prepayment model. A key advantage of this approach is that by studying
the implied prepayment function, we can identify factors that the market views
as important drivers of prepayment risk as well as the risk premia associated
with those factors. The implied prepayment function is easily identiﬁed using
1

See www.sifma.org/research/statistics.aspx.
1

the information in the cross section of mortgage-backed securities with diﬀerent
coupon rates (the coupon stack). Our approach also allows for the possibility that
mortgage cash ﬂows may be discounted at higher rates than Treasuries because of
either the perceived credit risk of the agency guaranteeing the mortgage-backed
security, or the illiquidity of mortgage-backed securities themselves. We apply
the framework to study the valuation of Fannie Mae mortgage-backed securities
over the 1998–2014 period. A number of important results emerge from this
analysis.
First, we ﬁnd that implied prepayments are driven by interest rates as well
as two additional macroeconomic risk factors: turnover and rate response. The
turnover rate reﬂects prepayments occurring for exogenous reasons unrelated to
interest rates, but possibly correlated with macroeconomic ﬂuctuations. Examples include adverse income shocks or unemployment resulting in a move or a
foreclosure, negative shocks to housing values resulting in underwater borrowers
strategically defaulting on non-recourse loans, or homeowners with appreciated
property taking cash-out mortgages to extract home equity. We ﬁnd that the
variation in the empirical turnover rate is strongly related to macroeconomic fundamentals such as consumption growth, changes in unemployment, and mortgage
delinquencies. This suggests that turnover risk may be systematic in nature and
carry a large risk premium. This is supported by evidence that the implied
turnover rate is more closely related to returns in ﬁnancial market than is the
empirical turnover rate. The rate response factor represents the time variation in
the sensitivity of reﬁnancing activity to mortgage rate incentives. For example,
borrowers may be less able to reﬁnance into a lower mortgage rate after declines
in housing prices, during recessions in which the borrowers’ income or credit may
have been impaired, or during periods in which mortgage lending standards are
tightened. The results also provide evidence that this factor may be systematic
in nature.
Second, we ﬁnd that the implied prepayments on agency-guaranteed mortgages behave very diﬀerently than actual prepayments. For most mortgagebacked securities, implied prepayment rates are signiﬁcantly higher than actual
prepayment rates. This result provides some of the ﬁrst direct evidence that the
market incorporates signiﬁcant prepayment-related risk premia into the prices of
mortgage-backed securities, and may also explain why previous models based on
empirical prepayment functions face challenges in their attempts to match the
market prices of mortgage-backed securities.
Third, we study the determinants of the prepayment risk premium by mapping it into the risk premia associated with the turnover and rate response factors.
We ﬁnd that the turnover factor carries a large positive premium throughout the
entire sample period, consistent with the systematic nature of turnover risk. In
2

contrast, the risk premium for the rate response factor is slightly negative before the ﬁnancial crisis, and becomes slightly positive after the crisis. Taken
together, these results indicate that the large majority (84.50 percent) of the
prepayment risk premium represents compensation for the risk of systematic or
macroeconomic-driven shocks in the turnover rate.
Fourth, we ﬁnd that cash ﬂows from mortgage-backed securities are discounted at a rate 72 basis points higher on average than are cash ﬂows from
Treasuries. This spread varies signiﬁcantly through time and is strongly correlated with the credit spread between Fannie Mae debt and Treasuries. Furthermore, the spread is signiﬁcantly related to supply-related factors such as
Federal Reserve purchases of mortgage-backed securities during its quantitative
easing programs and changes in dealers’ inventory positions of mortgage-backed
securities. These results provide the ﬁrst direct evidence that agency credit and
liquidity spreads inﬂuence the pricing of mortgage-backed securities.
Finally, we show that this simple reduced-form valuation framework ﬁts the
market prices of mortgage-backed securities very closely. The median root mean
squared error across the entire coupon stack is on the order of 27 cents per
$100 notional, which is on the same order of magnitude as the bid-ask spread
for mortgage-backed securities. This accuracy compares very well to previous
generations of valuation models for mortgage-backed securities. Furthermore,
this result provides evidence that the pricing of mortgage-backed securities in the
market may be much more rational than is commonly believed among market
practitioners.
This paper contributes to the extensive literature on the pricing of mortgagebacked securities. Important recent work in this area includes Gabaix, Krishnamurthy, and Vigneron (2007) who study the pricing of interest-only strips and
document that their option-adjusted spread covaries with the moneyness of the
market, consistent with a prepayment risk premium and the existence of specialized mortgage-backed security investors. Boyarchenko, Fuster, and Lucca
(2014) allow for the possibility that the implied prepayment rate may diﬀer
from the actual prepayment rate. They document an option-adjusted spread
smile across mortgages with varying rates and use information from the interestonly/principal-only market to decompose the option-adjusted spread into its
physical and risk-neutral components. They ﬁnd evidence of a signiﬁcant noninterest-rate-related prepayment risk premium in the components of the optionadjusted spread. This paper signiﬁcantly extends the literature by using the
entire cross section of mortgage-backed security prices to identify the implied
prepayment function and its components, the associated prepayment risk premia, and the credit/liquidity component of mortgage-backed security prices.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a
3

brief introduction to the agency mortgage-backed security market. Section 3
reviews the literature. Section 4 describes the data. Section 5 presents the
valuation framework. Section 6 describes the implied prepayment model. Section
7 discusses the empirical methodology. Section 8 presents the empirical results
for the implied prepayment function. Section 9 discusses the prepayment risk
premium and its components. Section 10 makes concluding remarks.
2. U.S. AGENCY MORTGAGE-BACKED SECURITIES

Agency mortgage-backed securities are issued by Fannie Mae (FNMA), Freddie Mac (FHLMC), or Ginnie Mae (GNMA).2 Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac
are government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs), whereas Ginnie Mae is a whollyowned government corporation. The U.S. agency mortgage-backed securities
market is among the largest and most liquid bond markets worldwide. Furthermore, more than 70 percent of the $9.8 trillion U.S. home mortgage market serves
as collateral for agency mortgage-backed securities. Immediately prior to the ﬁnancial crisis of 2007–2008, private ﬁnancial institutions accounted for more than
50 percent of U.S. mortgage-backed security issuance. Since the crisis, however,
“private label” issuance has declined dramatically and now represents less than
four percent of total mortgage-related issuance. In contrast, agency mortgagebacked security issuance has grown rapidly; the total notional size of the agency
mortgage-backed security market increased 58 percent from 2006 to 2015.3 In
this section, we review the key features of agency mortgage-backed securities.
2.1 Credit Quality
In exchange for monthly fees, the agencies guarantee the timely payment of
mortgage interest and principal. The guarantee protects investors from defaults
on the underlying mortgages since delinquent mortgages must be purchased out of
the trust at par by the issuer. This means that a default appears as a prepayment
from an investor’s perspective. Because GNMA securities carry the full faith and
credit guarantee of the United States, their credit quality should be the same as
that of U.S. Treasuries. FNMA and FHLMC securities carry a credit guarantee
from the issuing GSE rather the United States. Historically, the GSE guarantee
was viewed as an “implicit” government guarantee because investors believed
2

Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, and Ginnie Mae refer to the Federal National Mortgage Association, the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation, and the Government National Mortgage Association, respectively.

3

See Federal Reserve Board Flow of Funds Table L.217 and www.sifma.org/resea
rch/statistics.aspx.
4

that the government would back the agencies in times of stress. This view was
validated in September 2008 when the government placed FNMA and FHLMC
in conservatorship and provided them with unlimited access to collateralized
funding. Both FNMA and FHLMC are supervised and regulated by the Federal
Housing Finance Agency.
2.2 Mortgage-Backed Security Cash Flows
In this paper, we focus on agency mortgage-backed securities backed by pools of
ﬁxed-rate mortgages. A ﬁxed-rate mortgage is structured so that the borrower
is obligated to make the same payment each month, consisting of interest and
principal. In general, ﬁxed-rate mortgages can be prepaid at any time without
penalty. Each month, therefore, a pool of mortgages generates cash ﬂows consisting of scheduled interest, scheduled principal, and possibly prepaid principal. A
pass-through mortgage-backed security distributes to investors the principal and
interest payments from the underlying mortgage loans, less guaranty and servicing fees. Because the guaranty and servicing fees are based on the outstanding
balance, these fees decline over the life of the mortgage.4
Mortgage servicers collect and aggregate payments from the underlying
mortgage loans and pass the payments to the mortgage-backed security trust.
Mortgage payments are due on the ﬁrst of the month (with a grace period determined by state law). Investors, however, receive the payments after a delay
of 14, 19, or 24 days, depending on the mortgage-backed security program. If a
loan becomes delinquent, servicers advance scheduled principal and interest until
either the loan becomes current or is bought out of the trust at par. Servicers
retain a monthly fee based on a percentage of the outstanding mortgage balance
at the beginning of the month. This fee is often referred to as a “servicing strip”
because the cash ﬂows resemble an interest-only strip. In the FNMA, FHLMC,
and GNMA II programs, mortgages with diﬀerent gross coupons can be pooled
together as long as the net coupon (gross coupon minus servicing and guaranty
fees) is identical among all the loans in the mortgage pool. In the GNMA I
program, the gross coupon is always 50 basis points higher than the net coupon.
2.3 Agency Mortgage-Backed Security Trading
Agency mortgage-backed securities trade on either a to-be-announced (TBA)
basis or a speciﬁed pool basis. The TBA market is a highly liquid forward market
and accounts for 90 percent of all mortgage-backed security trading. From 2007
to 2014, the daily trading volume of U.S. agency mortgage-backed securities
averaged $276 billion, which compares well with the $525 billion daily trading
4

See www.fanniemae.com, www.freddiemac.com, and www.ginniemae.gov for
more information about agency securitization programs.
5

volume for U.S. Treasuries. Typically, pass-throughs are traded as speciﬁed pools
if they command a premium over TBAs or if they are ineligible for TBA delivery.5
Similar to Treasury note and bond futures, a buyer of a TBA agrees to
the trade without knowing the exact pools that will be delivered. Instead, the
buyer and seller agree to six parameters: price, par amount, settlement date,
agency program, mortgage type, and coupon. TBA trades generally settle to
a monthly schedule set by the Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association (SIFMA). Nearly all TBA trades occur with settlement dates less than
or equal to three months forward. Two days prior to the settlement date of
the trade, the seller notiﬁes the buyer of the exact pools that will be delivered
(the 48-hour rule). The pools are then exchanged for the cash payment on the
settlement date.
Market participants generally adhere to standards referred to as the “Good
Delivery Guidelines” maintained by SIFMA. These guidelines specify the eligible
collateral for a TBA trade and various operational guidelines such as the number
of bonds per million dollars notional of a trade, the allowable variation in the
delivery amount, and the costs of failing to deliver. TBA trades may also be
executed with stipulations such as production year, weighted average maturity
(WAM), weighted average loan age (WALA), FICO score, loan-to-value ratio, or
geographic distribution. A stipulated TBA trade, however, would likely occur at
a price higher than an unstipulated TBA.
2.4 The Quantitative Easing Programs
Table 1 provides a listing of the major events in the agency mortgage-backed
securities market during the study period. Among the most signiﬁcant of these
events are the Federal Reserve’s quantitative easing programs, commonly known
as QE I, QE II, and QE III. The ﬁrst program, QE I, was announced on November
25, 2008 and directed the purchase of up to $500 billion of agency mortgagebacked securities and $100 billion of GSE debt. The stated goal of QE I was to
reduce the cost and increase the availability of credit for the purchase of houses.
QE I was expanded on March 18, 2009 to allow additional purchases of up to
$750 billion of agency mortgage-backed securities and $100 billion of agency
debt. The QE II program was announced on November 3, 2010 and authorized
the purchase of up to $600 billion of longer-term Treasury securities. The QE
III program was announced on September 13, 2012 and directed the purchase of
up to $40 billion per month of agency mortgage-backed securities and $45 billion
5

Trading volume data comes from FINRA TRACE https://www.ﬁnra.org/indus
try/trace/structure-product-activity-reports-and-tables. See Vickrey and Wright
(2013) for a discussion of the TBA market. Also see Carlin, Longstaﬀ, and
Matoba (2014).
6

per month of Treasury securities. These programs had large eﬀects on the supply
of mortgage-backed securities in the market.6

3. LITERATURE REVIEW
Mortgage-backed security valuation is challenging because mortgage terminations
(prepayments and defaults) may depend on many factors such as changes in
interest rates, housing prices, employment status, family size, etc. For reviews of
the literature, see Kau and Keenan (1995), Capone (2001), Hayre (2001), Wallace
(2005), and Fabozzi (2006).
The ﬁrst generation of pricing models was pioneered by Dunn and McConnell
(1981a, 1981b) and extended by Brennan and Schwartz (1985). This framework
approaches the valuation of mortgage-backed securities from the perspective of
contingent claims theory. In particular, this approach models mortgage prepayments as the result of a borrower attempting to maximize the value of an implicit
interest rate option. Dunn and Spatt (2005) and Stanton and Wallace (1998)
extend the approach to model the prepayment decision as the result of minimizing lifetime mortgage costs in the presence of reﬁnancing costs. These papers,
however, imply an upper bound on mortgage prices that is often violated empirically, as demonstrated by Stanton (1995) and Boudoukh, Richardson, Stanton,
and Whitelaw (1997). Later papers add frictions to allow for higher mortgage
prices and consider the value of the prepayment option jointly with the option to
default. Important contributions are Titman and Torous (1989), Kau, Keenan,
Muller, and Epperson (1992), and Kau and Slawson (1995), Downing, Stanton,
and Wallace (2005), Longstaﬀ (2005), and many others. An important drawback of this modeling approach is that actual borrowers generally do not follow
the prepayment strategies implied by these models. Thus, actual mortgage cash
ﬂows and mortgage-backed security prices often diverge signiﬁcantly from those
implied by these types of models.
The second generation of mortgage-backed security pricing models takes a
more empirical approach. Typically, these models begin with a detailed econometric model of the historical behavior of prepayments, including elements such
as geography, seasoning, burnout, seasonality, and other factors. Key examples
of this approach include Schwartz and Torous (1989, 1992, 1993), Richard and
6

For a detailed discussion of the eﬀects of the quantitative easing programs,
see Gagnon, Raskin, Remache, and Sack (2011), Krishnamurthy and VissingJorgensen (2011, 2013), Christensen and Rudebusch (2012), Thornton (2014),
and Christensen and Gillan (2015).
7

Roll (1989), and Deng, Quigley, and Van Order (2000). In this framework, interest rate paths are simulated (under the risk-neutral measure) and the econometric prepayment model (estimated under the actual measure) is applied to
specify the cash ﬂows along each interest rate path. Important drawbacks of
this modeling approach include the fact that, by using an empirical prepayment
model, this approach does not allow for the possibility of a prepayment risk premium. In particular, this approach requires that prepayment dynamics be the
same under risk-neutral and actual measures. In actuality, market participants
disagree signiﬁcantly about prepayment forecasts (see Carlin, Longstaﬀ, and Matoba (2014)). The net eﬀect of these factors is that the prices implied by market
participants’ models often diverge signiﬁcantly from market prices. These diﬀerences are typically expressed in terms of a yield spread adjustment to discount
rates, known as the option-adjusted spread.
Given the inconsistent use of risk-neutral and actual measures in solving
for the option-adjusted spread, it is not surprising that the economic interpretation of the option-adjusted spread is murky, and its values are frequently more
volatile than the underlying mortgage-backed security prices. To illustrate this,
Figure 1 plots the time series of option-adjusted spreads for FNMA 6.50 percent mortgage-backed securities as implied by the sequence of pricing models
used by a major Wall Street mortgage dealer. As shown, the dealer changed
its model frequently during the 2007–2015 period, primarily because the prior
version of the model was failing to capture current market prices. The plot shows
that changes in the model are often associated with large discontinuities in the
time series of the option-adjusted spread that can be on the order of 100 basis
points or more. This erratic behavior in the option-adjusted spread, even when
holding the dealer ﬁxed, provides a strong argument for basing empirical analysis on mortgage-backed security prices directly, rather than on option-adjusted
spreads. This point is reinforced further by the evidence in Carlin, Longstaﬀ,
and Matoba (2014) that there is signiﬁcant disagreement across dealers in terms
of forecasted prepayment speeds, which would, in turn, translate into large differences in option-adjusted spreads across dealers.
Levin and Davidson (2005) attribute the variability in option-adjusted spreads to a prepayment risk premium and suggest a method to use market prices
to adjust the empirical prepayment process for prepayment risk. Gabaix, Krishnamurthy, and Vigneron (2007) study the pricing of interest-only strips and
document that their option-adjusted spread covaries with the moneyness of the
market, consistent with a prepayment risk premium and the existence of specialized mortgage-backed security investors. Boyarchenko, Fuster, and Lucca
(2014) document an option-adjusted spread smile across mortgages with varying rates and use information from the interest-only/principal-only market to
decompose option-adjusted spreads into their physical and risk-neutral compo8

nents. Their work includes the important insight that information about the
risk-neutral prepayment rate can be extracted from interest-only/principal-only
securities. Other important recent contributions in understanding the economics
of mortgage-backed security markets include Cheyette (1996), Linetsky (2004),
Goncharov (2006), Gorovoy and Linetsky (2007), Malkhozov, Mueller, Vedolin,
and Venter (2014), Hanson (2014), and Song and Zhu (2015).

4. THE DATA
The primary data for the study consist of monthly prices (observed at the end of
each month) from the TBA market for FNMA mortgage-backed securities with
varying coupons. The sample period is January 1998 to September 2014. The
data are obtained from a proprietary data set compiled by a major Wall Street
mortgage-backed security dealer. However, we have cross validated the proprietary data with prices publicly available in the Bloomberg system and found the
two sources to be very similar. To insure that we include only prices for actively
traded mortgage-backed securities, we limit the data set to mortgage-backed securities with coupon rates that are within 300 basis points of the current coupon
mortgage rate. The data set also includes three-month horizon conditional prepayment rate (CPR) information for each coupon.
Table 2 presents summary statistics for the data. As shown, the sample
includes mortgage-backed securities with coupons ranging from 2.50 percent to
9.50 percent. Of course, not all coupons are actively traded throughout the entire
sample period. The higher coupon mortgage-backed securities appear during the
early part of the sample period when mortgage rates are considerably higher,
and vice versa for the lower coupon mortgage-backed securities.
We also collect data for a wide variety of macroeconomic, mortgage market,
and ﬁnancial variables that will be used in the analysis throughout the paper.
The Appendix provides a description of each of these variables and the sources
of the data.
Finally, we collect historical data on Treasury constant maturity rates from
the Federal Reserve H.15 release. We use a standard cubic spline approach to
bootstrap the prices of zero-coupon bonds D(t) for maturities ranging up to 30
years for each month during the sample period (methodology is described in the
Appendix).

9

5. THE REDUCED-FORM FRAMEWORK
In valuing mortgage-backed securities, we use a reduced-form framework in which
an instantaneous prepayment process pt plays the central role. Speciﬁcally, pt is
the fraction of the remaining notional balance of the underlying mortgage pool
that is prepaid each instant. Thus, pt can be viewed as a prepayment intensity
or hazard rate.7 Our approach will be to solve for the implied value of pt and
its dynamics from the cross section and time series of prices of mortgage-backed
securities with diﬀerent mortgage rates.
For expositional clarity, we assume for the present that mortgage cash ﬂows
are paid continuously and that the ﬁxed mortgage rate m on the mortgages in the
underlying pool is the same as the coupon rate on the mortgage-backed security.
Let c denote the payment on a mortgage with an initial principal balance of one.
Since the present value of the mortgage equals one at inception,

1=c

T
0

e−mt dt,

= (c/m)(1 − e−mT ),

(1)
(2)

and the mortgage payment c is,
c=

m
.
1 − e−mT

(3)

Let It denote the principal balance of the mortgage at time t. The change in
the principal balance is just the diﬀerence between the interest on the mortgage
balance and the mortgage payment,
dIt = mIt − c.

(4)

Solving this ﬁrst-order diﬀerential equation subject to the initial condition implies

It =

1 − e−m(T −t)
.
1 − e−mT

7

(5)

The proportional rate pt at which loans are being prepaid is often referred to
as the CPR of the mortgage-backed security by market participants.
10

Now, consider a mortgage-backed security where the individual mortgages
in the underlying pool are all T -year ﬁxed-rate mortgages. Without loss of generality, we normalize the initial notional balance of the pool to be one. We denote
the remaining notional balance of the underlying pool at time t as Nt , which,
given the deﬁnition of pt , can be expressed as
 

Nt = exp − 0t ps ds .

(6)

In turn, the remaining principal balance of the underlying pool is given by Nt It .8
Finally, let F (m, T ) denote the value of a mortgage-backed security where
the underlying mortgages have a mortgage rate of m and maturity of T . The
value of the mortgage-backed security at time zero is given formally by

F (m, T ) = E Q



T
0


 

t
exp − 0 rs + ws ds Nt (c + pt It ) dt ,

(7)

where E Q [ · ] denotes expectation under the risk neutral measure, rt is the riskless
interest rate, and wt plays the role of a credit/liquidity spread. The rationale
for including wt in the model is to allow for the possibility that cash ﬂows from
agency mortgages may be discounted a higher rate than Treasury cash ﬂows,
either because the credit risk of the agency may not be as strong, or because
agency mortgages may be less liquid than Treasuries.

6. THE PREPAYMENT FUNCTION
To complete the valuation framework for mortgage-backed securities, we need to
specify the prepayment process pt . Before doing this, however, it is useful to ﬁrst
consider some of the stylized facts about actual prepayment rates.
To illustrate the relation between prepayments and reﬁnancing incentives,
Figure 2 plots the prepayment rates for FNMA mortgage-backed securities as
functions of the prices of these securities. As shown, there is a strong relation
8

It is important to distinguish between the remaining notional amount and the
principal balance since mortgage payments are based on the original notional
amount of the mortgages while prepayment cash ﬂows are based on the remaining
principal balance.
11

between the prepayment rate and the price of the mortgage-backed securities.
When the price of the mortgage-backed security is less than 100, the coupon
rate on the mortgage is lower than the current market rate, and the borrower
has no incentive to reﬁnance. When the price is greater than 100, however, the
borrower may be able to reduce his mortgage costs by reﬁnancing. Interestingly,
the relation between prepayment rates and mortgage prices has the appearance
of a piecewise linear function similar to that of a call option payoﬀ.
In particular, when the price of the mortgage-backed security is less than
100, the relation is ﬂat, although generally not zero. In fact, the prepayment rates
for these mortgage-backed securities can be as high as 10 to 15 percent, because
borrowers often prepay mortgages for reasons other than to reduce mortgage
costs. For example, borrowers often prepay mortgages even when the market
rate is higher than their mortgage rate for exogenous reasons such as a retirement
or a career-related move. Also, borrowers may reﬁnance into a higher mortgage
rate to extract home equity after an increase in housing prices. During the recent
ﬁnancial crisis, a major source of exogenous prepayments has been the high rate
of foreclosures throughout the U.S. (a foreclosure results in the pass through of
the entire remaining mortgage balance to the holders of an agency-guaranteed
mortgage-backed security).
When the price of the mortgage-backed security is greater than 100, the
relation is generally increasing, but spreads out as the price increases. A closer
inspection of the data, however, indicates that the relation is actually close to
linear at a point in time, but that the slope of the relation varies over time.
Thus, the unconditional relation appears spread out. To illustrate this, Figure 3
plots the prepayment rate and price relation for selected dates during the sample
period. As shown, the prepayment functions display varying slopes over time.
Motivated by these stylized facts, we use a simple generic speciﬁcation of
the implied prepayment function that allows for both exogenous and rate-related
prepayments. Speciﬁcally, we model the prepayment function as
pt = xt + yt max(0, m − a − b rt ).

(8)

In this speciﬁcation, xt denotes the exogenous hazard rate at which mortgages
are prepaid in the absence of reﬁnancing incentives. Intuitively, xt captures all
the non-interest-rate-related background factors that lead to prepayments. Thus,
we will refer to xt simply as the turnover rate.
The reﬁnancing incentive is determined by the diﬀerence between the mortgage rate m and the implied rate at which mortgages can be reﬁnanced. We
allow this implied rate to be a general aﬃne function a + b rt of the short-term
12

riskless rate, rather than constraining it to be a speciﬁc short-term or long-term
rate. The values of a and b will be estimated from the data.
The term yt which multiplies the reﬁnancing incentive term max(0, m −
a − b rt ) in Equation (8) measures how sensitive borrowers are to reﬁnancing incentives. For example, a borrower whose house value was less than the mortgage
balance would typically have a very low propensity to reﬁnance, or equivalently,
a low value of yt . After the introduction of the Home Aﬀordable Reﬁnancing
Program (HARP) in 2009, however, the same borrower might have been much
more likely to reﬁnance given the same level of reﬁnancing incentive. Similarly,
the propensity to reﬁnance could also vary with the required loan-to-value standards in the mortgage market. Given the role that yt plays in the prepayment
function, we denote it as the rate response factor.

7. ESTIMATION METHODOLOGY
In this framework, the value of a mortgage-backed security is a function of the
three state variables: wt , xt , and yt (in addition to the interest rate). To complete
the speciﬁcation of the model, we assume that the dynamics of the state variables
are given by the following system of stochastic diﬀerential equations under the
risk-neutral pricing measure,

dw = (αw − βw w) dt + σw dZw ,
√
dx = (αx − βx x) dt + σx x dZx ,
√
dy = (αy − βy y) dt + σy y dZy .

(9)
(10)
(11)

where the Brownian motions are independent of each other. The credit/liquidity
spread wt follows a mean-reverting process that can take on both positive and
negative values, paralleling the speciﬁcation used by Duﬃe and Singleton (1997,
1999), Longstaﬀ, Mithal, and Neis (2005), and many others. The state variables
xt and yt driving prepayments both follow mean-reverting square-root processes,
ensuring that prepayment rates are always nonnegative. Note that this speciﬁcation of dynamics places this model within the familiar aﬃne framework widely
used throughout the ﬁnancial literature.
To model the evolution of the riskless rate, we assume that rt follows the
single-factor Vasicek (1977) process. This assumption, however, can easily be
relaxed to allow for a more general multi-factor speciﬁcation. The riskless rate
is assumed to be independent of the other state variables.
13

The estimation of the model can be viewed as consisting of three steps. First,
we select an initial parameter vector θ, where θ = {a, b, αw , αx , αy , βw , βx , βy ,
σw , σx , σy }. Second, conditional on θ and for each month t during the sample
period, we solve for the values of wt , xt , and yt that best ﬁt the model to the
prices for the coupon stack (the cross section of mortgage-backed securities with
diﬀerent coupon rates) by minimizing the root mean squared error (RMSE).
Since the nonlinear structure of the prepayment function makes it diﬃcult to
express the price of mortgage-backed securities in closed-form, we use simulation
to solve for the model-based mortgage-backed security values. Third, we iterate
over alternative values of the parameter vector θ until we ﬁnd the vector that
results in the lowest global root mean square error (RMSE). Table 3 reports
the parameter values obtained from the estimation along with their asymptotic
standard errors. The outputs are the parameter values and the time series of
state variables.
The details of the estimation process are described in the Appendix. As discussed, the parameters for the riskless rate are estimated separately. Speciﬁcally,
we use an approach in which we ﬁt exactly the ten-year spot rate for each month
in the sample period, and adjust the volatility parameter of the Vasicek model
each month to match the basis point volatility of a one-year into ten-year swap
option. The results, however, are very robust to the speciﬁcation of the interest
rate model.

8. THE IMPLIED PREPAYMENT FACTORS
In this section, we discuss the empirical results and their implications. First, we
examine how well the model is able to ﬁt the market prices of mortgage-backed
securities. We then study the properties of the three state variables of the model:
the credit/liquidity spread wt , the turnover rate xt , and the rate response factor
yt .
8.1 Fitting Mortgage-Backed Security Prices
The coupon stack for each month in the sample period typically includes between
6 to 10 mortgage-backed securities with varying coupon rates at 50 basis point
increments. The estimation algorithm solves for the values of the three state
variables wt , xt , and yt that best ﬁt the model to the coupon stack. Since
there are more prices than state variables, it is clear that there will be residual
diﬀerences between model values and market values. To quantify the magnitude
of these diﬀerences, we compute the RMSE for each month in the sample period.
14

Figure 4 plots the time series of the RMSEs. As shown, the model ﬁts the
mortgage-backed security prices extremely well. For much of the sample period,
the RMSEs range from about 5 to 30 cents for mortgage-backed security prices
quoted in terms of a $100 notional position. This range compares reasonably well
with the bid-ask spreads of actively-traded mortgage-backed securities, which
discussions with traders indicate are typically on the order of three to four ticks,
or 32nds of a point. Once the ﬁnancial crisis begins in 2008, however, the RMSEs
tend to become larger in value. Intuitively, this may simply be the result of the
massive shocks that the housing and mortgage markets experienced during the
ﬁnancial crisis, as well as a lack of liquidity and risk capital in the markets to
arbitrage mispricing among mortgage-backed securities. The median RMSE for
the pre-crisis period is 23.8 cents. The median RMSE for the entire sample period
is 27.3 cents.
8.2 The Mortgage-Backed Security Pricing Factors
The estimation algorithm solves for the implied values of the three factors driving
mortgage-backed securities prices for each month during the sample period: the
credit/liquidity spread, the turnover rate, and the rate response factor. Table 4
provides summary statistics for the implied values of these factors. These pricing
factors are discussed individually below.
8.3 The Credit/Liquidity Spread
Table 4 shows that the mean value of the credit/liquidity spread is about 72.1
basis points with a standard deviation of 52.2 basis points. This mean value is in
relatively close agreement with the average spread on FNMA debt issues during
the sample period. For example, the average spread of FNMA ten-year debt
over Treasuries during the January 2000 to September 2014 period is 49.8 basis
points. We will study the link between the implied spread and FNMA credit
spreads in more depth shortly.
Figure 5 plots the time series of the implied credit/liquidity spread values
over the sample period, along with the spread for FNMA agency debt. As shown,
the majority of the implied spreads are positive. In particular, 178 or 88.6 percent
of the 201 estimates are positive. The fact that some of the implied spreads are
negative, however, hints that the implied spreads may be reﬂecting more than
the credit risk of FNMA bonds, particularly since FNMA credit spreads are
uniformly positive throughout the 2000–2014 period.
This latter observation is reinforced by comparing the spread values shown
15

in Figure 5 with the key events in the timeline given in Table 1. For example,
the downward spike around April 2009 coincides with the large expansion of the
QE I program to purchase an additional $750 billion of MBS. The very large
downward spike around September 2012 coincides with the announcement of the
QE III program to purchase $40 billion of agency MBS per month. Thus, these
observations hint that the massive purchases of MBS during QE I and QE III
may have had an eﬀect via new production and existing collateral being removed
from the market. The potential eﬀect is two-fold: a direct decrease in supply
would increase prices and decrease spreads, an indirect eﬀect on liquidity would
increase spreads. It appears that the ﬁrst eﬀect dominates the second.
On the other hand, Figure 5 also shows that the implied spreads appear
to be correlated with key events that may impact the credit risk of FNMA.
For example, the local minimum in the spread during the early part of 2005
coincides with a period when the mortgage delinquency rate reached historically
low values (the calm before the storm). Similarly, the spread attains its largest
values during the Lehman crisis period of Fall 2008. However, after FNMA
and FHLMC are placed into conservatorship and their credit risk is essentially
defeased, the implied spread quickly returns to pre-crisis levels, and subsequently
actually reaches historical lows.
To examine the properties of the implied spread in more detail, we regress
monthly changes in the spread on a number of explanatory variables reﬂecting
changes in the credit risk and liquidity of the mortgage-backed securities market.
First, we include monthly changes in the yield spread between FNMA notes and
Treasury notes with similar maturities. The intuition for including this spread
is that if FNMA’s cost of debt capital were to increase relative to that of the
Treasury, then the value of the FNMA guarantee should decline, resulting in lower
mortgage-backed security prices, or equivalently, higher implied spreads. Second,
we include current and lagged changes in primary dealers’ holdings of mortgagebacked securities as reported by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. The
intuition for this measure is that when primary dealers increase their inventories,
we would expect that the liquidity of the mortgage-backed securities market
would improve, leading to a decline in the implied spread. Third, we include
changes in the general collateral repo rate in the regression. Because the repo
rate reﬂects the cost to a mortgage-backed securities dealer of ﬁnancing inventory,
an increase in the repo rate would provide dealers with a strong incentive to
reduce inventory, allowing investors to purchase mortgage-backed securities at
better prices or lower spreads. Finally, we include several measures relating
to the supply of mortgage-backed securities in the market. The ﬁrst is the net
issuance of mortgage-backed securities. The second is the ratio of Federal Reserve
purchases of mortgage-backed securities to total net issuance. This ratio reﬂects
how much of the ﬂow of issuance is being absorbed by the Federal Reserve. A
16

high value for this ratio could imply that dealers are being crowded out of the
market, potentially impairing market liquidity. We also include the lagged value
of the change in the spread as a control variable.
Table 5 presents the regression results. As illustrated, the change in the
FNMA credit spread is strongly related to the change in the credit/liquidity
spread implied from the prices of mortgage-backed securities. The regression
coeﬃcient is positive and highly signiﬁcant with a t-statistic of 9.12. Although
this result is very intuitive, to our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst direct evidence that
the credit risk of the agency guaranteeing the timely payment of principal and
interest is related to the pricing of mortgage-backed securities. The regression
coeﬃcient of roughly 0.84 indicates that while the implied spread is closely related
to the spread on FNMA debt, the relation is not one-to-one and that there are
other drivers of the implied spread.
In particular, Table 5 shows that the coeﬃcient for the lagged change in
primary dealers’ inventory is negative and signiﬁcant. The negative signs for
both the current and lagged changes are consistent with the view that the implied
spread also reﬂects the overall liquidity of the mortgage-backed securities market.
Speciﬁcally, that when primary dealers increase their inventory, the liquidity of
the market increases, resulting in a decline in the implied spread.
Table 5 also show that there is a signiﬁcant positive relation between changes
in the implied spread and ratio of Federal Reserve purchases to total net issuance
of mortgage-backed securities. This result is consistent with the interpretation
that the large purchases of mortgage-backed securities during the quantitative
easing programs crowded out other players in the market and adversely aﬀected
liquidity.
Given the strong empirical relation between the credit/liquidity rate and the
FNMA credit spread, a simple estimate of the size of the liquidity component in
mortgage-backed securities could be obtained by subtracting the FNMA credit
spread from the credit/liquidity spread. Figure 6 plots this estimate of the liquidity spread. As shown, during the pre-crisis period, the liquidity spread is positive
with an average value of around 25 basis points. The liquidity spread spikes during the period leading up to the Lehman default and the conservatorship of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac in September 2008. Afterwards, however, the liquidity
spread declines to near zero with downward spikes coinciding with the initiation
and extension of the QE I program. The initiation of the QE III program with
its massive purchases of agency mortgage-backed securities coincides with the
large negative spike in the liquidity spread. Discussions with industry sources
suggest that as the Federal Reserve’s purchases of agency mortgage-backed securities began to crowd other players out of these markets, the diﬃculty of ﬁnding
tradeable collateral made existing supplies of mortgage-backed securities trade
17

at a premium. The liquidity estimates shown in Figure 6 are consistent with this
view.
8.4 The Turnover Rate
The implied turnover rate is based on the risk-neutral measure since its value is
inferred from the prices of mortgage-backed securities. Because prepayment rates
are directly observable, however, the turnover rate under the actual or empirical
probability measure is easily estimated from the data.9 As part of our analysis,
we will contrast the properties of the empirical and implied turnover rates and
examine their implications for risk premia.
Table 4 shows that the mean value of the implied turnover rate is about 17.2
percent. As we discuss later, this is higher than the observed reﬁnancing rate for
mortgages with coupon rates below the current market mortgage rate.
To explore this further, we regress quarterly changes in both the empirical
and implied turnover rates on variables that reﬂect the degree of ﬁnancial distress
in the mortgage markets and the state of the macroeconomy. As proxies for
ﬁnancial distress, we include the change in the mortgage foreclosure rate and the
lagged change in the mortgage deliquency rate (both from the Mortgage Bankers
Association National Delinquency Survey). As macroeconomic measures, we
include the lagged growth rate in US personal consumption expenditures and
the change in the US unemployment rate. The reason for focusing on quarterly
changes in the regression is that a number of the explanatory variables are only
observed quarterly. We include the contemporaneous value of some variables and
the lagged value for others (rather than including both values) simply because the
limited number of observations necessitates a parsimonious speciﬁcation. Thus,
we report results including only the value of each variable that appears to have
the most explanatory power. We note that the empirical results are largely
unaﬀected by this simpliﬁcation.
We also include variables that may reﬂect various dimensions of the wealth
and consumption incentives of mortgage borrowers. In particular, we include the
return on the Barclays US Aggregate Bond Index, the lagged return on the CRSP
value-weighted stock index, and the lagged change in the National Association of
Home Builders Market Index. Finally, we also include the change in the fraction
of reﬁnanced mortgages where the new balance is more than ﬁve percent higher
9

We estimate the empirical turnover rate for each month during the sample
period by simply taking the average prepayment rate for all mortgage-backed
securities trading at a price below 100 that month.
18

than the balance on the reﬁnanced loan, obtained from Freddie Mac’s Cash-out
Reﬁnance Report. These types of loans are known as cash-out mortgages since
the borrower ends up with additional cash. An increase in the fraction of cash-out
mortgages could signal that borrowers are reﬁnancing for consumption reasons
(rather than interest-rate-related reasons) such as extracting equity from a home
after housing values increase. We also include the lagged change in the turnover
rate as a control for time series eﬀects.
Table 6 reports the results from the regression. Focusing ﬁrst on the regression for changes in the actual turnover rate, the results show that turnover is
strongly related to changes in the state of the mortgage market as well as general
macroeconomic conditions. In particular, an increase in the delinquency rate
is signiﬁcantly positively related to subsequent turnover. This is intuitive since
higher delinquencies forecast future foreclosures. In contrast, the change in the
current foreclosure rate is signiﬁcantly negatively related to actual turnover. This
suggests that by removing problem loans from the underlying pool via foreclosure,
the average quality of the remaining loan pool improves and uncertainty about
credit outcomes is resolved. The coeﬃcient for the change in the unemployment
rate is positive and signiﬁcant, consistent with the interpretation that involuntary
turnover increases during economic downturns as borrowers face adverse shocks
and distress-related prepayments increase (via foreclosures, employment-related
moves, etc.). On the other hand, the coeﬃcient for consumption growth is positive and signiﬁcant, consistent with the view that voluntary mortgage turnover
may increase when borrowers increase their consumption of housing by selling
and moving up to more expensive homes, etc. This interpretation is also consistent with the signiﬁcant positive coeﬃcients for lagged stock returns and the
housing index, which suggest that as asset values increase, voluntary turnover
also increases.
Turning our attention now to the regression for changes in implied turnover,
we see that implied turnover behaves very diﬀerently from actual turnover. In
particular, none of the macroconomic and mortgage market ﬁnancial distress
variables are signiﬁcant in this regression. Instead, changes in implied turnover
are strongly related to returns in other markets. For example, the coeﬃcients
for bond returns, stock market returns, and changes in the housing market index (at the ten-percent level) are all signiﬁcant. These results suggest that the
implied turnover rate may include ﬁnancial risk premia correlated with those in
other ﬁnancial markets. Furthermore, changes in the implied turnover rate are
signiﬁcantly positively related to cash-out mortgage activity.
In summary, the relation between actual turnover rates and macroeconomic
factors such as consumption growth, unemployment, and ﬁnancial distress in the
housing markets suggests that turnover risk may be very systematic in nature.
19

If so, it would not be surprising if turnover risk were to carry a large risk premium. This possibility is strengthened by ﬁnding that changes in the implied
turnover rate are more strongly correlated with ﬁnancial market returns than
with macroeconomic fundamentals. We will explore this issue in depth later in
the paper.
8.5 The Rate Response Factor
Table 4 reports summary statistics for the implied rate response factor. As in
the previous section, we explore the properties of the rate response factor by
regressing quarterly changes in its empirical and implied values on variables that
may reﬂect the frictions borrowers face in reﬁnancing mortgages.10
The ﬁrst set of variables are chosen to proxy for mortgage credit conditions.
In particular, we include the change in the bank tightening index which measures
the fraction of bank loan oﬃcers who describe the trend of credit availability as
tightening (from the Federal Reserve’s Senior Loan Oﬃcer Opinion Survey on
Bank Lending Practices). We also include the change in the average loan-to-value
ratio for all conventional mortgages. These loan-to-value statistics are compiled
and reported by the Federal Housing Finance Agency. A decrease in the average
loan-to-value ratio would be consistent with the scenario in which lenders are
tightening mortgage credit, and vice versa. Finally, we include the change in
the total amount of nonmortage consumer credit outstanding as reported by the
Federal Reserve Board. Changes in this index may reﬂect fundamental changes
in the availability of credit to borrowers.
Since the credit frictions faced by mortgage borrowers may also depend on
macroeconomic conditions, we also include a number of macroeconomic measures
in the regression. As before, we include the lagged growth rate in US personal
consumption expenditures. We also include the change in the Conference Board’s
Consumer Conﬁdence Index, and the change in the unemployment rate.
Finally, we again include variables that may be related to the wealth of
mortgage borrowers since this could potentially aﬀect their ability to reﬁnance:
the return on the Barclays US Aggregate Bond Index, the lagged return on
the CRSP value-weighted stock index, and the lagged change in the National
10

The empirical rate response factor is estimated for each month during the
sample period by regressing the observed prepayment rates for the mortgagebacked securities with prices above 100 on the reﬁnancing incentive (deﬁned
as the diﬀerence between the mortgage coupon rate and the current coupon
mortgage rate).
20

Association of Home Builders Housing Market Index.
Table 7 reports the results from the regressions. Beginning again with the
results for the empirical rate response factor, we ﬁnd that none of the three
mortgage credit condition proxies (the bank tightening index, the average loanto-value ratio, and the amount of consumer credit) are signiﬁcant. On the other
hand, the results indicate that both the lagged consumption growth rate and
change in consumer conﬁdence are signiﬁcant. The negative signs for these variables, however, are perplexing since they suggest that frictions are higher as
macroeconomic conditions improve. One possible interpretation of this is that
borrowers pay less attention to reﬁnancing when macroeconomic conditions are
strengthening and their individual ﬁnancial situations improve. The strong link
between macroeconomic conditions and the rate response factor again argues
that the market may view this factor as a systematic risk which should carry
a risk premium. Finally, neither the bond, stock market, nor housing market
measures are signiﬁcant.
The results for the implied rate response factor are again very diﬀerent
from those for the empirical factor. As before, the link between macroeconomic
variables and the implied factor is much weaker. Furthermore, there is a strong
correlation between the implied rate response factor and both the bond market
return and changes in the housing index. This again suggests that a major
component of the implied rate response factor may represent a risk premium
compensating investors for the systematic nature of the variation in this factor.

9. THE PREPAYMENT RISK PREMIUM
In this section, we examine whether the market prices of mortgage-backed securities incorporate a risk premium for prepayment risk. Since we model prepayment
risk as an explicit function of the turnover rate and the rate response factor, our
framework also allows us to break down the total prepayment risk premium further into the components related to the turnover rate and the rate response
factor.
We note that mortgage-backed securities may also incorporate premia for
interest rate risk and agency credit risk. Rather than focusing on these wellknown and extensively-researched types of risk premia, however, we will focus
exclusively on the prepayment risk premium since there has been relatively little
previous research on this topic in the literature.
9.1 Is there a Prepayment Risk Premium?
21

To address the issue of whether there is a prepayment risk premium, we follow the
standard approach of comparing values estimated under the risk-neutral pricing
measure with those estimated under the actual or objective measure. Because
the implied prepayment function is estimated directly from the market prices of
mortgage-backed securities, it represents the prepayment function under the riskneutral pricing measure. In contrast, prepayments under the actual or empirical
measure are directly observable.
It is important to observe that since the prepayment rate represents a riskneutral hazard rate or probability in this framework, the implied value of the
turnover rate need not equal the empirical turnover rate. This follows from
Jarrow, Lando, and Yu (2005) who show that if hazard rates or intensities are
sensitive to shocks that carry risk premia (for example, such as macroeconomic
factors), then their values can diﬀer between the risk-neutral and actual measures.
This is analogous to what occurs in reduced-form credit models in which the
risk-neutral default probability or hazard rate need not equal the actual default
probability. A key diﬀerence, however, is that the actual probability of default
is extremely diﬃcult to measure given how rare default events are. Thus, it is
very challenging to estimate the diﬀerence between risk neutral and actual default
probabilities.11 In contrast, empirical prepayment rates are directly observed and
diﬀerences between the prepayment rate under the risk neutral and objective
measures are easily identiﬁed.
The implied prepayment rate for each mortgage-backed security is given by
simply substituting its weighted average coupon rate into the ﬁtted prepayment
function. Observe that in doing this, we are solving for the instantaneous implied
prepayment rate which can be compared directly to the three-month realized
CPR for the mortgage-backed security.12
The upper panel of Figure 7 plots the time series of the monthly averages for
both the implied and empirical prepayment rates. The bottom panel plots the
time series of the prepayment risk premium which is computed as the diﬀerence
between the implied and realized prepayment rates. As shown in the upper
panel, the implied and realized prepayment rates generally track each other over
time, but there are some notable exceptions, particularly during the peak of the
ﬁnancial crisis. This is particularly evident in the lower panel which shows that
the prepayment risk premium reached extreme values during late 2008 and early
2009.
11

For example, see Huang and Huang (2012) and Giesecke, Longstaﬀ, Shaeﬀer,
and Strebulaev (2011).

12

To solve for the risk premium over longer horizons, we would need also need to
solve for the parameters of the w, x, and y processes under the objective measure.
22

The upper panel of Table 8 presents summary statistics for the implied
prepayment rates, the empirical prepayment rates, and the prepayment risk premium. To make the results more interpretable, we ﬁrst compute the average
implied and actual prepayment rates across all coupons for each month. The
summary statistics in Table 8 are then computed using the time series of the
monthly averages.
As shown, the average implied prepayment rate across the entire sample of
mortgage-backed securities is 37.257 percent. In contrast, the average empirical prepayment rate for the same sample of mortgage-backed securities is 21.241
percent. Thus, the implied prepayment function is clearly very diﬀerent from
the actual prepayment function. The average diﬀerence between the implied and
actual prepayment rates is 16.015 percent. The hypothesis that this diﬀerence
is zero is strongly rejected by the data. These results provide direct conﬁrmation that there is a substantial prepayment risk premium incorporated into
mortgage-backed security prices. This direct evidence of prepayment risk premia
in the mortgage-backed securities market corroborates the evidence of prepayment risk premia in the option-adjusted spreads of interest-only/principal-only
securities reported by Gabaix, Krishnamurthy, and Vigneron (2007) and Boyarchenko, Fuster, and Lucca (2014).
On average, the implied prepayment rate is substantially higher than the
empirical prepayment rate. This has important implications for the pricing of
mortgage-backed securities. In particular, the prices of mortgages with coupon
rates below the current market rate are increasing in the prepayment rate while
the opposite is true for the prices of mortgages with coupon rates higher than the
current market rate. Thus, the positive prepayment risk premium implies that
discount mortgages will have higher values than implied by empirical prepayment
functions, while the reverse will be the case for premium mortgages. These results
are broadly consistent with the empirical evidence provided in Duarte, Longstaﬀ,
and Yu (2007).
To provide a cross sectional perspective, Figure 8 presents a scatter diagram
of the prepayment risk premium for the individual mortgage-backed securities in
the sample against their price. As shown, there is clearly heterogeneity in the
prepayment risk premium across mortgages with diﬀerent coupons. For example,
although the risk premium is positive on average across all mortgages, there are
clearly more negative values for mortgage-backed securities with prices in excess
of 100. The average prepayment risk premium for mortgage-backed securities
with prices below 100 is 17.17 percent, while the average for those with prices
greater than or equal to 100 is 14.83 percent.
To provide more insight into the heterogeneity in the prepayment risk premia
across mortgage-backed securities, it is useful to break down the premium into
23

its components. In the following sections, we will examine the turnover and rate
response risk premia separately.
9.2 The Turnover Risk Premium
As in the previous section, we can identify the turnover risk premium by comparing the implied turnover rate with the empirical turnover rate. The upper panel
of Figure 9 plots the time series of the implied turnover rate and the empirical
turnover rate.
As illustrated, virtually all of the implied turnover rates are higher than the
realized turnover rates. Some of the largest values of the implied turnover rate
occur during the ﬁrst half of 2005. Industry sources suggest that a large fraction
of this turnover was motivated by borrowers attempting to “cash out” some of
the equity in their homes resulting from the rapid increase in housing values.
Thus, the upwards spike in the implied turnover rate during this period may
reﬂect a shift away from the usual interest-rate-related reasons for reﬁnancing
towards consumption related incentives for reﬁnancing. The lower panel of Figure
9 plots the turnover risk premium which is computed as the diﬀerence between
the implied and empirical turnover rates.
The middle panel of Table 8 presents summary statistics for the implied
turnover rate, the empirical turnover rate, and the risk premium. The average
implied turnover rate is substantially higher than the realized turnover rate.
The average implied turnover rate is 17.211 percent, while the average empirical
turnover rate is only 3.679. Thus, the average turnover risk premium is 13.532
percent for the sample period. This value is highly statistically signiﬁcant.
Recall from the previous section that the average prepayment risk premium
is 16.015 percent on average. Thus, the average turnover risk premium of 13.532
percent represents 84.50 percent of the entire average prepayment risk, making
it by far the primary component. Given the earlier evidence that turnover risk
is related to broad trends in the economy, these result suggest that much of
the prepayment risk premium in mortgage-backed securities can be linked to the
eﬀects of non-interest-rate-related macroeconomic ﬂuctuations on prepayment
behavior.
9.3 The Rate Response Risk Premium
The upper panel of Figure 10 plots the time series of the implied rate response factor and the empirical rate response factor. As illustrated, the implied and empir24

ical rate response factors display considerable time series variation and generally
track each other closely. Some of the highest values of the rate response factor
occur during the 2002–2003 period during which reﬁnancings reached historically high levels. More recent increases in the rate response factor coincide with
the rapid expansion of the Home Aﬀordability Reﬁnancing Program (HARP) in
which investors with home values below their mortgage balance were allowed to
reﬁnance their homes.
The lower panel of Figure 10 shows the rate response risk premium measured
as the diﬀerence between the implied and empirical rate response factors. Although the risk premium takes both positive and negative values, the time series
plot shows that there are generally more negative values than positive values.
The lower panel of Table 8 presents summary statistics for the implied and
realized rate response factors along with the risk premium. The average implied
rate response factor of 10.432 is slightly lower than the realized rate response
factor of 11.907. The average rate response risk premium of −1.475 is relatively
small compared to the magnitude of the realized factor, but just crosses the
threshold of being statistically diﬀerent from zero.
The fact that the average rate response risk premium is negative explains
why the prepayment risk premia for premium mortgage-backed securities are
generally lower than those for discount mortgage-backed security, or are even
negative in some cases. Furthermore, the relatively small magnitude of the average rate response risk premium also explains why this risk premium represents
only a small portion of the total prepayment risk premium.

10. CONCLUSION
We present a new reduced-form framework for modeling the prices of mortgagebacked securities. Rather than imposing an exogenous prepayment function,
our approach solves for the actual prepayment function used by the market in
pricing mortgage-backed securities. By studying the properties of the implied
prepayment function, our goal is to shed light on the key drivers of prepayment
risk as perceived by the market.
The evidence suggests that macroeconomic factors play a large role in driving
prepayment risk. In particular, we ﬁnd that prepayment risk can be broken down
into three components: interest-rate risk, turnover risk, and rate response risk.
We infer the values of the turnover rate and the rate response factors from the
data and show that they are strongly related to macroeconomic factors such as
consumption, employment, consumer conﬁdenc, and ﬁnancial market returns.
25

Given the strong link between macroeconomic factors and the drivers of
implied prepayment risk, our direct evidence that there is a large prepayment
risk premium incorporated into the prices of agency mortgage-backed securities
makes intuitive sense. What is surprising, however, is that the large majority of
the prepayment risk premium appears to be compensation for turnover risk.
We also provide the ﬁrst direct evidence that mortgage-backed security prices
are also driven by changes in the credit risk of the agency guaranteeing the timely
payment of principal and interest as well as by changes in the liquidity of the
securities. These results are consistent with ﬁndings for other markets.
Although there is an extensive literature on the pricing of mortgage-backed
securities, previous pricing models have struggled in matching market prices.
By their nature, these models generally do not allow for non-interest-rate prepayment factors or risk premia. The diﬀerences between model-implied prices
and market prices are generally mapped into what is commonly known as the
option-adjusted spread. Our results indicate that much of the option-adjusted
spread may be explained by allowing for macroeconomic-driven prepayment risk
factors and their associated risk premia and by allowing for agency credit risk
in the discounting of cash ﬂows. Given the fundamental role of the housing and
mortgage-backed security markets in the macroeconomy, our results have many
important implications for researchers, policy makers, and practitioners.

26

REFERENCES
Boudoukh, Jacob, Matthew Richardson, Richard Stanton, and Robert F. Whitelaw, 1997, Pricing Mortgage-Backed Securities in a Multifactor Interest Rate
Environment: A Multivariate Density Estimation Approach, Review of Financial
Studies 10, 405-446.
Boyarchenko, Nina, Andrea Fuster, and David O. Lucca, 2014, Understanding
Mortgage Spreads, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staﬀ Report.
Brennan, Michael J., and Eduardo S. Schwartz, 1985, Determinants of GNMA
Mortgage Prices, Real Estate Economics 13, 209-228.
Capone, Charles A., 2001, Introduction to the Special Issue on Mortgage Modeling, Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics 23, 131-137.
Carlin, Bruce I., Francis A. Longstaﬀ, and Kyle Matoba, 2014, Disagreement
and Asset Prices, Journal of Financial Economics 114, 226-238.
Cheyette, Oren, 1996, Implied Prepayments, Journal of Portfolio Management
23, 107-115.
Christensen, Jens, and James M. Gillan, 2015, Does Quantitative Easing Aﬀect
Market Liquidity?, Working paper, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco.
Christensen, Jens, and Glen D. Rudebusch, 2012, The Response of Interest Rates
to U.S. and U.K. Quantitative Easing, Economic Journal 122, F385-F414.
Deng, Yongheng, John M. Quigley, and Robert van Order, 2000, Mortgage Terminations, Heterogeneity and the Exercise of Mortgage Options, Econometrica
68, 275-307.
Downing, Chris, Richard Stanton, and Nancy Wallace, 2005, An Empirical Test
of a Two-Factor Mortgage Valuation Model: How Much Do House Prices Matter?, Real Estate Economics 33, 681-710.
Duarte, Jeﬀerson, Francis A. Longstaﬀ, and Fan Yu, 2007, Risk and Return in
Fixed-Income Arbitrage: Nickels in Front of a Steamroller?, Review of Financial
Studies 20, 769-811.
Duﬃe, Darrell, and Kenneth J. Singleton, 1997, An Econometric Model of the
Term Structure of Interest-Rate Swap Yields, Journal of Finance 52, 1287-1321.
Duﬃe, Darrell, and Kenneth J. Singleton, 1999, Modeling Term Structures of
Defaultable Bonds. Review of Financial Studies 12, 687-720.

27

Dunn, Kenneth B., and John J. McConnell, 1981a, A Comparison of Alternative
Models for Pricing GNMA Mortgage-Backed Securities, Journal of Finance 36,
471-484.
Dunn, Kenneth B., and John J. McConnell, 1981b, Valuation of GNMA Mortgage-Backed Securities, Journal of Finance 36, 599-616.
Dunn, Kenneth B., and Chester S. Spatt, 2005, The Eﬀect of Reﬁnancing Costs
and Market Imperfections on the Optimal Call Strategy and the Pricing of Debt
Contracts, Real Estate Economics 33, 595-617.
Fabozzi, Frank J., 2006, The Handbook of Mortgage-Backed Securities, 6th Edition, (ed.), New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.
Gabaix, Xavier, Arvind Krishnamurthy, and Olivier Vigneron, 2007, Limits of
Arbitrage: Theory and Evidence from the Mortgage-Backed Securities Market,
Journal of Finance 62, 557-595.
Gagnon, Joseph, Matthew Raskin, Julie Remache and Brian Sack, 2011, The
Financial Market Eﬀects of the Federal Reserve’s Large-Scale Asset Purchases.
International Journal of Central Banking 7, 3-43.
Giesecke, Kay, Francis A. Longstaﬀ, Stephen Schaefer and Ilya Strebulaev, 2011,
Corporate Bond Default Risk: A 150-Year Perspective, Journal of Financial
Economics 102, 233-250.
Goncharov, Yevgeny, 2006, An Intensity-Based Approach to the Valuation of
Mortgage Contracts and Computation of the Endogenous Mortgage Rate, International Journal of Theoretical and Applied Finance 9, 889-914.
Gorovoy, Vyacheslav, and Vadim Linetsky, 2007, Intensity-Based Valuation of
Residential Mortgages: An Analytically Tractable Model, Mathematical Finance
17, 541–573.
Hanson, Samuel G., 2014, Mortgage Convexity, Journal of Financial Economics
113, 270-299.
Hayre, Lakhbir, 2001, Salomon Smith Barney Guide to Mortgage-Backed and
Asset-Backed Securities, John Wiley & Sons, New York, NY.
Huang, Jing-Zhi and Ming Huang, 2012, How Much of the Corporate-Treasury
Yield Spread Is Due to Credit Risk?, Review of Asset Pricing Studies 2, 153-202.
Jarrow, Robert A., David Lando, and Fan Yu, 2005, Default Risk and Diversiﬁcation: Theory and Empirical Implications, Mathematical Finance 15, 1-26.
Kaelo, P., and M. Ali, 2006, Some Variants of the Controlled Random Search
28

Algorithm for Global Optimization, Journal of Optimization Theory and Applications 130, 253-264.
Kau, James B., and Donald C. Keenan, 1995, An Overview of the OptionTheoretic Pricing of Mortgages, Journal of Housing Research 6, 217–244.
Kau, James B., Donald C. Keenan, Walter J. Muller III, and James F. Epperson, 1992, A Generalized Valuation Model for Fixed-Rate Residential Mortgages,
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 24, 279-299.
Kau, James B., and V. Carlos Slawson, Frictions, 2002, Heterogeneity and Optimality in Mortgage Modeling, Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics
24, 239-260.
Krishnamurthy, Arvind, and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, 2011, The Eﬀects of
Quantitative Easing on Interest Rates: Channels and Implications for Policy,
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall.
Krishnamurthy, Arvind, and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, 2013, The Ins and Outs
of Large Scale Asset Purchases, Kansas City Federal Reserve Symposium on
Global Dimensions of Unconventional Monetary Policy.
Levin, Alexander, and Andrew, Davidson, 2005, Prepayment Risk and OptionAdjusted Valuation of MBS, Journal of Portfolio Management 31, 73-85.
Linetsky, Vadim, 2004, The Spectral Decomposition of the Option Value, International Journal of Theoretical and Applied Finance 7, 337-384.
Longstaﬀ, Francis A., 1990, The Valuation of Options on Yields, Journal of
Financial Economics 26, 97-121.
Longstaﬀ, Francis A., 2005, Borrower Credit and the Valuation of MortgageBacked Securities, Real Estate Economics 33, 619-661.
Longstaﬀ, Francis A., Sanjay Mithal, and Eric Neis, 2005, Corporate Yield
Spreads: Default Risk or Liquidity? New Evidence from the Credit Default
Swap Market, Journal of Finance 60, 2213-2253.
Malkhozov, Aytek, Philippe Mueller, Andrea Vedolin, and Gyuri Venter, 2014,
Mortgage Risk and the Yield Curve, Working paper, London School of Economics.
Newey, Whitney K, and Kenneth D. West, 1987, A Simple, Positive, SemiDeﬁnite Heteroskedasticity and Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix,
Econometrica 55, 703-708.
Richard, Scott F., and Richard Roll, 1989, Prepayments on Fixed-Rate Mort29

gage-Backed Securities, Journal of Portfolio Management 15, 73-82.
Schwartz, Eduardo S., and Walter N. Torous, 1989, Prepayment and the Valuation of Mortgage-Backed Securities, Journal of Finance 44, 375-392.
Schwartz, Eduardo S., and Walter N. Torous, 1992, Prepayment, Default, and the
Valuation of Mortgage Pass-Through Securities, Journal of Business 65, 221-239.
Schwartz, Eduardo S., and Walter N. Torous, 1993, Mortgage Prepayment and
Default Decisions: A Poisson Regression Approach, Real Estate Economics 21,
431-449.
Shao, Anqi, 2012, A Fast and Accurate Simulation for CIR Processes, Ph.D.
Thesis, University of Florida.
Song, Zhaogang, and Haoxiang Zhu, 2015, Mortgage Dollar Roll, Working paper,
MIT.
Stanton, Richard, 1995, Rational Prepayment and the Valuation of MortgageBacked Securities, Review of Financial Studies 8, 677-708.
Stanton, Richard, and Nancy Wallace, 1998, Mortgage Choice: What’s the
Point?, Real Estate Economics 26, 173-205.
Titman, Sheridan, and Walter N. Torous, 1989, Valuing Commercial Mortgages:
An Empirical Investigation of the Contingent-Claims Approach to Pricing Risky
Debt, Journal of Finance 44, 345-373.
Thornton, Daniel L., 2014, QE: Is There a Portfolio Balance Eﬀect?, Federal
Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review 96, 55-72.
Vasicek, Oldrich, 1977. An Equilibrium Characterization of the Term Structure,
Journal of Financial Economics 5, 177-188.
Vickery, James, and Joshua Wright, 2013, TBA Trading and Liquidity in the
Agency MBS Market, Economic Policy Review 19, 1-18.
Wallace, Nancy, 2005, Innovations in Mortgage Modeling: An Introduction, Real
Estate Economics 33, 587-593.

30

200
100
0

Libor OAS (Basis Points)

−100
−200
2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

Figure 1. Eﬀects of Prepayment Model Changes on Libor OptionAdjusted Spreads. This ﬁgure shows the Libor option-adjusted spread (OAS)
in basis points for FNMA 6.50 percent mortgages implied by the series of prepayment models used by a speciﬁc major Wall Street dealer. Each line, alternating
black and gray, represents a diﬀerent version of the dealer’s prepayment model.
During the time period illustrated, the dealer used six diﬀerent versions of its
prepayment model. The Libor option-adjusted spread is highly model dependent, and updates to the prepayment model can lead to large diﬀerences in the
option-adjusted spread.

80
60
40

Annualized Prepayment Rate

20
0

90

95

100

105

110

Price
Figure 2. Prepayment Rates for FNMA Mortgage-Backed Securities.
This ﬁgure plots the three-month prepayment rates for FNMA mortgage-backed
securities against the prices of mortgage-backed securities. The prepayment rates
are expressed as annualized percentages of the principal balance of the mortgagebacked security. The data consist of monthly observations for all liquid coupons
over the January 1998 to September 2014 sample period.

115

80
60
40
20
0

Annualized Prepayment Rate

10−30−1998
05−30−2003
05−31−2013
09−30−2014

95

100

105

110

Price
Figure 3. Prepayment Rates for FNMA Mortgage-Backed Securities
for Selected Dates. This ﬁgure plots the three-month prepayment rates for
FNMA mortgage-backed securities against the prices of the mortgage-backed
securities for the indicated dates. The prepayment rates are expressed as annualized percentages of the principal balance of the mortgage-backed security.

100
80
60

Root Mean Squared Error

40
20
0
1998

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

2010

2012

2014

Figure 4. Root Mean Squared Errors from Fitting the Model. This
ﬁgure plots the time series of root mean squared errors from ﬁtting the model
to the cross section of mortgage-backed security prices. The root mean squared
error is expressed as cents per $100 notional position.

200
150
100
50

Spread (Basis Points)

0
−50

Mortgage Liquidity/Credit Spread
10−Year FNMA Debt Spread

1998

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

2010

2012

2014

Figure 5. The Implied Credit/Liquidity Spread and the Credit Spread
for FNMA Agency Debt. This ﬁgure plots the time series of the implied
credit/liquidity spread as well as the credit spread for ten-year FNMA agency
debt over the ten-year Treasury rate. Both spreads are expressed in basis points.

100
50
0

Spread (Basis Points)

−50
−100
2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

2010

2012

2014

Figure 6. The Estimated Liquidity Spread. This ﬁgure plots the time series
of the estimated liquidity spread in mortgage-backed securities. The liquidity
spread is computed as the diﬀerence between the implied credit/liquidity spread
and the 10-year FNMA credit spread. The spread is expressed in basis points.

80
60
40
20

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

2010

2012

2014

1998

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

2010

2012

2014

20

40

60

1998

0

Prepayment Risk Premium

0

Prepayment Rate

Implied Prepayment Rate
Empirical Prepayment Rate

Figure 7. The Implied and Empirical Prepayment Rates and the Prepayment Risk Premium. The upper panel plots the time series of the implied
prepayment rate and the empirical prepayment rate (both averaged across all
coupon rates for each month). The lower panel plots the time series of the prepayment risk premium deﬁned as the spread between the implied and empirical
prepayment rates. The rates and the risk premium are expressed as annualized
percentages of the principal balance of the mortgage-backed security.

100
50

Prepayment Risk Premium

0
−50

90

95

100

105

110

Price
Figure 8. Prepayment Risk Premia. This ﬁgure plots the prepayment
risk premium for individual mortgage-backed securities as a function of the price
of the mortgage-backed security. The risk premia are expressed as annualized
percentages of the principal balance of the mortgage-backed security.

115

40
30
20
10

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

2010

2012

2014

1998

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

2010

2012

2014

10

20

30

1998

0

Turnover Risk Premium

0

Turnover Rate

Implied Turnover Rate
Empirical Turnover Rate

Figure 9. The Implied and Empirical Turnover Rates and the Turnover Risk Premium. The upper panel plots the time series of the implied
turnover rate and the empirical turnover rate. The lower panel plots the time
series of the turnover risk premium deﬁned as the spread between the implied
and empirical turnover rates. The rates and the risk premium are expressed as
annualized percentages of the principal balance of the mortgage-backed security.

40
30
20
10

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

2010

2012

2014

1998

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

2010

2012

2014

0

10

20

30

1998

−10

Rate Response Risk Premium

0

Rate Response Factor

Implied Rate Response Factor
Empirical Rate Response Factor

Figure 10. The Implied and Empirical Rate Response Factors and
the Rate Response Risk Premium. The upper panel plots the time series
of the implied rate response factor and the empirical rate response factor. The
lower panel plots the time series of the rate response risk premium deﬁned as the
spread between the implied and empirical rate response factors.

Table 1
Major Events in the Agency Mortgage-Backed Securities Market

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19

2002
2003
2005
2007
2008

2009

2010

2011
2012
2013
2014

Sep–Dec
Jan–Jun
Jan–Jun
Jun–Jul
Mar
Jul
Sep
Dec
Mar
Mar
Dec
Mar
Aug
Nov
Jun
Sep
Sep
Jun
Oct

High levels of reﬁnancing activity after Federal Reserve lowers interest rates.
Reﬁnancing activity continues and reaches historically high levels.
Mortgage delinquency rates reach historically low levels.
Two Bear Stearns MBS funds suﬀer large losses and are liquidated. S&P places 612 subprime CDOs on creditwatch.
Financially distressed Bear Stearns avoids bankruptcy by being acquired by JP Morgan.
Federal Reserve Bank of New York is authorized to lend to FNMA and FHLMC if need arises.
FNMA and FHLMC are placed into conservatorship, Lehman Brothers defaults.
Federal Reserve announces QE I program to purchase up to $500 billion of agency MBS.
Home Aﬀordable Reﬁnance Program and Stability Plan announced, making reﬁnancing easier for high LTV loans.
Federal Reserve expands QE I program to purchase up to an additional $750 billion of agency MBS.
Treasury lifts all caps on the amount of FNMA and FHLMC preferred stock it may hold.
QE I purchases of agency MBS ends.
FOMC agrees to keep Fed holdings of securities at constant levels by reinvesting cash ﬂows in Treasuries.
Federal Reserve announces QE II program to purchase up to $600 billion of Treasuries.
QE II purchases of Treasuries ends.
Maturity Extension Program “Operation Twist” announced. Agency MBS cash ﬂows to be reinvested in agency MBS.
Federal Reserve announces QE III program, an open-ended program to purchase up to $40 billion of agency MBS per month.
Ben Bernanke announces “tapering” of QE programs, Dow drops 659 points.
QE III purchases of agency MBS and Treasuries ends.

Sources:
https://www.stlouisfed.org/ﬁnancial-crisis/full-timeline.
https://research.stlouisfed.org/publications/review/13/01/Fawley.pdf.
http://www.federalreserve.gov/releases/chargeoﬀ/delallsa.htm.

Table 2
Summary Statistics for FNMA Mortgage-Backed Securities. This table reports summary statistics for FNMA mortgage-backed
securities with the indicated coupon rates. Average Moneyness denotes the average diﬀerence between the coupon rate and the current coupon
mortgage rate. Average CPR denotes the average three month constant proportional repayment rate. N denotes the number of observations.
The sample consists of monthly observations for the period from January 1998 to September 2014.

Coupon

2.50
3.00
3.50
4.00
4.50
5.00
5.50
6.00
6.50
7.00
7.50
8.00
8.50
9.00
9.50

Average
Moneyness

Average
CPR

Minimum
Price

Average
Price

Maximum
Price

N

−0.416
−0.146
0.057
0.470
0.055
0.493
0.345
0.656
0.830
1.208
1.499
1.881
2.104
2.231
2.374

4.794
2.449
6.637
9.355
10.244
15.543
14.703
18.082
21.787
29.586
33.953
34.790
35.830
41.759
22.478

90.566
89.258
92.250
87.688
90.609
93.484
86.500
89.813
92.531
94.875
97.094
99.188
101.031
102.500
103.000

96.557
98.382
100.048
102.255
99.804
101.862
100.816
102.026
102.496
103.632
103.975
104.705
104.974
105.229
105.478

103.219
105.555
107.250
107.758
108.313
111.047
111.969
113.031
113.219
113.906
109.563
108.250
108.688
107.563
107.188

37
49
70
74
137
145
184
185
160
150
132
120
91
58
35

Table 3
Estimates of Model Parameters. This table reports the estimate of the model parameters along with
their asymptotic standard errors.

Parameter

a
b
αw
αx
αy
βw
βx
βy
σw
σx
σy

Value

Std. Error

0.00837
0.90582
0.00196
0.01653
0.02865
0.09795
0.30509
0.02710
0.00036
0.01694
0.07360

0.00151
0.01256
0.00075
0.00094
0.05145
0.01135
0.00903
0.02357
0.03092
0.00629
0.04235

Table 4
Summary Statistics for the Mortgage-Backed Security Pricing Factors. This table reports
summary statistics for the agency credit/liquidity spread (Spread), the turnover rate (Turnover),
and the rate response factor (Response). Spread is expressed in basis points. Turnover is expressed
as a percentage. The factors are estimated from the cross section of mortgage-backed security prices.
The sample consists of monthly observations for the period from January 1998 to September 2014.

Statistic

Mean
Minimum
Median
Maximum
Standard Deviation
Serial Correlation
Number

Spread

Turnover

Response

72.092
−85.151
70.471
228.117
52.213
0.947
201

17.211
2.123
16.430
39.343
7.173
0.799
201

10.432
2.253
9.479
33.032
5.518
0.851
201

Table 5
Results from the Regression of Monthly Changes in the Implied Credit/Liquidity Spread
on Explanatory Variables. This table reports the results from the regression of the monthly change
in the implied credit/liquidity spread (measured in basis points) on its lagged value, the change in the
FNMA credit spread (measured in basis points), the contemporaneous and lagged change in primary dealers’
holdings of mortgage-backed securities (measured in $ millions), the change in the general collateral repo rate
(measured in basis points), net issuance of mortgage-backed securities (measured in millions), and the ratio
of Federal Reserve purchases of mortgage-backed securities to net issuance of mortgage-backed securities.
All changes are monthly. The t-statistics are based on the Newey-West (1987) estimator of the covariance
matrix (with four lags). The superscript ∗∗ denotes signiﬁcance at the ﬁve-percent level; the superscript ∗
denotes signiﬁcance at the ten-percent level. The sample period is January 2000 to September 2014.

Variable

Intercept
Lagged Change in Implied Spread
Change in FNMA Spread
Change in Dealer Inventories
Lagged Change in Dealer Inventories
Change in Repo Rate
Net MBS Issuance
Ratio of Fed Purchases to Net MBS Issuance
Adj. R2
N

Coeﬃcient

0.27457
−0.01131
0.83522
−0.00018
−0.00022
−5.28683
−0.00004
0.04702

t-Statistic

0.23
−0.14
9.12∗∗
−1.22
−2.00∗∗
−1.55
−1.00
2.46∗∗
0.2441
176

Table 6
Results from the Regression of Quarterly Changes in the Empirical and Implied Turnover Rates on Explanatory Variables. This
table reports the results from regressions of the quarterly change in the turnover rate on its lagged value, the change in the mortgage foreclosure rate,
the lagged change in the mortgage delinquency rate, the lagged growth rate in personal consumption expenditures, the change in US unemployment
rate, the return on the Barclays US aggregate bond index, the lagged CRSP value-weighted stock index return, the change in the cash-out mortgage
activity index, and the lagged change in the US Home Builders Housing Index. The center panel presents the results for the regression in which the
change in the empirical rate response factors is the dependent variable. The right panel presents the results for the regression in which the change
in the implied rate response factor is the dependent variable. All variables are measured quarterly. The t-statistics are based on the Newey-West
(1987) estimator of the covariance matrix (with three lags). The superscript ∗∗ denotes signiﬁcance at the ﬁve-percent level; the superscript ∗ denotes
signiﬁcance at the ten-percent level. The sample period is January 1998 to September 2014.

Actual Turnover Rate

Variable

Intercept
Lagged Change in Turnover
Foreclosures
Lagged Change in Delinquencies
Lagged Consumption Growth
Change in Unemployment
Bond Index Return
Lagged Stock Index Return
Cashout Mortgage Activity
Lagged Housing Index
Adj. R2
N

Coeﬃcient
−0.65304
−0.45168
−6.35410
2.97624
0.55219
1.58191
−0.13608
0.07417
−2.75268
−0.10529

t-Statistic
−1.25
−4.37∗∗
−2.94∗∗
2.18∗∗
1.96∗
2.18∗∗
−0.48
3.65∗∗
−0.92
2.46∗∗
0.303
67

Implied Turnover Rate

Coeﬃcient
−0.43263
−0.32543
1.83879
−1.73444
−0.48931
0.48101
1.02113
−0.21101
20.04234
0.22336

t-Statistic
−0.39
−3.78∗∗
0.35
−0.79
−0.71
0.22
2.29∗∗
−3.18∗∗
2.66∗∗
1.83∗
0.202
67

Table 7
Results from the Regression of Quarterly Changes in the Empirical and Implied Rate Response on Explanatory Variables. This
table reports the results from the regression of the quarterly change in the turnover rate on its lagged value, the change in the bank credit tightening
index, the change in the FHLMC loan-to-value ratio for all conventional mortgages, the change in aggregate consumer credit, the lagged growth rate
in personal consumption expenditures, the change in the Conference Board consumer conﬁdence index, the change in the US unemployment rate,
the return on the Barclays US aggregate bond index, the lagged CRSP value-weighted stock index return, and the lagged change in the US Home
Builders Market Index. The center panel presents the results for the regression in which the change in the empirical rate response factors is the
dependent variable. The right panel presents the results for the regression in which the change in the implied rate response factor is the dependent
variable. All variables are measured quarterly. The t-statistics are based on the Newey-West (1987) estimator of the covariance matrix (with three
lags). The superscript ∗∗ denotes signiﬁcance at the ﬁve-percent level; the superscript ∗ denotes signiﬁcance at the ten-percent level. The sample
period is January 1998 to September 2014.

Actual Rate Response

Variable

Intercept
Lagged Change in Rate Response
Credit Tightening
Change in Loan-to-Value Ratio
Change in Consumer Credit
Lagged Consumption Growth
Change in Consumer Conﬁdence
Change in Unemployment
Bond Index Return
Lagged Stock Index Return
Lagged Housing Index
Adj. R2
N

Coeﬃcient

2.14403
−0.19025
−0.04499
−0.56175
−0.01208
−1.95335
−0.12507
−0.83600
0.34944
−0.01787
−0.05454

t-Statistic

1.32
−1.74∗
−1.51
−0.40
−1.63
−3.24∗∗
−2.58∗∗
−0.35
1.46
−0.34
−0.81
0.242
67

Implied Rate Response

Coeﬃcient
−2.84239
−0.08544
0.02277
−0.46346
0.00114
0.63379
−0.14176
−2.48097
1.30102
0.03545
−0.19088

t-Statistic
−1.80∗
−0.76
0.51
−0.85
0.05
0.75
−1.97∗
−1.21
3.79∗∗
0.49
−3.62∗∗
0.489
67

Table 8
Summary Statistics for Actual and Implied Prepayment Rates, Turnover Rates, and Rate Response Factors. This table reports
summary statistics for the indicated variables. The prepayment rates are computed as averages taken over all mortgage-backed securities each
month. Prepayment rates and turnover rates are expressed as percentages. Ratio denotes the actual value divided by the implied value. The
sample consists of monthly observations for the period from January 1998 to September 2014.

Average

Standard
Deviation

Minimum

Median

Maximum

N

Implied Prepayment Rate
Actual Prepayment Rate
Diﬀerence

37.257
21.241
16.015

11.493
8.395
12.464

16.526
4.443
−8.104

37.239
19.777
14.471

78.869
43.438
73.515

201
201
201

Implied Turnover Rate
Actual Turnover Rate
Diﬀerence

17.211
3.679
13.532

7.173
2.832
7.496

2.123
0.000
−2.653

16.430
3.320
13.268

39.343
19.470
35.491

201
201
201

Implied Rate Response
Actual Rate Response
Diﬀerence

10.432
11.907
−1.475

5.518
6.043
6.823

2.253
1.921
−16.462

9.479
10.562
−2.107

33.032
31.445
29.375

201
201
201

Appendix
In this appendix, we ﬁrst describe the variables used in the study along with the
sources for the data. We then describe the methodology used in the estimation
of the model.
A.1 Data Sources
Table A1 presents the deﬁnitions and data sources for the variables used in the
study.
A.2 Fannie Mae Mortgage-Backed Security Cash Flows
The pricing data are from the to-be-announced (TBA) market for 30-year Fannie
Mae (FNMA) mortgage-backed securities (MBS). Before describing how we estimate our model, it is important to consider the timing of cash ﬂows generated
by a FNMA TBA trade.
TBA trades settle according to a monthly schedule set by the Securities Industry
and Financial Markets Association (SIFMA). Thirty-year FNMA MBS falls into
SIFMA’s Class A, which typically settles during the second week of the month.
Because we select prices at the end of each month, the settlement date corresponding to these observations is around the second week of the following month
(the exact settlement dates can be found on Bloomberg). On the notiﬁcation
date, two days prior to settlement, the buyer is notiﬁed of the exact pools to be
delivered. On the settlement date, the buyer transfers a payment to the seller,
which consists of the agreed upon price (which we observe at month end) plus
accrued interest on the exact face value of the pools identiﬁed on the notiﬁcation
date. On the record date, the last day of the month, Fedwire records the buyer
as the new holder of the security. On the ﬁfth or sixth business day of the next
month, the pool factors (current balance / original balance) are released. The
pool factor determines the new face value of the mortgage after accounting for
scheduled principal payments and prepayments from the previous month. Then,
on the payment date later that month, the scheduled principal payments, interest
payments, and prepayments, less servicing and guaranty fees are passed to the
holder of the security. For FNMA MBS, the payment date is the 25th of the
month. If the 25th day happens to fall on a bond market holiday or a weekend,
the payment is made on the following business day. A timeline for the timing of
payments for a hypothetical TBA trade is shown in Table A2.
A.3 Adjustment for Fees
Fixed-rate mortgage pools consist entirely of ﬁxed-rate loans, but the underlying
loans may bear diﬀerent ﬁxed rates of interest. Interest on a ﬁxed-rate pool is
set on the issue date of the related certiﬁcates and it is equal to the interest

rates less the fee percentages for each loan in the pool. The fee percentage is the
sum of the servicing fee and the guaranty fee for that loan. Fixed-rate loans in
a single pool have interest rates that are within a two percent range (sometimes
a wider range may be allowed). However, the pass-through rate of each loan in
ﬁxed rate pool is the same. Therefore, the pass-through rate will not change if
prepayments occur.
Consider the cash ﬂow generated by a pass-through of an individual ﬁxed rate
mortgage. Prior to either prepayment or default, the owner of the pass-through
receives the constant cash ﬂow c generated by the mortgage loan less the servicing
and guaranty fees, which are a percentage of the principal balance It . Denote
the servicing and guaranty fees by the constant g. Then, the cash ﬂow generated
T
by the pass-through security, cP
t , in absence of prepayment, is
T
= c − gIt .
cP
t

(A1)

Therefore, the value of a FNMA MBS, after accounting for fees, is given by

F (m, T ) = E

Q



T

0

 

t
exp − 0 rs + ws ds Nt (c + (pt − g) It ) dt ,

(A2)

where
pt = xt + yt max (0, m − a − brt ) .

(A3)

A.4 Valuation
Due to the independence of wt from the other stochastic processes, we can write

F (m, T ) =

T
0

S(t) E

Q




 
t
exp − 0 rs ds Nt (c + (pt − g) It ) dt,

(A4)

where

 

S(t) = E Q exp − 0t ws ds .

(A5)

The expression for S(t) is given by
S(t) = A(t) exp(−w0 B(t)),

(A6)

where
A(t) = exp

2
αw
σw
−
2
βw

t+

2
σw
(1 − exp(−βw t)) ,
4β 3
1
(1 − exp(−βw t)) .
B(t) =
βw

2
σw
αw
−
2
3
βw
βw

(1 − exp(−βw t))
(A7)

+

(A8)

Applying the separation theorem of Longstaﬀ (1990), we can bring the discount
factor out of the expectation. Hence,
F (m, T ) =

T
0

S(t) D(t) Ê [ Nt (c + (pt − g) It ) ] dt,

(A9)

where D(t) is the price of a zero-coupon bond and the expectation Ê[ · ] is taken
with respect to the forward measure.
A.5 Adjustments For Discrete Cash Flows
In this section, we adjust the mortgage valuation formula to account for the
actual cash ﬂows from a TBA trade. Let
T̃ ≡ {0, ts , t1 , . . . , tK } ,

(A10)

be the set of points in time related to the payments associated with a mortgagebacked security with K months until maturity. The valuation date, or trade date,
is t = 0. The MBS settles at t = ts , and the MBS investor receives payments on
dates t1 through tK . Since the settlement dates are ﬁxed by SIFMA, the amount
of time from the valuation date t = 0 through the settlement date t = ts varies
depending on the trade date. Also, due to holidays and weekends, each time step
after settlement, i.e. Δti ≡ ti+1 − ti , i = 1, . . . , K − 1, may vary by a couple of
days. Let CFi be the cash ﬂow received by the mortgage investor at time ti . In
our framework, the value of the mortgage is
1
F (m, K) =
S(ts ) D(ts )

K

S(ti ) D(ti ) Ê[ CFi ].

(A11)

i=1

To determine the cash ﬂow CFi at ti , we can apply standard mortgage cash ﬂow
formulas (recall that in continuous time, the cash ﬂow is Nt [c + (pt − g) It ]).
Following Hayre (2001), for each dollar of a mortgage in month i,

m/12
,
1 − (1 + m/12)−K
1 − (1 + m/12)−K+i
,
Balance (end of month) = BALi =
1 − (1 + m/12)−K
Monthly payment = PAY i =

Principal portion of payment = PRINi = PAY i × (1 + m/12)−K−1+i ,
Interest portion of payment = INTi = PAYi − PRINi .

(A12)
(A13)
(A14)
(A15)

Let
T̃CF ≡ {0, τ1 , . . . , τK } ,

(A16)

be the set of points in time relevant to determine the monthly cash ﬂows of the
MBS. This set corresponds to month-ends. For the example in Table A2, t = 0 is
March 31st, the month end before the settlement date, and τ1 is April 30th. Note
that it is possible that τ1 is either before or after the trade date depending on
whether the trade date and settlement date occur in the same month. However,
because the data are observed at each month end, the elements of T̃ and T̃CF
are ordered as
0 < t s < τ 1 < t1 < τ 2 < t2 < · · · < τ K < tK ,

(A17)

as shown in the example in Table A2.
Recall that Nt represents the fraction of the mortgage pool that has not yet
prepaid (i.e. a survival factor). To keep track of monthly prepayments, we
calculate the single monthly mortality (SMM), a common object in mortgage
modeling. SMM is fraction of the pool outstanding at the beginning of the
month that is prepaid during the month. Hence,

SMMi =

Nτi−1 − Nτi
.
Nτi−1

(A18)

Therefore, the prepayments in a given month i, PPi , can be written as

PPi = BALi−1 × Nτi−1 − PRINi × Nτi−1 × SSMi .

(A19)

Note that the cash ﬂow CFi received by the investor at ti reﬂects the payments
(scheduled and prepaid) at τi from the underlying mortgage loans, less servicing
and guaranty fees g. Therefore,

CFi = PRINi × Nτi−1 + PPi +

m−g
× INTi × Nτi−1 .
m

(A20)

Given paths of rt , xt , and yt , we calculate a path of pt . After integration and
exponentiation, we calculate Nt for the relevant time points. Then, the standard
mortgage formulas provide the cash ﬂows.
A.6 The Discount Function
We collect historical data on nominal-constant maturity Treasury rates from the
Federal Reserve’s H.15 statistical release. Then, we use a standard cubic spline
to bootstrap the prices of zero-coupon bonds D(t) for the relevant time points
for up to 30 years. For a discussion of this methodology, see Longstaﬀ, Mithal,
and Neis (2005).
A.7 Estimation of Interest Rate Dynamics
We assume that the interest rate follows the Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process
drt = (αr − βr rt ) dt + σr dZr .

(A21)

Mortgage rates are most closely related to the 10-year rate. Therefore, we ﬁt the
10-year zero-coupon rate exactly. From the time series of D(10) , we estimate αr ,
βr , and σr via conditional maximum likelihood. Note that this provides us with
parameters under the real-world probability measure. However, the reﬁnance
incentive max(0, m − a − br) involves an aﬃne function of r. Therefore, when we
estimate a and b later in the procedure, we are eﬀectively allowing for a constant
risk premium.
Conditional on r(s), the interest rate r(t) is normally distributed with mean


2
−β(t−s)
r(s)e−β(t−s) + α
and variance σ2β 1 − e−2β(t−s) . Instead of estiβ 1−e
mating αr , βr , and σr directly, we estimate the following functions of the param
σ2
−βδ
2
−2βδ
,γ
=
e
and
V
=
1
−
e
, where δ denotes the time step
eters: μ = α
β
2β
of the observed 10-year rates r0 , r1, . . . , rn of r. Let f(ri |ri−1 ; γ, μ, V 2 ) denote the
probability density function of ri conditional on ri−1 . Hence, it follows that


2
(r
1
−
(γr
+
μ(1
−
γ)))
i
i−1
f(ri |ri−1 ; γ, μ, V 2 ) = √
exp −
.
2V 2
2πV
Therefore, the log-likelihood function for the observed interest rates is

(A22)


1
n
n
LLK γ, μ, V 2 = − log 2π − log V 2 −
2
2
2V 2

n

2

(ri − γri−1 − μ(1 − γ)) .
i=1

(A23)
Summing over all n observations and then maximizing the log-likelihood function
gives α̂r = 0.008120, β̂r = 0.2168, and σ̂r = 0.009511. Rather than use the
estimator of the volatility parameter in the simulations, we adjust the volatility
parameter of the Vasicek model each month to match the basis point volatility
of a one-year into ten-year swap option. The results, however, are robust to the
speciﬁcation of the interest rate model.
A.8 Estimation Methodology
The estimation of the model can be viewed as consisting of three steps.
1. First, we select an initial parameter vector θ, where θ = {a, b, αw , αx , αy ,
βw , βx , βy , σw , σx , σy }.
2. Second, conditional on θ and for each month t during the sample period, we
solve for the values of wt , xt , and yt that best ﬁt the model to the prices
for the coupon stack (the cross section of mortgage-backed securities with
diﬀerent coupon rates) by minimizing the root mean squared error (RMSE).
Since the nonlinear structure of the prepayment function makes it diﬃcult
to express the price of mortgage-backed securities in closed-form, we use
simulation to solve for the model-based mortgage-backed security values.
The simulation step solves
1
F (m, K) =
S(t0 ) D(t0 )

K

S(ti ) D(ti ) Ê[ CFi ],

(A24)

i=1

for given values of wt , xt , and yt . Since D(t) is computed from the Treasury yield curve and S(t) has a closed-form solution, we can focus on the
expectation in the equation above. We simulate paths of rt , xt , and yt , and
then compute a path of pt since
pt = xt + yt max (0, m − a − b rt ) .

(A25)

We use monthly time steps, and the square-root processes are simulated
following the algorithm presented in Shao (2012). From pt , we compute the
survival factors N (t) for each month, and then compute the mortgage cash
ﬂows CFi. The average cash ﬂows along each path provides the estimate of

the expectation. Given the value of the expectation, we then solve for the
mortgage price.
The RMSE of the simulated prices and the market prices provides the objective function for the optimization. We use the controlled random search
(CRS) algorithm of Kaelo and Ali (2006) to solve for the initial values of wt ,
xt , yt which minimize the RMSE for each date t.
3. Third, we apply the CRS algorithm to the parameter vector θ to ﬁnd the
vector that results in the lowest global root mean square error (RMSE). The
outputs are the parameter values and the time series of state variables.

Table A1
Data Definitions and Sources

Data

Frequency

Description and Source

1

FNMA MBS Prices

Monthly

2
3
4

FNMA CPR Data
Treasury CMT Data
Discount Function D(T)

Monthly
Monthly
Monthly

5

Interest Rate Volatility

Monthly

6

FNMA Agency Credit Spread

Monthly

7
8
9
10

Primary Dealers’ MBS Holdings
Repo Rate
Net MBS Issuance
Federal Reserve MBS Purchases

Monthly
Monthly
Monthly
Weekly

11

Consumption Expenditures

Monthly

12

Unemployment Rate

Monthly

13

Delinquency Rate

Quarterly

14

Foreclosure Rate

Quarterly

15

Cash-Out Mortgage Ratio

Quarterly

Proprietary data set provided by a major Wall Street MBS dealer.
Data cross validated with Bloomberg data.
Three-month CPR prepayment rate data collected and provided by eMBS Inc.
Constant maturity Treasury rates from Federal Reserve H.15 Selected Interest Rates Release.
Discount function out to 30 years bootstrapped from Treasury CMT rates using standard
cubic spline interpolation algorithm as described in Longstaﬀ, Mithal, and Neis (2005).
Basis point volatility for 1-year into 10-year swaptions. Proprietary data set provided by
major Wall Street MBS dealer.
Ten-year FNMA note yield over ten-year Treasury yield. Proprietary data set provided by a
major Wall Street MBS dealer.
Federal Reserve Bank of New York: http://www.newyorkfed.org/markets/gsds/search.html.
General collateral Treasury three-month repo rate provided by Bloomberg.
Net MBS issuance in $ millions provided by eMBS Inc.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Mortgage-Backed Securities
Held by the Federal Reserve: All Maturities [MBST], retrieved from FRED,
Federal Reserve Bank of St Louis, https://research.stlouisfed.org/fred2/series/MBST.
Weekly data aggregated to monthly and quarterly frequency.
Seasonally adjusted at annual rates. US Bureau of Economic Analysis, Personal
Consumption Expenditures [PCE], retrieved from FRED, Federal Reserve Bank of
St. Louis, https://research.stlouisfed.org/fred2/series/PCE.
Seasonally adjusted unemployment rate provided by Bureau of Labor Statistics,
http://data.bls.gov/timeseries/LNS14000000.
Seasonally adjusted. Mortgage Bankers Association National Delinquency Survey,
provided by Bloomberg (DLQTDLQT Index).
Mortgage Bankers Association National Delinquency Survey, provided by
Bloomberg (DLQTFORE Index).
Freddie Mac, Oﬃce of Chief Economist, Cash-Out Reﬁnance Report, 4Q 2014,
http://www.freddiemac.com/ﬁnance/reﬁnance report.html.

Table A1 Continued

Data

Frequency

Description and Source

16
17

Barclays Bond Index
Stock Market Return

Monthly
Monthly

18

Housing Market Index

Monthly

19

Consumer Credit

Monthly

20

Conventional LTV Ratios

Quarterly

21

Bank Tightening Index

Quarterly

22

Consumer Conﬁdence Index

Monthly

Monthly returns on the Barclays US Aggregate Bond Index.
Monthly valued-weighted return on all NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ ﬁrms,
Center for Research in Security Prices.
National Association of Home Builders Market Index. This index is based
on a monthly survey of NAHB members of the single-family housing market.
Seasonally adjusted. The outstanding amount of credit used by consumers
excluding mortgage loans. Federal Reserve, provided by Bloomberg (USHBMIDX Index).
Loan to value ratios for all conventional loans. Data reported by the
Monthly Interest Rate Survey (MIRS) of the Federal Housing Finance Agency (FHFA).
Percentage of banks tightening mortgage lending standards from Board of Governors
of the Federal Reserve System, Net Percentage of Banks Tightening Standards for
Mortgage Loans [H0SUBLPDHMSNQ], retrieved from FRED, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis
https://research.stlouisfed.org/fred2/series/H0SUBLPDHMSNQ.
The Conference Board. Provided by Bloomberg (CONCCONF Index).

Table A2
Cash Flow Time Line for a Hypothetical 30-Year Fannie Mae TBA trade. This table shows the key events and cash flows surrounding a
30-year Fannie Mae TBA trade executed on March 31.

Date

Event

Time

0

Note

March 31
April 6
April 12
April 14
April 30
May 7
May 25
..
.

Trade Date
Factor Date
48-Hour Day
Settlement Date
Record Date
Factor Date
Payment Date
..
.

May 31
..
.

Month End
..
.

τ2

Payment at t2 reflects prepayments over τ1 to τ2 .
..
.

June 26
..
.

Payment Date
..
.

t2

The buyer receives the second payment from the MBS.
..
.

June 31
..
.

Month End
..
.

τ3

Payment at t3 reflects prepayments over τ2 to τ3 .
..
.

July 25
..
.

Payment Date
..
.

t3

The buyer receives the third payment from the MBS.
..
.

ts
τ1
t1

Trade parameters: issuer, maturity, coupon, face value, price, settlement date.
Pool factors are released by FNMA.
The buyer is notified of the pools the seller will deliver to settle the TBA trade.
The buyer wires the payment to the seller.
Fedwire records the buyer as the new holder of record.
Pool factors are released by FNMA, reflecting January prepayments.
The buyer receives the first payment from the MBS.
..
.

