NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE STATE OF AMERICAN ENTREPRENEURSHIP:
NEW ESTIMATES OF THE QUALITY AND QUANTITY OF
ENTREPRENEURSHIP FOR 32 US STATES, 1988-2014
Jorge Guzman
Scott Stern
Working Paper 22095
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22095

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2016, Revised July 2019
Previously circulated as "The State of American Entrepreneurship: New Estimates of the
Quantity and Quality of Entrepreneurship for 15 US States, 1988-2014." We are thankful for
comments and suggestions by Marianne Bertrand, Erik Brynjolffson, Ankur Chavda, Catherine
Fazio, Joshua Gans, John Haltiwanger, Bill Kerr, Fiona Murray, Abhishek Nagaraj, Roberto
Rigobon, David Robinson, and Hal Varian, as well as seminar and conference participants at
Duke University, Harvard Business School, University of Toronto, the University of Virginia, the
Kauffman Foundation New Entrepreneurial Growth Conference, and the NBER Pre-Conference
on Entrepreneurship and Economic Growth, and to four anonymous referees. We also thank Open
Corporates for providing data for New York and Michigan, and RJ Andrews for his development
of the visualization approach. Sarah Andries, Jintao Chen, Ji Seok Kim, and Yupeng Liu
provided excellent research assistance. Finally, we acknowledge and thank the Jean Hammond
(1986) and Michael Krasner (1974) Entrepreneurship Fund and the Edward B. Roberts (1957)
Entrepreneurship Fund at MIT, and the Kauffman Foundation for financial support. All errors and
omissions are of course our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w22095.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Jorge Guzman and Scott Stern. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The State of American Entrepreneurship: New Estimates of the Quality and Quantity of
Entrepreneurship for 32 US States, 1988-2014
Jorge Guzman and Scott Stern
NBER Working Paper No. 22095
March 2016, Revised July 2019
JEL No. C53,L26,O51
ABSTRACT
Assessing the state of American entrepreneurship requires not simply counting the quantity but
also the initial quality of new ventures. Combining comprehensive business registries and
predictive analytics, we present estimates of entrepreneurial quantity and quality from 1988-2014.
Rather than a secular pattern of declining business dynamism, our quality-adjusted measures
follow a cyclical pattern sensitive to economic and capital market conditions. Consistent with the
role of investment cycles as a driver of high-growth entrepreneurship, our results highlight the
role of economic and institutional conditions as a driver of both initial entrepreneurial quality and
the scaling of new ventures over time.

Jorge Guzman
Columbia Business School
Uris Hall, 711
116th St & Broadway
New York, NY 10027
jag2367@gsb.columbia.edu
Scott Stern
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-476
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
sstern@mit.edu

Over the past two decades, economists have made significant progress in advancing the
measurement of entrepreneurship. The pioneering studies of Haltiwanger and co-authors (Davis
and Haltiwanger, 1992; Davis et al, 1996; Haltiwanger et al, 2013; Decker et al, 2014) moved
attention away from simply counting the density of small and medium sized firms towards the
measurement and growth dynamics of young firms.

These studies established that a

disproportionate share of new job creation is associated with new firms, and economic growth is
grounded in business dynamics. A separate stream of research focusing on selective samples of
high-performance entrepreneurial ventures and the institutions that surround them reinforce this
perspective. For example, Kortum and Lerner (2000) find that venture capital is associated with
higher levels of innovation, and Samila and Sorenson (2011) find that venture capital has a positive
impact on aggregate income, employment, and new establishment formation.
Notwithstanding these advances, there is increasing recognition that the relationship between
entrepreneurship and economic growth depends not simply on the quantity but also on the
underlying quality of new firms (Schoar, 2010; Hurst and Pugsley, 2011). While systematic
population-level indices of the quantity of entrepreneurial activity (such as the Business Dynamics
Statistics database, hereafter BDS) document a secular decline in the rate of business dynamism
and the “aging” of US private sector establishments (Hathaway and Litan, 2014a, 2014b, 2014c),
researchers focused on venture capital and high-growth firms have documented a sizeable increase
after the Great Recession in the funding of growth-oriented entrepreneurial ventures (Gornall and
Strebulaev, 2015).
To put these differences in perspective, consider the gap between the rate (relative to GDP) of
firm births per year as measured by the Business Dynamics Statistics versus the rate (relative to
GDP) of successful growth firms founded in a particular year (i.e., the number of firms founded in
a given year that achieved an IPO or significant acquisition within six years of initial business
registration), for the 32 states which will form the basis of our analysis. While the BDS shows a
slow and steady decline of approximately 40% (consistent with Hathaway and Litan (2014a)), the
realization of growth experienced a much sharper up-and-down cycle, with 1996 representing the
most successful start-up cohort in US history, followed by a relatively stable level from 2001 to
2008.2 Moreover, while it has long been known that the growth consequences of start-up activity
2

This divergence is reinforced by comparing BDS firm births and economic growth. While the BDS has little cyclical variation (and is on a
downward decline), GDP growth is far more variable with a sharp upward trend through the 1990s and a downward decline over the subsequent

2

are concentrated in the outcomes of a very small fraction of the most successful firms (Kerr, Nanda,
and Rhodes-Kropf, 2014), prior attempts to use population-level data to characterize the rate of
entrepreneurship have largely abstracted away from initial differences across firms in the
ambitions of their founders or their inherent growth potential.3
Simply put, alternative definitions of entrepreneurship suggest different assessments of the
state of American entrepreneurship.
Not simply a matter of measurement, characterizing entrepreneurial quality by cohort allows
for the empirical assessment of important economic and policy questions. For example, in line
with the debt deflation theory suggested by Fisher (1933), Bernanke and Gertler (1989) suggest
that high-quality entrepreneurship may be reduced during a recession due to structural financing
constraints (while low-quality entrepreneurship may be unaffected). And, this reduction in
growth-oriented entrepreneurship can exacerbate a downturn through reduced business dynamism.
Assessing this theoretical claim empirically requires the development of consistent measures for
the quantity and quality of entrepreneurship at founding and observing how these measures change
at different points in the business cycle. From a policy perspective, fostering growth-oriented
entrepreneurship may be fundamentally different than focusing on policies that enhance the
environment for “Main Street” businesses (Aulet and Murray, 2011; Mills and McCarthy, 2014;
Chatterji, 2018), and so being able to differentiate between new ventures in terms of their growth
potential can offer more targeted and effective entrepreneurship policy.
Building on Guzman and Stern (2015; 2017), this paper develops and implements a novel
approach to the measurement of both the quantity and quality of entrepreneurship which we then
use to provide substantive insight into both theoretical and policy questions.4 Our approach to
measuring entrepreneurial quality combines three interrelated insights.

First, a practical

requirement for any growth-oriented entrepreneur is business registration (as a corporation,
period. In recent work, Decker et al (2016) show that high growth in the High Tech sector (as defined by a collection of NAICS codes) has followed
a more cyclical pattern than the Retail and Services sectors, which account for the bulk of the decline in new firms.
3
The challenge is fundamentally a measurement problem: “The problem is that it is very difficult, if not impossible, to know at the time of
founding whether or not firms are likely to survive and/or grow.” (Hathaway and Litan, 2014b).
4
In our earlier work, we undertook preliminary explorations of the approach that we develop in this paper. In Guzman and Stern (2015), we
introduced the overall methodology in an exploratory way by examining regional clusters of entrepreneurship such as Silicon Valley at a given
point in time. We then focused on a single US state (Massachusetts) to see if it was feasible to estimate entrepreneurial quality over time on a near
real-time basis (Guzman and Stern, 2017). This paper builds on these earlier exercises to develop an analysis for 32 “representative” US states
(comprising more than 80% of overall GDP) over a 27-year period, introduce new economic statistics that allow for the characterization of
entrepreneurial quantity and quality over time and place, consider the relationship between alternative metrics of entrepreneurship and measures of
economic performance, and consider the changing nature of regional entrepreneurship for selected metropolitan areas. Passages of text describing
our methodology and approach, as well as the Data Appendix, draw upon these earlier papers (with significant revision for clarity and concision as
appropriate).

3

partnership, or limited liability company).

These public documents allow us to observe a

“population” sample of entrepreneurs observed at a similar (and foundational) stage of the
entrepreneurial process. Second, moving beyond simple counts of business registrants (Klapper,
Amit, and Guillen, 2010), we are able to measure characteristics related to entrepreneurial quality
at or close to the time of registration. These characteristics include how the firm is organized,
how it is named, and how the idea behind the business is protected. These start-up characteristics
may reflect choices by founders who perceive their venture to have high potential. In other words,
though observed start-up characteristics are not causal drivers of start-up performance, they may
nonetheless represent early-stage “digital signatures” of high-quality ventures. Third, we leverage
the fact that, though rare, we observe meaningful growth outcomes for some firms, and are
therefore able to estimate the relationship between these growth outcomes and start-up
characteristics. This mapping allows us to form an estimate of entrepreneurial quality for any
business registrant within our sample, even those in recent cohorts where a growth outcome (or
lack thereof) has not yet had time to be observed.
We use this predictive analytics approach to propose three new statistics for the measurement
of growth entrepreneurship:

the Entrepreneurship Quality Index (EQI), the Regional

Entrepreneurship Cohort Potential Index (RECPI), and the Regional Entrepreneurial Acceleration
Index (REAI). EQI is a measure of average quality within any given group of firms, and allows
for the calculation of the probability of a growth outcome for a firm within a specified population
of start-ups. RECPI multiples EQI and the number of start-ups within a given geographical region
(e.g., from a zip code or town to the entire five-state coverage of our sample), and so is a measure
of the quality-adjusted quantity of entrepreneurship. Whereas EQI compares entrepreneurial
quality across different groups, RECPI allows the direct calculation of the expected number of
growth outcomes from a given start-up cohort within a given regional boundary. REAI, on the
other hand, measures the ratio between the realized number of growth events for a given start-up
cohort and the expected number of growth events for that cohort (i.e.., RECPI). REAI offers a
measure of whether the “ecosystem” in which a start-up grows is conducive to growth (or not),
and allows variation in ecosystem performance across time and at an arbitrary level of geographic
granularity.
We calculate these measures on an annual basis for 32 U.S. states for the period 1988-2014.
We document several key findings. First, in contrast to the secular and steady decline observed in
4

the BDS, RECPI / GDP has followed a cyclical pattern that seems sensitive to the capital market
environment and overall economic conditions. Second, while the peak value of RECPI / GDP is
recorded in 2000, the overall level during the first decade of the 2000s is actually higher than the
level observed between 1990 and 1995, with an additional upward swing beginning in 2010.5 Even
after controlling for change in the overall size of the economy, the third highest level of
entrepreneurial growth potential is registered in 2014. Finally, there is striking variation over time
in the likelihood of start-up firms at a given quality level to realize their potential (REAI): REAI
declined sharply in the late 1990s, and did not recover through 2008. While we focus on estimates
of entrepreneurial quality based on a predictive model of equity growth outcomes (the achievement
of an IPO or significant acquisition within six years of founding), these broad patterns of results
also hold if one focuses on alternative definitions of equity growth (e.g., only focusing on IPOs)
or alternative growth measures such as the realization of more than 500 employees within the first
six years after founding.6
We use these measures to assess the long-standing theoretical debate regarding the relationship
between entrepreneurship and the business cycle.

While a long line of theoretical work

emphasizes the potential for economic growth to stimulate and nurture the founding of new
growth-oriented ventures, either by improving the balance sheet of investors (Fisher, 1933;
Bernanke and Gertler, 1989; Carlstrom and Fuerst, 1997; Rampini, 2004), or the investor
expectations of follow-on capital availability (Caballero, Farhi, and Hammour, 2004; Nanda and
Rhodes-Kropf, 2013), others have emphasized the potential for a “cleansing effect” of recessions,
whereby downturns instead enhance the potential of the firms that are founded ventures at that
time (Schumpeter, 1939; Cabarello and Hammour, 1994).

A key insight of this theoretical

literature is that economic conditions shape the aggregate entrepreneurial potential of start-up
cohorts and the overall incidence of high growth start-ups, but not the total number of start-ups
founded for each cohort. We use our measurement of both quantity and initial entrepreneurial
quality to test this hypothesis directly. Using a structural vector autoregression (SVAR) model,

5

We use a “nowcasting” index for the most recent cohorts which only use start-up characteristics available within the business registration data,
and compare that index to an “enriched” index which captures events that might occur early within the life of a start-up such as the initial receipt
of intellectual property.
6
Our employment growth results are based on a private sector data source, Infogroup USA. While we highlight the robustness of our core
findings to this potentially noisy measure of employment growth in this paper, we do not undertake a systematic assessment of employment-oriented
growth outcomes which could more naturally be conducted with a comprehensive administrative dataset such as the LBD.

5

we provide the first evidence that quality-adjusted quantity (RECPI) is procyclical while quantity
is unrelated to economic conditions.
Our approach of course comes with important limitations and caveats. First, and most
importantly, we strongly caution against a causal interpretation of the regressors we employ for
our predictive analytics—while factors such as eponymy and the form of business registration are
a “digital signature” that allows us to differentiate among firms in the aggregate, these are not
meant to be interpreted as causal factors that lead to growth per se (i.e., simply registering their
firm in Delaware is not going to directly enhance an individual firm’s underlying growth potential).
And, while we are encouraged by the robustness of our core approach across multiple states and
time periods, we can easily imagine (and are actively working on identifying) additional firm-level
measures which might allow for even more differentiation in quality, or account directly for
changing patterns over time and space in the “drivers” of growth. Finally, though we show some
robustness of our findings to the use of employment-oriented growth outcomes, a more complete
assessment of the differences between equity growth outcomes and employment-oriented
outcomes remains outstanding.
Keeping in mind these caveats, our findings nonetheless do offer a new perspective on the state
of American entrepreneurship. Most importantly, our results highlight that the recent shift in
attention towards young firms (pioneered by Haltiwanger and co-authors) is enriched by directly
accounting for initial heterogeneity among new firms. Even within the same industry, there is
significant heterogeneity among new firms in their ambition and inherent potential for growth.7
Policies that implicitly treat all firms as equally likely candidates for growth are likely to expect
“too much” from the vast majority of firms with relatively low growth potential. Second, the
striking decline in REAI after the boom period of the 1990s is the first independent evidence for
an often-cited concern of practitioners: even as the number of new ideas and potential for
innovation is increasing, there seems to be a reduction in the ability of companies to scale in a
meaningful and systematic way.
Our approach holds promise for multiple areas of economics research and policy. For
example, a predictive analytics approach to entrepreneurial quality allows for the assessment of
the relative importance of passive versus proactive growth firms in the overall process of firm
7

In recent work, Decker et al (2016) use business dynamics estimates to also document important variation in rates of dynamisms across
industries.

6

growth, and the specific role of venture capital in enabling the growth of firms with high initial
quality (Catalini et al, 2019). As well, it is possible to use our approach to examine the role of
gender differences among founders in the process of attracting venture capital and overall firm
growth (Guzman and Kacperczyk, 2019). And, it is possible to use this approach (which uses firm
choices regardless of location) to assess the role of location (e.g., whether the firm is in Silicon
Valley) in facilitating firm growth (Guzman and Stern, 2015), shaping the incentives to migrate
between locations (Guzman, 2019), and in assessing the role of local institutions (such as
universities) and policies (such as tax) in shaping the process of firm founding and growth (Stern
and Tartari, 2018; Fazio, et al, 2019).
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section I provides an overview of entrepreneurial
quality in economics and briefly outlines our theoretical intuition. Section II explains our
methodology, and Section III our dataset and the estimation of entrepreneurial quality for our
sample. Sections IV and V describe the variation in our key statistics across geography and time.
Section VI compares the relationship of our index to an alternative measure of economic growth
using employment outcomes. In section VII, we empirically test the relationship between GDP
growth and changes in national entrepreneurship. Section VIII concludes.
I. Entrepreneurial Quality: Do Initial Differences Matter?
Economists have long sought to understand the role of firm-specific characteristics in industry
dynamics. Gibrat (1931) provides the foundational benchmark in this area: Gibrat’s Law proposes
that the growth rate of firms (and the variance in that growth rate) are independent of firm size
(Sutton, 1997). Despite broad patterns consistent with Gibrat’s Law, a large literature beginning
with Mansfield (1962) instead emphasizes deviations from proportional growth. This literature
first emphasized that smaller firms have both higher growth rates and lower probabilities of
survival (Mansfield, 1962; Acs and Audretsch, 1988, among others), but over time additional
research suggested that younger firms also had high average growth rates and lower survival
probabilities (Evans, 1987; Dunne, Roberts, and Samuelson, 1988).8

8

Not simply a set of empirical regularities, these findings formed the foundations for important theoretical work, notably Jovanovic (1982) and
subsequent formal models of firm and industry dynamics (Ericson and Pakes, 1995; Klepper, 1996; Hopenhayn, 1992; Klette and Kortum, 2004).

7

Davis and Haltiwanger (1992) clarified this empirical debate by simultaneously considering
the role of size and age, developing systematic evidence that virtually all net job creation was in
fact due to younger firms (which are small because they are young) rather than smaller firms per
se (Davis, Haltiwanger, and Shuh, 1996; Jarmin, Haltiwanger, and Miranda, 2013; Akcigit and
Kerr, 2018). Building on these studies, Decker et al (2014) extend this approach to document an
overall decline in the rate of new firms that have at least one employee, which the authors
characterize as a reduction in the rate of business dynamism, with meaningful variation across
industry groups (Decker et al, 2016).
However, the role of young firms in shaping job creation is not homogenous across the
population of new firms. The vast majority of new firms are associated with no net new job
growth, and consequently a very small fraction of new firms is disproportionately responsible for
net new job growth. Using surveys and aggregate economic comparisons, some have suggested
that these differences in growth are accounted for by underlying differences in the firms themselves
(Hurst and Pugsley, 2011; Kaplan and Lerner, 2010; Schoar, 2010). Yet, beyond broad industry
effects, systematic studies of firm dynamics have yet to incorporate such ex ante differences in a
way that ties closely to the highly skewed ex post distribution of firm growth.
Accounting for this skew requires confronting a measurement quandary: at the time that a
company is founded, one cannot observe whether that particular firm will experience a skewed
growth outcome (or not). On the one hand, this challenge is fundamental, since entrepreneurship
involves a high level of uncertainty and luck. And, some outsized successes certainly result from
unlikely origins. Ben & Jerry’s, for example, was founded with the intention to be a one-store,
home-made ice-cream shop. With that said, many of the most successful firms in the economy
were founded with a strong growth orientation. For example, Jeff Bezos founded Amazon with
the intention of first creating the “world’s biggest bookstore” in order to take advantage of the
nascent potential of electronic commerce (Stone, 2013). To the extent that the new firms that
ultimately contribute to the skew are disproportionately drawn from firms with significant growth
ambitions and underlying potential at their time of founding, identifying these growth-oriented
firms can contribute significantly to the understanding of firm dynamics.
Our key insight is that while it may be difficult to identify the potential for growth based on
traditional economic metrics (e.g., profits during the first of operations), the founders themselves
likely have information about the underlying quality of their idea and their personal level of
8

ambition, and make choices at the time of founding consistent with their objectives and potential
for growth. Specifically, we can take advantage of the fact that entrepreneurs who assess the
underlying quality of their venture to be higher are more likely to make choices that result in
“digital signatures” associated with growth-oriented start-up firms, and that firms with these
resulting digital signatures are themselves more likely to grow. In other words, we can map the
realized performance of start-ups to the early-stage choices of founders. By mapping the
relationship between growth outcomes and these founder choices, we are able to form an estimate
of entrepreneurial quality at founding.
To understand this intuition, consider a simple model where all new firms have an underlying
quality level q (e.g., the underlying value of the idea and the ambition and capabilities of the
founder) that is observable to the entrepreneur but not to the econometrician. Firms with a higher
level of q are more likely to realize a meaningful growth outcome g. In addition, all entrepreneurs
face a set of binary corporate governance and strategy choices 𝐻 = {ℎ& , … , ℎ) }, such as how to
register the firm (e.g., as an LLC or corporation), what to name the firm (e.g., whether to name the
firm after the founders) and how to protect their underlying idea (e.g., whether to apply for either
a patent or trademark). Suppose further that while the cost of each corporate governance choice h
is independent of the quality of the idea (but might vary idiosyncratically across entrepreneurs),
the expected value of each of these choices is increasing in underlying quality (i.e., firms with a
higher q receive a higher marginal return to each element of H). Finally, suppose that while the
econometrician cannot observe underlying quality, she is able to observe both the corporate
governance choice bundle 𝐻 ∗ as well as growth outcomes g.

The proof in Appendix B

demonstrates that the mapping between g and H allows us to form a consistent estimate of the
underlying probability of growth conditional on initial conditions H (we refer to this estimate as
𝜃), and importantly that this mapping is a monotonically increasing function of q.
II. The Measurement of Entrepreneurial Quality and Performance
Building on this discussion, we now develop our empirical strategy. Our goal is to estimate
the relationship between a growth outcome, 𝑔, and early firm choices, 𝐻 ∗ , in order to form an
estimate of the probability of growth 𝜃. for all firms at their time of founding. This approach (and
our discussion) builds directly on Guzman and Stern (2015; 2017).

9

We combine three interrelated insights. First, as the challenges to reach a growth outcome as
a sole proprietorship are formidable, a practical requirement for any entrepreneur to achieve
growth is business registration (as a corporation, partnership, or limited liability company). This
practical requirement creates a public record of all registered companies, allowing us to form a
population sample of entrepreneurs “at risk” of growth at a similar (and foundational) stage.
Second, we are able to potentially distinguish among business registrants through the measurement
of characteristics related to entrepreneurial quality observable at or close to the time of registration.
For example, we can measure start-up characteristics such as whether the founders name the firm
after themselves (eponymy), whether the firm is organized in order to facilitate equity financing
(e.g., registering as a corporation or in Delaware), or whether the firm seeks intellectual property
protection (e.g., a patent or trademark). Third, we leverage the fact that, though rare, we observe
meaningful growth outcomes for some firms (e.g., those that achieve an IPO or high-value
acquisition within six years of founding). Combining these insights, we measure entrepreneurial
quality by estimating the relationship between observed growth outcomes and start-up
characteristics using the population of at-risk firms. For firm i born in region r at time t with startup characteristics 𝐻/,0,1 and growth outcome 𝑔/,0,123 , we estimate:
(1)

𝜃/,0,1 = 𝑃5𝑔/,0,123 6𝐻/,0,1 7 = 𝑓5𝛼 + 𝛽𝐻/,0,1 7

This model allows us to predict quality as the probability of achieving a growth outcome given
start-up characteristics at founding, and so estimate entrepreneurial quality as 𝜃./,0,1 . As long as the
process by which start-up characteristics map to growth remains stable over time (an assumption
which is itself testable), this mapping allows us to form an estimate of entrepreneurial quality for
any business registrant within our sample (even those in recent cohorts where a growth outcome
or not has not yet had time to be observed).
We use these estimates to propose three new entrepreneurship statistics capturing the level of
entrepreneurial quality for a given population of start-ups, the potential for growth
entrepreneurship within a given region and start-up cohort, and the performance over time of a
regional entrepreneurial ecosystem in realizing the potential performance of firms founded within
a given location and time period.

10

A. The Entrepreneurial Quality Index (EQI)
To create an index of entrepreneurial quality for any group of firms (e.g., all the firms within
a particular cohort or a group of firms satisfying a particular condition), we simply take the average
quality within that group. Specifically, in our regional analysis, we define the Entrepreneurial
Quality Index (EQI) as an aggregate of quality at the region-year level by simply estimating the
average of 𝜃/,0,1 over that region:
&

(2)

𝐸𝑄𝐼0,1 = ) ∑/∈CD?,@E 𝜃/,0,1
?,@

where {𝐼0,1 } represents the set of all firms in region r and year t, and 𝑁0,1 represents the number
of firms in that region-year. To ensure that our estimate of entrepreneurial quality for region r
reflects the quality of start-ups in that location rather than simply assuming that start-ups from a
given location are associated with a given level of quality, we exclude any location-specific
measures Hr,t from the vector of observable start-up characteristics.
B. The Regional Entrepreneurship Cohort Potential Index (RECPI).
From the perspective of a given region, the overall inherent potential for a cohort of start-ups
combines both the quality of entrepreneurship in a region and the number of firms in such region
(a measure of quantity). To do so, we define RECPI as simply 𝐸𝑄𝐼0,1 multiplied by the number
of firms in that region-year:
(3)

𝑅𝐸𝐶𝑃𝐼0,1 = 𝐸𝑄𝐼0,1 × 𝑁0,1

Since our index multiplies the average probability of a firm in a region-year to achieve growth
(quality) by the number of firms, it is, by definition, the expected number of growth events from a
region-year given the start-up characteristics of a cohort at birth. This measure of course abstracts
away from the ability of a region to realize the performance of start-ups founded within a given
cohort (i.e., its ecosystem performance), and instead can be interpreted as a measure of the
“potential” of a region given the “intrinsic” quality of firms at birth, which can then be affected by
the impact of the entrepreneurial ecosystem, or shocks to the economy and the cohort between the
time of founding and a growth outcome.

11

C. The Regional Ecosystem Acceleration Index (REAI).
While RECPI estimates the expected number of growth events for a given group of firms, over
time we can observe the realized number of growth events from that cohort. This difference can
be interpreted as the relative ability of firms within a given region to grow, conditional on their
initial entrepreneurial quality. Variation in ecosystem performance could result from differences
across regional ecosystems in their ability to nurture the growth of start-up firms, or changes over
time due to financing cycles or economic conditions. We define REAI as the ratio of realized
growth events to expected growth events:
∑K

L,?,@
(4) 𝑅𝐸𝐴𝐼0,1 = MNOPD

?,@

A value of REAI above one indicates a region-cohort that realizes a greater than expected
number of growth events (and a value below one indicates under-performance relative to
expectations). REAI is a measure of a regional performance premium: the rate at which the
regional business ecosystem supports high potential firms in the process of becoming growth
firms.
Together, EQI, RECPI, and REAI offer researchers and regional stakeholders the ability to
undertake detailed evaluations (over time, and at different levels of geographic and sectorial
granularity) of entrepreneurial quality and ecosystem performance.
III. Data and Entrepreneurial Quality Estimation
Our analysis leverages business registration records, a potentially rich and systematic data for
the study of entrepreneurship. Business registration records are public records created when an
individual registers a new business as a corporation, LLC or partnership. Appendix C of the
Supplementary Materials in this paper provides a rich and detailed overview of this data set, as do
the data appendixes in our prior work (Guzman and Stern, 2015; 2017).
We focus on 32 US states from 1988-2014 (see Appendix C for a list). While it is possible to
found a new business without business registration (e.g., a sole proprietorship), the benefits of
registration are substantial, and include limited liability, various tax benefits, the ability to issue
and trade ownership shares, and credibility with potential customers. Furthermore, all
corporations, partnerships, and limited liability companies must register with a Secretary of State
12

(or equivalent) in order to take advantage of these benefits: the act of registering the firm triggers
the legal creation of the company. As such, these records reflect the population of businesses that
take a form that is a practical prerequisite for growth.
Concretely, our analysis draws on the complete population of firms satisfying one of the
following conditions: (a) a for-profit firm in the local jurisdiction or (b) a for-profit firm whose
jurisdiction is in Delaware but whose principal office address is in the local state. In other words,
our analysis excludes non-profit organizations as well as companies whose primary location is not
in the state. The resulting dataset contains 27,976,477 observations.9 For each observation we
construct variables related to: (a) a growth outcome for each start-up; (b) start-up characteristics
based on business registration observables; and (c) start-up characteristics based on external
observables that can be linked directly to the start-up. We briefly review each one in turn and
provide a more detailed summary in our data appendix.
Growth. The growth outcome utilized in this paper, Growth, is a dummy variable equal to 1 if
the start-up achieves an initial public offering (IPO) or is acquired at a meaningful positive
valuation within 6 years of registration,10 as reported in the Thomson Reuters SDC database.11
During the period of 1988 to 2008, we identify 13,406 firms that achieve growth, of which 1,378
are IPOs and 12,028 are acquisitions, representing 0.07% of the total sample of firms in that period.
Start-Up Characteristics. At the center of our analysis is an empirical approach to map growth
outcomes to observable characteristics of start-ups at or near the time of business registration. We
develop two types of measures of start-up characteristics: (a) measures based on business
registration data observable in the registration record itself, and (b) measures based on external
indicators of start-up quality that are observable at or near the time of business registration.

9
The number of firms founded in our sample is substantially higher than the US Census Longitudinal Business Database (LBD), done from tax
records. For example, for Massachusetts in the period 2003-2012, the LBD records an average of 9,450 new firms per year and we record an average
of 24,066 firm registrations. We have yet to explore the reasons for this difference. However, we expect that it may be explained, in part by: (i)
partnerships and LLCs that do not have income during the year do not file a tax return and are thus not included in the LBD, and (ii) firms that have
zero employees and thus are not included in the LBD.
10
In our Data Appendix (Section III, Table A4) we investigate changes in this measure both in the threshold of growth (e.g. only IPOs) as well
as the time to grow; all results are robust to these variations
11
Although the coverage of IPOs is likely to be nearly comprehensive, the SDC data set excludes some acquisitions. SDC captures their list of
acquisitions by using over 200 news sources, SEC filings, trade publications, wires, and proprietary sources of investment banks, law firms, and
other advisors (Churchwell, 2016). Barnes, Harp, and Oler (2014) compare the quality of the SDC data to acquisitions by public firms and find a
95% accuracy; Netter, Stegemoller, and Wintoki (2011) perform a similar review. While we know this data not to be perfect, we believe it to have
relatively good coverage of ‘high value’ acquisitions. Further, none of the cited studies found significant false positives, suggesting that the only
effect of the acquisitions we do not track will be simply an attenuation of our estimated coefficients.

13

A. Measures Based on Business Registration Observables
We construct twelve measures based on information observable in business registration
records. We first create two binary measures that relate to how the firm is registered: Corporation,
whether the firm is a corporation rather than an LLC or partnership, and Delaware Jurisdiction,
whether the firm is registered in Delaware. We then create two additional measures based directly
on the name of the firm. Eponymy is equal to 1 if the first, middle, or last name of the top managers
is part of the name of the firm itself.12 We hypothesize that eponymous firms are likely to be
associated with lower entrepreneurial quality. Our second measure relates to the structure of the
firm name. Based on our review of naming patterns of growth-oriented start-ups versus the full
business registration database, a striking feature of growth-oriented firms is that the vast majority
of their names are at most two words (plus perhaps one additional word to capture organizational
form, e.g., “Inc.”). We define Short Name to be equal to one if the entire firm name has three or
fewer words, and zero otherwise.13
We then create several measures based on how the firm name reflects the industry or sector
within which the firm is operating, taking advantage of the industry categorization of the US
Cluster Mapping Project (“US CMP”) (Delgado, Porter, and Stern, 2016) and a text analysis
approach. We develop eight such measures. The first three are associated with broad industry
sectors and include whether a firm can be identified as local (Local), or traded (Traded), or traded
within resource intensive industries (Traded Resource Intensive). The other five industry groups
are narrowly defined high technology industries that could be expected to have high growth,
including whether the firm is associated with biotechnology (Biotech Sector), e-commerce (ECommerce), other information technology (IT Sector), medical devices (Medical Dev. Sector) or
semiconductors (Semiconductor Sector).
B. Measures based on External Observables
We construct two measures related to start-up quality based on intellectual property data
sources from the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office. Patent is equal to 1 if a firm holds a patent
12
Belenzon et al (2014; 2017) perform a more detailed analysis of the interaction between eponymy and firm performance, highlighting name
as a signal chosen by entrepreneurs given differences in growth intention.
13
Companies such as Akamai or Biogen have sharp and distinctive names, whereas more traditional businesses often have long and descriptive
names (e.g., “New England Commercial Realty Advisors, Inc.”).

14

application within the first year and 0 otherwise. We include patents that are filed by the firm
within the first year of registration and patents that are assigned to the firm within the first year
from another entity (e.g., an inventor or another firm). Our second measure, Trademark, is equal
to 1 if a firm applies for a trademark within the first year of registration.
Table 1 reports summary statistics and sources. A detailed description of all variables as well
as the specific set of US CMP clusters used to develop each industry classification are provided in
the Data Appendix (Appendix C).
C. Estimation of Entrepreneurial Quality
To estimate entrepreneurial quality for each firm in our sample, we regress Growth on the set
of start-up characteristics observable either directly through the business registration records or
otherwise related to the early-stage activities of growth-oriented start-ups. In Table 2, we present
a series of univariate logit regressions of Growth on each of these start-up characteristics. All
regressions are run on the full sample of firms from 1988 to 2008. To facilitate the interpretation
of our results, we present the results in terms of the odds-ratio coefficient and include the
McFadden pseudo R2.14
Our univariate results are suggestive, and highlight a relationship between early firm choices
and later growth. Measures based on the firm name are statistically significant and inform variation
in entrepreneurial outcomes. Having a short name is associated with a 3 times increase in the
probability of growth, and having an eponymous name with a 70% lower probability of growth.
Corporate form measures are also significant. Corporations are 3.4 times more likely to grow and
firms registered under Delaware jurisdiction (instead of the local jurisdiction) are 24 times more
likely to grow. These magnitudes are economically important and have strong explanatory
power—the pseudo-R2 of a Delaware binary measure alone is 0.09—indicating a potential role of
firm governance choices as a screening mechanism for entrepreneurial quality. Intellectual
property measures have the highest magnitude of all groups. Firms with a patent close to their birth

14

In all our models, we use logit rather than OLS for our predictions for two reasons. First, a large literature documents firm sizes and growth
rates as much closer to log-normal than linear (Gibrat, 1931; Axtell, 2001). While we stress that entrepreneurial quality is a distinct measure from
firm size, it is still more natural to use a functional form that best fits the known regularities of the data. While OLS is known to perform better
than logit in estimating marginal effects (see Angrist and Pischke, 2008), logit performs better than OLS in prediction of binary outcomes (Pohlman
and Leitner, 2003), consistent with the objective of this paper. We have also undertaken exploratory work investigating a non-parametric approach
involving unstructured interactions of start-up characteristics. The results from such an exercise result in an even more skewed distribution of
estimated entrepreneurial quality.

15

are 90 times more likely to grow, while firms with a trademark are 45 times more likely to grow.
Finally, the set of US CMP Cluster Dummies, implied from firm name, are also informative. For
example, firms whose name is associated with local industries (e.g. “Taqueria”) are 79% less likely
to grow, while firms whose name is associated with the biotechnology sector are 12 times more
likely to grow. These coefficients highlight the value of early firm name choices as indicators of
firm intentions and signals of a firm’s relationship to an industry.
It is of course important to caution against causal interpretations of these findings (and our
subsequent regression estimates). If a firm with low growth potential changes its legal jurisdiction
to Delaware, this decision need not have any impact on its overall growth prospects.15 Instead,
Delaware registration is an informative signal—based on the fact that external investors often
prefer to invest in firms governed under Delaware law—of the ambition and potential of the startup at the time of business registration.
In Table 3, we turn to a more systematic regression analysis to evaluate these relationships.
We begin in the first three specifications by evaluating the joint role of related groups of
measures.

16

(3-1) investigates the core corporate governance measures, indicating that

corporations are 4.1 times more likely to grow and Delaware firms are 23 times more likely to
grow. 17 Interestingly, both of these coefficients are actually larger than the odds ratio in the
univariate analysis. In (3-2), we focus on two measures based on firm name: firms with a short
name are 3 times more likely to grow while eponymous firms are 78% less likely to grow. Finally,
in (3-3), we study the relationship of intellectual property measures to Growth. Firms with a patent
are 50 times more likely to grow and firms with a trademark are 8 times more likely to grow.
We then estimate our core predictive analytics models in (3-4) and (3-5) by combining these
measures alongside industry and sector controls (i.e., firm names indicating whether the firm is in
a local versus traded industry, or associated with a particular industry cluster).

Our first

15

While it is possible the firms might “game” the algorithm by selecting into signals of high-quality (e.g., changing their name), this incentive
is bounded by the objectives of the founders. For example, it is unlikely that a founder with no intention to grow would incur the yearly expense
(around $1000) to maintain a registration in Delaware. As well, firms using names to signal that they serve a local customer base (e.g. “Taqueria”)
are unlikely to change their names in ways that affect their ability to attract customers. Finally, if firms with low underlying quality did choose to
invest in signals associated with high-quality, that would undermine the empirical correlation between start-up characteristics and firm growth.
16
We include state fixed effects to account for idiosyncratic differences across states in corporate registration policies and fees. Though
differences across states likely influence the “marginal” registrant (and would be of independent interest), it is unlikely that firms with significant
growth potential would be deterred from registration depending on the state in which they were founded. All of our core findings are robust to the
inclusion or exclusion of state fixed effects.
17
Since these are incidence-rate ratios (odds-ratios), the joint coefficients can be interpreted multiplicatively: Delaware corporations are 94.3
times more likely to grow (23 × 4.1 = 94.3).

16

specification (3-4) uses only business registration observables. The coefficients associated with
each of the business registration measures is roughly equivalent, though the impact of each
individual predictor is slightly attenuated.18 We then extend this specification in (3-5) to include
observables associated with early-stage milestones related to intellectual property. While the
coefficients on the business registration observables remain similar (though once again slightly
reduced in magnitude), each of the intellectual property observables is highly predictive. Given
the high correlation between Delaware and Patent, we separately allow for the estimation of firms
with a patent and no Delaware jurisdiction, firms with a Delaware jurisdiction and no patent, and
firms with both.19 In particular, receiving a patent is associated with a 23 times increase in the
likelihood of growth for non-Delaware firms, and the combination of Delaware registration and
patenting is associated with an 84 times increase in the likelihood of growth (simply registering in
Delaware without a patent is associated with only a 15 times increase in the growth probability).
Finally, firms successfully applying for a trademark in their first year after business registration
are associated with a four-times increase in the probability of growth.20
These two models offer a tradeoff. On the one hand, the “richer” specification of model (3-5)
involves an inherent lag in observability, since we are only able to observe early-stage milestones
in the period after business registration (in the case of the patent applications, there is an additional
18-month lag due to the disclosure policies of the USPTO). While including a more informative
set of regressors, model (3-5) is not as timely as model (3-4). Indeed, specifications that rely
exclusively on information encoded within the business registration record can be calculated on a
near real-time basis, and so provide the timeliest index for policymakers and other analysts. We
will calculate indices based on both specifications; while our main historical analyses will be based
off the results from model (3-5), model (3-4) can be used to provide our best estimate of changes

18

Appendix Table A1 presents the complete set of coefficient estimates for the US CMP Clusters and US CMP High-Tech Cluster dummy
variables. Briefly, as indicated in (A1-2), firms whose names indicate inclusion in a local industry (such as “restaurant”, “realtor”, etc) are 58%
less likely to grow, firms associated with traded industries are not significant, and firms specifically associated with resource intensive traded
industries are 12% less likely to grow. Names associated with specific high-technology sectors are also associated with growth: firms related to
biotechnology are 3 times more likely to grow, firm associated with e-commerce are 44% more likely to grow, firms associated with IT 2.5 times,
firms associated with medical devices 54%, and firms associated with semiconductors 2.3 times more likely to grow.
19
An alternative way of presenting this would be to include only an interaction for both. The Delaware and Patent coefficients would stay the
same, but the joint effect would require estimating 𝐷𝑒𝑙𝑎𝑤𝑎𝑟𝑒 × 𝑃𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑡 interaction rather than providing the effect directly.
20
It is worth noting that the coefficients in these two regressions are very similar to what we found in previous research in California (Guzman
and Stern, 2015) and Massachusetts (Guzman and Stern, 2017). Figure A2 reports the coefficients associated with each state-level fixed effect;
overall, our results are not sensitive to the inclusion or exclusion of these fixed effects in our regression analysis, predictive analytic estimates, or
mapping of entrepreneurial quality.

17

in the last few years. We use the term nowcasting in reference to the estimates related to (3-4) and
refer to (3-5) as the “full information” model (Scott and Varian, 2015).
D. Prediction Quality and Robustness
In Figure 2, we evaluate the predictive quality of our estimates by undertaking a tenfold crossvalidation test (Witten and Frank, 2005),21 and report the out-of-sample share of realized growth
outcomes at different portions of the entrepreneurial quality distribution. The results are striking.
The share of growth firms in the top 5% of our estimated growth probability distribution ranges
from 51% to 54%, with an average of 53%. The share of growth firms in the top 1% ranges from
34% to 38%, with 36% on average. Growth, however, is still a relatively rare event even among
the elite: the average firm within the top 1% of estimated entrepreneurial quality has only a 2.4%
chance of realizing a growth outcome.
In Appendix Table A2, we repeat our full information model with a series of robustness tests
to verify that the magnitudes in our model are not driven by variation across years or states. In
(A2-1) we report a variation of our model after also including year fixed-effects, (A2-2) includes
state-specific time trends, and (A2-3) includes both year fixed-effects and state-specific time
trends. While there is some variation in the magnitude of the coefficients, these changes are
relatively small, suggesting that the estimates are not driven by idiosyncratic variation across years
or states.22
IV.

The State of American Entrepreneurship

We now leverage these prediction models to calculate the centerpiece of our analysis:
evaluating trends in entrepreneurial quality (EQI), entrepreneurial potential (RECPI), and regional
economic performance (REAI) across the 32 states in our sample from 1988 through 2014. We
estimate two RECPI indexes, a full information index based on (3-5) using information in

21
Specifically, we divide our sample into 10 random subsamples, using the first subsample as a testing sample and using the other 9 to train
the model. For the retained test sample, we compare realized performance with entrepreneurial quality estimates from the model resulting from the
9 training samples. We then repeat this process 9 additional times, using each subsample as the test sample exactly once. This approach allows
us to estimate average out of sample performance, as well as the distribution of out of sample test statistics for our model specification.
22
Table B1 assesses the robustness of the index across states by estimating the out-of-sample shares of firms in the top 5% and top 10% of
quality by state, and the correlation between entrepreneurial quality estimates performed individually for each state and the national estimate. While
there is variation in each of these statistics across states, all of them indicate a relatively strong correlation between quality at the state level and our
national measure.

18

intellectual property and business registration records which we simply call RECPI, and a
nowcasting index that uses only business registration records (3-4), which we call Nowcasted
RECPI. U.S. RECPI, reported in Figure 3, is RECPI adjusted by the aggregate GDP of the 32
states in the sample.23 Finally, we also include a confidence interval estimated through a Monte
Carlo process repeating our procedure for 30 bootstrapped random samples (i.e. with replacement)
of the same size as our original sample. Before analyzing trends in the indexes, we note that both
U.S. RECPI and Nowcasted U.S. RECPI move very close to each other and that the confidence
interval of U.S. RECPI is narrow.
Both indexes indicate a rise of entrepreneurial potential in the 1990s through the year 2000,
with a rapid drop between 2000 and 2002. However, the level observed during the 2000s through
2008 is consistently higher than the level observed during the first half of the 1990s. After a
decline during the Great Recession (2008 and 2009), we observe a sharp upward spring starting in
2010. 24 Interestingly, Nowcasted U.S. RECPI is observed at its third highest level in 2014.
Relative to quantity-based measures of entrepreneurship such as the BDS, these estimates seem to
reflect broad patterns in the environment for growth entrepreneurship, such as capturing the dotcom boom and bust of the late 1990s and early 2000s, and capturing the rise of high-growth startups over the early years of this decade.
Our index of entrepreneurial potential does show gaps relative to realized entrepreneurial
performance. Though the statistics of GDP Growth in Figure 1B as well as the number of growth
firms in Figure 1A peak in the years 1995 and 1996 (respectively), U.S. RECPI instead peaks in
the year 2000. This offers insight into the possible sensitivity of entrepreneurial potential to credit
market cycles. While the 1996 cohort may have had lower initial potential, those firms were able
to take advantage of the robust financing environment during the early years of their growth; in
contrast, the peak U.S. RECPI start-up cohorts of 1999 and 2000 may have been limited in their
ability to reach their potential due to the “financial guillotine” that followed the crash of the dotcom bubble (Nanda and Rhodes-Kropf, 2013, 2014).
U.S. RECPI offers a new perspective on the “state” of entrepreneurship (at least for these
fifteen states). Specifically, our Nowcasting index suggests that there has been a steep rise in

23

It is also possible to adjust by population instead of GDP. RECPI / population shows a starker positive increase than RECPI / GDP, as GDP
per capita has also increased through the time period represented.
24
These broad patterns closely accord with the patterns we found for Massachusetts in Guzman and Stern (2017).

19

entrepreneurial potential over the last several years, and 2014 is the first year to begin to reach the
peaks of the dot-com boom. Indeed, it is useful to recall that our measure is relative to GDP: on
an absolute scale, U.S. RECPI 2014 is at the highest level ever registered. Finally, we emphasize
that, though there are small deviations, both the nowcasted and full information indexes have a
very high concordance.
A. Geographic Variation in Entrepreneurial Quality
Figure 4 illustrates the geographic variation in entrepreneurial quality for the 32 states in our
sample. We present RECPI by ZIP Code for all ZIP Codes with at least ten new firms (to avoid
overcrowding the image), where the size of each point is equal to the quantity of entrepreneurship,
and the color of the point indicates the EQI for that zip code (with darker coloring indicating a
higher EQI).
This map offers insight into the distribution of entrepreneurial quantity and quality across the
United States. First, the most intense areas for entrepreneurial potential are in well-known
entrepreneurial ecosystems such as Silicon Valley, Boston, and Austin. Second, several large
cities, including Los Angeles, Houston, Dallas and even Detroit host not simply a high level of
new registrants but a high average level of entrepreneurial quality among their start-ups. Third, a
number of other well known locations such as Seattle, northern Virginia (in the Washington DC
area), and register a high average EQI. At the same time, there are large areas of the United States
that host a high level of entrepreneurship but where estimates of start-up quality are relatively low.
Florida, in particular, seems to have a very high average quantity with low average quality. Many
of the Mountain States (e.g., Wyoming, Idaho, and Utah), as well as Northern New England
(Vermont and Maine) also seem to have a relatively low average estimated quality even within
key cities such as Salt Lake City.
Overall, this evidence supports three interrelated conclusions. First, relative to a perspective
emphasizing a worrisome secular decline in “shots on goal” (Hathaway and Litan, 2014b), our
approach and evidence suggest that there has been a more variable pattern of entrepreneurship
from 1988 to 2014, and that the last five years have been associated with an accumulation of
entrepreneurial potential similar to that which marked the late 1990s. Second, this variation in
potential has a clear relationship with later entrepreneurship performance of such cohorts as
measured by the number of realized growth firms as well as market value created by firms in those
20

cohorts. Finally, given the more gently sloped shape of the entrepreneurial boom of recent years,
it may be the case that this accumulation of entrepreneurial potential is more sustainable than
earlier periods.
V. Trends in the Effect of the US Entrepreneurial Ecosystem (REAI)
Entrepreneurship performance depends on not simply founding new enterprises, but the scaling
of those enterprises in a way that is economically meaningful. This insight motivates our second
set of findings where we examine “ecosystem” performance across the United States, as measured
by the Regional Ecosystem Acceleration Index (REAI). REAI captures the relative ability of a
given start-up cohort to realize its potential, relative to the expectation for growth events as
measured by RECPI (i.e., REAI = Number of Growth Events / RECPI). A value of 1 in the index
indicates no ecosystem effect. A value above 1 indicates a positive ecosystem effect, and a value
under 1 indicates a negative effect. In contrast to RECPI, this index reflects the impact of the
economic and entrepreneurial environment in which a start-up cohort participates (i.e., the
“ecosystem” in which it participates). This ecosystem will include the location in which the firm
is founded (e.g., Silicon Valley versus Miami) as well as the environment for funding and growth
at the time of founding. In Figure 5, we examine the changing environment for entrepreneurship
in the United States (i.e., change in the US Ecosystem, as reflected in the 32 states for which we
have data), we plot REAI over time from 1988-2008, and we develop a projected measure of REAI
for years 2009-2012. 25
Three distinct periods stand out. The early portion of our sample saw a significant increase in
REAI from a slight negative level to a peak of 1.58 for the 1995 cohort. This is consistent with
our evidence from Figure 1, in which the 1995-1996 start-up cohort was indeed the most
“successful.” This peak was followed by a steady decline through 2000, in which, conditional on
the estimated quality of a given start-up, the probability of growth was declining as a result of the
environment (i.e., time) in which that start-up was trying to grow. From 2000-2007, there is a
period of slight decline, with REAI moving from 0.95 down to 0.63. These differences are
economically meaningful: a start-up at a given quality level is estimated to be 3 times more likely

25

Because our approach requires that we observe the realized growth firms we can only measure our index with a 6 year lag, thus, up to 2008.
For years 2009 to 2012, we estimate our model with a varying lag of 𝑛 = 2014 − 𝑦𝑒𝑎𝑟 and calculate RECPI using such lag.

21

to experience a growth event in the six years after founding if it was founded in 1995 rather than
in 2007. Finally, though still a preliminary estimate, we observe a resurgence in REAI for cohorts
from 2007 to 2012, highlighting a potential improvement in the entrepreneurial ecosystem in
recent years in parallel with the boom in the availability of entrepreneurial finance. While this rise
is economically important, its ultimate impact once all growth outcomes are realized remain to be
seen.
VI. Equity versus Employment Growth Outcomes
While equity growth is a measure of success for founders and investors, realizing
significant employment growth is an alternative measure of entrepreneurial success more closely
tied to broader economic performance (e.g. Krishnan, Nandy, and Puri, 2015; Davis and
Haltiwanger, 1992). While a full analysis of the relationship between business registration
observables and comprehensive employment outcomes is beyond the scope of this paper (as such
an analysis could more naturally be conducted in the context of an integrated longitudinal database
such as the LBD), we undertake a preliminary robustness check to evaluate how the use of an
employment-based success metric influences our analysis and findings. To do so, we take
advantage of a dataset of employment levels for more than 10 million firms available from
Infogroup USA between 1997 and 2014.26 We construct two new outcome variables, Employment
Growth 500 and Employment Growth 1000, each equal to 1 for all firms recorded as having greater
than 500 or 1000 or more employees, respectively, within 6 years, and 0 otherwise. Though this
measure does not capture the employment levels of all firms (and all employment data are
themselves categorical estimates rather than the fine-grained measures available through
administrative data), this rough cut allows us to identify the vast majority of firms that experience
the (rare and usually highly observable) event of becoming a large employer in a relatively short
period of time. As context, the 500 employee threshold is used to differentiate small and mediumsized enterprises from large firms by the Small Business Administration, and so it is useful to
consider this transition within six years from one category to the other.
26

Infogroup is a private sector business database similar to Dunn and Bradstreet. An overview of the dataset and our variable construction, as
well as references to prior work using these data, is provided in Appendix D. We utilize the annual snapshot data maintained by MIT Libraries
from 1997 to 2014. We match firms by name and states and then examine, for each firm name/state combination, whether that firm achieves a
given employment outcome (500 or 1000) within six years of its business registration. As well, to avoid duplicates, we focus only on headquarter
locations (as indicated by Infogroup), deleting all non-headquarter establishments. Infogroup reports employment for the entire company in the
‘headquarter’ entry.

22

We use these data to conduct three interrelated exercises. First, in Table 5, we compare our
baseline entrepreneurial quality model using Growth versus the Employment Growth measures as
the dependent variable. The estimates are surprisingly similar not just in sign but also in relative
magnitude, with a higher concordance between Growth and Employment Growth 500. For
example, firms with a trademark are 6.2 times more likely to get 1000 employees (4 times for
equity growth), firms with a patent 46.8 times (20.8 times for equity growth), firms registered in
Delaware 13.3 times (14.0 for equity growth), and firms with both a patent and Delaware
registration 131.4 times (80.56 for equity growth). This similarity between coefficients suggests
that our baseline model not only captures financial outcomes but also captures significant variation
across firms in their potential to achieve a rare and outsized employment growth outcome.
As a second exercise, we use the model with the lower level of concordance (Employment
Growth 500) as an alternative baseline for our predictive approach to form a quality estimate for
each firm in our sample and compare our initial entrepreneurial quality estimates with this
alternative. The correlation between a predictive analytic based on Growth versus Employment
Growth 500 is 0.84. Finally, we examine how the incidence of Employment Growth 500 is
predicted by our estimates of entrepreneurial quality using our baseline equity growth regression
and report the share of firms that achieve employment growth in the top 5% and 10% of quality.
The results are striking: more than 48% of all measured employment growth outcomes occur
within the top 10% of our entrepreneurial quality distribution, with around 40% in the top 5%.
While we emphasize that this analysis is incomplete insofar as our measures of employment
growth may be incomplete, it nonetheless suggests that there is a meaningful relationship between
equity and employment growth, and that both of these highly skewed outcome variables have a
predictable relationship with measures of underlying entrepreneurial quality.
VII. The Impact of the Business Cycle on Entrepreneurial Quantity and Quality
We now proceed to evaluate how the business cycle influences US entrepreneurial quality and
quantity. To do so, we implement an SVAR regression that models the interdependent relationship
between RECPI and the business cycle, and allows us to estimate the impact of GDP growth on
entrepreneurship. The impact of business cycles on entrepreneurship has been long-debated in
economics, most notably in the contrast between the debt deflation theory of Fisher (1933) and the
“cleansing effect” of recessions emphasized by Schumpeter (1939).
23

Bernanke and Gertler (1989) offer the first formal account of the debt deflation hypothesis,
demonstrating how random macroeconomic shocks influence the balance sheets of would-be
entrepreneurs and consequently change their ability to undertake the ambitious projects that
represent new high-quality entrepreneurship (see also Carlstrom and Fuerst (1997) and Rampini
(2004)). Relatedly, business cycles also change investor expectations concerning the future
availability of capital, which in turn can lead to a reduction in the riskiness of financed projects
(Caballero, Farhi, and Hammour, 2006), a dynamic with particular implications for the availability
of early-stage venture capital (Nanda and Rhodes-Kropf, 2016). On the other hand, a smaller
theoretical literature has focused on the potential for more growth-oriented entrepreneurship to be
founded in recessions due to a “cleansing effect”, under the possibility that the bankruptcy or
financial stress of marginal incumbent firms during a downturn might enhance entry opportunities
for new productive firms (Schumpeter 1939; Caballero and Hammour, 1994).
Existing empirical evidence has yet to precisely support one hypothesis or the other. For
example, while Nanda and Rhodes-Kropf (2013) show that increases in the supply of venture
capital lead VCs to invest in more innovative firms, and Moreira (2015) highlights that there are
procyclical differences in the initial size of firms across the business cycle, which persist,
Koellinger and Thurik (2012) do not observe any relationship between GDP growth and the
subsequent quantity of entrepreneurship (using surveys of business ownership) in a panel of 22
OECD countries.27 More generally, none of these papers provide a direct test of the key underlying
hypotheses in Bernanke and Gertler (1989), or other theories. Do positive changes in the GDP
growth rate predict no change in the overall quantity of entrepreneurship and a positive change in
the quality-adjusted quantity of entrepreneurship? Conversely, do recessions result in a downward
shift in the distribution of entrepreneurial quality-adjusted quality?
To evaluate such relationship, we propose a structural vector autoregression model (SVAR)
that models the interdependent nature of entrepreneurship and economic growth. Economic growth
influences entrepreneurship contemporaneously and with a lag, while entrepreneurship only
responds to growth with a lag, reflecting the time it takes to undertake an investment, which can
be modeled as follows:

27

Koellinger and Thurik (2012) do find, however, a relationship in the opposite causal direction, that entrepreneurship predicts (Grangercauses) economic growth.

24

(5) 𝐿𝑛(𝛥𝐺𝐷𝑃1 ) = 𝑎& 𝐿𝑛 f

MNOPD@gh
ijP@gh

k + ⋯ + 𝑎m 𝐿𝑛 f

MNOPD@gn
ijP@gn

k + 𝑏& 𝐿𝑛(𝛥𝐺𝐷𝑃1p& ) +

… + 𝑏m 𝐿𝑛(𝛥𝐺𝐷𝑃1pm ) + 𝑢1
(6) 𝐿𝑛(

MNOPD@
ijP@

) = 𝑐& 𝐿𝑛(

MNOPD@gh
ijP@gh

) + ⋯ + 𝑐m 𝐿𝑛(

MNOPD@gn
ijP@gn

) + 𝑑t 𝐿𝑛(𝛥𝐺𝐷𝑃1 ) +

𝑑& 𝐿𝑛(𝛥𝐺𝐷𝑃1p& ) + ⋯ + 𝑑m 𝐿𝑛(𝛥𝐺𝐷𝑃1pm ) + 𝑣1
where 𝐿𝑛(𝛥𝐺𝐷𝑃1 ) represents GDP growth (in log) at time 𝑡 and 𝐿𝑛 f

MNOPD@
ijP@

k represents the

quality-adjusted flow of entrepreneurship at t, and 𝑢1 and 𝑣1 are the idiosyncratic disturbances in
the growth rate and the entrepreneurship rate, respectively. We fit a recursive SVAR to estimate
𝑑m as the percent increase in quality-adjusted entrepreneurship from a percentage increase in the
annual GDP growth rate.
Using the (admittedly small) sample of 27 annual observations for the United States from
1988-2014, Appendix Table A4 reports coefficient estimates from this approach as well as
equivalent regressions using only the quantity of firms instead of RECPI. Figure 6 presents the
impulse response functions. We begin in (A4-1) and (A4-2) with a reduced-form single-lag VAR
model. While (A4-1) reports a positive relationship between GDP growth and RECPI, (A4-2)
indicates no relationship between changes in GDP growth and start-up quantity. We then turn to
a three-lag SVAR model that allows not only to capture dynamics but also allows for
contemporaneous impact between GDP growth and entrepreneurship.28 The parameter estimates
are similar. Throughout we observe a positive relationship between GDP growth and subsequent
RECPI and no relationship between GDP growth and the raw quantity of entrepreneurship. We
see this more clearly in Figures 6A and 6B, which present the impulse response function for
regression. The figures indicate that a doubling of the GDP growth rate leads to a 2% increase in
MNOPD
ijP

in current year t, and a 4% increase in years t+1 and t+2, which then tapers off. In contrast,
vw3

as illustrated in Figure 6B, there is no net relationship between GDP growth and 𝐿𝑛 fijPk. We
further this analysis in (A4-5) and (A4-6) by considering an alternative measure of business cycles,
the presence of an economic recession as determined by the NBER Business Cycle Dating

28

The three-lag structure minimizes both the Aikake Information Criterion (AIC) and Schwarz’s Bayesian Information Criterion (SBIC).

25

Committee. As shown in Figures 6C and 6D, the onset of a recession decreases

MNOPD
ijP

by 5% in t

vw3

and t+1 (with a subsequent tapering off), while having no net impact on 𝐿𝑛(ijP).
We emphasize that these results should be viewed with caution. We are basing our inferences
on only a relatively short time-series, and it is of course possible that the relationship between
economic performance and entrepreneurship changes over time and place. With that important
caveat, these results are consistent with the hypothesis that, while economic shocks have an
ambiguous and noisy impact on the overall start-up rate, there is a meaningful relationship between
economic shocks and the propensity to start ventures with high growth potential at founding.
VIII. Conclusion
This paper develops a quality-based approach with business registration records for 32 states
to create and evaluate novel indices of the quantity and quality-adjusted quantity of
entrepreneurship. Not simply a matter of data, the predictive analytics approach allows us to focus
on a more rigorous examination of variation over time and across places in the potential from a
given start-up cohort (RECPI), the ability of an entrepreneurial ecosystem to realize that potential
over time (REAI) and the relationship between entrepreneurship and economic fluctuation.
This analysis offers several new findings about the state of American entrepreneurship. First,
in contrast to the secular decline observed in aggregate quantity-oriented measures of business
dynamism (Decker et al, 2014), the expected number of growth outcomes in the United States has
followed a cyclical pattern that appears sensitive to the capital market environment and overall
market conditions. U.S. RECPI reflects broad and well-known changes in the environment for
startups, such as the dotcom boom and bust of the late 1990s and early 2000s. As well, a qualityadjusted predictive analytics approach captures striking regional variation in the growth potential
of start-ups across the United States, including the presence of strong ecosystems such as Silicon
Valley or Boston and relatively quantity-oriented entrepreneurship regions such as Miami.
By accounting for quality, our estimates offer a different perspective on the role of start-ups in
the US economy over the past thirty years. While the expected number of high-growth startups
peaked in 2000 and then fell dramatically with the dot-com bust, starting in 2010 there has been a
sharp upward swing in the expected number of successful startups formed and the accumulation
of entrepreneurial potential for growth (even after controlling for the change in the overall size of

26

the economy). Indeed, in contrast to the secular decline in start-up activity observable in the BDS,
our estimates of U.S. RECPI indicate a net upward trend across the full time-series of our sample.
For example, the rate of expected successful startups fell to its lowest point in 1991, and reached
its second highest level in 2014 (the final year of our sample). This finding suggests that the
challenges to growth arising from entrepreneurship may be less directly related to the lack of
formation of high-growth potential startups, and instead more related to other dynamics or
ecosystem concerns. In particular, while there is high cyclicality in RECPI / GDP, REAI—the
likelihood of startups to reach their potential—declined in the late 1990s and did not recover
through 2008. Relative to the mid 1990s, the 2000s was a period in which a lower level of
entrepreneurial potential was realized. For example, conditional on the same estimated potential,
a 1995 startup was 3 times more likely to achieve a growth event in 6 years than a startup founded
in 2007.
Accounting for entrepreneurial quality through a predictive analytics approach is not simply a
question of more nuanced measurement of the same phenomena.

Instead, a shift towards

entrepreneurial quality allows one to more directly connect entrepreneurship and overall economic
performance. Using our measures in a structural VAR model, we find economic shocks are
associated with a procyclical impact on the quality-adjusted quantity of entrepreneurship, while
there is no relationship with quantity alone. These results provide novel empirical evidence on the
way entrepreneurship is shaped by economic conditions, and allow us to begin to adjudicate
between competing theories of this relationship.
More generally, our analysis suggests that directly taking a quantitative approach to the
measurement of entrepreneurial quality can yield new insight into the precursors and consequences
of entrepreneurial ecosystems and the impact of entrepreneurship on economic and social progress.
Several follow-on research directions are possible. First, our data reveal striking variation across
regions and time in both the quality-adjusted quantity of entrepreneurship as well as the potential
for growth condition on initial quality. Examining how regional and temporal determinants of
entrepreneurial ecosystems impact both entrepreneurial quality, the growth process, and even the
migration of firms between regions is a promising area for future research (Guzman, 2018).
Second, while our current analysis examines the link between entrepreneurial quality at founding
and subsequent growth (measured as either equity or employment growth), it is separately possible
to examine how particular institutions that impact start-ups after founding (such as the receipt of
27

venture capital) impact that growth process. For example, in Catalini, Guzman and Stern (2019),
we examine both the selection into and impact of venture capital on start-up firms by exploiting
this predictive analytics approach. Further work connecting firm founding, capital investment, and
growth is likely to allow for a more structured understanding of the role of external capital in startup growth. Finally, a striking feature of our predictive analytics results is the unusual level of
skewness in the entrepreneurial quality distribution (e.g., around 40% of all equity growth
outcomes are contained within the top 1% of the estimated quality distribution).
Directly measuring the high level of skewness in the initial distribution of firms likely offers
new insight into a number of areas, such as industrial organization, finance, and organizational
economics. These benefits are likely to be enhanced by ongoing technological improvements in
data storage and processing capabilities, which will likely improve the precision and applicability
of these estimates. To this end, these estimates are an initial implementation pointing towards a
more general approach using founding observables and ex-post performance to estimate founding
quality. For example, it may be possible to develop integrated datasets including measures based
on firm founding statements, online job postings, media mentions, and the degree and nature of
online or social media presence (e.g., presence or absence of a web page, functionality of that
webpage, etc.). Combined with more sophisticated predictive algorithms (e.g., machine learning
approaches as developed in Guzman (2018)), it may be possible to capture different types of
performance and the linkage between the initial conditions at founding and different types of
economic and social impact.
REFERENCES
Acs, Zoltan J., and David B. Audretsch. 1988. “Innovation in Large and Small Firms: An
Empirical Analysis.” The American Economic Review 78 (4): 678–90.
Akcigit, Ufuk, and William Kerr. 2018. “Growth Through Heterogeneous Innovations.” Journal
of Political Economy 126 (4): 1374-1443.
Angrist, Joshua D., and Jörn-Steffen Pischke. 2008. Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An
Empiricist's Companion. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Aulet, William, and Fiona E. Murray. 2013. “A Tale of Two Entrepreneurs: Understanding
Differences in the Types of Entrepreneurship in the Economy.” SSRN Electronic Journal.
10.2139/ssrn.2259740.
28

Axtell, Robert L. 2001. "Zipf distribution of US firm sizes." Science 293(5536): 1818-20.
Barnes, Beau Grant and Nancy Harp and Derek Oler. 2014. “Evaluating the SDC Mergers and
Acquisitions Database.” The Financial Review 49(4): 793.
Bernanke, Ben, and Mark Gertler. 1989. “Agency Costs, Net Worth, and Business
Fluctuations.” The American Economic Review 79 (1): 14-31.
Belenzon, Sharon, Aaron Chatterji, and Brendan Daley. 2017. “Eponymous Entrepreneurs”
The American Economic Review 107 (6): 1638-55.
Belenzon, Sharon, Aaron Chatterji, and Brendan Daley. 2018. “Choosing Between Growth
and Glory” National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) Working Paper 24901.
Caballero, Ricardo J., and Mohamad L. Hammour. 1994. "The Cleansing Effect of
Recessions," The American Economic Review 84 (5): 1350-1368.
Caballero, Ricardo J., Emmanuel Farhi, and Mohamad L. Hammour. 2006. “Speculative
Growth. Hints from the U.S. Economy” The American Economic Review 96 (4): 1159-1192.
Carlstrom, Charles T, and Timothy S. Fuerst. 1997. “Agency Costs, Net Worth, and Business
Fluctuations: A Computable General Equilibrium Analysis.” The American Economic Review
87 (5): 893-910.
Catalini, Christian, Jorge Guzman, and Scott Stern. 2019. “Passive Versus Active Growth:
Evidence from Founder Choices and Venture Capital Investment.” Working Paper.
Chatterji, Aaron. 2018. “The Main Street Fund: Investing in an Entrepreneurial Economy”. The
Hamilton Project, June.
C. Churchwell. 2016. “Q. SDC: M&A Database.” Baker Library – Fast Answers.
http://asklib.library.hbs.edu/faq/47760 (accessed on January 17, 2017).
Davis, Steven, and John Haltiwanger. 1992. “Gross Job Creation, Gross Job Destruction, and
Employment Reallocation.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics. 107 (3): 819-862.
Davis, Steven, John Haltiwanger, and Scott Shuh. 1996. Job Creation and Destruction.
Cambridge: MIT Press.
Decker, Ryan, John Haltiwanger, Ron Jarmin, and Javier Miranda. 2014. “The Role of
Entrepreneurship in US Job Creation and Economic Dynamism.” Journal of Economic
Perspectives 28 (3): 3-24.
Decker, Ryan, John Haltiwanger, Ron Jarmin, and Javier Miranda. 2016. “Where Has All
The Skewness Gone? The Decline in High-Growth (Young) Firms.” European Economic
29

Review 86: 4-23.
Delgado, Mercedes, Michael E. Porter, and Scott Stern. 2016. “Defining Clusters of Related
Industries.” Journal of Economic Geography. 16 (1): 1-38.
Dunne, Timothy, Mark J. Roberts, and Larry Samuelson. 1988. "Patterns of Firm Entry and
Exit in U.S. Manufacturing Industries." RAND Journal of Economics 19(4): 495-515.
Ericson, R., and A. Pakes. 1995. “Markov-Perfect Industry Dynamics: A Framework for
Empirical Work.” The Review of Economic Studies, 62(1): 53-82.
Evans, David S. 1987. “The Relationship Between Firm Growth, Size, and Age: Estimates for
100 Manufacturing Industries.” The Journal of Industrial Economics 35 (4): 567–81.
Fazio, Catherine, Jorge Guzman, and Scott Stern. 2019. “The Impact of State-Level R&D Tax
Credits on the Quantity and Quality of Entrepreneurship.” Working Paper.
Fisher, I. 1933. “The Debt-Deflation Theory of Great Depressions.” Econometrica 1(4): 337-357.
Gibrat, Robert. 1931. Les Inégalités Économiques. Paris: Librairie du Recueil Sirey
Gornall, Will, and Ilya A. Strebulaev. 2015. “The Economic Impact of Venture Capital:
Evidence from Public Companies.” Stanford Graduate School of Business Working Paper 3362.
Guzman, Jorge. 2019. “Go West Young Firm: Agglomeration and Embeddedness in Startup
Migrations to Silicon Valley.” Columbia Business School Research Paper 18-49.
Guzman, Jorge, and Aleksandra Kacperczyk. 2019. “Gender Gap in Entrepreneurship.”
Research Policy. 46 (7): 1666-1680.
Guzman, Jorge, and Scott Stern. 2015. “Where is Silicon Valley?” Science 347(6222): 606-609.
Guzman, Jorge, and Scott Stern. 2017. “Nowcasting and Placecasting Entrepreneurial Quality
and Performance.” Measuring Entrepreneurial Businesses: Current Knowledge and Challenges,
edited by John Haltiwanger, Erik Hurst, Javier Miranda, and Antoinette Schoar. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press. Chapter 2.
Haltiwanger, John, Ron Jarmin, and Javier Miranda. 2013. “Who Creates Jobs? Small versus
Large versus Young.” The Review of Economics and Statistics 95 (2): 347-361.
Hathaway, Ian, and Robert E. Litan. 2014a. “Declining Business Dynamism in the United
States: A Look at States and Metros.” Economic Studies at Brookings Series. May, 2014.
Hathaway, Ian, and Robert E. Litan. 2014b. “Declining Business Dynamism: It’s for Real.”
Economic Studies at Brookings Series. May, 2014.
Hathaway, Ian, and Robert E. Litan. 2014c. “The Other Aging of America: The Increasing
30

Dominance of Older Firms.” Economic Studies at Brookings Series. July, 2014
Hopenhayn, H. 1992. “Entry, Exit, and firm Dynamics in Long Run Equilibrium.”
Econometrica 60(5): 1127-1150.
Hurst, Erik & Benjamin Wild Pugsley. 2011. "What do Small Businesses Do?" Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity 43(2): 73-142.
Jovanovic, Boyan. 1982. “Selection and the Evolution of Industry.” Econometrica 50(3): 649-70.
Kaplan, Steven, and Josh Lerner. 2010. “It Ain’t Broke: The Past, Present, and Future of
Venture Capital.” Journal of Applied Corporate Finance 22 (2): 36-47.
Kerr, William, Ramana Nanda, and Matthew Rhodes-Kropf. 2014. “Entrepreneurship as
Experimentation.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 28 (3): 25-48.
Koellinger, Philipp and Roy Thurik. 2012. “Entrepreneurship and the Business Cycle.” The
Review of Economics and Statistics 94(4): 1143-1156.
Klapper, Leora, Raphael Amit and Mauro F. Guillén, 2010. “Entrepreneurship and Firm
Formation across Countries.” International Differences in Entrepreneurship, 129-158. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Klepper, Steven. 1996. “Entry, Exit, Growth, and Innovation over the Product Life Cycle.”
The American Economic Review 86(3): 562-583.
Klette, Tor and Samuel Kortum. 2004. “Innovating Firms and Aggregate Innovation.” Journal
of Political Economy 112(5): 986-1018.
Kortum, Samuel, and Josh Lerner. 2000. “Assessing the contribution of venture capital to
innovation.” RAND Journal of Economics 31 (4): 674-692.
Krishnan, Karthik, Debarshi K. Nandy and Manju Puri. 2015. “Does Financing Spur Small
Business Productivity? Evidence from a Natural Experiment.” Review of Financial Studies 28
(6): 1768-1809.
Mansfield, Edwin. 1962. “Entry, Gibrat’s Law, Innovation, and the Growth of Firms.” The
American Economic Review 52(5): 1023–1051.
McFadden, Daniel. 1974. “Conditional logit analysis of qualitative choice behavior.” Frontiers
in Econometrics. 105-142. New York: Academic Press.
Moreria, Sara. 2016. “Firm Dynamics, Persistent Effects of Entry Conditions, and Business
Cycles.” SSRN Working Paper 3037178.
Mills, Karen Gordon, and Brayden McCarthy. 2016. “The State of Small Business Lending:
31

Innovation and Technology and the Implications for Regulation.” Harvard Business School
(HBS) Working Paper 17-042, November.
Nanda, Ramana, and Matthew Rhodes-Kropf. 2013. “Investment Cycles and Startup
Innovation.” Journal of Financial Economics 110(2): 403-418.
Nanda, Ramana, and Matthew Rhodes-Kropf. 2014. “Financing Risk and Innovation.” Harvard
Business School (HBS) Working Paper 11-013.
Nanda,

Ramana

and

Matthew

Rhodes-Kropf.

2016.

“Financing

Entrepreneurial

Experimentation.” Innovation Policy and the Economy. 16(1): 1-23. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
J. Netter, M. Stegemoller, and M. B. Wintoki. 2011. “Implications of Data Screens on Merger
and Acquisition Analysis: A Large Sample Study of Mergers and Acquisitions from 1992 to
2009.” The Review of Financial Studies 24 (7): 2316–2357.
Pohlman, John T and Dennis W. Leitner. 2003. “A Comparison of Ordinary Least Squares and
Logistic Regression.” The Ohio Journal of Science 103(5): 118-125.
Rampini,

Adriano

and

Amir

Sufi

and

S.

Viswanathan.

2014. “Dynamic

risk

management.” Journal of Financial Economics 111 (2): 271-296
Sutton, John. 1997. “Gibrat’s Legacy.” Journal of Economic Literature 35: 40-59.
Samila, Sampsa, and Olav Sorenson. 2011. “Venture Capital, Entrepreneurship, and Economic
Growth.” The Review of Economics and Statistics. 93(1): 338-349.
Schoar, Antoinette. 2010. "The Divide between Subsistence and Transformational
Entrepreneurship." Innovation Policy and the Economy, edited by Josh Lerner and Scott Stern,
57 – 81. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Schumpeter, J.A. 1939. Business Cycles: A Theoretical, Historical, and Statistical Analysis of
the Capitalist Process. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Stern, Scott and Valentina Tartari. 2018. “The Role of Universities in Local Entrepreneurial
Ecosystems.” Working Paper.
Stone, Brad. 2013. The Everything Store: Jeff Bezos and the Age of Amazon. New York: Little,
Brown and Company.
Witten, Ian H., and Eibe Frank. 2005. Data Mining: Practical machine learning tools and
techniques. Burlington: Morgan Kaufmann.

32

33

TABLE 1. SUMMARY STATISTICS (1988-2014)
Source

Mean

Std Dev

0.00071

0.02672

0.48

0.50

0.024

0.153

0.46

0.50

0.0707

0.2563

Outcome Variable
Growth

SDC Platinum

Corporate Form Observables
Corporation

Bus. Reg. Records

Delaware

Bus. Reg. Records

Name-Based Observables
Short Name

Bus. Reg. Records

Eponymous

Bus. Reg. Records

Intellectual Property Observables
Patent

USPTO

0.0019

0.0439

Trademark

USPTO

0.0014

0.0374

Local

Estimated from name

Traded (3)
Traded Resource Int.

Estimated from name
Estimated from name

0.19
0.537
0.133

0.39
0.499
0.339

0.002
0.050
0.022
0.028
0.000
27,976,477

0.044
0.218
0.147
0.166
0.020

Industry Measures (US CMP Clusters)

Industry Measures (US CMP High-Tech Clusters)
Biotech Sector
Ecommerce Sector
IT Sector
Medical Dev. Sector
Semiconductor Sector
Observations

Estimated from name
Estimated from name
Estimated from name
Estimated from name
Estimated from name

(2) US CMP Cluster Dummies are estimated by using a sample of 10M firms and comparing the
incidence of each word in the name within and outside a cluster, then selecting the words that have
the highest relative incidence as informative of a cluster. Firms get a value of 1 if they have any of
those words in their name. The procedure is explained in detail in our Data Appendix.
(3) Note that there are also firms that we cannot associate with local nor traded industries.

34

TABLE 2. L OGIT UNIVARIATE REGRESSIONS
Firm Name Measures:
Variable
Short Name

Industry Measures (US CMP Clusters):
Coefficient

Pseudo R2

3.147***

0.018

Variable
Local

(0.0612)

Eponymous

0.299***

0.003

0.011

Traded Resource Intensive

0.952

0.000

(0.0243)

Traded

Corporate Form Measures:

Corporation

Pseudo R2

0.206***
(0.00848)

(0.0168)

Variable

Coefficient

Coefficient

Pseudo R2

3.375***

0.016

(0.0769)

1.208***

0.001

(0.0212)

Biotech Sector

12.22***

0.004

(0.723)
Delaware

23.72***

0.088

(0.427)

Ecommerce Sector

1.823***

0.002

(0.542)
IP Measures:
Variable
Patent

Coefficient

Pseudo R2

88.50***

0.059

IT Sector

5.463***

0.012

(0.146)

(2.225)
Medical Dev. Sector
Trademark

45.30***

0.016

3.486***

0.006

(0.102)

(1.882)
Semiconductor Sector

12.61***

0.001

(1.517)

Observations

18,764,856

Logit univariate regressions of Growth (IPO or Acquisition within 6 years) with each of the observables we develop for our dataset. Incidence
rate ratios reported; Standard errors in parentheses. * p<0.05 ** p<0.01 *** p<0.001

35

TABLE 3. GROWTH PREDICTIVE MODEL - L OGIT REGRESSION ON IPO OR ACQUISITION WITHIN 6 YEARS

(1)
Corporate Governance Measures
Corporation
4.070***
(0.0975)
23.28***
(0.451)
Name-Based Measures
Short Name

Preliminary Models
(2)

(3)

Delaware

Eponymous

Nowcasting
(up to real-time)
(4)

Full
(2 year lag)
(5)

3.276***
(0.0788)

3.061***
(0.0739)

18.22***
(0.363)
2.815***
(0.0546)

2.487***
(0.0491)

2.263***
(0.0456)

0.218***
(0.0123)

0.296***
(0.0168)

0.315***
(0.0179)

Intellectual Property Measures
Patent

49.57***
(1.572)

Trademark

7.772***
(0.484)

3.964***
(0.219)

Patent - Delaware Interaction
Patent Only

22.77***
(1.059)

Delaware Only

15.18***
(0.335)

Patent and Delaware

US CMP Clusters
US CMP High-Tech Clusters
N
18,764,856
R-squared
0.135

84.08***
(3.320)

18,764,856
0.057

18,764,856
0.094

Yes
Yes
18,764,856
0.163

Yes
Yes
18,764,856
0.187

We estimate a logit model with Growth as the dependent variable. Growth is a binary indicator equal to 1 if a
firm achieves IPO or acquisition within 6 years and 0 otherwise. Growth is only defined for firms born in the
cohorts of 1988 to 2008. This model forms the basis of our entrepreneurial quality estimates, which are the
predicted values of the model. Incidence ratios reported; Robust standard errors in parenthesis. * p<0.05 **
p<0.01 *** p<0.001

36

TABLE 4. E NTREPRENEURIAL Q UALITY MODELS WITH H IGH E MPLOYMENT GROWTH OUTCOMES

(1)

(2)

(3)

Equity Growth (IPO or
Acquisition)

Employment
> 500

Employment >
1000

3.008***
(0.0860)

1.542***
(0.0681)

1.378***
(0.103)

Short Name

2.248***
(0.0514)

1.568***
(0.0635)

1.279***
(0.0883)

Eponymous

0.304***
(0.0197)

0.675***
(0.0595)

0.781
(0.112)

3.984***
(0.268)

7.194***
(0.750)

6.243***
(1.053)

14.01***
(0.354)

12.61***
(0.626)

13.43***
(1.149)

Patent Only

20.83***
(1.101)

26.52***
(2.607)

46.79***
(6.684)

Patent and Delaware

80.56***
(3.645)

95.87***
(9.064)

131.4***
(19.86)

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

12842817
0.184

12842817
0.103

12708349
0.100

Dependent Variable
Corporate Governance Measures
Corporation
Name-Based Measures

Intellectual Property Measures
Trademark
Patent - Delaware Interaction
Delaware Only

US CMP Clusters
US CMP High-Tech Clusters
N
pseudo R-sq

We develop models with the same regressor as our full information entrepreneurial quality
model (Table 3, Column 5) but substitute high equity growth outcomes for high
employment growth outcomes. Our outcome variable is 1 if a firm has high employment
six years after founding and zero otherwise, at different thresholds. Employment measures
are taken from the Infogroup USA panel data. We have a long-term project with the US
Census to develop entrepreneurial quality estimates using continuous employment
outcomes. Robust standard errors in parenthesis. * p < .05 , ** p < .01, *** p < .001

37

FIGURE 1

FIGURE 2

Notes: This Figure presents the results of an out of sample cross validation procedure performed on all firms born between 1988 and
2008 in our database. We use a 10-fold cross validation and plot the incidence of growth across each 5-percent bin.

38

FIGURE 3

Notes: RECPI / GDP represents the total, quality adjusted, entrepreneurship production in a region after controlling for the size of the economy in
that year.

39

FIGURE 4. THE STATE OF AMERICAN ENTREPRENEURSHIP

Notes: This map represents the quality and quantity of entrepreneurship in 2012 across all 32 US states for which we have data in our sample. Data
is presented by ZIP Code. The size of the point represents the quantity of firms and the color of the point represents the average quality of
entrepreneurship in that ZIP Code (white is the lowest average quality and dark red the highest). The entrepreneurial quality model includes state
fixed-effects to account for the institutional differences in firm registration. For six states, Washington, Oklahoma, Arkansas, Ohio, Virginia, and
New York, our data does not allow us to track the precise ZIP Code in which the firm is located for all firms.

40

FIGURE 5

Notes: The Regional Entrepreneurship Acceleration Index (REAI) measures the realized performance of an entrepreneurial ecosystem relative to the expected potential of
that ecosystem. It is defined as the number of growth events (IPO or acquisition within six years of founding) to occur from a cohort over the RECPI of that cohort.
Confidence intervals are estimated through a Monte Carlo process drawing 30 random samples of size N. Projected performance is a preliminary estimate given the number
of growth events that have occurred so far for that cohort.

41

FIGURE 6. EFFECT OF ECONOMIC CONDITIONS ON ENTREPRENEURSHIP

A.

Effect of 𝐿𝑛(𝛥𝐺𝐷𝑃1 ) on 𝐿𝑛(

MNOPD@
ijP@

C. Effect of 1[𝑈𝑆_𝑅𝑒𝑐𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛1 ] on 𝐿𝑛 f

)

MNOPD@
ijP@

IMPULSE RESPONSE FUNCTIONS
vw3
B. Effect of 𝐿𝑛(𝛥𝐺𝐷𝑃1 ) on 𝐿𝑛( @ )
ijP@

k

D. Effect of 1[𝑈𝑆_𝑅𝑒𝑐𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛1 ] on 𝐿𝑛(

vw3@
ijP@

)

Notes: This figure reports the relationship of economic conditions to entrepreneurship production in the United States. ∆Ln(GDP(t)) is the log change in US GDP between
years t-1 and t. 1[US Recession(t)] is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the US was in a recession in that year. The years of recession are 1990, 2001, 2008, and 2009. All lag
structures are chosen as those that maximize the Akaike's Information Criterion (AIC) and the Schwarz's Bayesian Information Criterion (SBIC), which agree in all cases.
All models pass a VAR stability test, with all eigenvalues within the unit circle. A Granger causality test rejects the null of no relationships (p < 0.01) for the ∆Ln(GDP)
models, and is marginally unable to reject it for the US Recession models (p = 0.13).

42

PRINT APPENDIX
Rank in US GDP
1
2
3
4
5
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
17
18
19
20
21
22
25
27
28
29
30
32
34
39
43
46
47
50
52

Data Coverage US States - Ranked by GDP
State
GDP
California
$2,287,021
Texas
$1,602,584
New York
$1,350,286
Florida
$833,511
Illinois
$742,407
Ohio
$584,696
New Jersey
$560,667
North Carolina
$491,572
Georgia
$472,423
Virginia
$464,606
Massachusetts
$462,748
Michigan
$449,218
Washington
$425,017
Minnesota
$326,125
Colorado
$309,721
Tennessee
$296,602
Wisconsin
$293,126
Arizona
$288,924
Missouri
$285,135
Oregon
$229,241
Oklahoma
$192,176
South Carolina
$190,176
Kentucky
$189,667
Iowa
$174,512
Utah
$148,017
Arkansas
$129,745
New Mexico
$95,310
Idaho
$66,548
Alaska
$60,542
Maine
$56,163
Rhode Island
$45,962
Vermont
$30,723
Total GDP in Sample
$13,941,781
Number of States
32
US GDP
$17,565,783
Share of GDP in Sample
81%

Share of GDP
13.0%
9.1%
7.7%
4.7%
4.2%
3.3%
3.2%
2.8%
2.7%
2.6%
2.6%
2.6%
2.4%
1.9%
1.8%
1.7%
1.7%
1.6%
1.6%
1.3%
1.1%
1.1%
1.1%
1.0%
0.8%
0.7%
0.5%
0.4%
0.3%
0.3%
0.3%
0.2%

43

SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS TO:

The State of American Entrepreneurship:
New Estimates of the Quantity and Quality of Entrepreneurship for 32 US States,
1988-2014

Jorge Guzman, MIT
Scott Stern, MIT and NBER
For online publication

1

2

Table A1. Full Model Specification of Models in Table 3.
Dependent Variable: 1[IPO or Acquisition in six years or less]

Corporate Governance Measures
Corporation

Delaware
Name-Based Measures
Short Name

Eponymous

Nowcasting
(up to real-time)
(1)

Full
(2 year lag)
(2)

3.276***
(0.0788)

3.061***
(0.0739)

18.22***
(0.363)
2.487***
(0.0491)

2.263***
(0.0456)

0.296***
(0.0168)

0.315***
(0.0179)

Intellectual Property Measures
Trademark

3.964***
(0.219)

Patent - Delaware Interaction
Patent Only

22.77***
(1.059)

Delaware Only

15.18***
(0.335)

Patent and Delaware

84.08***
(3.320)

US CMP Cluster Dummies
Local

0.418***
(0.0175)

0.434***
(0.0182)

Traded Resource Intensive

0.876***
(0.0242)

0.868***
(0.0243)

Traded

0.997
(0.0199)

1.048*
(0.0212)

2.845***
(0.186)

2.173***
(0.155)

E-Commerce

1.443***
(0.0466)

1.348***
(0.0446)

IT

2.468***
(0.0857)

2.175***
(0.0779)

Medical Devices

1.535***
(0.0587)

1.301***
(0.0515)

Semiconductors

2.329***
(0.304)
18,764,856
0.163

1.590***
(0.224)
18,764,856
0.187

US CMP High-Tech Cluster Dummies
Biotechnology

N
R-squared

3

TABLE A2. R OBUSTNESS M ODELS. S TATE F IXED EFFECTS AND S TATE-S PECIFIC TIME TRENDS
DEPENDENT V ARIABLE: 1[IPO OR A CQUISITION IN SIX YEARS OR LESS]
(1)
Corporate Governance Measures
Corporation
2.499***
(0.0630)
Name-Based Measures
Short Name
2.280***
(0.0460)

(2)

(3)

2.657***
(0.0675)

2.572***
(0.0651)

2.287***
(0.0461)

2.286***
(0.0461)

0.315***
(0.0179)

0.313***
(0.0178)

0.313***
(0.0178)

4.102***
(0.230)

4.017***
(0.223)

4.055***
(0.228)

15.22***
(0.336)

15.58***
(0.343)

15.40***
(0.340)

Patent Only

21.78***
(1.018)

22.10***
(1.034)

21.58***
(1.011)

Patent and Delaware

90.91***
(3.613)

92.35***
(3.661)

92.55***
(3.696)

0.439***
(0.0185)

0.438***
(0.0184)

0.440***
(0.0185)

0.858***
(0.0241)

0.853***
(0.0240)

0.859***
(0.0242)

1.038
(0.0210)
US CMP High-Tech Cluster Dummies
Biotechnology
2.278***
(0.164)

1.042*
(0.0211)

1.036
(0.0210)

2.239***
(0.160)

2.276***
(0.164)

Eponymous
Intellectual Property Measures
Trademark
Patent - Delaware Interaction
Delaware Only

US CMP Cluster Dummies
Local

Traded Resource Intensive

Traded

E-Commerce

1.311***
(0.0436)

1.302***
(0.0432)

1.305***
(0.0434)

IT

2.127***
(0.0760)

2.135***
(0.0762)

2.115***
(0.0756)

Medical Devices

1.303***
(0.0516)

1.302***
(0.0515)

1.301***
(0.0515)

Semiconductors

1.546**
(0.221)
Yes
Yes
No
18,764,856
0.192

1.572**
(0.222)
No
Yes
Yes
18,764,856
0.190

1.537**
(0.220)
Yes
Yes
Yes
18,764,856
0.193

Year FE
State FE
State Trends
N
pseudo R-sq

We repeat the main regression model of Table 3 but include year fixed effects, and state-specific time-trends, to evaluate the robustness
of our findings. We perform other tests on the performance of our predictive model in our appendix. Robust standard errors in
parenthesis. * p < .05 , ** p < .01, *** p < .001

4

T ABLE A3. ENTREPRENEURIAL Q UALITY M ODELS WITH H IGH EMPLOYMENT G ROWTH O UTCOMES

(1)

(2)

(3)

Equity Growth (IPO or
Acquisition)

Employment > 500

Employment > 1000

3.008***
(0.0860)

1.542***
(0.0681)

1.378***
(0.103)

2.248***
(0.0514)

1.568***
(0.0635)

1.279***
(0.0883)

0.304***
(0.0197)

0.675***
(0.0595)

0.781
(0.112)

3.984***
(0.268)

7.194***
(0.750)

6.243***
(1.053)

Delaware Only

14.01***
(0.354)

12.61***
(0.626)

13.43***
(1.149)

Patent Only

20.83***
(1.101)

26.52***
(2.607)

46.79***
(6.684)

Patent and Delaware

80.56***
(3.645)

95.87***
(9.064)

131.4***
(19.86)

0.418***
(0.0202)

0.954
(0.0563)

0.960
(0.0962)

Traded Resource Intensive

0.831***
(0.0268)

1.357***
(0.0700)

1.297**
(0.112)

Traded

0.418***
(0.0202)

0.954
(0.0563)

0.960
(0.0962)

2.114***
(0.181)

0.828
(0.194)

0.339
(0.198)

E-Commerce

1.316***
(0.0496)

1.213**
(0.0858)

0.972
(0.123)

IT

2.185***
(0.0872)

1.008
(0.0935)

0.922
(0.146)

Medical Devices

1.231***
(0.0556)

1.214*
(0.109)

1.181
(0.183)

Semiconductors

1.585**
(0.245)
12842817
0.184

3.342***
(0.825)
12842817
0.103

2.639*
(1.164)
12708349
0.100

Dependent Variable
Corporate Governance Measures
Corporation
Name-Based Measures
Short Name

Eponymous
Intellectual Property Measures
Trademark

US CMP Cluster Dummies
Local

US CMP High-Tech Cluster Dummies
Biotechnology

N
pseudo R-sq

We develop models with the same regressor as our full information entrepreneurial quality model (Table 3, Column 5) but
substitute high equity growth outcomes for high employment growth outcomes. Our outcome variable is 1 if a firm has
high employment six years after founding and zero otherwise, at different thresholds. Employment measures are taken
from the Infogroup USA panel data. We have a long-term project with the US Census to develop entrepreneurial quality
estimates using continuous employment outcomes. Robust standard errors in parenthesis. * p < .05 , ** p < .01, *** p <
.001

5

TABLE A4. V ECTOR A UTOREGRESSION M ODELS (VAR) ON THE IMPACT OF CHANGES IN GDP G ROWTH TO ENTREPRENEURSHIP

Dependent Variable
Intersection ∆Ln(GDP)(t)
∆Ln(GDP)(t-1)

VAR
(1)
(2)
Ln(RECPI/GDP) Ln(N/GDP)

1.166
(0.80)

0.140
(0.561)

SVAR
(3)
(4)
Ln(RECPI/GDP) Ln(N/GDP)
0.011
0.005
3.48**
(1.08)

-1.184
(0.62)

∆Ln(GDP)(t-2)

1.08
(1.07)

-0.59
(0.59)

∆Ln(GDP)(t-3)

-1.05
(0.85)

0.30
(0.50)

SVAR: US Recession
(5)
(6)
Ln(RECPI/GDP) Ln(N/GDP)

Intersection 1[US Recession](t)

-0.0453

-0.011

1[US Recession](t-1)

-0.106*
(.06)

0.059**
(.023)

1[US Recession](t-2)

-0.03
(.06)

0.044*
(.025)

1[US Recession](t-3)

-0.01
(.038)

0.033*
(.019)

Ln(RECPI/GDP)(t-1)

0.208
(0.22)

0.477*
(.29)

Ln(RECPI/GDP)(t-2)

-0.115
(0.241)

0.093
(.35)

Ln(RECPI/GDP)(t-3)

0.678**
(0.229)

0.233
(.27)

Ln(N/GDP)(t-1)

0.791***
(0.105)

0.975***
(0.0375)

1.27***
(0.19)

1.38***
(.20)

Ln(N/GDP)(t-2)

0.062
(0.33)

-0.029*
(0.35)

Ln(N/GDP)(t-3)

-0.436
(0.219)

-0.42**
(.211)

Notes: All models are run on a 27 observation time series representing each year observed in the data, from 1988 to 2014 (inclusive). VAR
models are estimated through simultaneous equations, only the equation with GDP as a dependent variable is presented in the table. Three
lag structure chosen as the optimal one using the Akaike information criterion (AIC) and the Bayesian information criterion (BIC). US
Recession is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the year is 1992, 2001, 2008, or 2009. All regressions also pass VAR stability tests—the
eigenvalues of all models lie within the unit circle. Standard errors in parenthesis. * p < .1 ** p < .05 *** p < .01

6

APPENDIX B1

Modeling Entrepreneurial Quality Through Governance Choices.
We begin our framework by developing a simple model to map early firm choices
observable in business registration records to the underlying quality and potential of the firm. Our
goal with this model is suggestive: its purpose is to provide clarity on the intuition through which
we can use ex-ante firm choices and ex-post growth outcomes to measure underlying firm quality2.
Suppose a firm has positive quality at birth, 𝑞 ∈ ℝ+. This quality creates firm value 𝑉(𝑞),
a measure of the net-present value of its opportunities, which is also positive and increasing in
𝜕𝑉

𝑞 (i.e. 𝜕𝑞 > 0). Both quality and value are unobservable to the analyst.
At birth, the firm must choose whether to use each of N independent binary governance
options. These governance options reflect early choices that must be done around the birth of a
firm such as whether to register as a corporation, whether to register locally or in Delaware, or the
name of the firm3. The firm thus much choose a set 𝐻 = {ℎ1 , … , ℎ𝑁 } , ℎ𝑖 ∈ {0,1} ∀ℎ𝑖 .
Each option offers benefit 𝑏(𝑞, ℎ). The benefit is increasing in ℎ, and the marginal benefit
is also increasing in 𝑞. The option also has constant cost 𝑐(ℎ) plus an idiosyncratic component that
is uncorrelated with quality and specific to this firm and option. This idiosyncratic component
represents the different costs entrepreneurs could face due to heterogeneous preferences,
institutional variation across corporate registries, local institutions (e.g. available financing), and
firm characteristics (e.g. industry). Therefore:
Benefit of h is 𝑏(𝑞, ℎ)

Appendix A is a set of 3 tables included in the main document.
We model the governance decisions of firms in a sophisticated model in Guzman and Stern (mimeo).
3
In this model, we focus on corporate governance options only, but the model naturally applies to other firm choices
such as patenting, registering trademarks, and any other observable at birth.
1
2

7

𝜕𝑏
𝜕2𝑏
≥0,
≥0
𝜕ℎ
𝜕ℎ𝜕𝑞
Cost of h is 𝐶(𝑞, ℎ) = 𝐶(ℎ) = 𝑐(ℎ) + 𝜖
𝐸[𝜖] = 0, 𝐸[𝜖𝑞] = 0

The Entrepreneur’s Problem. The entrepreneur maximizes the value of the firm given the firm’s
quality, the available choices, and the idiosyncratic components:
𝑁

𝐻∗ = argmax 𝑉(𝑞) + ∑[𝑏(𝑞, ℎ𝑖 ) − 𝑐(ℎ𝑖 ) − 𝜖𝑖 ]
𝐻={ℎ1 ,…,ℎ𝑁 }

𝑖=1

Since these choices are binary, the entrepreneur takes option ℎ𝑖 if 𝑏(𝑞, ℎ𝑖 ) ≥ 𝑐(ℎ𝑖 ) + 𝜖𝑖 .
In this problem, for a given 𝑞 and a given menu of governance choices, different values of
𝐻∗ will occur. Since alx`l firms face the same set of options by assumption, the values of 𝐻∗ will
differ only due to 𝑞. Our goal is to understand what can be learned about true entrepreneurial
quality q by looking at these choices.
Our first proposition studies how the value of 𝐻 ∗ changes as 𝑞 changes.
Proposition 1: 𝐸[𝐻∗ ] is weakly increasing in 𝑞.
Proof. First, note that the term 𝑉(𝑞) does not matter in the entrepreneur’s problem, as it is
constant given an original value of 𝑞. Therefore, the entrepreneur only maximizes ∑𝑁
𝑖=1[𝑏(𝑞, ℎ𝑖 ) −
𝑐(ℎ𝑖 ) − 𝜖𝑖 ], where the only terms that depend on 𝑞 are 𝑏(𝑞, ℎ𝑖 ). Since the marginal return to each
ℎ𝑖 is increasing in 𝑞 (i.e.

𝜕2 𝑏
𝜕ℎ𝜕𝑞

≥ 0), then, for any two values 𝑞′′ > 𝑞′ , 𝑃[𝑏(𝑞′′, ℎ𝑖 ) ≥ 𝑐(ℎ𝑖 ) +

𝜖𝑖 ] ≥ 𝑃[𝑏(𝑞′ , ℎ𝑖 ) ≥ 𝑐(ℎ𝑖 ) + 𝜖𝑖 ] which implies 𝐸[𝐻∗ |𝑞′′ ] ≥ 𝐸[𝐻∗ |𝑞′ ]. QED
The relationship between 𝐻 ∗ and 𝑞 , in which the early entrepreneurial choices are
determined in part by the firm quality, is the key insight on which we build our empirical approach.

8

Entrepreneurs must make choices early on, and they do so given their own potential and intentions
for firm growth (their quality) as well as some idiosyncrasies. These choices, in turn, are
observable in public records such as corporate registries, patent databases, or media, to name a
few, and observing them for a firm can allow us to separate firms into different quality groups. To
learn how we can do that we add more structure.
Firm growth outcomes. While the analyst cannot observe firm quality or value, we assume
she is able to observe a growth outcome 𝑔, such as employment, IPO, or revenue with a lag. This
growth outcome is more likely at higher values of 𝑉(𝑞), such that 𝐸[𝑔|𝑞] is increasing in 𝑞,
exhibiting first order stochastic dominance.
Since 𝐸[𝐻 ∗ |𝑞] is also increasing in 𝑞 and is first order stochastic dominant, it follows from
the transitivity of first order stochastic dominance (see Hadar and Russell, 1971) that 𝐸[𝑔|𝐻 ∗ ] is
also exhibits first order stochastic dominance in q.
Lemma 1 (𝐄[𝐠|𝐇 ∗ ] is an increasing function of q): For any two 𝑞′′ > 𝑞′, if 𝐻∗ (𝑞) is a solution
to the Entrepreneur’s Problem, 𝐸[𝑔|𝐻∗ (𝑞′′ )] ≥ 𝐸[𝑔|𝐻 ∗ (𝑞′)]
Proof. See above.
Now, consider a mapping 𝑓 −1 which estimates the expected value of growth given 𝐻 ∗ ,
𝑓 −1 (𝑔, 𝐻) → 𝜃. Then, if 𝜃 is the expected value of 𝑔 given 𝐻∗ , then 𝜃̂ identifies a monotonic
function of 𝑞.
Proposition 2 (Mapping g and H to Quality): If a mapping 𝑓 −1 (𝑔, 𝐻) → 𝜃̂ is an estimate of
𝐸[𝑔|𝐻∗ ], and 𝐻∗ is a solution to the Entrepreneur’s Problem, then 𝜃̂ is a monotonic function of
𝑞.
Proof: The proof is simple, since Lemma 1 shows that all mappings 𝐸[𝑔|𝐻∗ (𝑞)] are monotonic in
𝑞, then if the value we use of 𝐻∗ is a solution to the entrepreneur’s maximization problem, then

9

the values from function 𝑓 −1 also need to be monotonic in 𝑞.

10

APPENDIX C
DATA APPENDIX

11

I.

Overview of Data Appendix

This data appendix to the paper The State of American Entrepreneurship, by Jorge Guzman
and Scott Stern, outlines in detail the use of business registration records in the United States, the
steps and decisions we took when converting those records into measures for analysis, and
robustness tests we ran to validate the potential for bias both due to specific assumptions about
each measure as well as heterogeneity in our sample across geography and time. It serves the dual
purpose of serving as an introduction for future users of business registration data while also
providing detailed robustness verification and explaining the logic of specific decisions on many
aspects of our data.
Section II of this appendix explains the development of our measures and dataset, including
how we matched multiple datasets for analysis, how we built our measures using the merged
dataset, and the economic rationale for the production of each one. Section III explains the
differences between business registration records across the United States, their ease of access,
and variation in the data they provide. It also highlights the potential for bias given the time when
different data is observed (i.e. whether we observe the most recent value of a business or the
original one) and performs numerous robustness tests to rule out the potential for bias driving our
results given these differences. Section IV analyzes the potential for bias in our aggregate RECPI
with a focus on guaranteeing that the predictive value of our indexes is high across geographies
and time, and is not driven by a particularly large startup period (e.g. the dot-com bubble) nor
driven by a particular area with many growth startups (e.g. Silicon Valley).

12

II.

Using Business Registration Records to Find Signals of Quality

Our data set is drawn from the complete set of business registrants in thirty two states from
1988 to 2014. Our analysis draws on the complete population of firms satisfying one of the
following conditions: (i) a for-profit firm whose jurisdiction is in the source state or (ii) a for-profit
firm whose jurisdiction is in Delaware but whose principal office address is in the state. The
resulting data set is composed of 27,976,477 observations. For each observation, we construct
variables related to (i) the growth outcome for the startup, (ii) measures based on business
registration observables and (iii) measures based on external observables that can be linked to the
startup.
Growth outcome. The growth outcome utilized in this paper, Growth, is a dummy variable
equal to 1 if the startup achieves an initial public offering (IPO) or is acquired at a meaningful
positive valuation within 6 years of registration. Both outcomes, IPO and acquisitions, are drawn
from Thomson Reuters SDC Platinum 4. Although the coverage of IPOs is likely to be nearly
comprehensive, the SDC data set excludes some acquisitions. SDC captures their list of
acquisitions by using over 200 news sources, SEC filings, trade publications, wires, and
proprietary sources of investment banks, law firms, and other advisors (Churchwell, 2016). Barnes,
Harp, and Oler (2014) compare the quality of the SDC data to acquisitions by public firms and
find a 95% accuracy (Netter, Stegemoller, and Wintoki (2011), also perform a similar review).
While we know this data not to be perfect, we believe it to have relatively good coverage of ‘high
value’ acquisitions. We also note that none of the cited studies found significant false positives,

4
Thomson Reuters’s SDC Platinum is a commonly used database of financial information. More details are available at
http://thomsonreuters.com/sdc-platinum/

13

suggesting that the only effect of the acquisitions we do not track will be an attenuation of our
estimated coefficients.
We observe 13,406 positive growth outcomes for the 1988–2008 start-up cohorts), yielding
a mean for Growth of 0.0007. In our main results, we assign acquisitions with an unrecorded
acquisitions price as a positive growth outcome, because an evaluation of those deals suggests that
most reported acquisitions were likely in excess of $5 million. We perform a series of robustness
tests on different outcomes in the next section of this data appendix.
Start-up characteristics. The core of the empirical approach is to map growth outcomes to
observable characteristics of start-ups at or near the time of business registration. We develop two
types of measures: (i) measures based on business registration observables and (ii) measures based
on external indicators of start-up quality that are observable at or near the time of business
registration. We review each of these in turn.
Measures based on business registration observables. We construct six measures of startup quality based on information directly observable from the business registration record. First,
we create binary measures related to how the firm is registered, including corporation, whether
the firm is a corporation (rather than partnership or LLC) and Delaware jurisdiction, whether the
firm is incorporated in Delaware. Corporation is an indicator equal to 1 if the firm is registered as
a corporation and 0 if it is registered either as an LLC or partnership. 5 In the period of 1988 to
2008, 0.10% of corporations achieve a growth outcome versus only 0.03% of noncorporations.
Delaware jurisdiction is equal to 1 if the firm is registered under Delaware, but has its main office
in the source state (all other foreign firms are dropped before analysis). Delaware jurisdiction is
favorable for firms which, due to more complex operations, require more certainty in corporate
5
Previous research highlights performance differences between incorporated and unincorporated
entrepreneurs (Levine and Rubinstein, 2013).

14

law, but it is associated with extra costs and time to establish and maintain two registrations.
Between 1988 and 2008, 2.4% of the sample registers in Delaware; 37% of firms achieving a
growth outcome do so.
Second, we create four measures that are based on the name of the firm, including a
measure associated with whether the firm name is eponymous (named after the founder), is short
or long, is associated with local industries (rather than traded), or is associated with a set of hightechnology industry clusters.
Drawing on the recent work of Belenzon, Chatterji, and Daley (2017) (BCD), we use the
firm and top manager name to establish whether the firm name is eponymous (i.e., named after
one or more of the president, CEO, chairman, or managers (in the case of LLCs and partnerships)).
Eponymy is equal to 1 if the first, middle, or last name of the top managers is part of the name of
the firm itself.6 We require names be at least four characters to reduce the likelihood of making
errors from short names. Our results are robust to variations of the precise calculation of eponymy
(e.g., names with a higher or lower number of minimum letters). We have also undertaken
numerous checks to assess the robustness of our name matching algorithm. Not all states include
the name of top managers 7. Within those that do, 7.7% of the firms in our training sample are
eponymous [an incidence rate similar to BCD], though only 2.4% for whom Growth equals one.
It is useful to note that, while we draw on BCD to develop the role of eponymy as a useful startup characteristic, our hypothesis is somewhat different than BCD: we hypothesize that eponymous
firms are likely to be associated with lower entrepreneurial quality. Whereas BCD evaluates
whether serial entrepreneurs are more likely to invest and grow companies which they name after
6

For corporations, we consider top managers only the current president, for partnerships and LLCs, we allow
for any of the two listed managers. The corporation president and two top partnership managers are listed in the
business registration records themselves.
7
These, and other, institutional differences are taken care of in our specifications through the inclusion of state fixed
effects.in

15

themselves, we focus on the cross-sectional difference between firms with broad aspirations for
growth (and so likely avoid naming the firm after the founders) versus less ambitious enterprises,
such as family-owned “lifestyle” businesses.
Our second measure relates to the length of the firm name. Based on our review of naming
patterns of growth-oriented start-ups versus the full business registration database, a striking
feature of growth-oriented firms is that the vast majority of their names are at most two words
(plus perhaps one additional word to capture organizational form (e.g., “Inc.”). Companies such
as Google or Spotify have sharp and distinctive names, whereas more traditional businesses often
have long and descriptive names (e.g., “Green Valley Home Health Care & Hospice, Inc.”). We
define short name to be equal to one if the entire firm name has three of less words, and zero
otherwise. 46% of firms within the 1988-2008 period have a short name, but the incidence rate
among growth firms is more than 73%. We have also investigated a number of other variants
(allowing more or less words, evaluating whether the name is “distinctive” (in the sense of being
both non-eponymous and also not an English word). While these are promising areas for future
research, we found that the three-word binary variable provides a useful measure for distinguishing
entrepreneurial quality.
We then create four measures based on how the firm name reflects the industry or sector
that the firm within which the firm is operating. To do so, we take advantage of two features of
the US Cluster Mapping Project (Delgado, Porter, and Stern, 2016), which categorizes industries
into (a) whether that industry is primarily local (demand is primarily within the region) versus
traded (demand is across regions) and (b) among traded industries, a set of 51 traded clusters of
industries that share complementarities and linkages. We augment the classification scheme from
the US Cluster Mapping Project with the complete list of firm names and industry classifications

16

contained in Reference USA, a business directory containing more than 10 million firm names and
industry codes for companies across the United States. Using a random sample of 1.5 million
Reference USA records, we create two indices for every word ever used in a firm name. The first
of these indices measures the degree of localness, and is defined as the relative incidence of that
word

in

firm

names

∑j={local firms} 1[wi ⊆ namej ]
∑j={non−local firms} 1[wi ⊆ namej ]

that

are

in

local

versus

non-local

industries

(i.e., ρi =

). We then define a list of Top Local Words, defined as those words

that are (a) within the top quartile of 𝜌𝑖 and (b) have an overall rate of incidence greater than 0.01%
within the population of firms in local industries (see Guzman and Stern, (2015, Table S10) for
the complete list). Finally, we define local to be equal to one for firms that have at least one of the
Top Local Words in their name, and zero otherwise. We then undertake a similar exercise for the
degree to which a firm name is associated with a traded name. It is important to note that there
are firms which we cannot associate either with traded or local and thus leave out as a third
category. Just more than 19% of firms have local names, though only 5% of firms for whom
growth equals one, and while 54% of firms are associated with the traded sector, 59% of firms for
whom growth equals one do.
We additionally examine the type of traded cluster a firm is associated with, focusing in
particular on whether the firm is in a high-technology cluster or a cluster associated with resource
intensive industries. For our high technology cluster group (Traded High Technology), we draw
on firm names from industries include in ten USCMP clusters: Aerospace Vehicles, Analytical
Instruments, Biopharmaceuticals, Downstream Chemical, Information Technology, Medical
Devices, Metalworking Technology, Plastics, Production Technology and Heavy Machinery, and
Upstream Chemical. From 1988 to 2008, while only 5% firms are associated with high technology,
this rate increases to 16% within firms that achieve our growth outcome. For our resource
17

intensive cluster group, we draw on firms names from fourteen USCMP clusters: Agricultural
Inputs and Services, Coal Mining, Downstream Metal Products, Electric Power Generation and
Transmission, Fishing and Fishing Products, Food Processing and Manufacturing, Jewelry and
Precious Metals, Lighting and Electrical Equipment, Livestock Processing, Metal Mining,
Nonmetal Mining, Oil and Gas Production and Transportation, Tobacco, Upstream Metal
Manufacturing. While 14% of firms are associated with resource intensive industries, and 13%
amongst growth firms.
Finally, we also repeat the same procedure to find firms associated with more narrow sets
of clusters that have a closer linkage to growth entrepreneurship in the United States. We
specifically focus on firms associated to Biotechnology, E-Commerce, Information Technology,
Medical Devices and Semiconductors. It is important to note that these definitions are not
exclusive and our algorithm could associate firms with more than one industry group. For
Biotechnology (Biotechnology Sector), we use firm names associated with the US CMP
Biopharmaceuticals cluster. While only 0.19% of firms are associated with Biotechnology, this
number increases to 2.2% amongst growth firms. For E-commerce (E-Commerce Sector) we focus
on firms associated with the Electronic and Catalog Shopping sub-cluster within the Distribution
and Electronic Commerce cluster. And while 5% of all firms are associated with e-commerce, the
rate is 9.3% for growth firms. For Information Technology (IT Sector), we focus on firms related
to the USCMP cluster Information Technology and Analytical Instruments. 2.4% of all firms in
our sample are associated with IT, and 12% of all growth firms are identified as IT-related. For
Medical Devices (Medical Dev. Sector), we focus on firms associated with the Medical Devices
cluster. We find that while 3% of all firms are in medical devices, this number increases to 9.6%
within growth firms. Finally, for Semiconductors (Semiconductor Sector), we focus on the sub-

18

cluster of Semiconductors within the Information Technology and Analytical Instruments cluster.
Though only 0.04% of all firms are associated with semiconductors, 0.5% of growth firms are.

Measures based on external observables. We construct two measures related to start-up
quality based on information in intellectual property data sources. Although this paper only
measures external observables related to intellectual property, our approach can be utilized to
measure other externally observable characteristics that may be related to entrepreneurial quality
(e.g., measures related to the quality of the founding team listed in the business registration, or
measures of early investments in scale (e.g., a Web presence).
Building on prior research matching business names to intellectual property
(Balasubramanian and Sivadasan, 2010; Kerr and Fu, 2008), we rely on a name-matching
algorithm connecting the firms in the business registration data to external data sources.
Importantly, because we match only on firms located in California, and because firms names
legally must be “unique” within each state’s company registrar, we are able to have a reasonable
level of confidence that any “exact match” by a matching procedure has indeed matched the same
firm across two databases. In addition, our main results use “exact name matching” rather than
“fuzzy matching”; in small-scale tests using a fuzzy matching approach [the Levenshtein edit
distance (Levenshtein, 1965)], we found that fuzzy matching yielded a high rate of false positives
due to the prevalence of similarly named but distinct firms (e.g., Capital Bank v. Capitol Bank,
Pacificorp Inc v. Pacificare Inc.).
Our matching algorithm works in three steps.
First, we clean the firm name by:

19

•

expanding eight common abbreviations (“Ctr.”, “Svc.”, “Co.”, “Inc.”, “Corp.”, “Univ.”,
“Dept.”, “LLC.”) in a consistent way (e.g., “Corp.” to “Corporation”)

•

removing the word “the” from all names

•

replacing “associates” for “associate”

•

deleting the following special characters from the name: . | ’ ” - @ _

Second, we create measures of the firm name with and without the organization type, and with and
without spaces. We then match each external data source to each of these measures of the firm
name. The online appendix contains all of the data and annotated code for this procedure.
This procedure yields two variables. Our first measure of intellectual property captures
whether the firm is in the process of acquiring patent protection during its first year of activity.
Patent is equal to 1 if the firm holds a patent application in the first year. All patent applications
and patent application assignments are drawn from the Google U.S. Patent and Trademark Office
(USPTO) Bulk Download archive. We use patent applications, rather than granted patents, because
patents are granted with a lag and only applications are observable close to the data of founding.
Note that we include both patent applications that were initially filed by another entity (e.g., an
inventor or another firm), as well as patent applications filed by the newly founded firm. While
only 0.2% of the firms in 1988–2008 have a first-year patent, 14% of growth firms do.
Our second intellectual property measure captures whether a firm registers a trademark
during its first year of business activity. Trademark is equal to 1 if a firm applied for a trademark
within the first year, and 0 otherwise. We build this measure from the Stata-ready trademark DTA
file developed by the USPTO Office of Chief Economist (Graham et al, 2013). Between 1988 and
2008, 0.11% of all firms register a trademark, while 4.7% of growth firms do.

20

III.

Observing Entrepreneurship Across States using Business Registration Records

III.A Business Registration Records State by State
While the act of registering a business is essentially the same across the United States, and
carries basically the same benefits, corporation registries do vary in their internal operation across
jurisdictions. While we have high confidence that firms register at the same point in their lifespan
independent of state, the exact information we are able to get from each state is more nuanced.
Business registration records vary in accessibility of the data, fields available, the exact definition
and information within each field, and ease of use of data files. Each of these creates considerations
in our use of business registration files, and has shaped the definition of our final sample.
Though business registration records are a public record, access to full datasets of
registration records varies substantially in availability, cost and operational procedures required to
get the files. In one end of the spectrum, we found several states that posted bulk data files publicly
and allowed anonymous download of such files (Alaska, Florida, Washington, Wyoming, and
Vermont). There was also another set of states for which access to these files required interfacing
directly with the corporations office and filing some forms, but the procedure to access the data
was relatively straightforward, and the costs where reasonable and appeared in line with a principle
of trying to simply recuperate the costs of an administrative task (California, Massachusetts, Ohio,
and others). There were other states that charged costs that we found higher than what would
appear to be the appropriate to cover an administrative cost, and while we decided to pay for some
of those in the low end (e.g. $1,250 for Texas) we avoided others that where substantially higher
(e.g. $59,773.42 for New Jersey). Finally some states appeared to be outright evasive on fulfilling
requests for data that is supposed to be public record, and suggested that either providing such data

21

was impossible for them (e.g. Wisconsin) or deflected multiple attempts to contact individuals in
their corporations division, through both phone and email, to ask for the records (e.g.
Pennsylvania). In selecting our sample states, we tried to balance ease of access with economic
importance, spending extra effort to get the top 5 by GDP (California, Texas, New York, Florida,
and Illinous). We do note, however, that there did not appear to be any discernible pattern as to
which states fell under different access regimes for their registration data. In prior work (Guzman
and Stern, 2016) we have called on business registration offices to open access to such data.
The state corporations offices also vary in the fields that they provide or that can be
generated from the information in their records. There were a number of fields which we were
only able to get for a small number of states, such as date the firm becomes inactive (though most
states record it, many where do not do consistently), firm industry, and stated mission of the firm,
and as such decided not to use these fields in our national analysis even though their ability to
explain growth seemed promising. There were also states that did not have fields that are important
in our analysis and had to be dropped. In two cases (North Carolina and Ohio) we received the
data from the corporations office but found they did not record the jurisdiction of foreign firms
(firms registered in a different state), and we were unable to know which firms were from Delaware
and which were from other states. We decided to drop these two states from our analysis. For two
other states (New York and Washington) we found many firms had a missing address or had the
address of their registered agent rather than the firm. We were able to keep these states for our
national indexes, but unable to do any micro-geography analysis for them and included a caveat
in our national map (note that state-level indexes are not affected by this issue since we do record
the firm in the state correctly). Finally, not all states provided the current manager or president of

22

the firm, and as such we were unable to estimate eponymy for all states and did not include it in
the main prediction model.
The state corporation offices also differ in the exact specification of each field and only
provided exactly equivalent fields for jurisdiction and registration date in all states. States vary,
for example, in the specific set of corporate types that they allow. Specifically, only some states
include an extra type of corporation or LLC for trade services (e.g. plumbing, law, etc) called a
“Professional Corporation” or “Professional LLC”. While a promising category, we are unable to
take advantage of this extra categorization since it doesn’t exist in all states, and instead only split
into corporation and non-corporation firms in our analysis. Within corporations, the share of firms
that registers a corporation changed through time due to the introduction of the LLC. LLC as a
legal form was introduced at different times in different states, and in some states the introduction
occurs within our sample years (for example, it was introduced in Massachusetts in 1995). As
such, the role of corporations varies across years with the main effect being adverse selection of
low-quality firms that would have registered as LLC but are instead corporations in the early years.
We view this as a bias that only works against our results and do not control for it. We are also
unable to differentiate between S-Corporations and C-Corporations since those are tax statuses
rather than legal forms, and corporations can change from one to the other year to year. Finally,
while non-profit status is also a tax status (e.g. as a 501(c) organization), all states also allow firms
to registered specifically as a non-profit corporation and we are hence able to drop these firms (and
the related benefit corporations, cemetery corporations, religious corporations, and trusts) directly
through registration data before our analysis.
States also vary in the firm name information they provide. Only some states provided the
list of all names an entity has had (e.g. Massachusetts and Texas). For those states, we are able to

23

recover the original name of the firm and use such name when matching to intellectual property
records and when creating our name-based measures. In cases where we did not have the original
name, we used instead the current (provided) name. Only one state (Massachusetts) provides
information to recover the original address of firms, and only for a subsample, while all other states
only provide the current firm address. We investigate the possibility of any bias that could incur
in our analysis by using the current address and firm name, rather than original ones, in the next
section. Furthermore, states only provide the name of the current president or manager, and not
the original firm founding, an issue we also evaluate in the next section.
Finally, states also vary in the ease of use of the data they provide, and no two states provide
the data in the same format. Some states provide simple comma-delimited files that are easy to
import in Stata, or fixed-length fields that can be imported through a Stata dictionary, while other
states provide lists of transaction records that then need to be pre-processed through scripts that
then produce the files that can be added to Stata.
III.B Estimating Potential Biases from Changes in Firm Location.
A main concern in our analysis is the potential of bias from changes in firm location. The
data we receive from business registries holds the current location of the firm, but our goal in
understanding entrepreneurial quality geography is to understand the initial location of the firm.
(Importantly this does not impact our firm-level quality estimates, and hence we can analyze
variation across different unbiased ex-ante quality levels of firms.) Firms are likely to move for
many reasons. Ex-ante better firms might be more likely to start close to the center of an
entrepreneurial cluster as it might have more value for the local externalities and move out of high
potential clusters if unsuccessful, while ex-post successful firms (with lower quality ex-ante) might

24

be more likely to move into such clusters. The potential direction and effect of this bias is in
principle unclear.
While we are unable to study the extent of this bias in all states, we are able to perform a
sub-sample study in Massachusetts. Using Massachusetts offers several important benefits that
support the robustness of any forthcoming conclusions. First, our samples are beneficial: We are
able to obtain two samples in Massachusetts that are almost exactly two years apart (one from
January 06, 2013, and one from November 24, 2014); furthermore, a sample from January 2013
provides the earliest possible snapshot that includes all 2012 firms (the most recent firms for which
we estimate our full quality model, and the data we use for our full US snapshot), and hence
includes the address in the firm’s actual registration. Second, Massachusetts requires firms to
update their address (among other things) in a yearly annual report guaranteeing we observe the
new address for all firms that move. In other states, such annual report is not necessary. If a firm
doesn’t report its new address, we would continue to observe the original business address even
after it moves, and our analysis will hold no bias. And third, the period we consider is a period in
which there is considerable geographic migration of high-quality firms within Massachusetts, from
Route 128 to the Cambridge and Boston area (see Guzman and Stern, 2015b for further details).
Each of these details guarantees that our estimate is most likely to be an upper bound, and the
extent of bias identified in this analysis is, if anything, likely to be lower in our national sample.
For this analysis, given that the ZIP Code is the smallest unit of geographic measurement
that we use in this paper, we focus all of our analysis in ZIP Code level variation 8. First, for each
firm, we keep their 2013 ZIP Code (observed in January 06, 2013) their 2015 ZIP Code (observed
in November 24, 2014). We also geocode each ZIP Code to assess the distance of any geographic

8
This also helps protect from noise that could occur from “fuzzy” address matching approaches rather than exact ZIP
Code matching.

25

move and remove all firms that have an invalid ZIP Code (e.g. due to typos) 9. Finally, we estimate
the leave-self-out quality of each ZIP Code for each firm using the average quality of all firms
from 1988-2012 in our sample period.
We begin by documenting the extent to which a firm changes location at all. Table B3
presents the rates of change in ZIP Code for each 2-year group in our data. The first column
indicates the age of the firm in 2013, when we first observe it, and the second column the share of
firms that stay in the same ZIP Code in the next two years for the group. These estimates are not
conditional on survival, and thus capture the share of total firms that will change from one category
to the next in the total sample (i.e. it controls for changes in survival probability), the quantity we
are interested on. Firms under 4 years or less (at 2013) are most likely to change address, with a
probability of change between 2.4% and 3.3%. This probability then drops quickly, and in the 26year-old cohort the probability of change is only 0.3%. Because our measure implicitly also
includes likelihood of survival at different cohorts, we can estimate the overall likelihood that a
firm record will have a different address after N years by simply doing the running product of the
probability of same ZIP Code (under the assumption the migration dynamics have been the same
historically). Column 4 includes this result. For the cohort of 10-year-old firms, we estimate 88%
of the records to still contain the original ZIP Code, and for 26 year old firms we estimate this
share at 83%. We repeat this exercise with only the top 10% of quality firms in the distribution.
While the likelihood of change of ZIP Code for a high-quality firm is higher, even within this
group, we estimate 76% of records still contain the original ZIP Code by 10 years and 72% by 26
years. In unreported tests, we find the share of firms that move in the top 1% is not meaningfully
higher than the top 10%.

9

We consider all ZIP Codes we cannot geocode through the Google API to be invalid.
26

In our paper, most of our micro-geography results are done based on spatial visualizations.
We therefore would also like to know how far are the firms moving. If firms are moving to
contiguous ZIP Codes around the same high-quality cluster, perhaps due to small relocations or
even ZIP Code redistricting, then the impact of those moves on our maps is small. On the contrary,
if they move over large distances, then the impact is large. Using geocodings for each ZIP Code
we estimate the distance of each ZIP code to another. We find 25% of all firms move less than 4
miles (25th percentile is 3.8), 50% of all firm moves are on less than 8 miles (50 th percentile is 7.8),
and 90% of all moves are 35 miles or less (90th percentile is 35.24). The top 10% has a similar
median (6.8) though higher variance (90th percentile is 330 miles).
Finally, any firm movement across ZIP Codes can only bias our results if it is systematic.
If the moves are instead random, then average ZIP Code quality (our measure) would be constant
even after there is firm migration. We estimate the difference in ZIP Code quality before and after
a firm move (ZIP Code quality is estimated using all firms in that ZIP Code in November 24, 2014,
without the moving firm included in either the source of destination ZIP Codes), and present a
histogram of this measure in Figure B1. This difference in ZIP Code quality has a mean and median
both basically centered at zero, therefore suggesting these moves are unbiased.
As a final test, we investigate whether this difference can vary by firm quality or age – i.e.
if firms of higher or lower quality (or age) can systematically move to higher or lower average
quality ZIP Codes. To do so, we run an OLS regression of firm quality on difference in ZIP Code
(both in natural logs to account for the substantial skewness in entrepreneurial quality measures
and be able to interpret this as an elasticity). The coefficient is .017 with a p-value of .27 using
robust standard errors and an R2 of .0005. This effect is (basically) indistinguishable from zero.

27

We also regress log-age on difference in ZIP Code quality to get a coefficient of -.016 with a pvalue of .40 and R2 of .0002.

III.C Analyzing Other Potential Sources of Bias in the Use of Business Registration Records
We now turn to analyzing the potential for bias in our estimates due to the specific nature
of our sample. We specifically comment on six specific areas where there exists the possibility of
bias: the impact of unobserved name changes, the role of re-incorporations on our data, the impact
of spin-offs vs new firms, changes of ownership, changes in firm location, and the role of
subsidiaries as separate corporate entities. We review each one in turn.
Name changes. As mentioned in section I of this appendix, we receive the original name
for only some states in our dataset and only the current name in the rest of the states. While changes
in name that correlate to growth could bias the relationship between our name-based measures and
growth, it is unlikely to bias our most important measures. Specifically, changes in name cannot
impact firm legal type (corporations vs non-corporations) or firm jurisdiction (Delaware). Our
name-matching algorithm to match patents and trademarks uses firm names and assumes that the
name we use is the same name as in the patent. While this can result in bias, it is only a bias that
would work against our results – since we look for patents around the registration date, we can
have false negatives for firms where we are looking for the wrong (new) name in the patent record
but the firm had a previous name, but false positives are much less likely. These governance and
intellectual property measures are, in fact, the most important in our study, and we find the fact
that they cannot be affected by name changes assuring. Perhaps a risk in using only original names
in some states is that the rate of false negatives will change depending on states. In unreported

28

robustness tests, we have found the variation in results from using always the final name for all
states (and hence implicitly having the same bias for all states) to be immaterial for our results.
Change of Ownership. Our dataset differs from other datasets in what is a firm and how it
changes depending on ownership. The Longitudinal Business Database is built using tax records
from corporate entities. As such, establishments that change ownership might bias the sample in
different way and users of this data take substantial care to make sure changes in ownership do not
drive their results (e.g. see the data appendix of Decker, Haltiwanger, Jarmin, and Miranda, 2014).
Our data is different. Changes in ownership do not affect the registered firm and, unless the firm
is closed down and re-incorporated, changes in ownership do not change anything in registration
records.
The potential for re-incorporations. We argue in our analysis that we identify the extent
to which firms are born with different quality, which is observed to the entrepreneur. An alternative
hypothesis would be that entrepreneurs change their firm type once they observe their potential, at
which point they re-incorporate the firm differently (e.g. as a Delaware corporation). To study the
possibility of this bias we take advantage of institutional details of the process through which firms
re-incorporate to observe the instances when it occurs. When a low potential firm (e.g. a
Massachusetts LLC) re-incorporates as a high-quality firm (e.g. a Delaware corporation), it is done
in two steps. First, a new firm is registered under the high quality regime; then, the old firm is
merged into the new firm so that the new firm holds the old firm’s assets and other matters (note
that it is not possible to just “convert” the firm among firm types without creating a new target
firm).
Once again, we use our Massachusetts data, which also includes a list of all mergers that
have occurred among registered firms and the date of each merger. Obviously, firms can merge

29

for many reasons and re-incorporation is only one of them. We create a measure Re-registration,
which is equal to 1 only when the target firm was registered close to the merger date (90 days
window). The facts we identify are included in Table B4. We review each in turn.
We identify a total of 7,485 mergers where the target firm is in Massachusetts (we drop all
other firms earlier in our data, including firms registered before 1988 and firms with domicile
outside Massachusetts). Of those, 3,348 firms (44.73%) are re-registrations, which are 3,035 new
firms (sometimes multiple firms merge into one), while the rest are not. This total is low relative
to the total firms in our sample for Massachusetts, 591,423 firms, suggesting that at most 0.5% of
firms can potentially have a bias. We identify 1,932 cases in which both the source and target are
in our dataset, with the rest likely being firms either registered before 1988 or with a foreign
domicile.
We now proceed by studying our five most significant variables in this transition: patent,
trademark, Delaware Jurisdiction, Corporation). Our main goal is to understand the extent to which
founders of low quality firms might later on re-register as high quality firms. To do so, we estimate
the number firms that “gain” each of these observables, where a “gain” means the source firm did
not have the observable, but the new firm does (e.g. the source firm is not a Corporation but the
new firm is). We also compare this number with the total number of firms with this measure equal
to 1 in our Massachusetts sample. As can been seen in Table B5, in all cases, the share of firms
that gain a positive observable is always less than 3%. In Delaware, the observable which might
hold the most bias, only 0.76% of all Delaware firms are re-registrations of firms changing
corporate form, while the other 99.4% is not.

30

III.D Robustness Tests on Variations of Growth Outcome
In this section, we document a number of robustness tests done on our main predictive
model and variations of our growth outcome variable. Our goal in these tests is to guarantee our
sample is not sensitive to specific sub-sample issues in our definition of growth, such that small
variation in the growth criteria would lead to widely different results, and to validate that spurious
correlations are not driving our estimates. Given our focus on predictive value of our early stage
measures rather than causal inference, we will look at the difference in coefficient magnitudes
when comparing other coefficients to this baseline model, rather than statistical significance. That
is, we seek to know whether changing our definition of growth would lead to different spatial and
time-based indexes of EQI, RECPI and REAI rather than understanding if the magnitude itself is
equal to one another in a statistical sense. We present all regressions in Table B4, with column 1
presenting our baseline model, columns 2-5 presenting alternate robustness models, and columns
6-9 presenting the absolute percentage difference between the coefficients of the baseline model
and the alternative model.
Model (1) is our existing full information model presented in Table (5), with growth
defined as an IPO or acquisition within six years, which we include here as a baseline model.
In Models 2 and 3 we focus on increasing the threshold of growth for which we measure a
firm as having achieved growth. In Model 2, we investigate whether our results could be driven
by a large number of low-value exits that are sold at a loss for stockholders. We use a different
growth measure that is equal to 1 only for IPOs and acquisitions with a recorded firm valuation of
over $100 million dollars. The number of growth firms drops significantly from 13,406 growth
firms to 1,378, a drop of 90%. Delaware Only and Patent and Delaware have the highest percentage

31

difference, with the Delaware Only coefficient being 2.5 times higher than the baseline model and
the Patent and Delaware coefficient being 3.5 times higher. Importantly, we highlight that our use
of SDC Platinum as a source of acquisitions is likely to lead to a positive selection in our sample:
SDC Platinum is already more likely to include transactions that are significant in value and less
likely to represent mergers that are only a sell of small assets of a firm.
Model 3 increases our threshold of quality further and includes only IPOs. IPO outcomes
represent the top-end of growth successes in our sample, and understanding if our dynamics hold
in this set might prove a particularly useful regularity. The number of growth firms drops
substantially to 1,477, a share that appears broadly in line with patterns of exit of venture backed
events in Kaplan and Lerner (2010). We also drop our Corporation measure before running this
regression since it is endogenous – all IPOs are necessarily corporations, as it is not possible for
non-corporations to sell shares. Our coefficients exhibit more variation than those in Model 2, with
the most notable differences in Patent measures and Delaware measures. Patent independently
increases by 1.6 times, Trademark increase almost 1.1 times while the interaction term increases
by 2.4 times. The importance of name based measures also increases, with firms with short names
being 33% more likely to grow in the IPO model than the baseline model, as well as some sector
measures, particularly an association to Traded industries, increases the likelihood of IPO by 24%,
an association to Local industries (already a negative correlation to growth), which increases the
likelihood of IPO by 52% relative to the baseline model, and being a biotechnology firm, which is
1.2 times more likely to grow relative to the baseline. Assuming IPO measures are a higher value
version of our growth outcome, it would appear that the effect of our measures is even starker in
this high value growth outcome compared to our main growth measure. This further supports our

32

view that our measures relate to real outcomes where, if anything, we could have even larger
variation in quality when selecting stricter growth measures.
Models 4 and 5 test for biases that could relate to the window of growth in 6 years rather
than a longer number of years. Changing the number of years allows us to investigate potential
differences in dynamics of firms depending on their observables and industry sector and
investigate to what extent this could bias our results. In Model 4, we define growth as an IPO or
acquisition within 9 years instead of 6 years. Given that the time-window is three years longer, we
drop the last three years (2006-2008) in our training sample from this regression, since the full
growth window will not have elapsed for those years. The number of growth firms in these years
increases by 50% from 11,500 to 17,248 after excluding these extra years. This might appear to be
lower than would be expected since the average years to IPO or close to six, but we note that
growth outcomes are skewed and the median is much lower than six years. The largest variation
in relative magnitude is for firm with Delaware Only measure, which are 21% more likely to grow
than in the 6 year window, and for firms to be corporations which are 21% more likely to grow
relative to baseline.
Finally, in Model 5 we use an unbounded IPO outcome that is equal to 1 if a firm ever has
an IPO. We run this regression on our 1988-2008 sample, implicitly allowing the most recent firms
at least 9 years to achieve such outcome. As in Model 3, we find looking at IPO growth basically
makes our estimates starker and highlights the ability of our measures to correlate significantly to
growth outcomes at the very top end.

33

Evaluating Entrepreneurial Quality Estimates
Even if our model has strong predictive capacity, another potential source of concern could
be heterogeneity within subsamples. Specifically, if one state (California) holds a disproportionate
number of growth outcomes, or if growth outcomes occur disproportionately on a small number
of years (the late 1990s), it is possible that our model is mostly fitting that region or time-period
but does not have the external validity to work outside of the training years and states. If so, our
prediction of quality in future years would be poor even if such predictions are good in the sample
years.
We begin testing the accuracy across states in Table B1. We perform three different tests.
In Column 3, we estimate the share of state growth firms in the top 5% of the state quality
distribution using our 30% training sample. All states appear to separate growth firms in a within
a small percentage at the top of the distribution10. The share of firms in the top 5% is highest in
Massachusetts (78%), and New Jersey (73%) and lowest in Florida (35%); California (55%) is
only around the median, and there does not appear to be a discernible relationship between this
statistic and the distribution of venture capital or high technology clusters. Our second test
evaluates to what extent do our observables characterize the growth process in a region. To do so,
we re-run our full information model (Model 1 of Table 4) separately for each state and calculate
the pseudo-R2 of each model. Once again, variation in this measure appears to be stable, with our
measures having important relationship to growth outcomes in all states. Finally, we measure the
relationship between entrepreneurial quality estimated from these states’ specific models to our
global quality measure. In column 5 we report the correlation between the two.

11

All correlation

10
We are unable to estimate this measure for Alaska, Vermont and Wyoming due to the low number of growth firms
that the states have.
11
Another potential approach to test the difference in predictive measures between quality estimated with a state and
national model would be to look at the distribution of the difference between these two measures (𝑑𝑖 = 𝜃𝑖,𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑒 − 𝜃𝑖
and test for H0 : 𝑑𝑖 = 0. However, because the state model implicitly includes a state fixed effect this would counfound

34

measures are high, with the highest one being in New York (.973) and the lowest in North Carolina
(.528), all other states are between .598 and .960. In conclusion, while there is variation in state
performance each of these three tests, we find our estimate of quality with a national index to hold
good predictive capacity at the state level.
We repeat the same three tests for each year in Table B2. The robustness of our model
across years appears to be even higher than the robustness across states. The share of top 5% varies
from 41% to 64%. Interestingly both the best predictive accuracy (share in top 5%) and the best
fit between our observables and growth do not occur in the late 1990s but in the years 2005 to
2008. Both the stability across a long period of time and the fact that this accuracy appears to be
improving gives us confidence in the quality of our predictions in the years following 2008, where
growth is unobserved.

quality and ecosystem effects.
35

APPENDIX D
INFOGROUP SAMPLE
Our paper, though mostly focused on efforts to study the relationship of entrepreneurship to
economic growth, also considers a section on the possibility of achieving High Growth
employment outcomes.

To study this question, we use data from Infogroup USA to estimate

predicted employment six years after founding. Infogroup USA is a database of local businesses
which is sold for marketing and research purposes (similar to Dunn and Bradstreet). The dataset
was originally created by collecting all firms who advertised in the Yellow Pages, but quickly
moved to include other ways of capturing firms. The data is a list of over 10 million establishments
and includes the name of the establishment, the address of the establishment, the parent
establishment (if any), the industry code, and the estimated employment and sales (inclusive of
children establishment for parents), as estimated by Infogroup.
We received annual snapshots of the Infogroup USA database, purchased by MIT Libraries, for
the years 1997 to 2014. We deleted all child establishments and kept only ‘headquarter’ locations.
Using the name-based matching algorithm that we used to match all other datasets, we matched
each of our firms to the sample of firms in the file six years ahead and in the same state. If a firm
is found, and their employment level is above 500, then we record a variable Employment Growth
500 as 1, else, we give it the value of 0. We repeat this exercise for the threshold of 1000
employees.

36

REFERENCES

N. Balasubramanian, J. Sivadasan, (2010) “NBER Patent Data-BR Bridge: User guide and
technical documentation” SSRN Working paper #1695013
B. Barnes, N. Harp, D. Oler, (2014) “Evaluating the SDC mergers and acquisitions database”
The Financial Review. 49(4): 93-822.
Belenzon, Sharon, Chatterji, Aaron and Brendan Daley. 2017. “Eponymous Entrepreneurs”
American Economic Review 107(6):1638-55, June 2017
C. Churchwell. (2016). “Q. SDC: M&A Database”. Baker Library – Fast Answers. Url:
http://asklib.library.hbs.edu/faq/47760. Accessed on January 17, 2017.
M. Delgado, M. Porter, S. Stern, (2016) “Defining clusters in related industries” Journal of
Economic Geography. 16 (1): 1-38
S. Graham, G. Hancock, A. Marco, A. F. Myers, (2013) “The USPTO case files data set:
Descriptions, lessons and insights” SSRN Working Paper #2188621
W. R. Kerr, Shihe Fu, (2008) "The Survey of Industrial R&D--Patent Database Link
Project." J. Technol. Transf. 33, no. 2
V. I. Levenshtein, (1965) "Binary codes capable of correcting deletions, insertions, and
reversals." Doklady Akad. Nauk SSSR 163(4): 845–848
R. Levine, Y. Rubinstein, (2013) “Smart and illicit: Who becomes an entrepreneur and does
it pay?” NBER Working Paper #19276
J. Netter, M. Stegemoller, and M. B. Wintoki. (2011) “Implications of Data Screens on
Merger and Acquisition Analysis: A Large Sample Study of Mergers and Acquisitions
from 1992 to 2009” The Review of Financial Studies. 24 (7): 2316–2357.

37

TABLE B1
Goodness of Fit Measures of Entrepreneurial Quality Model Across States
This table performs two goodness-of-fit estimates for entrepreneurial quality measures across states. Columns 1 and 2
repeat our out of sample 10-fold cross validation process (Figure 2) across each state. Specifically, it estimates the share
of out of sample growth firms who are in the top 5% and 10% of the state's entrepreneurial quality distribution, for 10
different random out of sample, samples. The median of this estimate is reported. Column 3 reports the correlation
between the quality measures and a second quality estimate, built only with data of each state independently. States with
10 growth events are not included.

State
Alaska
Arkansas
Arizona
California
Colorado
Florida
Georgia
Iowa
Idaho
Illinois
Kentucky
Massachusetts
Maine
Michigan
Minnesota
Missouri
North Carolina
New Jersey
New Mexico
New York
Ohio
Oklahoma
Oregon
Rhode Island
South Carolina
Tennessee
Texas
Utah
Virginia
Vermont
Washington
Wisconsin

Total
Growth
Events
1
45
95
4166
49
1148
475
60
43
332
111
1069
22
176
298
134
185
431
29
883
344
109
218
3
103
177
1785
220
212
17
326
140
Average

(1)

(2)

(3)

Median of: share in
top 5%
66.7%
61.5%
55.3%
100.0%
34.8%
63.0%
66.7%
83.3%
68.3%
57.1%
77.7%
42.1%
55.6%
53.8%
42.1%
73.3%
100.0%
67.4%
45.7%
62.5%
70.0%
58.3%
63.6%
45.4%
59.1%
62.1%
58.8%
56.3%
63.8%

Median of: share in
top 10%
66.7%
72.7%
62.5%
100.0%
43.0%
71.7%
66.7%
100.0%
78.0%
72.7%
84.5%
47.4%
70.0%
60.0%
47.4%
74.5%
100.0%
70.5%
58.6%
62.5%
80.0%
75.0%
63.6%
57.4%
68.8%
71.4%
70.6%
57.1%
67.4%

Correlation of State Model and
National Model
63.8%
87.8%
94.7%
65.9%
91.5%
96.0%
79.6%
91.6%
88.6%
82.3%
94.9%
84.9%
94.7%
84.5%
52.8%
94.6%
84.1%
97.0%
93.6%
85.2%
94.5%
59.8%
91.6%
97.3%
94.9%
93.5%
91.5%
78.2%
86.0%

38

TABLE B2

Cohort Year

Quality of Predictive Algorithm By Cohort (70% Test Sample)
1
2
3
4
Total Growth
Share of Growth
Share of Growth
Share of Growth
Firms in Test
Firms Top 10%
Firms Top 5% of
Firms Top 1% of
Sample
of Sample
Test Sample
Test Sample

5
Correlation with
Single Year Quality

1988
1989

239
225

65%
68%

44%
51%

28%
31%

0.87
0.94

1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995

273
320
373
404
442
557

61%
57%
61%
62%
62%
57%

45%
47%
47%
44%
47%
41%

26%
22%
25%
26%
23%
20%

0.94
0.89
0.95
0.94
0.93
0.94

1996
1997
1998
1999
2000

612
528
534
648
627

67%
67%
69%
72%
73%

53%
53%
57%
59%
64%

27%
32%
37%
41%
52%

0.93
0.93
0.96
0.89
0.96

2001
2002
2003
2004
2005

451
442
493
452
428

66%
58%
61%
60%
62%

51%
48%
47%
50%
51%

34%
31%
29%
35%
34%

0.96
0.94
0.93
0.95
0.94

2006
493
61%
54%
39%
0.93
2007
409
65%
58%
42%
0.95
2008
433
63%
53%
38%
0.97
We run our main Full Information model on a random 30% of our data, and predict the other 70%. The results above
reflect the distribution of the growth firms in this 70% test sample when sorted by predicted quality.

39

TABLE B3
Test of changes of address using a Massachusetts subsample
P(Address Change) by Age
All Firms

Top 10% of Quality
P(Address Change)
in Two Years
Lifetime Probability

Lifespan

P(Address Change)
in Two Years

0-2
2-4
4-6

2.5%
3.3%
2.4%

97.5%
94.3%
92.0%

7.5%
5.7%
4.3%

92.5%
87.2%
83.4%

6-8
8
10
12
14

1.7%
1.4%
1.1%
1.0%
1.0%

90.4%
89.2%
88.2%
87.3%
86.4%

4.1%
2.0%
2.4%
1.4%
1.6%

80.0%
78.4%
76.5%
75.4%
74.2%

16
18
20
22
24

0.8%
0.7%
0.6%
0.6%
0.4%

85.7%
85.1%
84.6%
84.1%
83.8%

0.7%
0.6%
0.6%
0.7%
0.2%

73.7%
73.3%
72.8%
72.3%
72.2%

Lifetime Probability

26
0.3%
83.5%
0.4%
Cohort of Age 0 is the 2012 Cohort
Lifetime probability of address change is the implied probability of changing address for a firm

71.9%

40

TABLE B4
Other implementations of our model

We estimate a logit model with Growth as the dependent variable, under different definitions of Growth. These models are estimated with an earlier sample of 32
US states Incidence ratios reported; Robust standard errors in parenthesis.
Models
1

Share Difference with Baseline

Original
Regression
2.263***
(0.0456)

2
Growth (Only
Acq >=
100M)
2.666***
(0.190)

IPO in 6
Years
3.018***
(0.195)

Growth in 9
Years
2.089***
(0.0361)

IPO
(Ever)
3.286***
(0.171)

Eponymous

0.315***
(0.0179)

0.182***
(0.0531)

0.276***
(0.0560)

0.339***
(0.0160)

0.261***
(0.0420)

Corporation

3.061***
(0.0739)

8.525***
(0.942)

Trademark

3.964***
(0.219)

3.749***
(0.406)

3.322***
(0.407)

4.246***
(0.245)

3.489***
(0.351)

5%

16%

7%

12%

Patent Only

22.77***
(1.059)

71.39***
(9.009)

59.71***
(6.879)

18.65***
(0.801)

51.96***
(4.627)

214%

162%

18%

128%

Delaware Only

15.18***
(0.335)

52.53***
(3.900)

31.65***
(2.147)

12.04***
(0.243)

25.32***
(1.324)

246%

108%

21%

67%

Patent and Delaware

84.08***
(3.320)

381.6***
(38.08)

284.8***
(27.95)

71.83***
(2.796)

216.1***
(16.81)

354%

239%

15%

157%

0.434***
(0.0182)

0.549***
(0.0814)

0.660***
(0.0824)

0.441***
(0.0156)

0.589***
(0.0593)

26%

52%

2%

36%

0.868***
(0.0243)

0.935
(0.0808)

1.319***
(0.0974)

0.857***
(0.0208)

1.312***
(0.0774)

8%

52%

1%

51%

Traded

1.048*
(0.0212)

1.020
(0.0653)

1.304***
(0.0804)

1.141***
(0.0204)

1.215***
(0.0585)

3%

24%

9%

16%

Biotech Sector

2.173***
(0.155)

2.429***
(0.368)

4.697***
(0.604)

2.269***
(0.157)

5.595***
(0.565)

12%

116%

4%

157%

Ecommerce Sector

1.348***
(0.0446)

1.134
(0.113)

1.158
(0.110)

1.265***
(0.0368)

1.272**
(0.0949)

16%

14%

6%

6%

IT Sector

2.175***
(0.0779)

1.535***
(0.166)

1.714***
(0.178)

2.035***
(0.0642)

1.723***
(0.143)

29%

21%

6%

21%

Medical Dev. Sector

1.301***
(0.0515)

0.975
(0.119)

1.123
(0.124)

1.271***
(0.0449)

1.126
(0.0982)

25%

14%

2%

13%

Semiconductor Sector

1.590***
(0.224)

2.248**
(0.614)

1.195
(0.445)

1.862***
(0.238)

2.450***
(0.583)

41%

25%

17%

54%

State Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Observations

18764856

18613648

18681641

14214629

18707865

Short Name

Local

Traded Resource
Intensive

3

4

5

2.453***
(0.0529)

6
Growth
(Only Acq
>= 100M)
18%

7
IPO
in 6
Years
33%

8
Growth
in 9
Years
8%

IPO
(Ever)
45%

42%

12%

8%

17%

179%

9

20%

41

Pseudo R-squared

0.187

0.306

0.240

0.155

0.235

42

TABLE B5
Re-Registrations in Massachusetts
General Statistics
Total Massachusetts Firms in Sample
Firms founded through a re-registration
Share of Firms Founded through re-registration
Re-incorporations with source and destination firm in sample

591,423
3,035
0.51%
1,932

Corporations
Firms that Gain Corporation = 1
Total Corporations in Sample
Share

640
358,978
0.18%

Delaware Jurisdiction
Firms that Gain Delaware = 1

245

Total Delaware Firms in Sample

32,194

Share

0.76%

Patents
Firms that Gain Patent = 1
Total Patent Firms in Sample
Share

43
2,373
1.81%

Trademark
Firms that Gain Trademark = 1
Total Trademark Firms in Sample
Share

30
1,365
2.20%

Short Name
Firms that Gain Short Name = 1
Total Short Name Firms in Sample

222
265102

Share
0.08%
A firm is coded as gaining an observable if the source firm of the re-registration did not have such
observable at birth but the new firm does.

43

FIGURE B1

44

45

