                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                HOW MANAGEMENT RISK AFFECTS CORPORATE DEBT

                                          Yihui Pan
                                       Tracy Yue Wang
                                      Michael S. Weisbach

                                      Working Paper 22091
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22091


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2016




We would like to thank Shan Ge, Tyler Jensen, Abby Kim, Dongxu Li, Xingzhou Li, Keeseon
Nam, Xi Wu and Julian Zhang for excellent research assistance. Participants in presentations at
Arizona, Beijing University, CKGSB, Fullerton, George Washington, London Business School,
University of Minnesota, Ohio State University, University of Oregon, Southern Methodist
University, University of Southern California, University of Texas-Dallas, University of Utah,
Villanova University, 2015 Western Finance Association Meeting, 2015 Annual Conference on
Financial Economics and Accounting, and 2015 FMA Asia Annual Meeting, as well as Benjamin
Bennett, Jeff Coles, Michael Cooper, Naveen Daniel, Harry DeAngelo, Isil Erel, Steve Karolyi,
Sigitas Karpavicius, John Matsusaka, Stanislava Nikolova, Oded Palmon, Miriam Schwartz-Ziv,
Berk Sensoy, Henri Servaes, Anil Shivdasani, Léa Stern, Luke Taylor, Jun Yang, Xiaoyun Yu,
Lu Zhang, and an anonymous referee provided very helpful suggestions. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Yihui Pan, Tracy Yue Wang, and Michael S. Weisbach. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
How Management Risk Affects Corporate Debt
Yihui Pan, Tracy Yue Wang, and Michael S. Weisbach
NBER Working Paper No. 22091
March 2016
JEL No. G32,G34,M12,M51

                                         ABSTRACT

Management risk occurs when uncertainty about future managerial decisions increases a firm’s
overall risk. This paper argues that management risk is an important yet unexplored determinant
of a firm’s default risk and the pricing of its debt. CDS spreads, loan spreads and bond yield
spreads all increase at the time of CEO turnover, when management risk is highest, and decline
over the first three years of CEO tenure, regardless of the reason for the turnover. A similar
pattern but of smaller magnitude occurs around CFO turnovers. The increase in the CDS spread
at the time of the CEO departure announcement, the change in the spread when the incoming
CEO takes office, as well as the sensitivity of the spread to the new CEO’s tenure, all depend on
the amount of prior uncertainty about the new management.


Yihui Pan                                             Michael S. Weisbach
Department of Finance                                 Department of Finance
1655 Campus Center Drive                              Fisher College of Business
University of Utah                                    Ohio State University
Salt Lake City, UT 84112-9303                         2100 Neil Ave.
Yihui.Pan@business.utah.edu                           Columbus, OH 43210
                                                      and NBER
Tracy Yue Wang                                        weisbach.2@osu.edu
Carlson School of Management
University of Minnesota
321 19th Avenue South
Minneapolis, MN 55455
wangx684@umn.edu
1. Introduction

        A firm’s default risk reflects not only the likelihood that it will have bad luck, but also the risk that

the firm’s managerial decisions will lead the firm to default. Management risk occurs when the impact of

management on firm value is uncertain, and, in principle, could meaningfully affect the firm’s overall risk.

Practitioners have long understood the importance of management risk, and regularly characterize it as an

important factor affecting a firm’s risk. 1 However, the academic literature on corporate default risk and the

pricing of corporate debt has largely ignored management risk. This paper evaluates the extent to which

uncertainty about management is a factor that affects a firm’s default risk and the pricing of its debt.

        We identify the effect of management risk using the idea that uncertainty about future managerial

decisions rises around executive turnovers, particularly CEO turnovers, and decreases over time as the

manager’s actions are observed. When a senior manager departs, there is an immediate increase in the

uncertainty about who his replacement will be, and also about the impact the new manager will have on firm

value. Part of this uncertainty is resolved when the incoming manager’s identity is revealed, but substantial

uncertainty remains about his ability and the quality of match between him and the firm. If the ex ante

expectation of a manager’s quality is on average correct, then there should be no systematic change in the

market’s estimate of an average manager’s ability over his tenure in office. What will decline unambiguously,

however, is the noise in this estimate, since more observations of his actions will allow the market to learn

more about the manager. Therefore, management risk, which arises because of the uncertainty of the

manager’s value added, should decline with a manager’s tenure. If management risk increases the market’s

assessment of a firm’s default probability, then the default risk embedded in the pricing of firms’ debt should

also increase around the time of executive turnover and subsequently decline over the executive’s tenure.




1
  For example, a special document Moody’s circulated about corporate governance claims: “[T]here is inherent
transition risk in any CEO change and we therefore look to evaluate any changes to strategic initiatives or financial
policies that differ from previous expectations, and whether credit metrics or liquidity deteriorates as a result.” See:
Plath (2008).

                                                           1
        Using a sample of primarily S&P 1500 firms between 1987 and 2012, we characterize the way that

the risk of a firm’s corporate debt varies with the uncertainty the market likely has about its management.

The basic pattern is depicted in Figure 1, which illustrates the way CDS spreads change around the time of a

CEO change. The announcement of a CEO’s departure is associated with an increase in the firm’s CDS

spread, reflecting an increased market assessment of the firm’s default risk. The CDS spread declines at the

announcement of the successor, and further declines during the new CEO’s time in office, approximately

back to the pre-turnover level after about three years. Holding other factors constant, the 5-year CDS spread

is about 35 basis points (22% relative to the sample mean) higher when a new CEO takes office than three

years into his tenure. Spreads on shorter-term CDS contracts exhibit an even larger sensitivity to CEO

turnover and tenure. Spreads on loans and bond yield spreads also decline following CEO turnovers. These

patterns occur regardless of the reason for the turnover; changes in spreads following turnovers that occur

because of the death or illness of the outgoing CEO are not economically or statistically significantly

different from changes in spreads in the entire sample.

        The CEO, however, is not the only member of the management team that is relevant for decision-

making in the firm. We examine the effect of Chief Financial Officers’ (CFOs’) turnovers as well. Our

estimates indicate that, similar to CEOs, spreads on a firm’s CDS and new debt decline over the first three

years of its CFO’s tenure, but the magnitude of the decline is smaller than that following CEO turnovers,

especially if the CFO turnover is not accompanied by a CEO turnover.

        The observed decline in default risk over tenure potentially reflects the resolution of uncertainty

about management and hence a decline in management risk. To evaluate whether this interpretation is the

appropriate one, we examine cross-sectional variation in the way that ex ante uncertainty gets resolved across

CEOs and firms. In particular, Bayesian learning models imply that if the changes in spreads around CEO

turnover occur because of changes in management risk, then when ex ante uncertainty about management is

higher, spreads should increase more around management turnover and decline faster subsequently.




                                                      2
        Consistent with this prediction, our estimates suggest that the increase in the CDS spread at the time

of the CEO departure announcement, the change in the spread when the incoming CEO takes office, as well

as the sensitivity of the spread to the new CEO’s tenure, all depend on the amount of uncertainty there is

about the new management. For example, the increase in CDS spreads at the announcement of a CEO

departure when the firm does not have a presumptive replacement is almost three times as high as when there

is such an “heir apparent.” The revelation of the new CEO’s identity leads to smaller declines in spreads

prior to the time when he takes over if the new CEO is younger than if he is older; presumably less is known

about the young CEOs ex ante so less uncertainty is resolved when they are appointed. But once a younger

CEO does take over, the market learns more about his ability from observing his performance, so the spreads

decline faster.

        In addition, when the CEO has an existing relationship with a lender before he takes his current job,

the lender is likely to know more about the CEO’s ability and future actions, leading to lower management

risk. Consistent with this argument, we find that the sensitivity of interest rates to the CEO’s time in office is

39-57% lower for loans in which the CEO has a prior relationship with the lender compared to those without

such a relationship. This relation holds even if the CEO is an outsider and the relationship was built while he

worked at a different firm, so the existence of the relationship is exogenous to the credit condition of the

current firm. Further, any additional management-induced risk should have a larger impact on the default risk

and the pricing of riskier debt than of safer debt. Consistent with this prediction, we find that the firm’s

spreads are more sensitive to CEO tenure when the firm is more highly levered, for term loans and for junior

bonds. Overall, the cross-sectional evidence is consistent with the notion that the decline in spreads over

executive tenure reflects the resolution of uncertainty about management.

        Since uncertainty about management is likely to be idiosyncratic rather than systematic, it

theoretically should not affect a firm’s cost of debt (i.e., the expected return on debt). Accordingly, firms

should not adjust the cost of capital they use for capital budgeting purposes because of management-related

uncertainty. In addition, since variation in management risk appears to be relatively short-term, it is unlikely


                                                        3
to affect firms’ long-term capital structure targets. However, since management risk increases the volatility

of cash flows, it should increase the demand for precautionary savings. Consistent with this idea, we find that

firms facing higher management risk tend to have higher cash holdings. In particular, cash holdings decline

with executive tenure, but only for firms for which management risk is likely to be high.

        Understanding the way management risk affects corporate default risk and the pricing of corporate

debt has a number of implications. First, our study identifies an important yet unexplored source of corporate

default risk and a potentially important determinant of the pricing of corporate debt. The corporate finance

literature on corporate debt pricing has focused on variables intended to capture risks coming from economy-

wide factors, or those correlated with the nature of firms’ assets (see for example van Binsbergen, Graham,

and Yang (2010)). A parallel literature in asset pricing models a firm’s credit risk, usually again as a function

of economy-wide factors and firms’ assets. However, Collin-Dufresne, Goldstein, and Martin (2001) find

that these traditional credit risk factors and liquidity measures fail to explain the bulk part of the credit spread

changes. Our analysis suggests that models predicting credit risk could be meaningfully improved by

including variables that capture management risk, such as the CEO’s tenure and his background including his

age and whether he is an heir apparent.

        Second, our study suggests that the effect of management risk on corporate debt pricing can be used

to quantify the relative value impact of different types of managers. For example, our estimates suggest that

the impact on debt price from the uncertainty about CFO is about 40-66% of that from the uncertainty about

CEO. 2 In addition, the fact that there is not a significant difference in the impact of tenure on spreads

between insider and outsider CFOs, while there is a significant difference between insider and outsider CEOs,

suggests that the managerial skills required by the CFO job are more general and transferrable than those

required by the CEO job. These results complement prior studies using interview scores or employment

history to infer the generality of managerial skills and their value impact (Kaplan, Klebanov, and Sorensen,

2012; Custodio, Ferreira, and Matos, 2013).

2
 A recent study that uses a similar approach to compare the relative importance of different types of directors is Stern
(2015).
                                                           4
          Third, our study highlights the importance of managing the management risk in a firm. Practices

such as managerial succession planning and transparency in managerial policies can significantly reduce the

firm’s perceived default risk. Since 2009, the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission has required that

corporate boards significantly address the succession related issues as leadership voids or uncertainty could

adversely affect companies. 3 Our findings support SEC’s concern and suggest that creditors clearly care

about management risk.



2. Data

2.1. The Risk of Corporate Debt

          The price of corporate debt is in large part determined by the likelihood that the firm’s future cash

flows will be insufficient to cover the promised payments to debtholders. When management’s policies

become more uncertain, the firm’s cash flow distribution becomes more dispersed, so the likelihood of

default and the loss conditional on default are likely to increase. For this reason, we expect management risk

to affect the firm’s default risk premium.

          One way to measure the default risk premium is through the CDS spread that is traded on a firm’s

debt. The payoff from the CDS contract occurs when the firm defaults on its debt, so the market clearing

price on the CDS contract reflects the market’s expectation that the debt will default. This default risk

premium is also embedded in the promised yield on a firm’s debt. Let rD be the expected return on a firm’s

debt, y be the promised yield, p be the probability of default, and rdefault be the recovery rate in default. Then

we have the following relation:

                                             rD = (1 − p ) * y + p * rdefault
                                                            p                                 (1)
                                             ⇒ y = rD +         (rD − rdefault )
                                                           1− p



3
 See the Securities and Exchange Commission’s Division of Corporate Finance Legal Bulletin 14E, released on Oct.
27, 2009.
                                                           5
In other words, the promised yield equals the sum of the expected return on debt and a default risk premium.

Uncertainty about a firm’s management should affect the firm’s idiosyncratic risk rather than systematic risk,

since the uncertainty about an incoming CEO’s skills are unlikely to co-vary with the overall state of the

economy. Thus, management risk likely affects the promised yield through the default risk premium

component. We measure the promised yield by the interest rate that the firm pays on its new loans, and the

yield to maturity on its newly issued bonds.

2.1.1 The CDS Spread

        To measure management risk, the CDS spread is particularly useful, because it provides a direct

measure of the firm’s default risk. Blanco et al. (2005) documents that the CDS and bond yield spreads are

close to each other over long intervals, while over short intervals, CDS spreads tend to respond more quickly

to changes in credit conditions. In addition, CDS spread data is available at the daily frequency, so they allow

us to measure changes in risk over relatively short intervals. However, many firms do not have CDS

contracts traded on their debt, and CDS data are only available since 2001.

        Our CDS data are provided by MarkIt, a comprehensive data source that assembles a network of

industry-leading partners who contribute information for about 2,600 CDS on a daily basis. Based on the

contributed quotes, MarkIt creates a daily composite quote for each CDS contract. We use the five-year

spreads in our main specifications because these contracts are the most liquid and constitute over 85 percent

of the entire CDS market. But for robustness, we also use the one-year and three-year CDS spreads in some

specifications. To maintain uniformity in contracts, we only keep CDS quotations for senior unsecured debt,

which makes up over 91% of the entire CDS sample in MarkIt, with a modified restructuring (MR) clause

and denominated in U.S. dollars. 4 The first section of Panel A of Table 1 reports the CDS statistics at the

daily frequency over 946 CEOs’ first ten years in office in 539 firms (the CEO sample is described in Section

2.2). The average 5-year CDS spread in our sample is 159 basis points (median 76).



4
 The Modified Restructuring clause was introduced in the ISDA standard contract in 2001. This clause limits the scope
of opportunistic behavior by sellers in the event of restructuring agreement to deliverable obligations with maturity of
30 months or less. This clause applies to the majority of quoted CDS for North American entities.
                                                           6
2.1.2 Loan Spread Data

        We retrieve data for bank loans occurring between 1987 and 2012 from DealScan, which is

maintained by Thomson Reuters’ Loan Pricing Corporation (LPC). This database contains detailed

information on loans to U.S. corporations since 1987. 5 We match the borrowers to the firms in our sample

using a procedure described in Chava and Roberts (2008).6

        The second section of Panel A of Table 1 reports loan-level statistics for loans taken by our sample

CEOs during the first ten years of their tenure. The 3,693 CEOs, from 2,316 firms, initiated 17,076 loans for

which Dealscan reports non-missing spreads.

        To measure the price of bank debt, we use the All-in-Drawn Spread (AIS) that the borrower pays

over LIBOR at the loan origination date, 7 winsorized at the top and the bottom 1% of the DealScan sample

distribution. The mean of the loan spreads in our sample is 158 basis points, and the median is 125 basis

points. We also report summary statistics for other components of the bank loan contracts, such as loan

maturity, loan size, number of lenders, number of loan covenants, whether the loan has performance pricing,

whether the loan is secured, whether the borrowing company has a speculative grade when the loan was

initiated, and whether the loan is classified as “refinancing” by DealScan. Detailed variable definitions are

reported in the Appendix.

2.1.3 Corporate Bond Yield Spread Data

        The corporate bond data are taken from the Mergent Fixed Investment Securities Database (FISD), a

comprehensive database of publicly-offered U.S. bonds since 1987. FISD provides details on debt issues and

the issuers. Our sample period is from 1987 to 2012. The third section of Panel A of Table 1 reports statistics

for bonds issued during the first ten years of CEO tenure. There are 8,525 public bonds with available data

on offering yield, which were issued by 2,135 CEOs from 1,433 firms.



5
  The data are primarily gathered from SEC filings, and the rest from direct research by LPC through contacts with
borrowers, lenders, and the credit industry at large. Strahan (1999) provides a detailed description of the DealScan
database.
6
  See http://wrds-web.wharton.upenn.edu/wrds/ds/linkingtable/index.cfm.
7
  This measure adds to the borrowing spread any annual fees the firms pay to the lenders.
                                                         7
        To measure the bond yield spread, we use the offering yield of a corporate bond at issue minus the

yield of the maturity-matched Treasury bond. We winsorize the spreads at the top and the bottom 1% of the

entire FISD sample distribution. When the maturity of the bond for which the spread is calculated does not

exactly match the maturity of the available government bonds, we use linear interpolation to estimate the

yield of the risk-free benchmark. The average bond yield spread in our sample is 182 basis points (median

121). Summary statistics for other bond characteristics, such as bond maturity, offering size, and whether the

bond is subordinated, are also reported in Panel A of Table 1.

2.2. CEO Turnover and Tenure

        We construct a sample of CEOs from 1987 to 2010, since both the loan data and the bond data begin

in 1987. We use the information on job title, the year becoming CEO, and the CEO annual flag provided in

ExecuComp, to identify CEOs at the firm-year level, from which we identify whether there is a CEO

turnover in a firm and year. 8 Panel B of Table 1 describes the distribution of turnovers over time in the loan,

bond, and CDS samples.

        For each CEO, the variable “Tenure” equals 0 for the fiscal year in which the CEO takes office, and

increases with each year the CEO is in office. The average CEO’s total time in office (see Appendix for

definition) in our sample is 6.14 years and the median is 5 years. About 85% of the CEOs in our sample are

long-term CEOs with total time in office no less than three years.

        A challenge in drawing inferences in the CEO turnover setting is that the timing of CEO turnover

can coincide with firm performance because CEOs are sometimes fired for performance-related reasons.

Following Pan, Wang, and Weisbach (2015, 2016), we identify several subsamples of turnovers that are

likely to have occurred for non-performance related reasons. The first group consists of turnovers caused by

illness or death of the departing CEO. We combine CEO turnover announcements in Capital IQ’s Key




8
  Although ExecuComp’s coverage starts in 1992, some of the CEOs in the database took office before 1992, leading to
some CEO turnovers from the late 1980s in our sample. In our main analysis, we examine CDS spreads during the first
three years of CEO tenure. Since the CDS data starts in 2001, CEOs in the CDS sample took office later.
                                                         8
Developments with Factiva news search to identify a subsample of such turnovers. 9 Second, we combine the

death/illness subsample with announced retirements. To mitigate the incidence of “suspicious” retirement

announcements, we only include retirements for which the firm’s stock performance in the year prior to the

turnover is above the industry-year median. The third group consists of turnovers for which there is no

change in the top management team (the top four most highly paid non-CEO executives) in the CEO

turnover year, which are unlikely to be firings, since firings typically involve changes of other top managers

in addition to the CEO. Fourth, because forced turnovers tend to be preceded by high stock return volatility

or poor stock and accounting performances, we consider the group of turnovers that are preceded by both

good performance (both stock return and ROA above industry-year median) as well as low idiosyncratic

volatility (below industry-year median) since these turnovers are unlikely to have been motivated by

performance.

        Fifth, and more specific to the context in this study, we identify a subsample of turnovers that were

not preceded by a significant run-up of default risk as reflected in the firms’ CDS spreads in the prior two

years. The idea is that a run-up of default risk before turnover could indicate performance-related turnovers.

Specifically, for each firm with CDS data in our sample, we estimate the time trend in CDS spreads during

dates [-730, -30], with date 0 being the day when the new CEO takes office. We include 185 turnovers with a

negative or insignificantly positive pre-turnover CDS trend in this subsample.

        Finally, we use the Factiva news search to identify turnovers that appear to be overtly forced (e.g.,

Factiva reported that the CEO was forced to leave or left under pressure). Panel C of Table 1 reports the

number of turnovers in each subsample.

        The incoming CEO’s background is likely to be related to the amount of uncertainty about his ability.

We identify two dimensions about the CEO’s background that are potentially related to such uncertainty: the

CEO’s age and his prior position. The average age of the incoming CEO at the time of turnover in our

sample is 51. We thus classify new CEOs who are younger than 50 at the time of turnover as “Young CEOs”.

9
 We thank Edward Fee, Charles Hadlock, and Joshua Pierce for kindly providing us with the classification of illness,
death related, and outright forced turnovers between 1990 and 2006 used in Fee, Hadlock and Pierce (2013).
                                                         9
Using information on the time of a CEO “joining company” from ExecuComp, supplemented by the data

from Boardex, we classify CEOs who have been with the firm for less than three years when becoming CEO

as “Outsider CEOs”, and others as insider CEOs. We also follow Naveen (2006) and classify “Heir-Apparent

CEOs” in our sample as executives with the title “president” or “chief operating officer (COO)” prior to

becoming CEO. Panel C of Table 1 reports the number of turnovers that involve young CEOs, outsider CEOs,

or heir-apparent CEOs.

2.3. Other Variables

        To control for other factors that potentially affect the loan, bond, or CDS spreads, we include a set of

firm characteristics and credit market conditions in our empirical specifications, mostly following Graham et

al. (2008) and van Binsbergen et al. (2010). For credit market conditions, we control for three variables:

“Credit Spread” is the difference between the yields of AAA and BAA corporate bonds; “Term Spread” is

the difference between the yields of 10-year Treasury bonds and 2-year Treasury bonds; “VIX” is CBOE

volatility index, which shows the market’s expectation of 30-day volatility. The first section in Table 1, Panel

D reports summary statistics for the three variables.

        We obtain firm-specific variables from Compustat and winsorize them at the top and the bottom 1%

of the distribution. The average firm in our sample has book assets of about $1.4 billion, 0.24 book leverage,

a market-to-book equity ratio of 2.9, an asset tangibility ratio of 0.28, cash flow volatility of 0.56, ROA of

0.11, and dividend payout ratio of 0.22. The second portion of Panel D of Table 1 reports summary statistics

for these firm-specific measures, as well as other financial variables. The Appendix presents detailed

definitions of all variables.



3. Measuring Variation in Default Risk around Management Changes

3.1. CDS Spreads over CEO Tenure

        To evaluate whether uncertainty about a new CEO’s ability and policies affects the market’s

expectation of a firm’s default risk, we first examine the way in which firms’ CDS spreads change over CEO


                                                        10
tenure. Since CDS spreads provide a market-based assessment of the likelihood that the firm will default on

its debt at any point in time, the way they vary over a CEO’s tenure measures changes in expected default

risk premium over this period.

        Figure 1 plots the average CDS spread around key events associated with the evolution of the

uncertainty about a new CEO. It is constructed using the 284 CEO turnovers of firms with available CDS

data, and for which the departure announcements of the outgoing CEOs occurred on different dates from the

dates when the incoming CEOs took office. When the departure is announced, the CDS spread increases by

almost 35 basis points relative to the average spread in the prior three months, likely reflecting the increase in

the uncertainty about the management. The spread subsequently decreases by about 15 basis points when the

new CEO is announced, indicating that part of the uncertainty about the management is resolved by the

knowledge of the incoming CEO’s identity. The changes in expected default risk over the relatively short

window when the information about the CEO succession is being revealed suggest that the CEO himself has

a major impact on the market’s perception of the firm’s default risk. Because of the steep increase in spreads

around the time of the CEO change, it seems unlikely to be driven by turnovers tending to occur at times of

high risk, the source of which could be unrelated to management.

        The spread decreases only slightly between the time the identity of the incoming CEO is announced

and when he takes office. During his first three years of office, it declines by another 23 basis points. This

decline in the early portion of his tenure likely occurs because of the resolution of uncertainty about the

CEO’s ability and policies.

        Figure 1 suggests that spreads tend to follow an inverted U-shaped pattern around CEO turnovers.

However, while the company’s proxy statements usually disclose the date when the CEO takes office, it is

not always possible to know the exact date when a CEO’s departure is announced and when the identity of

his replacement becomes known to the market. For this reason, we focus most of our analysis on the period

following new CEO’s appointment, by measuring the way a firm’s managerial-related risk changes over his

time in office. We do, however, analyze pre-turnover changes in spreads in Section 4.


                                                       11
        To estimate the way in which CDS spreads are affected by the resolution of uncertainty about the

CEO’s ability in the first few years of his tenure, we estimate the following equation:

                          CDS _ Spreadtij = f (Tenuretij ) + α ij + λt + Controlsti + ε tij (2)

The variable “ Tenuretij ” is CEO-j’s time in office in firm-i in year t. To capture potential nonlinearities in the

tenure-spread relation, we use a piecewise-linear (spline) specification that allows the relation to change over

time. The variable α ij is a firm-CEO fixed effect for firm i and CEO j; its inclusion implies that we identify

the effect of managerial uncertainty from the time-series variation in CDS spreads within a particular firm-

CEO pair. This approach, therefore, controls for any time-invariant differences cross firm-CEO pairs. The

variable λt is the calendar year fixed effect, which controls for market-wide factors that affect firm-level

default risk. Time-varying controls include the debt recovery rate as reported by data distributors, firm-

specific financial variables, as well as measures of credit market conditions such as the aggregate credit

spread, term spread, and the VIX index.

        Table 2 reports estimates of this equation. Column (1) presents estimates for all CEOs in our sample,

regardless of how long they stayed in office. We estimate these equations on the period between the year

when the CEO took office and the tenth year of his tenure. These estimates indicate that a firm’s CDS spread

declines by 0.032 basis points for each day in the CEO’s first three years in office. Over the first 1095

calendar days (three years), the total decline amounts to 35 basis points, which amounts to 46% of the sample

median CDS spread of 76 basis points (22% of the sample mean of 159). The speed of decline in the CDS

spread becomes statistically insignificant and small in magnitude after the first three years.

        In Column (2) we focus only on the first three years of CEO tenure for CEOs who stay in office for

at least three years, and use a linear specification of tenure. In this specification, we exclude short-term CEOs

(e.g., interim CEOs, turnaround specialists, and CEOs that departed very quickly), so that our estimates will

not be affected by the unbalanced nature of the panel. The resulting estimates imply that the firm’s CDS

spread declines by 0.031 basis points per day during this time period, suggesting that firms’ default risk is

higher when there is a new CEO, and declines over time as the CEO’s quality, as well as the policies he is
                                                          12
likely to pursue, becomes known over time. In addition, the magnitude of such decline during the first three

years is very similar across the full sample of CEOs (Column (1)) and the long-term CEOs (Column (2)).

Thus, including or excluding CEOs with less than three years’ of tenure does not appear to affect our

estimates of the decline in default risk over tenure.10

        If uncertainty about management and its resolution are most pronounced in the first three years of a

CEO’s tenure, then we expect the spreads on shorter-term CDS contracts to be even more sensitive to the

changes in management risk around CEO turnover than longer-term CDS contracts. To test this conjecture,

we replace 5-year CDS spreads with 3-year CDS spreads in Column (3) and 1-year CDS spreads in Column

(4) of Table 2. Indeed, the CDS spread-tenure sensitivity increases to 0.05 for the 3-year spreads and 0.07 for

the 1-year spreads, both of which are statistically significantly different from the coefficient of 0.031 on

Tenure in Column (2). In the first three years of a CEO’s tenure, the 1-year CDS spread on the firm’s debt on

average declines by about 77 basis points, 70% relative to the sample mean. Therefore, the estimates using

the 5-year CDS spreads can be viewed as a conservative estimate of the effect of management risk on default

risk premium.

3.2. An Alternative Interpretation: Endogenous Timing of CEO Turnover

        An alternative interpretation of the declining default risk over CEO tenure is that CEO changes tend

to occur at times of relatively high uncertainty that is unrelated to management, leading to heightened default

risk around CEO changes. To isolate the way that uncertainty about the incoming CEO varies over time and

its effect on a firm’s risk, we consider cases of “normal” turnovers, in which the CEO turnover is not driven

by heightened uncertainty about the firm’s fundamentals. In subsection 2.2, we describe a number of

subsamples of such turnovers. 11

        In Table 3, we report estimates of Equation (1) on subsamples constructed by the likely reason for

the turnover of the outgoing CEO. These estimates suggest that the decline in the spreads on the firm’s CDS

10
   In unreported robustness tests, we use the monthly average CDS spreads instead of the daily data. The results are
essentially the same as those reported in Table 2, with CDS spreads declining by about 1.1 basis points per month
during the CEO’s first three years.
11
   Pan, Wang, and Weisbach (2015) document that there is no abnormally poor performance or high idiosyncratic
volatility prior to each of these subsamples of turnovers.
                                                          13
over CEO tenure occurs regardless of the factors leading to the CEO turnover. The estimated magnitude of

decline in CDS spread is similar across subsamples of likely non-performance-driven turnovers (Columns 1-

5), as well as in the union of the subsamples in Columns (2) to (5) (Column 6). In each specification the

estimates suggest that there is a significant decline of CDS spread over CEO tenure.

         In each of these subsamples, there are substantially fewer observations than in the full sample, so

standard errors are higher and statistical significance levels are lower. For example, in the health/death

subsample presented in Column (1), there are only 10 turnovers, corresponding to 5,928 trading days, about

2% of the 270,124 trading days used in the comparable specification in Table 2 for the full sample. Yet, the

coefficient for the health/death subsample (-.037) is comparable to that for the full sample (Column (2) of

Table 2, -.031), and is still significantly different from zero at the 10% level. Moreover, the p-value from a

Wald test on the difference between the estimated coefficient on Tenure in Table 2, Column (2) and the

estimated coefficient on Tenure in Table 3, Column (1) is 0.954, rejecting the hypothesis that the two are

significantly different. The robustness of the decline over tenure regardless of the underlying reasons for

turnovers suggests that it is unlikely that the negative coefficient on tenure in the full sample is generated by

the endogenous timing of CEO turnover.

         In contrast, for the outright forced turnover sample (Column 7), the estimated decline in CDS spread

is about 0.132 basis point per day, which is about four times as large as it is for the other turnovers, and is

statistically significantly different from the coefficient for the full sample. Since outright forced turnovers

tend to follow poor firm performance and high volatility, the estimated larger decline could reflect relatively

high uncertainty at the time of the turnover about both the firm’s fundamentals and the new CEO. 12

3.3. CEO Tenure and Interest Rates on Firms’ Debt

3.3.1. Loan Spreads over CEO Tenure

         If declining management risk is the reason for the decrease in CDS spreads over tenure, then this

declining management risk should also affect the promised interest rates on the firms’ debt. To test this

12
  In the Internet Appendix IA.1, we also address the possibility that the decline in CDS spreads is driven by increases in
expected CEO ability over CEO tenure rather than decreases in the uncertainty about CEO ability.
                                                           14
hypothesis, we estimate the way that the spreads on newly-initiated loans vary over CEO tenure, using the

specification in Equation (1) with CDS spreads replaced with the “all in drawn” spreads on the loans. When

we estimate this equation, we add a number of controls for loan characteristics. In particular, we include the

loan size, maturity, number of lenders, and dummy variables indicating whether the loan uses performance

pricing, loan purposes, and tranche types. During the first three years of CEOs’ tenure, firms initiate 1.6

loans on average (median is one loan) per year, and about 39% of new CEOs’ firms only took one loan over

the first three years of the CEO’s tenure. To avoid having to eliminate these observations, we use firm fixed

effects instead of firm-CEO fixed effects in the loan equations and control for firm life cycle effects by

including firm age into the equation. Finally, since loan spreads are observable only when a new loan is

initiated, we use annual rather than daily data, so the resulting coefficients have to be adjusted accordingly to

compare magnitudes across specifications.

        These estimates are reported in Panel A of Table 4. Column (1) documents that loan spreads

decrease with CEO tenure. The speed at which loan spreads decrease declines over time, with the fastest

decrease occurring in the first three years. The estimated coefficients imply that loan spreads decline 6.5

basis points per year, amounting to about 20 basis points over the three-year period. Column (2) reports the

estimates over the CEO’s first three years in office for the subsample of CEOs who stay in office for at least

three years, which are of a similar magnitude to those reported in Column (1). Column (3) contains estimates

using the subsample of likely non-performance driven turnovers (the union of rows (2)-(5) in Panel C of

Table 1); these estimates imply that following these turnovers, the loan spread a firm pays declines by 5.2

basis points per year. 13

        One difference between the results using CDS spreads and loan spreads is that we observe a firm’s

CDS spread every day but observe its loan spreads only when a firm initiates a new loan. Therefore, it is

possible that the results could be influenced by the endogenous timing of loan initiation. One approach to

assessing the importance of this potential bias is to consider the set of firms for which the loan represents a

13
  Because of the relatively small number of observations with loan data, we pool the different subsamples of likely
non-performance related turnovers together to calculate the estimates reported in Column (3).
                                                        15
refinance, rather than a new capital raising, using DealScan’s classification (the variable “Refinancing

Indicator”) to identify refinancings. The equation estimated on refinancing loans only is presented in Column

(4) of Panel A of Table 4. These estimates are similar to those estimated on the entire sample, and indicate

that there is a statistically significant decrease in loan spread of 5.1 basis points on refinancing loans in each

of the first three years of CEO tenure.14

          Although the pattern in the loan spread is similar to that in the CDS spread around CEO turnovers,

the magnitude of the decline in spread is much smaller in the loan sample (20 basis points in three years)

than in the CDS sample (35 basis points). The difference in these estimated effects potentially occurs because

firms in the CDS sample are on average much larger than those in the loan sample, with the CDS sample

having an average book assets equal to $10.3 billion, compared to only $2.38 billion in the loan sample.

Larger firms tend to be more transparent due to more disclosure, more analyst coverage, and more media

coverage. This greater transparency likely facilitates market learning about the new management, leading to

a faster resolution of uncertainty and a faster decline of spreads over CEO tenure. In fact, in an untabulated

test, we find that firms with book assets in the top quartile of the loan sample distribution have an estimated

31-basis-point decline in loan spread in the first three years of a CEO’s tenure, close to the decline in CDS

spread.

3.3.2. Bond Yield Spreads over CEO Tenure

          The major alternative corporate debt instrument to a bank loan is a corporate bond. Since

management risk should affect the pricing of all corporate liabilities, we also test the hypothesis that the

perceived default risk and hence promised yields on issuances of corporate bonds decline with the tenure of

firms’ CEOs. To do so, we estimate equations similar to those for bank loans using the promised yield spread

on a firm’s corporate bonds as our dependent variable.




14
  Besides the loan spread, we also observe information on other non-price terms of the loan contracts such as the loan
maturity, loan size, number of lenders, whether the loan is secured or not, and the number of loan covenants. The results
are reported in Table IA.2 of the Internet Appendix. The main difference in non-price terms over CEO tenure is that
bank loans originated earlier tend to have significantly shorter maturities than those originated later.
                                                          16
        Panel B of Table 4 presents estimates of this equation. These estimates indicate that CEO tenure has

a similar effect on promised bond yields as it does on CDS spreads and loan spreads. Column (1) presents the

spline specification using the entire sample. The estimates in this column imply that, as with spreads on CDS

and loans, bond yield spreads decline in a convex manner over the CEO’s tenure. Column (2) restricts the

sample to the first three years of tenure for CEOs who remain on the job that entire period, and reports a

negative effect of tenure on spreads. Finally, Column (3) further restricts the sample to those CEOs

following the likely “non-performance related” turnovers (the union of rows (2)-(5) in Panel C of Table 1)

and again finds a negative relation between tenure and spreads. The coefficients on tenure range between 7.5

and 9.6 basis points per year, so they imply that over the three-year period, yield spreads decline between 23

and 29 basis points. This rate of decline over tenure is slightly steeper than it is for loans and less steep than

it is for CDS.

3.4. Uncertainty about Management Teams: The Role of the CFO

        The analysis to this point has focused on the way that the uncertainty about incoming CEOs’ abilities

and policies affects firms’ default risks. The underlying assumption is that the CEO plays an important

decision-making role in the firm, so that when the person occupying this position changes, policies can

change. However, the CEO is only one member of the management team. Presumably, when top managers

other than the CEO change, there is also an increase in uncertainty about future policies, although potentially

a smaller one than when the CEO changes.

        One important member in the senior management team is the Chief Financial Officer (CFO). We

examine whether a change of CFO has a similar effect on the perceived default risk as a change of the CEO.

We focus on the CFO rather than other members of the top management team because US firms almost

always have one and only one individual with that title, so it is straightforward to identify changes in the

individual holding that position. While there is an extensive literature on the importance of CEOs, we know

little about the relative importance of CFOs, as well as the differences in the skills required for these two jobs.




                                                       17
The effect of management risk on corporate debt pricing can be used to quantify the importance of learning

about managerial ability for different managerial roles.

        We collect CFO turnover data from corporate news announcements in the Capital IQ database from

2001 to 2009. 15 We exclude transitory CFOs who stayed in the job for less than 3 years. This process leads to

a sample of 1,033 CFO turnovers in 908 firms during the 2001-2009 period with CDS or loan or bond spread

information, summarized in Panel A of Table 5. In this sample, the average CFO spends four years in office

and the median is 3.4 years. In addition, outsider succession is more common in the CFO sample (37%) than

in the CEO sample (28%), consistent with data reported by Mian (2001).

        In Panel B of Table 5, we estimate the relation between the firm’s CDS spread and the CFO’s time in

office, using the same specification as in Table 2. Column (1) contains estimates implying that the CDS

spread declines by a statistically significant 0.027 basis points per day during the first three years of a new

CFO’s tenure. During the subsequent 3 years, the decline is just 0.004 basis points per day, which is not

statistically significantly different from zero. Column (2) restricts the sample to the first 3 years of a CFO’s

tenure, and finds a similar decline in CDS spreads of 0.022 basis points per day.

        An issue in interpreting these results is that many CFO turnovers coincide with CEO turnovers;

declines in spreads following these cases likely reflect uncertainty about both managers, and possibly others

as well if there is a large change in the top management team. For this reason, we reestimate this equation on

the subsample of CFO turnovers accompanied by a CEO change within a year before or after the time of the

CFO change (Column (3), 311 turnovers), as well as on the subsample for which there was not a CEO

change within this two-year period (Column (4), 722 turnovers).

        In each subsample, the firm’s CDS spread significantly declines with CFO’s tenure, but the

magnitude of the estimated coefficient on tenure is much smaller on the subsample of CFO changes without

CEO changes (-0.017 in Column (4)) than for the subsample in which there is both a CEO change and a CFO



15
  We do not use ExecuComp to identify CFO turnovers because there is no reliable indicator for CFOs in the pre-2007
data and there is no information on the time that a new CFO takes office. For the firm-years between 2007 and 2009, we
have verified that the two data sources are consistent in 86% of observations.
                                                         18
change (-0.059 in Column (3)). The difference between the two estimates is statistically significant at 1%

level. For further comparison, in the subsample for which there is a CEO change without a CFO or other top

management change, the estimated coefficient on tenure is -0.035, which is between these two estimates (see

Table 3, Column (3)), and is significantly more negative than the coefficient on tenure for the subsample of

CFO changes not accompanied by CEO changes (-0.017). Since the CEO is the most important officer,

uncertainty about his ability affects firms the most, but uncertainty about the CFO matters as well. Not

surprisingly, when both officers change at the same time, the decline in spreads with tenure is the largest,

most likely because these cases are associated with the greatest managerial uncertainty at turnover. 16

        As with CEO turnovers, another possible explanation for the spread/tenure relation is that both the

CFO turnover and the higher default risk could be driven by factors unrelated to management risk, which is

more likely when the turnover is due to poor firm performance. For this reason, we consider the subsample

of 43 CFO turnovers that are not accompanied by CEO turnovers and follow the death, illness, or retirement

of the departing CFOs when the firm is performing well. The estimates using this subsample are presented in

Column (5) of Table 5. The results indicate that in this subsample, we still observe a significant CDS spread

decline over the CFO’s first three years of tenure. The magnitude of the decline (0.021 basis points per day)

is close to the full sample estimate (0.022 basis points per day). Consequently, it does not appear that the

observed decline in default risk over the first 3 years of a CFO’s tenure occurs because of the management

changes occurring at times of high uncertainty unrelated to management. Instead, the results suggest that

uncertainty about his ability or future actions generates incremental default risk.

        In Panel C of Table 5, we examine the relation between the firm’s loan and bond yield spreads and

the CFO’s tenure. We find that the loan spread tends to decline by 5.3 basis points per year and the bond

yield spread tends to decline by 6.2 basis points per year in the CFO’s first three years in office. These

declines are statistically significant, but, similar to the pattern from CDS spreads, smaller than those reported

in Table 4 following CEO turnovers.

16
 This finding is consistent with the findings in Bennedsen et al. (2013) based on managers’ hospitalization records that
CEOs are more important to firm value than other top executives.
                                                          19
        Overall, the results in Tables 2-5 suggest that there is a substantial, statistically significant decrease

in the default risk of a firm’s debt over the CEO’s and the CFO’s tenures, reflected by the firm’s CDS spread,

the spreads on its bank loans, and the yield on its corporate bonds. The decrease is fastest in the chief

executives’ first three years in office. This decline does not appear to come from executive turnovers

occurring in periods when non-management related uncertainty is high. Just as it would for other sources of

uncertainty about the firm, the market raises the default risk premium on the firm’s debt when management’s

ability or policies are unknown.



4. Cross-Sectional Differences in the Change in Default Risk

        Cross-sectional variation in the sensitivity of spreads to executive turnover and tenure provides a

way to confirm that the decline in spreads over CEO tenure does in fact reflect the resolution of managerial

uncertainty. In particular, if the increase in spreads following management changes reflects uncertainty about

the ability and policies of the new management, then when this uncertainty is higher, there should be a larger

increase in spreads around the time of the turnover. In addition, there should be a larger subsequent decline

as the uncertainty becomes resolved.

4.1. CEO Background and Prior Uncertainty about the CEO

        Different types of CEO successions and different types of CEOs are likely to be associated with

different amounts of uncertainty about the new management. For example, the existence of an “heir apparent”

usually indicates a well-anticipated succession, with an incoming CEO of known ability and a continuation

of the prior CEO’s policies. In contrast, appointments of outsider CEOs are likely to lead to more uncertainty

about the quality of the match with the new firm or future policies, and consequently, more uncertainty about

future cash flows. In addition, the market will tend to know less about younger managers who are appointed

to be CEOs, since they tend to have shorter job histories and less visibility than older incoming CEOs. For

this reason, the market is likely to have a more diffuse prior about younger incoming CEOs than older ones.

4.1.1. Evidence from Prior to the Arrival of the New CEO


                                                       20
        While we have focused mostly on the declines in risk subsequent to the appointment of a new CEO,

Figure 1 suggests that there are a number of components to the change in CDS spreads around a CEO

turnover: CDS spreads increase at the announcement of a CEO’s departure, decline to some extent when the

new CEO’s identity is revealed, and then decline further after the new CEO takes office. If the changes in

CDS spreads are caused by uncertainty about the new management, then the magnitude of each of these

changes should depend on how much uncertainty about the new management ex ante. We test this hypothesis

and present the results in Table 6.

        Panel A of Table 6 considers the increase in CDS spreads at the announcement of CEO departures.

In the 432 CEO turnovers in our sample with CDS spread data and identifiable CEO departure

announcement dates, the CDS spread increases by an average of about 41 basis points at the departure

announcement, relative to the average in the three months prior to the announcement month. However, for

the turnovers for which the firm has a designated heir-apparent and thus presumably lower uncertainty about

the incoming management, the CDS spread increases by only 19 basis points, statistically significantly lower

than in cases where there is no heir-apparent (54 basis points). This comparison reflects the difference in the

uncertainty rather than the expectation of the incoming management’s ability, since the identity of the new

CEO has not been announced in most of these cases.

        CEO departures occurring because of the death or illness of the CEO often occur unexpectedly.

Therefore, these turnovers are likely to be associated with high uncertainty about the incoming management.

In the ten such cases in our sample, the CDS spread increases by an average of 53 basis points, which is

statistically significantly higher than for the rest of the turnovers. Forced turnovers tend to occur at times of

high uncertainty.    However, the average increase in CDS spread is 43 basis points at the time of

announcements, which is not significantly higher than in other CEO turnovers. One potential reason for the

lack of a difference for forced turnovers is that in these cases CDS spreads are likely to have already been

relatively high prior to the announcement of the forced CEO turnover.




                                                       21
        Panel B of Table 6 presents statistics on the change in CDS spread between the departure of the

outgoing CEO and the arrival of the incoming CEO. Since part of the uncertainty about the new management

(e.g., the new CEO’s identity) is resolved during this period of time, we expect the firm’s CDS spread to

decrease. In the 284 CEO turnovers in which the announcement of the outgoing CEO’s departure and the

arrival of the new CEO occur on different dates, we find that, following the rise at the announcement of the

departure, the CDS spread on average declines by 18 basis points by the time that the new CEO takes office.

This decline equals 51% of the rise in spread (35 basis points) at the CEO departure announcement for this

sample. If the initial rise in spread reflects the total additional uncertainty brought on by the imminent arrival

of new management, then about half of such uncertainty gets revolved by the time the new CEO takes office.

        Cross-sectionally, when there is more remaining uncertainty about the incoming CEO’s ability, the

decline in spreads between the departure announcement and the time the incoming CEO takes over should be

smaller. To evaluate this hypothesis, we compare the declines between cases where the incoming CEO is

hired from outside the firm and those in which the incoming CEO is promoted from within. When the CEO

is hired from outside, the uncertainty about the quality of match between the firm and the new CEO could

still be high even after the new CEO’s identity is revealed. In contrast, when the firm hires an insider, much

of the uncertainty should be revealed by the announcement of this hiring.

        In our sample, the CDS spread declines by an average of 16.5 basis points, or 35% of the initial

spread increase, between the time of the outgoing CEO’s departure and the beginning of the replacement’s

tenure, when the replacement is an outsider. In contrast, when the incoming CEO is an insider, the spread

declines by 18.5 basis points, or 62% of the initial rise in this subsample. Similarly, we find that for younger

new CEOs (younger than 50 when taking office), only 38% of the initial spread rise is reversed by the time

of the new CEO’s inauguration, while for older new CEOs, the fraction is 58%. These differences in

magnitudes across turnovers suggest that the pattern of increases and subsequent decreases in CDS spreads

around the time of CEO turnover does occur because of the market’s uncertainty about the CEO and his

future actions.


                                                       22
4.1.2. Evidence from after CEO Turnover

        The results in Panels A and B of Table 6 suggest that uncertainty about a new CEO’s ability when he

takes office is lower for heir-apparent CEOs, and higher for outsider CEOs and younger CEOs. Learning

models such as Pastor and Veronesi (2003) predict that learning should be faster when prior uncertainty

about ability is higher (see Hermalin and Weisbach (2014) for applications of this idea to governance). A

consequence of a faster learning speed is that post turnover, the perceived default risk (and thus CDS spreads)

should decline at a higher rate when there is more prior uncertainty about the CEO’s ability.

        In Panel C of Table 6, we examine whether the sensitivity of CDS spreads to tenure is larger when

the uncertainty about the incoming CEO when he takes office is larger. Column (1) includes a term

interacting tenure with a dummy variable indicating that the new CEO is not an “heir-apparent”. The results

suggest that the spread-tenure sensitivity is largely concentrated in non-heir-apparent CEOs. For heir-

apparent CEOs, the spread-tenure slope is negative but close to zero, indicating little ex ante uncertainty

about them when they take office.

        Column (2) presents estimates of a similar equation including a term interacting tenure with a

dummy equal to one if the incoming CEO is an outsider. The effect of tenure on CDS spread for outsider

CEOs (- 0.079) is substantially and significantly larger than that for insider CEOs. Similarly, Column (3)

presents estimates including an interaction term for young (under 50 years old) CEOs. The results indicate

that the coefficient for young CEOs is statistically significantly larger than for older CEOs. All these results

suggest that the firm’s CDS spread is more sensitive to CEO tenure when there is higher prior uncertainty

about the CEO.

        A potentially important distinction between CEO and CFO is that a CFO’s skills, such as experience

with financial reporting, tax, and making accounting judgments, are typically more general and transferrable

across firms than a CEO’s skills. 17 The generality of CFOs’ skills could be one reason why we observe more



17
  Ralph Bender, CFO of the Manship Media Group, for example, suggests that a successful CFO should be a technical
generalist, rather than specializing in one area: “The key to being a successful CFO is not so much knowing everything,
but knowing a little bit about a lot of things, trying to stay abreast of these things.” (see Lamoreaux (2009))
                                                          23
outsider successions for CFOs than for CEOs. Comparing the market learning processes for insider and

outsider CFOs can also shed light on the degree of generality of managerial skills required by the CFO job.

In Column (4) of Table 6, Panel C, we find that the CDS spread to tenure sensitivity is not significantly

different between insider and outsider CFOs, suggesting that the prior uncertainty about a new CFO’s ability

is similar regardless of his succession origin. This finding is different from what we report for insider and

outsider CEOs, consistent with the idea that CFO skills are more general than CEO skills.

        In summary, the cross-sectional evidence from both the CEO turnover process and the post-turnover

time in office suggest that a firm’s default risk and CDS spread react to changes in the amount of uncertainty

about the new management. Alternative interpretations such as endogenous CEO turnover timing or changes

in firms’ fundamentals are unlikely to consistently explain these cross-sectional findings.

4.2. Prior Relationships with Lenders

        We have presumed to this point that all suppliers of debt capital have access to the same information

about the firm’s management, so that all have the same assessment of the CEO or CFO’s ability or policies at

each point in time. However, it is possible that some lenders do in fact have better information about the

CEO and the firm than other lenders. This informational advantage underlies the literature on relationship

banking, which suggests that a long-term relationship between firms and lenders reduces asymmetric

information and consequently the spreads that firms pay on loans. 18 If part of the asymmetric information

that contributes to the spread differences between relationship and non-relationship based loans is about the

management of the borrowing firm, then the existence of a personal relationship between the manager and

the lender should reduce this information asymmetry. Consistent with this idea, Karolyi (2015) finds that

firms are more likely to choose the lenders that have a personal relationship with their new executives after

executive turnovers. To the extent that such a personal relationship lowers the amount of prior uncertainty



18
   This literature began with Rajan’s (1992) analysis. Petersen and Rajan (1994, 1995), Berger and Udell (1995),
Schenone (2010), Bharath et al. (2007, 2011), and Karolyi (2015) all document that relationship-based loans have lower
spreads than otherwise identical loans in which there is not a prior relationship between the firm and its lender. These
studies also suggest that the loan market is competitive enough that the benefit from reduced information asymmetry is
at least partly passed onto the borrower.
                                                          24
about the new management from the perspective of a lender, we consider the possibility that it reduces the

sensitivity of loan spreads to the manager’s time in office.

        To test this prediction, we rely on DealScan data, together with information on executive job

changes from ExecuComp, from which we can measure whether a CEO worked for a firm that previously

took a loan from a particular lender. We construct an indicator variable “Prior CEO-Lender Relationship”,

which equals one if at least one of the lead bank(s) of the current new loan was a lead bank in a loan of the

CEO’s employer in the five years before he became the CEO of the current firm, and zero otherwise. We

expect such a prior relationship to reduce the lender’s initial uncertainty about the new CEO’s ability, leading

to lower sensitivity of spreads to the new CEO’s tenure. The interpretation of this variable depends on

whether a CEO was an internal or external hire; for internal hires, the prior relationship would exist

whenever the current firm had taken a loan with the lender, while with an external hire, it would exist if his

prior firm had taken the loan. Panel A of Table 1 reports summary statistics of this variable.

        We estimate the way in which the effect of tenure on loan spreads varies with previous lending

relationships in Column (1) of Table 7, focusing on the first three years of a CEO’s tenure. The estimated

direct effect of CEO tenure on loan spread is -10.396 and is statistically significant, while the interaction

effect between CEO tenure and prior CEO-lender relationship is 6.543 and also is statistically significant.

These estimates imply that when there is no prior relationship, the spread declines by about 10 basis points

per year of CEO tenure. However, the existence of a prior relationship between the new CEO and the lead

bank(s) reduces the spread-tenure sensitivity by about 63% (=6.543/10.396).

        The estimates using our full sample pool CEOs who were internal hires together with those who

were external hires. For each case, the prior lending relationship likely resolves some uncertainty perceived

by the lenders. However, when the new CEO is an internal hire, a prior relationship with the lender(s)

reduces uncertainty about both the current firm and the CEO, while when the new CEO is an external hire, a

prior relationship reduces only uncertainty about the CEO. To isolate the extent to which the personal




                                                       25
relationship with the lender leads to lower uncertainty perceived by the lender about the management, we re-

estimate this equation on the subsample of CEOs who were hired from outside the firm.

        Column (2) reports the estimates for the subsample of outsider CEOs. The direct effect of tenure is

much larger in absolute magnitude here than in Column (1) (-17.655 vs. -10.396), because there is more

uncertainty about outsider CEOs. The interaction effect is 7.711, which implies that if the incoming outsider

CEO has worked with the lender before joining the current company, then the loan spread is 44%

(=7.711/17.655) less sensitive to the new CEO’s time in office. Thus, a personal relationship between a CEO

and a lender, even if it occurs prior to the CEO joining his current firm, leads to less uncertainty perceived by

a lender, and consequently lower sensitivity of spreads to CEO tenure.

        In Columns (3) and (4), we repeat this exercise for CFOs. Similar to the estimates for CEOs, the

existence of a prior relationship between the CFO and the lender(s) significantly reduces the sensitivity of the

firm’s loan spreads to the CFO’s time in office by 52% for the full sample of CFOs (=4.257/8.222) and 31%

for outsider CFOs (=4.321/14.122). The magnitude of this sensitivity for CFOs is smaller than for CEOs,

consistent with the view that uncertainty about firm-CEO match quality is more important than that about

firm-CFO match quality, as CFOs’ ability is more general and transferable.

        Overall, the results in Tables 6 and 7 suggest that the CDS spread and loan spread to tenure relations

are affected by the amount of prior uncertainty about the new CEO. This pattern is consistent with the

argument that the declining interest rate over CEO tenure is driven by the decrease in the amount of

uncertainty about the new management over time.

4.3. The Risk of the Debt Claim

        Another cross-sectional prediction is that the effect of management uncertainty should be larger

when the debt is more risky. When the firm is closer to default, the incremental effect of any additional risk

on default probabilities is higher. For this reason, default risk premiums should be more sensitive to CEO

tenure for speculative grade issuers than for investment grade issuers, for highly levered issuers than for

moderately levered issuers, and for subordinated debt than for senior debt.


                                                       26
         We evaluate these predictions in Table 8. In Column (1), we re-estimate the CDS equation from

Table 2, Column (2), but also include interaction terms between tenure and a dummy variable indicating

whether the firm has a speculative credit rating (below BBB-) at the time of the turnover, and between tenure

and a dummy variable that equals 1 if the firm’s leverage ratio is in the top quartile of the sample distribution

(above 36%) at the time of turnover. 19 The coefficient on the interaction with “Speculative Grade” is close

to zero and insignificant, but the coefficient on the interaction with high leverage is negative, large in

magnitude, and significantly different from zero. The sensitivity of CDS spread to CEO tenure in highly

leveraged firms more than doubles the level in moderately leveraged firms.

         In Columns (2) and (3), we estimate a similar equation for the loan and bond samples. For the loan

equation, we also compare term loans and lines of credit, since term loans are more risky for banks than are

lines of credit. Similarly, for the bond equation, we compare subordinated bonds and senior bonds. 20,21 The

estimates presented in Column (2) document that loan spreads are significantly more sensitive to CEO tenure

for highly leveraged firms and for term loans. Similarly, Column (3) shows that the bond yield spreads are

significantly more sensitive to CEO tenure when firms are highly leveraged and bonds are more junior.

Overall, tenure-spread sensitivities appear to be higher when debt is more risky.

         In summary, the cross-sectional evidence about the relation between the spreads on the firm’s debt

and its CEO’s time in office is consistent with the view that the observed decline in spreads over tenure is

driven by a reduction in uncertainty about management. The default risk implicit in the pricing of the firm’s

debt appear to be more sensitive to CEO tenure when there is higher prior uncertainty about the CEO’s




19
   In the firms with speculative grades in our loan sample, the majority (more than 96%) have an issuer credit rating
between BB- and B, so the vast majority of our sample firms are not in default.
20
   Almost all of the loans in our sample are senior, so we cannot consider the effect of seniority using the loan sample.
21
   The other differences in the specifications between the columns come from the features of the different markets. For
firms with a traded CDS, we have daily values for the CDS, so we estimate our equation using daily data. With daily
data, we choose to include firm-CEO fixed effects, so the direct effects of speculative grade and high leverage cannot be
estimated since these firm characteristics are measured at the time of each turnover. Using the loan and bond data, we
only have one observation for each time a firm takes out a loan or issues a bond, so we measure tenure in years and use
firm fixed effects rather than firm-CEO fixed effects, and the direct effects of firm characteristics such as speculative
grade and high leverage can be estimated because a firm may have multiple turnovers.
                                                          27
ability, when there is no prior relationship between the new CEO and the lender, and when the debt claim is

more risky.



5. Implications of Management Uncertainty for Financial Management

        When a new CEO takes office, the uncertainty about his ability and policies affects the total risk of

the firm and therefore the interest it must pay on its debt. The additional risk is likely to be idiosyncratic

rather than systematic since the uncertainty about an incoming CEO’s skills is unlikely to co-vary with the

overall state of the economy. For this reason, management risk should not affect the expected return on a

firm’s debt, and therefore should not affect its capital budgeting decisions. However, higher management

risk will increase the likelihood of a cash flow shortfall and therefore increase the precautionary demand for

holding cash.

        To evaluate whether management risk does affect precautionary savings, we consider the way firms’

cash holdings vary over their CEOs’ first three years in office. In Panel A of Table 9, we estimate equations

predicting firms’ cash holdings as a function of its CEO tenure. 22 In addition to the controls employed in

prior specifications, we also control for the uses of cash: actual investment expenditures (capital expenditures,

acquisitions, change in net working capital), debt obligations (measured by leverage ratios), and dividend

payouts. The estimated cash-tenure sensitivity therefore reflects the impact of CEO tenure on the firm’s cash

holdings, netting out the current uses of cash, so it should capture the impact of management uncertainty on

precautionary savings.

        The estimates in Column (1) indicate that cash holdings are highest when the firm has a new CEO,

significantly decrease in the CEO’s first three years, and do not vary with CEO tenure after the CEO has

been in office for three years. Column (2) estimates imply that the cash to assets ratio decreases by about 0.3

percentage points per year, for a total of almost one percentage point over the first three years of CEO tenure.

Given that the median cash to assets ratio in our sample is 7%, a one-percentage-point decline in cash ratio

22
  Cash holdings are defined as cash and short-term marketable securities normalized by the book value of assets. We
obtain similar results if we exclude marketable securities when calculating cash holdings.
                                                        28
represents a 13% decline, a nontrivial drop. Column (3) documents that there is a similar decline in cash

holdings over CEO tenure following turnovers that are not likely to be performance-motivated (turnovers

that satisfy any of the criteria in Rows (2)-(5) of Table 1, Panel C). Similar to the decline in the spreads on

debt, the estimated decline in cash over the first three years of tenure does not appear to be a consequence of

CEO turnovers occurring at times of high non-management-related uncertainty.

        If the decline in cash holdings over the first three years of CEO tenure occurs because of uncertainty

about the new CEO, then this sensitivity should vary with the amount of uncertainty there is about the new

CEO. Panel B of Table 9 presents tests of this hypothesis. The results suggest that when the prior uncertainty

about the CEO is relatively high, i.e., the new CEO is young, not an heir apparent, or is an outsider, cash

holdings are more sensitive to CEO tenure. The coefficients on the interaction between tenure and “Young

CEO” (Column (1)), “Non-heir-apparent CEO” (Column (2)), and “Outsider CEO” (Column (3)) are all

negative and significant, increasing the effect of tenure on cash ratios.

        Overall, the results in Table 9 are consistent with the view that the additional cash holdings at the

beginning of a CEO’s tenure reflect precautionary savings, most likely because of incremental uncertainty

during this period about management’s future actions.



6. Conclusion

        A central feature of financial markets is that the interest rate a firm pays on debt increases with the

market’s perception of the firm’s risk. This risk occurs because of factors that affect the value of the firm’s

underlying assets, and also because of uncertainty about how these assets will be managed. Consequently, a

rational market should incorporate managerial-generated uncertainty into its assessment of a firm’s risk when

pricing its securities. Holding constant a firm’s fundamental risks, when there is more uncertainty about a

management team’s abilities or its future choices of actions, creditors should increase the interest rates they

charge the firm. This paper provides evidence that such management risk is an important component in the

pricing of corporate debt.


                                                       29
        Uncertainty about management is likely to be highest when there is a new management team and

decreases over time as the new management’s strategies, talent, as well as the quality of the match between

the manager and the firm, become better known to the market. Our empirical analysis suggests that CDS

spreads on a firm’s debt, loan spreads at origination, and the bond yield spreads at issuance are all

significantly higher when the firm’s CEO and/or the CFO are new in office, than when they have been in

office for three years. This pattern persists regardless of whether the turnover occurred for non-performance-

related reasons or not. The sensitivity of the borrowing cost to CEO tenure is more pronounced when the

prior uncertainty about the manager is higher: if the CEO is not an heir-apparent, is an outsider, is younger,

or has no prior relationship with the lender(s). Finally, we also find that firms adjust their financial

management policies as a response to changes in management risk around CEO turnovers. In particular,

firms tend to hold more precautionary savings when they face higher management risk.

        Overall, our study suggests that uncertainty about management affects firms’ default risk and

consequently the pricing of their debt. Such an observation has implications for management as well as for

financial markets. First, management risk should affect the way that academics and practitioners model credit

risk. Such models could be meaningfully improved by explicitly incorporating managerial characteristics

likely to be associated with the market’s uncertainty about the policies the management will adopt. Second

and more generally, the paper’s results suggest that risk should not be viewed monolithically: a firm’s risk

comes from many sources, including both the fundamentals of its business and its choice of management

team. Third, it emphasizes the importance of transparency in managerial policies and communicating them to

the marketplace, since predictability of managerial strategies appears to lower firms’ default risk premiums.

Overall, management risk appears to be an important component of a firm’s overall risk; understanding its

implications for both the pricing of securities and for financial management is likely to be a useful topic for

future research.




                                                      30
                                               References

Bennedsen, Morten, Francisco Pérez-González, and Daniel Wolfenzon, 2013, “Estimating the Value of the
Boss: Evidence from CEO Hospitalization Events,” Working Paper.

Berger, Allen N. and Gregory F. Udell, 1995, “Relationship Lending and Lines of Credit in Small F Finance,”
Journal of Business, 68, 351-381.

Blanco, R., S. Brennan and I.W. Marsh, 2005, “An Empirical Analysis of the Dynamic Relationship between
Investment-Grade Bonds and Credit Default Swaps,” Journal of Finance, 60 (5), 2255-2281.

Bharath, Sreedhar, Sandeep Dahiya, Anthony Saunders and Anand Srinivasan, 2007, “So What do I Get?
The Bank’s View of Lending Relationship,” Journal of Financial Economics, 85(2), 368-419.

Bharath, Sreedhar, Sandeep Dahiya, Anthony Saunders and Anand Srinivasan, 2011, “Lending Relationships
and Loan Contract Terms,” Review of Financial Studies, 24(4), 1141-1203.

Bradley, Michael and Michael Roberts, 2015, “The Structure and Pricing of Debt Covenants”, Quarterly
Journal of Finance, Forthcoming.

Chava, Sudheer and Michael Roberts, 2008, “How does Financing Impact Investment? The Role of Debt
Covenants,” Journal of Finance, 63, 2085 – 2121.

Collin-Dufresne, Pierre, Robert S. Goldstein, and J. Spencer Martin, 2001, “The Determinants of Credit
Spread Changes,” The Journal of Finance, 56, 2177-2207.

Custódio, Claudia, Miguel Ferreira and Pedro Matos, 2013, “Generalists vs. Specialists: Lifetime Work
Experience and Chief Executive Officer Pay,” Journal of Financial Economics, 108(2), 471-492.

Demerjian, Peter, Baruch Lev, and Sarah McVay, 2012, “Quantifying Managerial Ability: A New Measure
and Validity Tests,” Management Science, 58(7): 1229-1248.

Fee, C. Edward, Charles J. Hadlock, and Joshua R. Pierce, 2013, “Managers Who Lack Style: Evidence from
Exogenous CEO Changes,” Review of Financial Studies, 26 (3), 567-601.

Graham, John R., Si Li, and Jiaping Qiu, 2008, “Corporate Misreporting and Bank Loan Contracting,”
Journal of Financial Economics, 89, 44-61.

Hermalin, Benjamin E. and Michael S. Weisbach, 2014, “Understanding Corporate Governance through
Learning Models of Managerial Competence,” Working Paper.

Kaplan, Steven N., Mark M. Klebanov, and Morten Sorensen, 2012, “Which CEO Characteristics and
Abilities Matter?” Journal of Finance, 67, 973-1007.

Karolyi, Stephen A., 2015, “Personal Lending Relationships,” Working Paper.

Lamoreaux, Matthew G., 2009, “CFO 101, Five Prerequisites,” Journal of Accountancy, 208(3), 3-5.

Mian, Shehzad, 2001, “On the Choice and Replacement of Chief Financial Officers,” Journal of Financial
Economics, 60, 143-175.
                                                   31
Naveen, Lalitha, 2006. “Organizational Complexity and Succession Planning”, Journal of Financial and
Quantitative Analysis, 41(3), 661-683.

Pan, Yihui, Tracy Yue Wang, and Michael S. Weisbach, 2015, “Learning about CEO Ability and Stock
Return Volatility,” Review of Financial Studies, 28(6), 1623-1666.

Pan, Yihui, Tracy Yue Wang, and Michael S. Weisbach, 2016, “CEO Investment Cycles,” Review of
Financial Studies, forthcoming.

Pastor, Lubos and Pietro Veronesi, 2003, “Stock Valuation and Learning about Profitability,” Journal of
Finance, 58, 1749-1789.

Petersen, Mitchell and Raghuram Rajan, 1994, “The Benefits of Firm-Creditor Relationships: Evidence from
Small Business Data,” Journal of Finance, 49, 3-37.

Petersen, Mitchell and Raghuram Rajan, 1995, “The Effect of Credit Market Competition on Lending
Relationships", Quarterly Journal of Economics, 110, 407-443.

Plath, Christian, 2008, “Analyzing Credit and Governance Implications of Management Succession
Planning,” working paper.

Rajan, Raghuram, 1992, “Insiders and Outsiders: The Choice between Informed and Arm’s-length
debt,” Journal of Finance, 47(4), 1367-1400.

Schenone, Carola, 2010, “Lending Relationships and Information Rents: Do Banks Exploit their Information
Advantage?” Review of Financial Studies, 23(3), 1149-1199.

Strahan, Philip, 1999, “Borrower Risk and the Price and Nonprice Terms of Bank Loans,” Working Paper.

Stern, Léa, 2015, “A Learning Based Approach to Evaluating Boards of Directors,” Working Paper.

van Binsbergen, Jules H., John R. Graham, and Jie Yang, 2010, “The Cost of Debt,” The Journal of Finance,
65, 2089-2136.




                                                   32
                                 Appendix: Variable Definitions

Loan spread (in basis point)     All-in-Drawn Spread (AIS) over LIBOR at the origination date,
                                 from the current pricing file. Winsorized at 1% in the Deal
                                 Scan/Compustat merged data base.
Loan maturity (in months)        A calculation of how long (in months) the facility will be active
                                 from signing date to expiration date, from the facility file.
Loan size (in $ millions)        The amount of the facility, from the facility data set.
Secured                          An indicator variable that equals one if the loan is secured, from
                                 the facility file.
Number of lenders                Total number of lenders in a loan, from the lender file.
Number of loan covenants         The total number of covenants in six categories (therefore this
                                 variable ranges from 0 to 6): equity sweep, debt sweep, asset
                                 sweep, financial, dividend and secured, following Bradley and
                                 Roberts (2015)
Performance Pricing              A loan feature that ties the interest rate of the loan to an indicator
                                 (e.g., leverage, interest coverage ratio) of the firm’s performance,
                                 from the performance pricing file.
Loan Type                        Type of the loan (facility): term loan, revolver, etc.
Loan Purpose                     Purpose of the loan (facility): takeover, working capital, debt
                                 repayment, etc.
Lead Bank                        Following Bharath et al. (2007), we focus on lead bank(s) in the
                                 syndicate in relationship lending. Any lender characterized as
                                 “lead arranger”, “lead bank”, “lead manager”, or have an
                                 allocation of more than 90% of the total committed amount to the
                                 facility is characterized as a lead bank. Any bank that is described
                                 as “participant” is not a leading bank.
Prior CEO (CFO)-Lender           A binary variable that equals 1 if the lead bank(s) of the current
Relationship                     new loan was a lead bank in a loan of the CEO’s employer in the
                                 five years before he became the CEO of the current firm, and zero
                                 otherwise.
Dummy (Loan Initiation or Bond   An indicator variable that equals 1 if the firm takes at least one
Issuance)                        loan or issued one bond in the fiscal year.
Yield spread (in basis point)    Offering yield spread. The difference between the offering yield at
                                 issuance and the yield of the benchmark treasury bond, calculated
                                 only for fixed coupon bond (about 78% of the Mergent sample).
Bond size (in $ millions)        Offering amount, the par value of debt at issuance (in $ millions)
Bond maturity (in months)        Maturity date – offering date (in months).
Subordinated                     An indicator variable that equals 1 if the bond is junior, junior
                                 subordinate, subordinate, senior subordinate, and 0 otherwise
                                 (senior or senior secured).
CDS Spread (in basis point)      The amount paid by the Protection Buyer to the Protection Seller,
                                 typically denominated in basis points, with an annualized quote
                                 but paid quarterly. We use the five-year spreads because these
                                 contracts are the most liquid and constitute over 85 percent of the
                                 entire CDS market. To maintain uniformity in contracts, we only
                                 keep CDS quotations for senior unsecured debt with a modified
                                 restructuring (MR) clause and denominated in U.S. dollars.
CDS(Departure)-CDS(Pre-          The rise in CDS spreads between the average CDS spreads from
departure)                       three months before the departure announcement (month -3 to
                                               33
                                 month -1; with month 0 being the departure month) and the
                                 departure announcement.
CDS(Inauguration)-               The drop in CDS spreads between the dates of the previous CEO’s
CDS(Departure)                   departure announcement and when the new CEO takes office.
Recovery Rate (in percentage)    Reported by data contributors. Most pricing methodologies
                                 estimate recovery rates in a very simplistic way: a percentage is
                                 assigned to the seniority of the debt of a company. For investment
                                 grade issuers, recovery is generally assumed to be 40% (as the
                                 probability of default is low, the recovery rate is at best an
                                 estimate). For distressed issuers however, where the probability of
                                 default is higher, recovery tends to be more precisely defined.
Credit Spread (in basis point)   The difference between AAA corporate bond yield and BAA
                                 corporate bond yield (data source: Federal Reserve Board of
                                 Governors) measured in the month prior to loan initiation.
Term Spread (in basis point)     The difference between the 10-year Treasury yield and the 2-year
                                 Treasury yield (data source: Federal Reserve Board of Governors)
                                 measured in the month prior to loan initiation.
VIX (in percentage)              CBOE volatility index, which shows the market's expectation of
                                 30-day volatility. It is constructed using the implied volatilities of
                                 a wide range of S&P 500 index options. This volatility is meant to
                                 be forward looking and is calculated from both calls and puts.
Firm Age                         Age of the firm since IPO, using the first day appear in CRSP (or
                                 the IPO date in Compustat if missing), constructed for each firm-
                                 year.
Log(Assets)                      Logarithm of the total book assets (assets are measured in $
                                 millions)
Leverage                         (Long-term debt + debt in current liabilities)/total assets
M/B                              Market value of equity (closing price at the fiscal year end times
                                 shares outstanding) divided by book value of equity
Q                                (Market value of equity + the book value of total debt)/book value
                                 of total assets
ROA                              Earnings before interest, tax, and depreciation scaled by the total
                                 book assets
Tangibility                      Net property, plant and equipment/total assets
CF Volatility                    Residual volatility of the AR(1) process of ROE, following Pastor
                                 and Veronesi (2003)
Payout Ratio                     (Dividend/Earnings) per share
Cash Ratio                       Cash and short-term marketable securities scaled by
                                 (contemporaneous) book assets
Capx                             Capital expenditure scaled by total book assets, with missing or
                                 negative Capx set to 0.
Acquisition                      Value of acquisitions scaled by total book assets. Acquisitions
                                 include completed deals covered in SDC with the deal form of
                                 “Acquisitions of Assets”, “Acquisitions of certain Assets”, “Acq.
                                 Maj. Int.”, “Acq. Part. Int.”, “Acq. Rem. Int.”, “Acquisition” or
                                 “Merger” (as the acquirer”).
Change in NWC                    Change in net working capital without cash, scaled by total assets
Speculative Grade                An indicator variable that equals 1 if the firm has a rating below
                                 BBB-, and 0 otherwise (investment grade)

                                               34
Highly Levered                         An indicator variable that equals 1 if leverage is greater than 36%
                                       (corresponds to the 75% of the leverage distribution, as well as the
                                       mean of the speculative grade firms).
Total time in office                   Equals 0 if the CEO (or CFO) came into office and left office in
                                       the same year; 1 if he left the year after he became CEO (or CFO);
                                       etc.
Management Ability                     CEO’s ability, relative to their industry peers, in transforming
                                       corporate resources to revenues (see Demerjian, Lev, and McVay
                                       (2012) for details). We use the second stage residual of regressing
                                       the raw ability scores on firm-level characteristics.
Long-term CEO                          CEOs with at least 3 years in office.

Outsider CEO                           An indicator that equals 1 if the CEO is hired from outside (i.e.,
                                       with the firm for less than three year when becoming CEO)
Heir-apparent CEO                      An indicator variable that equals 1 if the new CEO was an heir
                                       apparent. An executive with the title “president” or “chief
                                       operating officer (COO)” or both, who is distinct from the CEO
                                       and the chairman is designated as the “heir apparent”
Young CEO                              An indicator variable that equals 1 if the CEO who was younger
                                       than 50 when taking office.
Turnovers Due to Health or Illness     Include cases where a) news searches revealed that the CEO
                                       departure was related to a health condition or death (from Fee et al.
                                       2013), or b) turnover reason provided in Execucomp is “deceased”.
Turnovers Due to Retirement of         This sample includes turnovers where a) news searches revealed
Departing CEO                          that the CEO departure was related to a health condition or death
                                       (from Fee et al. 2013), b) turnover reason provided in Execucomp
                                       is “deceased”, c) departing CEOs older than 65 years. We exclude
                                       the “suspicious” retirements by focusing on retirements at good
                                       performance. This means that the cumulative monthly industry-
                                       adjusted stock return during the 12-months before the new CEO’s
                                       inauguration month (see the variable definition for Cum. Industry-
                                       adj. Return month [-12,-1] below) is greater than 0.
No Management Shakeup                  CEO turnovers not accompanied by management (top-4 highest
                                       paid non-CEO executives) changes during the turnover year and
                                       the year after turnover
Cum. ind.-adj. return month [-12,-1]   Cumulative industry (Fama-French 49)-adjusted return during the
                                       12 months before the inauguration month
Median monthly IVOL month[-12,-        The median of the monthly industry (Fama-French 49)-adjusted
1]                                     idiosyncratic volatility during the 12 months before the
                                       inauguration month
Good pre-turnover performance          Turnovers that satisfy the following three conditions: 1) the
(Pre-turnover Ind-adj. IVOL<=0 &       median of the monthly industry-adjusted idiosyncratic volatility
stock return>=0 & ROA>=0)              during the 12-months before the inauguration month (see the
                                       variable definition for Median Monthly IVOL month [-12,-1]
                                       above) is less or equal to 0.2) the cumulative monthly industry-
                                       adjusted stock return during the 12-months before the inauguration
                                       month (see the variable definition for Cum. Industry-adj. Return
                                       month [-12,-1] above) is no less than 0.3) the ind-adj. ROA in the
                                       fiscal year prior to the inauguration month is no less than 0. ROA
                                       is defined as the earnings before interest, tax, and depreciation
                                                     35
                                scaled by the beginning of fiscal year total book assets.
No Pre-turnover run-up in CDS   To capture the change in the CDS spread before turnover, we run
spread                          firm-CEO specific regressions of daily CDS spread on event days
                                [-730, -30], with day 0 being the day when the CEO takes office.
                                We require at least 250 trading day data on CDS spread. Turnovers
                                with non-positive (or insignificant) tenure-time slope are classified
                                as not preceded by an increase in the CDS spread.
Outright Forced                 Outright forced turnovers include the “overtly forced” group from
                                Fee et al. (2013) with cases for which news searches indicated that
                                the CEO was forced to leave or left under pressure.




                                              36
                                           Table 1: Summary Statistics

                                     Panel A: Loan, Bond, and CDS Attributes
This table reports the summary statistics of loan, bond, and CDS attributes during the first 10 years of CEO tenure.
Loan level and bond level variables, such as the loan spread and yield spread, are calculated when loans are initiated or
when bonds are issued for the sample period that we have loan or bond data (1987 – 2012). The CDS variables are
measured at the daily frequency for the sample period that we have CDS data (2001 – 2012).

Variables                                  Obs.           sd.         mean           p25           p50           p75
5-Year CDS Spread                        955,103        229.24        159.12        38.53          75.66       174.67
3-Year CDS Spread                        883,751        232.92        135.51        25.33          53.73       134.92
1-Year CDS Spread                        851,911        223.61        103.97        12.65          31.19        87.01
Recovery Rate                            950,007          3.09         39.61        39.43            40           40
Loan Spread                               17,076        126.89        157.93          50            125          225
Loan Maturity                             16,478         26.74         44.28          20             48           60
log(Loan Size)                            17,075          1.45          5.30         4.53           5.37         6.21
Number of lenders                         17,063          9.71          9.97           3              7           14
Number of covenants                       3,112           1.84          4.41           3              5            6
Performance Pricing                       17,076          0.50          0.45           0              0            1
Refinancing                               12,450          0.38          0.82           1              1            1
Secured                                   10,568          0.49          0.60           0              1            1
Prior CEO-lender Relationship             11,039          0.48          0.35           0              0            1
Speculative Grade                         11,259          0.49          0.39           0              0            1
Yield Spread                              8,525         194.77        182.49        62.94         121.27         233
Bond Maturity                             8,520         125.62        144.24          61            120          144
log(Bond Size)                            8,525           1.74          5.43         5.01           5.70         6.21
Subordinated                              8,525           0.37          0.16           0              0            0

                                              Panel B: CEO Turnovers

This table reports the distribution of CEO turnovers over time for CEOs in three samples. Information on CEO turnover
is obtained from Execucomp for the sample period 1987-2010. Although Execucomp’s coverage starts in 1992, some of
the CEOs in the database took office before 1992, leading to some CEO turnovers from the late 1980s being in our
sample. The CDS data is available only from 2001. Therefore, the turnovers in the CDS sample from early periods tend
to be later years of a long-term CEO’s tenure and are scarce.

Became CEO            # of turnovers in the loan        # of turnovers in the bond          # of turnovers in the CDS
Year                           Sample                            Sample                              Sample
1987 - 1991                      532                               344
1992 - 1996                      834                               454                                 103
1997 - 2001                      988                               580                                 288
2002 - 2006                      892                               461                                 303
2007 - 2012                      568                               348                                 263
Total                            3,814                             2,187                               957



                                                          37
                                                CEO Time in Office
This table reports the distribution of CEO’s total time in office (in years) for CEOs in the union of the above three
samples.
                                                   Obs.          Mean    25th percentile Median 75th percentile
CEO Total Time in Office (in years)                4,294          6.14            3            5             9

                            Panel C: CEO Turnover Types and CEO Characteristics
This table reports the number of various CEO turnovers based on turnover reason (see appendix for more details),
succession origin, and CEO age at turnover, for the CEO sample in Panel B.

                                                                      # of Turnovers
                      (1) Health/Death                                      119
                      (2) Health/Death/Retirement at good performance       242
                      (3) No Mgt. Shakeup                                   495
                      (4) Good pre-turnover performance                     728
                      (5) No Pre-turnover run-up in CDS spread              185
                      (6) Outright Forced                                   246
                      (7) Non-Heir-apparent CEO                            3,653
                      (8) Outsider CEO                                     1,194
                      (9) Young CEO                                        1,651


                                    Panel D: Firm and macro-level Attributes
This table reports the summary statistics of firm attributes (yearly, 1987-2012) for all Execucomp firms that had
turnovers between 1987 and 2012, as well as the credit market conditions (daily, 1987-2012 for credit and term spread,
1990-2012 for VIX).


            Variables                   Obs.         sd.         mean      p25         p50          p75
            Credit Spread               6,533      40.37         98.15      72          90          113
            Term Spread                 6,505      90.95        109.75      26         103          190
            VIX                         5,794       8.13         20.45    14.73       18.87        23.96
            Log(Assets)                35,260       1.94          7.27     5.96        7.21         8.53
            Leverage                   34,503       0.22          0.24     0.06        0.21         0.36
            M/B                        34,119       4.30          2.90     1.33        2.04         3.34
            ROA                        33,962       0.16          0.11     0.07        0.12         0.18
            Tangibility                33,349       0.24          0.28     0.08        0.20         0.42
            CF Volatility              30,563       0.96          0.56     0.25        0.29         0.42
            Payout Ratio               35,528       0.45          0.22     0.00        0.00         0.31
            Cash Ratio                 35,168       0.18          0.14     0.02        0.07         0.20
            Capx                       35,192       0.06          0.05     0.01        0.04         0.07
            Acquisition                35,192       0.07          0.02     0.00        0.00         0.00
            Change in NWC              34,526       0.07          0.00     0.00        0.00         0.00

                                                           38
                              Table 2: The Effect of CEO Tenure on CDS spread

This table reports the changes in CDS spread (daily) over CEO tenure. The sample period is 2001-2012. CEO tenure is
measured by days since the CEO takes office. Column (1) reports the results using a piecewise linear specification for
all CEOs (no matter how long they stayed in office) from year 0 to year 10. Columns (2) to (4) report the results for the
first three years of CEOs who stay in office for at least three years. Columns (1) and (2) use the 5-Year CDS spreads as
the dependent variable, while (3) and (4) use 3-Year and 1-Year CDS spreads, respectively. All the control variables are
measured contemporaneous to the CDS spreads. The definitions of all variables are in Appendix. Standard errors are
clustered at the firm-year level. ***, **, * denote significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

                                       (1)                     (2)                 (3)                    (4)
                                  Years [0,10]                   Years [0,2]
                                                                               3-Year CDS            1-Year CDS
                                            5-Year CDS Spread                    Spread                Spread
 Tenure (years 0-2)                  -0.032***
                                       (0.011)
 Tenure (years 3-5)                     -0.015
                                       (0.011)
 Tenure (years 6-10)                    -0.002
                                       (0.011)
 Tenure (in days)                                        -0.031**                -0.050***             -0.070***
                                                           (0.015)                 (0.019)               (0.021)
 Recovery Rate                      -12.817***          -10.784***              -16.765***            -21.073***
                                       (1.225)             (1.416)                 (2.065)               (2.318)
 Credit Spread                        0.478***           0.443***                 0.546***              0.693***
                                       (0.039)             (0.066)                 (0.082)               (0.098)
 Term Spread                             -0.02              -0.05                   -0.036                0.017
                                       (0.029)             (0.043)                 (0.055)               (0.061)
 VIX                                  2.098***           2.443***                 2.331***              2.100***
                                       (0.134)             (0.259)                 (0.304)               (0.328)
 Log(Assets)                        -44.778***             42.382                   50.402               76.452*
                                      (12.259)            (30.398)                (37.072)              (41.416)
 Leverage                           209.408***             76.313                 129.382*               100.950
                                      (46.637)            (61.511)                (76.949)              (82.463)
 M/B                                    -6.977             13.347                 29.221**             36.193***
                                       (6.049)             (8.938)                (12.322)              (13.855)
 ROA                               -487.058***         -509.336***             -606.647***           -632.129***
                                      (74.297)           (118.529)               (141.388)             (152.415)
 Tangibility                             36.79              4.283                   98.273               138.704
                                      (77.583)           (111.459)               (138.973)             (153.043)
 CF Volatility                       16.036***              4.654                    3.669                3.971
                                       (4.381)             (7.087)                 (8.142)               (9.651)
 Payout Ratio                       -23.384***             -6.306                 -10.947*              -12.432*
                                       (5.167)             (5.110)                 (6.232)               (6.673)
 Firm-CEO and Year FE                      x                  x                        x                    x
 Observations                          770,255            270,124                  244,917               238,308
 Adjusted R-squared                      0.758              0.833                    0.804                0.740
                                                          39
     Table 3: Tenure-CDS Spread Relations Following Likely Non-performance Driven Turnovers

This table reports the changes in CDS spread (daily) over the first three years of CEO tenure for various turnover
subsamples that are likely to be non-performance driven, as well as outright forced turnovers. We control for the same
set of CDS, firm or macro level variables as in Table 2, but do not report the coefficients for brevity. We report the
number of turnovers for each subsample, in addition to the number of firm-day observations. The definitions of turnover
types are in Appendix. Standard errors are clustered at the firm-year level. ***, **, * denote significance at 1%, 5%,
and 10% levels, respectively.

                   (1)             (2)           (3)          (4)           (5)                (6)             (7)
                                            CDS Spread, Years [0,2], Long-term CEOs
                                Health/
                                                               Good pre-      No pre-
                 Health/        Death/         No mgt.                                     Union (2)-       Outright
                                                               turnover      turnover
                 Death           Ret. at       shakeup                                        (5)            forced
                                                                 perf.        run-up
                               good perf.

Tenure           -0.037*        -0.042*        -0.035*          -0.029*       -0.043*       -0.026**       -0.132**
(in Days)        (0.020)        (0.022)        (0.019)          (0.016)       (0.022)        (0.013)        (0.050)
Firm-CEO
F.E. and
year F.E.           x             x               x               x             x               x             x
Obs.              5,928         14,541          38,566         119,125        84,777         164,501        25,864
# of
turnovers          10             24             53               178           114            232            42
Adj. R2           0.871          0.876          0.787            0.780         0.814          0.762          0.910




                                                          40
                                   Table 4: Borrowing Rates over CEO Tenure

                                                  Panel A: Loan Spread
This table reports the changes in loan spread at origination over CEO tenure. Column (1) uses piecewise linear
regressions, for all the CEOs from year 0 (turnover year) to year 10. Columns (2) to (4) report the results for the first
three years of long-term (in office for at least three years) CEOs’ tenure. Further, Column (3) reports the results for 961
likely non-performance driven turnovers only (union of the four types of turnovers in Columns (2)-(5) in Panel C of
Table 1 in the loan sample). Column (4) reports the results for loans that are classified as “refinancing” by DealScan.
Lagged firm-level control variables, such as firm age, firm size, leverage, M/B, ROA, tangibility, cash flow volatility,
payout ratio, are included in all the regressions, but omitted in the table for brevity. Standard errors are clustered at the
loan level. ***, **, * denote significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

                                    Years [0,10]                        Years [0,2], Long-term CEOs
                                          (1)                (2)                      (3)                          (4)
                                                                            Likely non-performance
                                                                                                              Refinancing
                                                                               driven turnovers
Tenure (years 0-2)                    -6.454***
                                        (1.521)
Tenure (years 3-5)                      -0.949
                                        (0.913)
Tenure (years 6-10)                     -0.329
                                        (0.731)
Tenure (in years)                                        -6.246***                   -5.236*                    -5.115**
                                                           (1.873)                    (2.592)                    (2.417)
Credit Spread                         0.358***            0.296***                  0.448***                     0.337**
                                       (0.053)             (0.093)                    (0.133)                    (0.136)
Term Spread                           0.161***             0.122*                   0.218***                      0.094
                                       (0.031)             (0.062)                    (0.081)                    (0.081)
log(Debt Maturity)                    -6.251**             -4.164                     -4.346                    -13.465*
                                       (2.744)             (4.964)                    (5.979)                    (7.115)
log(Debt Size)                       -12.028***         -11.596***                 -10.259***                  -9.752***
                                       (1.118)             (1.985)                    (2.947)                    (2.664)
Performance Pricing                  -16.779***         -24.207***                 -16.022***                 -27.900***
                                       (2.100)             (4.160)                    (6.139)                    (5.678)
Firm Age                               -3.715*             -0.913                     -2.843                     -9.177*
                                       (1.918)             (4.320)                   (10.356)                    (5.323)
Tranche Type and Loan
Purpose                                   x                  x                          x                          x
Firm-level Controls                       x                  x                          x                          x
Firm and Year F.E.                        x                  x                          x                          x
Observations                            12,843             4,881                      2,140                      3,062
Adjusted R-squared                      0.690              0.716                      0.748                      0.751



                                                            41
                                Panel B: Bond Yield Spreads over CEO Tenure

This table reports the changes in the bond yield spread at issuance over CEO tenure. Column (1) uses piecewise linear
regressions, for all the CEOs from year 0 (turnover year) to year 10. Columns (2) to (3) report the results for the first
three years of long-term CEOs’ tenure. Further, Column (3) reports the results for 439 likely non-performance driven
turnovers only (union of the four types of turnovers in columns (2)-(5) in Panel C of Table 1 in the bond sample). We
control macro-level credit conditions, bond characteristics, and lagged firm-level characteristics (firm age, firm age,
firm size, leverage, M/B, ROA, Tangibility, cash flow volatility, payout ratio). Standard errors are clustered at the firm
level. ***, **, * denote significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

                                         Years [0,10]                              Years [0,2]
                                          (1)                             (2)                           (3)
                                                                                              Likely non-performance
                                                                                                 driven turnovers
Tenure (years 0-2)                      -7.519**
                                         (3.677)
Tenure (years 3-5)                       -3.107
                                         (2.754)
Tenure (years 6-10)                       1.205
                                         (2.139)
Tenure (in years)                                                      -9.600**                        -7.465*
                                                                        (4.845)                        (3.849)
Credit Spread                           1.107***                       1.335***                       1.265***
                                         (0.103)                        (0.154)                        (0.203)
Term Spread                               0.110                           0.116                         0.118
                                         (0.072)                        (0.149)                        (0.198)
log(Debt Maturity)                       -9.553                          -7.735                         9.119
                                         (6.939)                        (9.238)                        (8.079)
log(Debt Size)                           -4.710                         -18.150                        -15.261
                                         (8.635)                       (16.074)                       (15.605)
Firm-level Controls                         x                               x                             x
Firm and Year F.E.                          x                               x                             x
Observations                              5,921                           2,326                         1,207
Adjusted R-squared                        0.531                           0.593                         0.599




                                                           42
                                    Table 5: CFO Turnovers and Default Risk

The CFO turnover data is assembled based on the news announcements from 2001 to 2009 in Capital IQ database.
Panel A reports the summary statistics of CFO turnover, tenure, and total time in office (in years) for CFOs whose
employers took loans or issued bonds or are in the CDS sample during their first 10 years of tenure. “CFO Turnovers
with long-term successors” include CFO successions with incoming CFOs that stay in office for at least 3 years. “CFO
Turnovers (with long-term successors) not accompanied by CEO turnovers within +/-12 months” also include long-term
CFOs only. Further, in this sample, there is no CEO turnover in the 12 months before or the 12 months after a CFO
turnover. “Outsider CFO Succession (with long-term successors)” means that the new long-term CFO comes from
outside the company. Panel B reports changes in a firm’s CDS spread during its CFO’s tenure. The CFO tenure is
measured by the number of days since the CFO takes office. Column (1) reports the results using a piecewise linear
specification for all CFOs from year 0 to year 10. Columns (2) to (5) report the results for the first three years of long-
term CFOs. Panel C reports changes in a firm’s loan/bond spread during the first three years of its long-term CFO’s
tenure. In both Panels B and C, we include the usual set of controls as in Tables 2A and 3A, but for brevity we do not
report the coefficient estimates of some of those variables. All variable definitions are in Appendix. Standard errors are
clustered at the firm-year level in Panel A, at the loan level in the loan regression in Panel B, and at the firm level in the
bond regression in Panel B. ***, **, * denote significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

                          Panel A: Summary Statistics of CFO Turnover and CFO Tenure

                                                                                                             # of turnovers
                                                                                                               2001-2009
CFO Turnovers                                                                                                    1,857
CFO Turnovers with long-term successors                                                                          1,033
CFO Turnovers (with long-term successors) not accompanied by CEO turnovers within +/-
                                                                                                                   722
12 months
CFO Turnovers (with long-term successors) accompanied by CEO turnovers within +/-12
                                                                                                                   311
months
CFO turnovers (with long-term successors) due to death/health/retirement at good
                                                                                                                   68
performance
CFO turnovers (with long-term successors) due to death/health/retirement at good
                                                                                                                   43
performance, and not accompanied by CEO turnovers within +/-12 months
Outsider CFO succession (with long-term successors)                                                                380




                                                   CFO Time in Office

                                                            Obs.     Mean 25th percentile Median 75th percentile
CFO Total Time in Office (in years)                         1,857     3.96          1.58           3.42            5.83




                                                             43
                          Panel B: Uncertainty about CFO and CDS Spread
                             (1)          (2)            (3)                (4)              (5)
                        Years [0, 10]                    Years [0,2], Long-term CFOs
                                                                           Not
                                                   Accompanied                         Health/death/
                                                                      accompanied
                                                      by CEO                           retirement at
                                                                         by CEO
                                                     turnovers                        good perf., not
                                                                        turnovers
                                                    within +/-12                     accompanied by
                                                                       within +/-12
                                                      months                          CEO turnovers
                                                                         months
                                                   CDS Spread
CFO Tenure (years 0-2)   -0.027***
                           (0.009)
CFO Tenure (years 3-5)     -0.004
                           (0.009)
CFO Tenure (years 6-10)    -0.009
                           (0.012)
Tenure                                -0.022**        -0.059**           -0.017*          -0.021*
(in days)                              (0.011)         (0.029)           (0.009)          (0.011)
Controls                      x            x              x                  x                x
Firm-CFO and Year F.E.        x            x              x                  x                x
Observations              611,823      288,831         107,909           180,922           12,116
Adjusted R-squared          0.820       0.847           0.843             0.840             0.923

        Panel C: Loan Spread and Bond Yield Spread during First Three Years of a CFO’s Tenure
                                                          (1)         (2)
                                                     Loan Spread Yield Spread
                       Tenure (in years)               -5.271*     -6.155*
                                                       (2.713)      (3.175)
                       Credit Spread                  0.448***    1.091***
                                                       (0.110)      (0.157)
                       Term Spread                    0.305***    0.492***
                                                       (0.101)      (0.182)
                       log(Debt Maturity)               10.562     -25.310
                                                       (8.155)     (19.464)
                       log(Debt Size)                   -5.113     -19.243
                                                       (3.377)     (14.970)
                       Performance Pricing           -22.144***
                                                       (6.623)
                       Tranche Type and Loan Purpose       x           x
                       Firm-level Controls                 x           x
                       Firm and Year F.E.                  x           x
                       Observations                      2,390       1,313
                       Adjusted R-squared                0.732       0.534

                                                 44
                     Table 6: Cross-Sectional Differences in the Spread-Tenure Relation

                       Panel A: The Rise in CDS Spread at the Departure Announcement

This table reports the average increase in CDS spread between the average level from month -3 to month -1 and the
departure announcement (month 0), for the whole sample, firms with vs. without designated heir apparent, turnovers
due to the departing CEO’s death/illness vs. the non-death/illness sample, outright forced turnovers vs. non-forced
turnovers. We also report the number of observations for each sample, as well as the differences between various pairs
of subsamples. *** denotes that the difference is significant at 1%.

                                                          CDS(Departure)-CDS(Pre-departure)                  Obs.
Full Sample                                                            40.960                                432

Firm Has Heir                                                             19.078                             165
Firm Has No Heir                                                          54.485                             267
Diff. btw. Has Heir and No Heir                                         -35.407***

Death/Illness                                                              53.114                             10
Non-Death/Illness                                                          40.672                            422
Diff. btw. Death/Illness and Non-Death/Illness                           12.422***

Forced                                                                     42.893                             31
Non-Forced                                                                 40.709                            402
Diff. btw. Forced and Non-Forced                                            2.184


                     Panel B: The Decrease in CDS Spread from Departure to Inauguration

This table reports the average drop in CDS spread between the previous CEOs’ departure announcements and new
CEOs’ inaugurations, for the whole sample, firms with outsider vs. insider new CEOs, and firms with young vs. old
incoming CEOs. “Young CEO” is a CEO who is less than 50 years old when taking office. We also report the
percentage of this drop as a fraction of the initial spread increase at departure, the number of observations for each
sample, as well as the differences between various pairs of subsamples. *** denotes that the difference is significant at
1%.

                                CDS(Departure)-                CDS(Inauguration)-             % of the Initial
                               CDS(Pre-departure)               CDS(Departure)                   Increase           Obs.
Full Sample                         34.845                          -17.969                       51.6%             284

Outsider New CEO                      46.614                          -16.502                      35.4%             82
Insider New CEO                       29.754                          -18.564                      62.4%            198
Diff. btw. Out- and
                                    16.806***                        2.061***
Insiders

Young CEO (<50)                       44.167                          -16.763                      38.0%             70
Old CEO (>=50)                        31.743                          -18.368                      57.9%            210
Diff. btw. Young and
Old                                 12.424***                        1.605***



                                                          45
  Panel C: Differences in Prior Uncertainty about CEO (or CFO) and Post-turnover Decline in CDS Spread

This table reports the effect of prior uncertainty about the new CEO (or new CFO) on changes in CDS spread during the
first three years of the CEO’s (or CFO’s) tenure. All CEOs or CFOs in our sample stay in office for at least three years.
“Non-Heir-apparent CEO” indicates that the CEO was not an heir-apparent before becoming the CEO. “Outsider CEO
(CFO)” indicates that the CEO (CFO) comes from outside the company. “Young CEO” is a CEO who is less than 50
years old when taking office. All variable definitions are in Appendix. Standard errors are clustered at the firm-year
level. ***, **, * denote significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

                                                       (1)               (2)            (3)                    (4)
                                                                             CDS Spread
Tenure (in days)                                     -0.002            -0.011         -0.019                -0.023**
                                                     (0.020)           (0.016)        (0.017)                (0.011)
Tenure*Non-Heir-apparent CEO                       -0.038***
                                                     (0.013)
Tenure*Outsider CEO                                                  -0.079***
                                                                       (0.019)
Tenure*Young CEO                                                                         -0.031**
                                                                                          (0.014)
Tenure*Outsider CFO                                                                                            0.002
                                                                                                             (0.019)
Recovery Rate                                     -10.922***         -10.425***         -11.382***        -13.041***
                                                     (1.464)            (1.475)            (1.512)           (1.684)
Credit Spread                                      0.447***           0.460***           0.449***           0.466***
                                                     (0.067)            (0.068)            (0.068)           (0.061)
Term Spread                                          -0.048             -0.051             -0.044            -0.076*
                                                     (0.044)            (0.044)            (0.045)           (0.045)
VIX                                                2.362***           2.381***           2.395***           2.312***
                                                     (0.263)            (0.271)            (0.268)           (0.231)
Log(Assets)                                          18.709             13.808             35.176            -22.288
                                                    (29.133)           (29.271)           (30.918)          (23.211)
Leverage                                             97.590             70.097             62.883           142.305*
                                                    (62.022)           (61.478)           (61.235)          (81.475)
M/B                                                  11.223              4.612            17.106*             -0.456
                                                     (9.224)            (9.609)            (9.429)           (1.009)
ROA                                              -492.586***        -490.520***        -524.634***       -522.663***
                                                   (119.798)          (123.376)          (117.712)         (121.474)
Tangibility                                          51.508             28.684             27.600           205.937*
                                                   (105.597)          (103.968)          (122.724)         (115.476)
CF Volatility                                         3.822              3.854              3.854          28.344***
                                                     (7.210)            (7.349)            (6.984)           (6.408)
Payout Ratio                                         -6.759            -8.479*             -6.364             -6.804
                                                     (5.088)            (4.946)            (5.202)           (5.245)
Firm-CEO (CFO) F.E. and Year F.E.                       x                  x                  x                  x
Observations                                        260,297            252,500            253,091           288,831
Adjusted R-squared                                    0.833              0.835              0.835              0.847




                                                             46
                     Table 7: Prior Lending Relationship and Spread-Tenure Relations

This table reports the effect of relationship lending on changes in loan spreads during the first three year of CEO’s or
CFO’s tenure. All CEOs and CFOs in our sample stay in office for at least three years. “Prior CEO (or CFO)-lender
Relationship” is a dummy variable that equals one if the lead bank(s) of the current new loan was a lead bank in a loan
of the CEO’s employer in the five years before he became the CEO of the current firm, and zero otherwise. We include
the firm-year level controls as in Tables 4A, but for brevity we do not report the coefficient estimates of some of those
variables. All variable definitions are in Appendix. Standard errors are clustered at the loan level. ***, **, * denote
significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

                                                  (1)                 (2)              (3)                    (4)
                                               Full CEO             Outsider        Full CFO                Outsider
                                                Sample               CEOs            Sample                  CFOs
                                                                          Loan Spread
Tenure (in years)                             -10.396***          -17.655***            -8.222*             -14.122*
                                                (3.039)              (5.312)            (4.251)              (7.284)
Tenure (in years)*Prior                          6.543*              7.711*              4.257*              4.321*
CEO (CFO)-Lender Relationship                   (3.374)              (3.900)            (2.183)              (2.276)
Prior CEO (CFO)-Lender                          -12.335              -8.054              -7.308               4.498
Relationship                                    (8.132)             (21.012)            (8.746)             (15.917)
log(Debt Maturity)                               -2.211               1.063              10.667               7.998
                                                (5.818)              (9.699)            (8.212)             (13.416)
log(Debt Size)                                -10.764***          -14.267***             -5.136              -4.730
                                                (2.187)              (3.943)            (3.381)              (5.138)
Performance Pricing                           -24.972***          -23.402***          -22.220***           -27.334**
                                                (5.010)              (8.822)            (6.661)             (11.740)
Tranche Type and Loan Purpose                       x                   x                   x                   x
Firm-level Controls                                 x                   x                   x                   x
Firm and Year F.E.                                  x                   x                   x                   x
Observations                                      3,965               1,511               2,394               1,034
Adjusted R-squared                                0.706               0.699               0.733               0.719




                                                          47
                      Table 8: Risk of the Debt Claim and the Spread-Tenure Relation

This table contrasts the changes in the CDS spread, loan spread or bond yield spread over the first three years of the
CEO’s tenure for riskier debt claims and less risky debt claims. All CEOs in our sample stay in office for at least three
years. “Speculative Grade” indicates a firm with credit rating below BBB- in the turnover year. “Highly Levered”
indicates borrowers with leverage ratio in the top quartile (0.36) in the turnover year. “Subordinated” indicates junior
bonds. “Term Loan” indicates (all types of) term loans. We include the usual set of firm, loan, or bond level controls,
but for brevity we do not report the coefficient estimates of those variables. All variable definitions are in Appendix.
Standard errors are clustered at the firm-year level in Column (1), at the loan level in Column (2), and at the firm level
in Column (3). ***, **, * denote significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

                                                      (1)                             (2)                       (3)
                                                  CDS Spread                      Loan Spread              Yield Spread
Tenure (in days)                                   -0.025*
                                                    (0.013)
Tenure (in days)*Speculative                        -0.015
                                                    (0.020)
Tenure (in days)*Highly Levered                    -0.033*
                                                    (0.018)
Tenure (in years)                                                                    -0.454                   -4.223*
                                                                                     (2.180)                  (2.413)
Tenure (in years)*Speculative                                                        -5.357                    6.014
                                                                                     (4.328)                  (7.354)
Tenure (in years)*Highly Levered                                                    -4.825*                   -5.551*
                                                                                     (2.597)                  (2.846)
Tenure (in years)*Term Loan                                                        -10.380**
                                                                                     (4.898)
Tenure (in years)*Subordinated                                                                               -6.900*
                                                                                                             (3.508)
Speculative                                                                        18.617**                105.042***
                                                                                    (7.760)                 (34.197)
Highly Levered                                                                    106.446***               51.787***
                                                                                   (10.333)                 (19.329)
Term Loan                                                                          47.466**
                                                                                   (22.961)
Subordinated                                                                                                  6.353
                                                                                                             (24.150)
Firm-level Controls                                     x                               x                       x
Loan- or Bond-level Controls                                                            x                       x
Firm-CEO and Year F.E.                                  x
Firm and Year F.E.                                                                      x                        x
Observations                                        248,186                           3,451                    2,246
Adjusted R-squared                                   0.832                            0.771                    0.611

                                                            48
                            Table 9: Management Risk and Precautionary Savings

                                       Panel A: Cash Ratio over CEO Tenure

This table reports the change in cash ratio over CEO tenure. The dependent variable is the ratio of cash and cash
equivalent to book assets in year t. The firm level controls are also measured in year t. Columns (1) reports the results
using a piecewise linear specification for all CEOs from year 0 to year 10. Columns (2) and (3) report the results for the
first three years of CEOs who stay in office for at least three years. The likely non-performance driven turnover sample
includes turnovers that satisfy any of the criteria in rows (2)-(5) of Panel C of Table 1. All variable definitions are in
Appendix. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. ***, **, * denote significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels,
respectively.
                                   Years [0, 10]                      Years [0, 2], Long-term CEOs
                                                                 Cash Ratio
                                           (1)                      (2)                           (3)
                                                                                       Likely non-performance
                                                                                           driven turnovers
Years (0-2)                            -0.003***
                                         (0.001)
Years (3-5)                              -0.001
                                         (0.001)
Years (6-10)                              0.001
                                         (0.001)
Tenure (in years)                                                -0.003***                          -0.002**
                                                                   (0.001)                           (0.001)
Firm Age                                0.001***                   0.001**                             0.001
                                         (0.000)                   (0.000)                           (0.001)
Log(Assets)                            -0.025***                 -0.025***                         -0.028***
                                         (0.003)                   (0.004)                           (0.007)
Leverage                               -0.113***                 -0.124***                         -0.102***
                                         (0.010)                   (0.018)                           (0.024)
Q                                       0.006***                  0.008***                             0.002
                                         (0.001)                   (0.002)                           (0.005)
Capx                                   -0.152***                 -0.210***                         -0.222***
                                         (0.022)                   (0.038)                           (0.067)
Acquisition                            -0.082***                 -0.094***                         -0.076***
                                         (0.012)                   (0.018)                           (0.027)
ROA                                       0.012                      0.035                             0.018
                                         (0.021)                   (0.025)                           (0.027)
Change in NWC                          -0.086***                 -0.106***                           -0.081*
                                         (0.015)                   (0.025)                           (0.042)
Tangibility                            -0.349***                 -0.346***                         -0.316***
                                         (0.017)                   (0.024)                           (0.043)
CF Volatility                           0.003***                    0.003*                            -0.002
                                         (0.001)                   (0.002)                           (0.004)
Payout Ratio                              0.001                      0.002                           -0.004*
                                         (0.001)                   (0.002)                           (0.002)
Firm F.E.                                   x                          x                                 x
Observations                             28,508                     10,642                             4,486
Adjusted R-squared                        0.772                      0.797                             0.832
                                                           49
                          Panel B: Uncertainty about CEO and Cash-Tenure Sensitivity

This table reports the effect of prior uncertainty about a new CEO on the cash-tenure sensitivity during the first three
years of the CEO’s tenure. The dependent variable is the ratio of cash and cash equivalent to book assets in year t. All
CEOs in our sample stay in office for at least three years. “Heir-apparent CEO” indicates that the CEO was the heir-
apparent before becoming the CEO. “Outsider CEO” indicates that the CEO comes from outside the company. “Young
CEO” is a CEO who is less than 50 years old when taking office. All variable definitions are in Appendix. Standard
errors are clustered at the firm level. ***, **, * denote significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
                                                            (1)                    (2)                     (3)
                                                                               Cash Ratio
Tenure (in years)                                       -0.002**                 -0.000                 -0.002**
                                                         (0.001)                (0.001)                  (0.001)
Tenure (in years)*Young CEO                             -0.004**
                                                         (0.002)
Young CEO                                                 0.005
                                                         (0.004)
Tenure (in years)*Non-Heir-apparent CEO                                          -0.004**
                                                                                  (0.002)
Heir-apparent CEO                                                               -0.014***
                                                                                  (0.005)
Tenure (in years)*Outsider CEO                                                                          -0.004**
                                                                                                         (0.002)
Outsider CEO                                                                                             -0.0002
                                                                                                         (0.005)
Firm Age                                                  0.001**                 0.001**                0.001**
                                                          (0.000)                 (0.000)                (0.000)
Log(Assets)                                             -0.024***               -0.024***              -0.025***
                                                          (0.004)                 (0.004)                (0.004)
Leverage                                                -0.124***               -0.124***              -0.124***
                                                          (0.018)                 (0.018)                (0.018)
Q                                                        0.008***                0.008***               0.008***
                                                          (0.002)                 (0.002)                (0.002)
Capx                                                    -0.210***               -0.208***              -0.207***
                                                          (0.039)                 (0.038)                (0.039)
Acquisition                                             -0.092***               -0.093***              -0.092***
                                                          (0.019)                 (0.018)                (0.019)
ROA                                                         0.030                   0.035                  0.030
                                                          (0.028)                 (0.025)                (0.028)
Change in NWC                                           -0.104***               -0.106***              -0.103***
                                                          (0.026)                 (0.025)                (0.026)
Tangibility                                             -0.347***               -0.347***              -0.349***
                                                          (0.024)                 (0.024)                (0.024)
CF Volatility                                              0.003*                  0.003*                 0.003*
                                                          (0.002)                 (0.002)                (0.002)
Payout Ratio                                                0.002                   0.002                  0.002
                                                          (0.002)                 (0.002)                (0.002)
Firm F.E.                                                     x                       x                      x
Observations                                               10,447                  10,642                 10,494
Adjusted R-squared                                          0.793                   0.797                  0.793
                                                          50
                 Figure 1: Average CDS Spreads at Key Events Related to CEO Turnovers

This figure plots the average CDS spreads (measured in basis points) in each event period. The sequence of events starts
from the 3 months before the departure announcement of the outgoing CEO, to the departure announcement, to the
appointment announcement of the new CEO, to his inauguration, and then 36 months after the inauguration. The CDS
spread for “within 3 months before departure” is the average CDS spread in month [-3,-1] before the departure
announcement. The turnover sample includes 284 CEO turnovers since 2001, for which the departure announcement
and the inauguration occurred in different times.



           190
           185
           180
           175
           170
           165
           160
           155
           150
           145
                 Within 3 months       Departure       Appointment       Inauguration     36 Months after
                 before Departure                                                          Inauguration




                                                          51
                          Internet Appendix for
                “How Management Risk Affects Corporate Debt”

               YIHUI PAN, TRACY YUE WANG, AND MICHAEL S. WEISBACH *




                                                  Abstract



This Internet Appendix provides supplementary materials to the paper How Management Risk Affects

Corporate Debt. The document reports two tables that we mention in the paper but do not report for brevity

and is organized as follows. Section 1 and Table IA.1 address the alternative interpretation that the decline in

CDS spreads is driven by increases in expected CEO ability over CEO tenure rather than decreases in the

uncertainty about CEO ability. The table reports results on the relation between proxies of expected CEO

ability and CEO tenure. It also contrasts the relation between CDS spreads and CEO tenure with and without

controlling for the expected CEO ability. Table IA.2 reports the relation between non-price loan terms and

CEO tenure.




*Pan is from the Department of Finance, University of Utah, email: yihui.pan@business.utah.edu. Wang is
from the Department of Finance of the Carlson School of Management, University of Minnesota, email:
wangx684@umn.edu. Weisbach is from the Department of Finance, Ohio State University, email:
weisbach@fisher.osu.edu.



                                                      52
1. Change in Perceived CEO Ability

        Theoretically, the market should update on both the expectation and uncertainty about management’s

ability. Bayesian learning implies that the market’s posterior estimate of the mean of the CEO’s ability can

either increase or decrease over time, while this estimate continually becomes more precise, so the

uncertainty about ability continually declines. Therefore, the natural interpretation of the observed decline in

spreads is about the uncertainty of CEO ability rather than its mean.

        However, if the expected ability does systematically increase over a CEO’s tenure, possibly due to

on the job learning, then this effect could lead to declining default risk as well. We note that the rise in CDS

spread at the time of CEO departures is more likely to reflect the uncertainty rather than the expectation of

the incoming management’s ability, since the identity of the new CEO has not been announced in most of

these cases. Still, to evaluate this alternative hypothesis, we construct proxies for expected CEO ability and

examine whether including those proxies subsumes the effect of CEO tenure on CDS spreads.

        We use two proxies for expected CEO ability. The first one is the firm’s return on assets (ROA),

which is earnings before interest, tax, and depreciation scaled by the total book assets. We control for

industry-year median ROA to filter out industry effects, which can be viewed as fundamentals unrelated to

management. The second proxy is the management ability measure from Demerjian, Lev, and McVay (2012),

which is based on managers’ efficiency, relative to their industry peers, in transforming corporate resources

to revenues. The correlation between the two proxies is 0.36 in our sample. Although neither variable is a

perfect measure of expected CEO ability, both are likely to be correlated with it.

        The results are reported in Table IA.1 in the internet appendix. The first two columns examine the

relation between the expected ability proxies and CEO tenure in the first three years of tenure in the sample

of long-term CEOs, and suggest that there is no significant relation between the two. Next, we compare the

estimated effect of CEO tenure on CDS spreads, controlling for Demerjian et al. measure of management

ability (Column (4)) and without (Column (3)), and find them to be very similar. Overall, these results

suggest that changing CEO ability is unlikely to explain the strong relation between firms’ CDS spreads and


                                                      53
their CEOs’ tenure. In terms of the economic magnitude, a one-standard-deviation increase (0.249) in

management ability is associated with a decrease of 16 basis points (=0.249*64.4) in CDS spread, less than

half of the decrease in CDS spreads due to the reduction in management uncertainty over the first three years

of a new CEO’s tenure.



2. Sensitivity of Non-Price Loan Terms to CEO Tenure

        Besides the loan spread, we also observe information on other non-price terms of the loan contracts

such as the loan maturity, loan size, number of lenders, whether the loan is secured or not, and the number of

total loan covenants. In Table IA.2 we examine whether these non-price loan terms also systematically

change over a CEO’s tenure. Overall, the results suggest that the main effect of managerial risk on corporate

loans is through the loan pricing. The main difference in non-price terms over CEO tenure is that bank loans

originated earlier tend to have significantly shorter maturities than those originated later.




                                                        54
                             Table IA.1: Expected CEO Ability and CEO Tenure
This table reports the changes in two ability measures over CEO tenure -- ROA and Management Ability (as in
Demerjian, Lev, and McVay (2012)). It also reports the changes in CDS spread over CEO tenure, with or without
controlling for management ability. The sample includes the first three years of tenure for CEOs who are in office for at
least three years, for firms with data on CDS spreads. “Management Ability” measures CEO’s ability, relative to their
industry peers, in transforming corporate resources to revenues. All the control variables are measured
contemporaneous to the CDS spreads. The definitions of all variables are in Appendix. Standard errors are clustered at
the firm-year level. ***, **, * denote significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
                                         (1)                (2)                          (3)                  (4)
                                        ROA          Management Ability                        CDS Spread
Tenure (in years)                       0.002              0.005
                                       (0.002)            (0.007)
Tenure (in days)                                                                     -0.032**               -0.031**
                                                                                      (0.015)                (0.015)
Management Ability                                                                                        -64.428***
                                                                                                            (24.378)
Recovery Rate                                                                      -964.090***           -963.979***
                                                                                     (151.371)             (151.300)
Credit Spread                                                                       54.137***              54.192***
                                                                                       (7.591)               (7.585)
Term Spread                                                                          -9.611**               -9.503**
                                                                                       (4.763)               (4.753)
VIX                                                                                  2.258***               2.256***
                                                                                       (0.267)               (0.267)
log(Assets)                           -0.104***            -0.174***                  -16.205                 -9.613
                                        (0.018)              (0.059)                  (29.941)              (30.135)
Leverage                                 -0.05                0.042                  122.718*               127.911*
                                        (0.045)              (0.125)                  (66.248)              (65.932)
M/B                                     0.0003               0.002*                    13.164                 14.045
                                       (0.0003)              (0.001)                   (9.476)               (9.387)
ROA                                                         0.449**                -536.001***           -458.059***
                                                             (0.196)                 (135.755)             (132.658)
Tangibility                            -0.140*               -0.339                   159.796                163.507
                                       (0.082)               (0.274)                 (120.461)             (121.571)
CF Volatility                           0.0001               -0.009                     1.754                  1.328
                                       (0.002)               (0.007)                   (7.484)               (7.448)
Payout Ratio                           -0.0001               -0.015                    -2.294                 -4.022
                                       (0.002)               (0.019)                   (5.527)               (5.785)
Industry ROA                          0.614***
                                       (0.195)
Firm-CEO and year F.E.                     x                     x                       x                     x
Observations                            1,256                   995                   214,139               214,139
Adjusted R-squared                      0.871                  0.802                   0.854                 0.854
                                                          55
                         Table IA.2: Non-Price Terms of Loan Contract over Tenure

This table reports the changes in other components of the loan contract during the first three years after CEO turnovers,
including loan maturity, loan size, number of lenders, whether the loan is secured, and the number of total loan
covenants. All CEOs in our sample stay in office for at least three years. The loan sample in this table does not
condition on the availability of information on loan spread. The definitions of all variables are in the variable definition
appendix. Standard errors are clustered at the loan level. ***, **, * denote significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels,
respectively.

                           (1)                   (2)                 (3)                    (4)                (5)
                        log(Loan                                  Number of                                 Number of
                                          log(Loan Size)                                 Secured
                        Maturity)                                  Lenders                                  Covenants

Tenure                    0.014*                -0.001              -0.297                0.011                -0.024
(in years)               (0.008)               (0.020)              (0.241)              (0.011)              (0.090)
Credit Spread             -0.001               -0.002*              -0.011                  0                   0.002
                         (0.000)               (0.001)              (0.010)              (0.000)              (0.007)
Term Spread              -0.001*                -0.001              -0.001                  0                 0.006**
                         (0.000)               (0.001)              (0.007)              (0.000)              (0.003)
Firm Age                  0.039*                -0.032              -0.387                0.015               0.176**
                         (0.022)               (0.041)              (0.375)              (0.025)              (0.081)
log(Assets)                0.008              0.513***             2.788***            -0.113***               -0.287
                         (0.022)               (0.038)              (0.493)              (0.022)              (0.222)
Leverage                  -0.104                -0.076               2.418              0.214**                -0.111
                         (0.082)               (0.165)              (1.806)              (0.089)              (0.450)
M/B                        0.001                0.007*              -0.016                0.001                -0.003
                         (0.002)               (0.004)              (0.048)              (0.002)              (0.012)
ROA                       0.332*              1.094***               2.711             -0.754***             -3.520**
                         (0.172)               (0.336)              (4.025)              (0.181)              (1.472)
Tangibility               -0.116                 0.088               5.268               -0.081                 2.045
                         (0.140)               (0.283)              (4.483)              (0.193)              (1.818)
CF Volatility             -0.002                -0.005               0.153               -0.003                 0.015
                         (0.010)               (0.018)              (0.209)              (0.008)              (0.064)
Payout Ratio              0.035*                 0.055             1.389***              -0.023               -0.481*
                         (0.021)               (0.038)              (0.449)              (0.025)              (0.259)
Performance
                        0.096***              0.286***             4.271***            -0.069***
Pricing                                                                                                       -0.135
                          (0.022)              (0.043)              (0.484)              (0.023)              (0.094)
Tranche Type,
                             x                    x                    x                    x
Loan Purpose                                                                                                      x
Firm and Year
                             x                    x                    x                    x
F.E.                                                                                                             x
Observations               4,886                5,053                5,047                3,077                 855
Adj. R-squared             0.744                0.671                0.301                0.679                0.906


                                                            56
