                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            OPTIMAL CURRENCY AREA:
                   A 20TH CENTURY IDEA FOR THE 21ST CENTURY?

                                      Joshua Aizenman

                                     Working Paper 22097
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w22097


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   March 2016




I gratefully acknowledge the discussion and comments at the March 8-9 2016 ATI-IMF seminar
on “The Future of Monetary Integration,” Mauritius, and the insightful comments of George
Tavlas. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Joshua Aizenman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Optimal Currency Area: A 20th Century Idea For the 21st Century?
Joshua Aizenman
NBER Working Paper No. 22097
March 2016, Revised March 2017
JEL No. F15,F33,F4,F41

                                          ABSTRACT

We take stock of the history of the European Monetary Union and pegged exchange-rate regimes
in recent decades. The post-Bretton Woods greater financial integration and under-regulated
financial intermediation have increased the cost of sustaining a currency area and other forms of
fixed exchange-rate regimes. Financial crises illustrated that fast-moving asymmetric financial
shocks interacting with real distortions pose a grave threat to the stability of currency areas and
fixed exchange-rate regimes. Members of a currency union with closer financial links may
accumulate asymmetric balance-sheet exposure over time, becoming more susceptible to sudden-
stop crises. In a phase of deepening financial ties, countries may end up with more correlated
business cycles. Down the road, debtor countries that rely on financial inflows to fund structural
imbalances may be exposed to devastating sudden-stop crises, subsequently reducing the
correlation of business cycles between currency area’s members, possibly ceasing the gains from
membership in a currency union. A currency union of developing countries anchored to a leading
global currency stabilizes inflation at a cost of inhibiting the use of monetary policy to deal with
real and financial shocks. Currency unions with low financial depth and low financial integration
of its members may be more stable at a cost of inhibiting the growth of sectors depending on
bank funding.


Joshua Aizenman
Economics and SIR
USC
University Park
Los Angeles, CA 90089-0043
and NBER
aizenman@usc.edu
    1. OCA and its Challenges: Overview
       The literature on Optimal Currency Area (OCA) originated more than 50 years ago by
Mundell (1961), McKinnon (1963) and Kenen (1969). What started in the 1960s as an academic
abstract discussion morphed in the 1990s into a passionate debate about the desirability and
viability of the European Monetary Union [EMU] as an OCA. The growing consensus among
economists in the 1990s was that conditions favoring keeping the national currency and
exchange-rate flexibility included a low labor mobility across borders, the absence of
supranational tax-cum-transfer mechanisms, a high degree of nominal rigidity in domestic prices,
a low degree of openness to trade, and dissimilarities in national economic structures [see Buiter
(1999)]. Accordingly, more perfect currency areas are those composed of countries where most
of these conditions do not hold. Similar considerations apply to the choice of pegging the
exchange rate to another currency. Applying the OCA criteria, prominent economists in the
1990s argued that the euro zone was a currency union among countries that did not meet OCA
conditions [see Krugman (2013), Pisani-Ferry (2013) and Gibson, Palivos and Tavlas (2014) for
updated overview and analysis of these issues]. Just before the outbreak of the euro-area crisis,
Jonung and Drea (2010) celebrated the success of the Eurozone despite its critics.

       Influential papers by Frankel and Rose (1997, 1999) provided a more optimistic view on
the stability of currency areas, noting the endogeneity of OCA criteria. A country's suitability for
entry into a currency union depends on the intensity of trade with other potential members of the
union and the extent to which domestic business cycles are correlated with those of the other
countries. Using 30 years of data for 20 industrialized countries, they uncovered strong empirical
findings: countries with closer trade links tend to have more tightly correlated business cycles.
The authors concluded that countries are more likely to satisfy the criteria for entry into a
currency union after taking steps toward economic integration rather than before. This provided
an optimistic avenue for the viability of “moving closer towards a more perfect union.”1



1
  Glick and Rose (2002) also supported this argument, finding a large impact on the growth of
trade of a currency union among its members. Revisiting this issue, Glick and Rose (2015) found
a more modest impact of the EMU on trade among its members and noted that switches and
reversals across methodologies do not make allowances for any bold statements. Rose (2017)
provides an update of the empirical evidence.

                                                  2
        This paper takes stock of the history of the euro zone and pegged exchange-rate regimes
in recent decades, pointing out the need to reshape OCA criteria into the 21th century. While the
contributions of the 1960s remain relevant, they were written during the Bretton Woods system
when financial integration among countries and private financial flows were low and banks were
heavily regulated. Thus, the discussion in the 1960s overlooked possible challenges to the
stability of OCA when countries are financially integrated, cross-border financial flows are free
from impediments, financial intermediation is deregulated, and there is growing depth of the
“shadow banking” that competes with Main Street banks. This paper points out that greater
financial integration and under-regulated financial intermediation increase the cost of joining a
currency area as well as adopting other forms of fixed-exchange rate [e.g., currency board,
dollarization, and the like].

        A key lesson of the euro zone crisis and the Global Financial Crisis (GFC) of 2008–2009
is that fast-moving asymmetric financial shocks interacting with real distortions pose a grave
threat to the stability of currency unions. Currency unions that may survive differential growth
trends in the absence of financial integration among its members may find that sudden stops of
financial flows sharply reduce the growth of indebted members that fund imbalances by financial
inflows, ending with banking and sovereign crises. Thus, the odds of a successful currency area
depend on the viability of effective institutions and policies dealing with adjustment to
asymmetric financial and real shocks that impact its members. In the absence of these
arrangements, adverse asymmetric-financial shocks may magnify real distortions into destructive
banking, sovereign, and private debt crises, thus destabilizing currency unions. Our discussion
suggests that the net benefits of joining a currency area change over time. What may have
seemed like a viable and successful currency union destined to “live together happily ever after”
(the first euro decade) may have turned into a bad union with strong centrifugal forces at times of
asymmetric shocks that test the union’s viability (the second euro decade). Tighter unions may
offer enough pooling mechanisms that provide sufficient insurance to increase the stability of a
union. Achieving a tighter union, however, may require overcoming coordination problems, a
move toward a banking union, possible union-wide deposit insurance backed by union-wide
backstop mechanisms, and effective institutions to deal with the resultant moral hazard
challenges [De Grauwe (2011), Krugman (2012), Aizenman (2015)].



                                                 3
       A currency union of developing countries anchored to a global stable currency provides a
nominal anchor, thus preventing runaway inflation [see the experience of the CFA franc].
However, such a currency union also implies the inability to use monetary policy to deal with a
real and financial crisis impacting union members as well with external shocks that change the
exchange rates between global currencies. Unions with low financial depth and low financial
member integration may face complex dynamic challenges. Limited finance may reduce the
exposure to asymmetric financial shocks threatening the stability of a currency union at a cost of
inhibiting the growth of sectors that depend on external funding. Similar challenges are posed to
the stability of fixed-exchange rate regimes at times of deeper financial integration [e.g.,
currency boards, dollarization, and the like].

   2. Recent experience with currency areas and fixed-exchange rates regimes:
      challenged by volatility and financial shocks


       A manifestation of the challenges posed by financial integration to the stability of fixed-
exchange rate regimes goes back to the 1990s. Emerging markets that liberalized their financial
systems in the early 1990s under a fixed exchange rate experienced a rise in financial inflows
that correlated with deteriorating current account deficits, real appreciation, and a heating
economy. The resultant balance-sheet exposures were below the radar screens of markets and
policymakers, especially when such exposures were the outcome of private borrowing. This
happy-go-lucky process lasted several years until an abrupt stop of financial inflows, which was
followed by capital flight crises (Calvo and Reinhart 1999). The experience of Mexico in the
Tequila crisis of 1994–1995, Korea and several East Asian countries in the East Asian 1997–
1998 crisis, Brazil and Russia during 1998, and Argentina in 2001 among others, followed a
common pattern. The sudden stop of financial flows and capital flight triggered a balance of
payment crisis, a sharp depreciation, switches to a flexible exchange rate coupled often with
domestic banking crises and an IMF-type stabilization program.

       The emerging-market economic crises of the 1990s are manifestations of Mundell’s
trilemma: arbitrage forces imply that greater financial openness and proactive monetary policy
are incompatible with a fixed-exchange rate regime. We summarize these trends by tracking
each country’s three “trilemma policy goals indexes” on zero-to-one scales -- monetary
independence, exchange rate stability, and financial integration. For each of these indexes,


                                                  4
higher value indicates getting closer to the corresponding trilemma policy goal. Figure 1 shows
the paths of the average trilemma indexes for the group of emerging markets [EMG].




    Figure 1, Emerging Markets Trilemma Configuration, Monetary Independence [Mon. Indep.],
      Exchange Rate Stability [Excr. Stab.] and Financial Integration [KAOPEN], 1970-2014 2


         Towards the end of the Bretton Woods era, emerging markets exhibited a high degree of
exchange rate stability, an intermediate degree of monetary independence, and a low degree of
financial integration [0.9, 0.5, 0.3 in a scale of zero to one in 1970, respectively, see Figure 1].
By 2000, after the 1990s wave of financial liberalizations and sudden stop financial crises,
emerging markets moved toward the middle ground of the trilemma configuration – reflected by
controlled financial openness and exchange rate flexibility as well as proactive monetary policy



2
  Aizenman, Chinn, and Ito (2010) quantified the three-trilemma indexes for more than 170
countries during recent decades. The monetary independence index depends negatively on the
correlation of a country’s interest rates with the base country’s interest rate, the exchange rate
stability index depends negatively on exchange rate volatility, and the degree of financial
integration is the Chinn-Ito capital controls index. For further details, see
http://web.pdx.edu/~ito/trilemma_indexes.htm.


                                                   5
[values of around 0.5 in a scale of 0 to 1 for the three trilemma indexes in 2000, Figure 1].
Aizenman, Chinn and Ito (2010, 2011) tested and validated a continuous version of Mundell’s
Trilemma – a rise in one trilemma variable results in a drop of a linear weighted sum of the other
two. Furthermore, greater exchange rate stability has been associated with greater output
volatility, and the convergence of emerging market economics to the middle ground of the
trilemma has been associated with lower output volatility. Remarkably, the Trilemma “middle
ground configuration” of Emerging Markets passed the test of time so far, and probably helped
Emerging Markets’ adjustment to the Global Financial Crisis [Aizenman and Pinto (2013)].

       The common 1990s view was that these sudden-stop crises were reflective of problematic
institutions—possible crony capitalism in maturing middle income countries—with no relevance
to the formation of common currency areas among more advanced economies. It took another
decade to show that the challenges associated with financial globalization are universal. The
short history of the euro crisis vividly illustrated the concern that asymmetric financial shocks
posed grave risks to common currency areas with limited depths of union-wide banking and
fiscal arrangements. Observers viewed the successful convergence of most EU countries toward
meeting the Maastricht treaty criteria by 1999, and the subsequent lunching of the euro and its
rapid acceptance as a viable currency as steppingstones toward a stable and prosperous Europe.
This was vividly reflected by the rapidly declining sovereign spreads of the Eurozone members.
Intriguingly, at times of growing current account deficits in GIIPS (Greece, Ireland, Italy,
Portugal, and Spain), GIIPS bond interest rates dramatically converged during the 1990s to the
German rate (see Figures 2 and 3). By 2010, the founding fathers of the eurozone took these
developments as evidence dispelling the concerns of prominent economists regarding the sub-
optimality of the eurozone [Jonung and Drea (2010)]. If only…




                                                 6
                     Figure 2: GIIPS and German Government Bond Rates
                    Source: ECB, Bloomberg, http://iuwest.wordpress.com/




             Figure 3 Germany and GIIPS current account, % of GDP, 1999–2012
                              Source: IMF WEO, April 2014


       Similar to the experience of emerging markets that liberalized financial systems in the
1990s under a fixed exchange rate, the increasing costs of the growing balance-sheet exposures
associated with large external GIIPS borrowing were mostly overlooked by markets and
policymakers until an abrupt stop that was followed by capital flight crises (Aizenman, 2015).
                                                7
These dynamics reflected a fundamental problem with the pricing of sovereign risk in which the
private sector, as the “interest rate taker,” overlooks the growing marginal impact of borrowing
on sovereign risk, thus inducing an externality that leads to over-borrowing. This externality was
probably magnified by the economic strength of the eurozone core and by moral hazard—the
presumption that the growing costs of unwinding the euro would induce bailouts down the road.
Chances are that the elusive “Great Moderation” did not help by masking the growing tail risks
in the OECD countries. The countries joining the eurozone experienced a buoyant decade of
growing optimism associated with their deepening financial integration and convergence to low
inflation before a sudden stop and capital flight crisis hit the GIIPS and morphed into the
eurozone crisis, raising serious doubts about the future viability of the euro project as well as the
EU.

       The euro crisis revealed the inherent fragility associated with the position of a small
economy in the common currency area as articulated by De Grauwe (2011): “When entering a
monetary union, member countries change the nature of their sovereign debt in a fundamental
way; i.e. they cease to have control over the currency in which their debt is issued. As a result,
financial markets can force these countries’ sovereigns into default. In this sense, member
countries of a monetary union are downgraded to the status of emerging economies. This makes
the monetary union fragile and vulnerable to changing market sentiments. It also makes it
possible that self-fulfilling multiple equilibria arise.” Specifically, the absence of a credible
deposit-insurance scheme supported by the central bank or the federal center of a currency union
implies that heightened sovereign spreads of a member country may put a self-fulfilling run in
motion. This applies especially in countries with high bank-sovereign interdependence in which
private banks hold large shares of sovereign debt [as was the case in the eurozone]. In the
absence of a credible backstop scheme, heightened sovereign spreads may put a run in motion on
the banking system of the affected country/ies.3
       Furthermore, as many insurance companies across the eurozone invested in GIIPS
sovereign debt, higher sovereign spreads may have destabilized the insurance market and the



3
  Note that this argument holds only if the central bank of the country in question is credible and
the sovereign issues debt that is denominated in the local currency. Clearly, these conditions
would not hold for many countries, including those that experienced crises in the Eurozone.

                                                   8
entire shadow eurozone banking system. These spillovers led to adverse externalities that further
destabilized the system and imposed major challenges on regulators. After a decade of large
external borrowing by the GIIPS, as well as co-financing booming real estate and consumption
growth, the sudden stop of financial inflows forced an abrupt end to the earlier boom. The
private sector was forced into massive deleveraging, a sharp contraction in demand associated
with shrinking current account deficits, collapsing real estate valuation, and ultimately bailouts
by the “troika”—the EC, ECB, and the IMF. Losses of the private banking system were
frequently socialized, thus massively increasing the public debt/GDP ratio.
       In similar circumstances, countries with a national currency adjust by large depreciations,
facilitating a painful but fast adjustment and thereby mitigating the recessionary effects of
banking crises [see the experience of the U.K. and Iceland during and after the GFC, or the
earlier experience of Mexico from 1995 to 1998, and Korea from 1997 to 2000]. In contrast, the
GIIPS found that the rapid rise of their sovereign spreads was magnified by nominal wage and
price rigidities into a deeper real crisis that induced deflationary dynamics, a rapid increase of
unemployment, and an out-migration of the more movable parts of their labor force, namely, the
better educated and younger workers. In line with Fisher’s debt deflation dynamics, the slow
internal depreciation magnified the debt overhang and deepened the recession. These dynamics
vividly illustrated the challenges facing countries in a currency union with a weak center in the
presence of financial integration, under-regulated financial intermediation, and financial flows.
       A lesson from the eurozone crisis is that in a shallow currency union with limited union-
wide backstop institutions, adverse asymmetric financial shock amplifies existing financial and
real distortions. This process may rapidly accelerate into a debt and banking crises in the affected
countries, triggering a much deeper recession than one experienced under similar financial shock
by a country with a stand-alone currency.4 The contrast between the U.K. and Spain [De Grauwe
(2011)], or Poland and Spain (see Figure 4) vividly illustrates the extra burden associated with
being in the eurozone. The figure documents the remarkable resilience of Poland. Poland
managed a steady and positive real GDP growth rate under a flexible exchange rate during the



4
  Among the fundamental factors of each of the individual crisis countries in the Eurozone was
the build-up of external and internal debts -- whether public debt, or private debt. In these
circumstances, the straight-jacket imposed by the Eurozone membership precludes country
specific depreciations, magnifying recessionary forces during the adjustment.
                                                  9
                                                                         Real GDP Growth Rates
               8.0

               6.0

               4.0

               2.0

               0.0




                                                                                                   2004-01-01
                     1998-01-01

                                  1999-01-01

                                               2000-01-01

                                                            2001-01-01

                                                                         2002-01-01

                                                                                      2003-01-01



                                                                                                                2005-01-01

                                                                                                                             2006-01-01

                                                                                                                                          2007-01-01

                                                                                                                                                       2008-01-01

                                                                                                                                                                    2009-01-01

                                                                                                                                                                                  2010-01-01

                                                                                                                                                                                               2011-01-01

                                                                                                                                                                                                            2012-01-01

                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2013-01-01

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2014-01-01
              -2.0

              -4.0

              -6.0

                                                                                      Poland                                         Spain                                       UK


Figure 4: Real GDP Growth rates (%), 1998-2013, Poland, Spain, UK. Date Source: FRED


2000s, and thus experienced a much milder exposure to the global financial crisis and the
eurozone crisis than Spain.5 Note also the sharp V-shape recovery of the U.K. during the GFC
which then resumed positive growth in less than two years. In contrast, it took Spain five years to
resume positive, though anemic, growth.6 The rise in the sovereign spread facing Spain, and the


5
  The GDP/capital growth rate decline during the GFC [2006 to 2008] was about 4% in Poland,
which was half of the decline experienced by Germany and Spain. Remarkably, the public
debt/GDP of Poland increased mildly from 45% in 2007 to 57% in 2013, while that of Spain
almost tripled during that period, rising from 37% to 94%. The Zloty/Euro rate depreciated by
44% during the GFC [rising from 3.21 zloty/euro in 6/30/2008 to 4.64 zloty/euro in 2/1/2009],
thus mitigating the recessionary impact of the crisis. These considerations are reflected in the
attitude of Beata Szydlo, the new Polish Premier elected in 2015, who described the euro as a
bad idea that would make Poland a “second Greece.” [Financial Times, “ECB alarmed at UK
push to rebrand Union” 12/5/2015].

6
 The U.K.’s expansionary monetary policy induced the depreciation of the British pound by a
third of its value (from 2.1 dollar/pound in Nov. 7, 2007, to 1.38 dollar/pound in January 22,
2009), thus facilitating a faster recovery. In contrast, Spain stagnated. The sharp increase in the
sovereign spread of Spain in 2010 and 2011 and its stagnating growth implied that, despite
entering the crisis with lower public debt/GDP than the U.K., Spain resumed anemic growth in
2014 with a sizably larger public debt/GDP than the U.K.
                                                                                                                         10
accumulation of non-preforming loans following the burst of the construction bubble, resulted in
a banking crisis. By June 2012, the banking crisis induced Madrid to request international aid for
its banks. Although the ECB’s three-year Long Term Refinancing Operation (LTRO) provided
significant temporary relief, it also increased the interconnectedness between 12 Spanish banks
and the sovereign [IMF Country Report No. 12/137]. This de-facto bailout prevented the
collapse of Spain’s banking system, however, it did not avert the deepening recession.
   3. Concluding remarks -- OCA: proceed with caution

       Arguably, the Global Financial Crisis (GFC) illustrated that the endogeneity of the OCA
is time dependent and differs between trade and financial integration. Common currency area
members with close financial links may accumulate asymmetric balance-sheet exposure over
time, thus becoming more susceptible to sudden-stop crises. This may generate asymmetric
dynamic patterns in currency unions—in the phase of deepening financial ties, countries may end
up with more correlated business cycles and deeper trade among its members. Once bad shocks
strike and lead to capital flight from indebted countries, debtor countries that rely on financial
inflows to fund structural imbalances may be exposed to devastating sudden-stop crises that
reduce the correlation of business cycles between debtors and creditors union’s members
countries. In a shallow currency union, debtors countries may find that fast-moving financial
crises magnify the cost of real distortions, reversing the earlier gains associated with joining the
currency union to costly protracted recessions associated with sovereign debt, public debt, and
banking crises. The asymmetry between the impacts of deeper trade versus deeper financial
integration on the stability of a currency union is rooted in the difference between temporal trade
[export and imports of goods] versus inter-temporal trade [debt and portfolio flows]. Unlike
commercial trade, inter-temporal trade of financial assets may lead to growing exposure to
abrupt reversal of flows over time, thus testing the viability of a shallow currency area.

       The net benefits of joining a currency area change over time. What seemed a viable and
successful union may turn into a bad union with strong centrifugal forces at times of asymmetric
shocks, thus testing the viability of the union. Tighter currency unions may provide enough
pooling mechanisms to provide insurance and increase the stability of a union. However,
achieving a tighter union may require moving towards banking unions, possible union-wide
deposit insurance backed by union-wide fiscal mechanisms, and effective institutions dealing
with the resultant moral hazard challenges. Dealing properly with these issues may require

                                                 11
overcoming coordination failures and ‘tragedy of the common’ issues. It also may require
leadership of the union core [Germany in the EMU?] and a costly learning by doing associated
with experimenting various forms of backstop-mechanism [Aizenman (2015)].

       A union of developing countries anchored to a global stable currency prevents runaway
inflation [e.g., the CFA franc]. However, it also implies the inability to use monetary policy to
deal with asymmetric real and financial shocks impacting the union (e.g., in terms of trade
shocks affecting countries in differential ways) as well as with external shocks that change the
exchange rates between global currencies (e.g., the appreciation or depreciation of the dollar
against most other global currencies). Currency unions with low financial depth and low
financial integration among its members may face complex dynamic challenges. Limited finance
may reduce the exposure to asymmetric financial shocks, thereby stabilizing a currency union, at
a cost of inhibiting the growth of sectors that depend on external funding. A currency union
member country blessed with exportable commodities may find that union membership inhibits
diversification toward manufacturing and magnifies the impact of “Dutch Disease” concerns
over time, thus hindering the adjustment to terms of trade shocks. Similar concerns apply to
other versions of fixed exchange rates [e.g., currency board, dollarization, and the like].7




7
 Kazakhstan’s fixed exchange rate regime was one of the latest victims of the declining
commodity prices, moving to a floating exchange rate in August 2015. Plummeting oil prices
and devaluations by Russia and China increased exponentially the cost of defending the currency
against the dollar. Azerbaijan followed Kazakhstan in moving to a floating currency in
December 2015, after a devaluation of about 25% in February 2015. In both cases, growing
exchange market pressure and declining international reserves induced exchange rate regime
changes.


                                                 12
                                          References
Aizenman, Joshua, Menzie D. Chinn, and Hiro Ito. "The emerging global financial architecture:
     Tracing and evaluating new patterns of the trilemma configuration." Journal of
     International Money and Finance 29.4 (2010): 615-641.

__________________ "Surfing the waves of globalization: Asia and financial globalization in
     the context of the trilemma," Journal of the Japanese and International Economies, 25.33
     (2011): 290-320, September.

Aizenman, Joshua, and Brian Pinto. "Managing Financial Integration and Capital Mobility—
     Policy lessons from the past two decades." Review of International Economics 21.4 (2013):
     636-653.

Aizenman, Joshua, Michael Hutchison, and Yothin Jinjarak. "What is the risk of European
     sovereign debt defaults? Fiscal space, CDS spreads and market pricing of risk." Journal of
     International Money and Finance 34 (2013): 37-59.

Aizenman, Joshua. "The Eurocrisis: Muddling through, or on the Way to a More Perfect Euro
     Union." Comparative Economic Studies (2015): 57, 205–221.

Buiter, Willem “The EMU and the NAMU: What is the Case for North American Monetary
     Union?” Canadian Public Policy 25 (1999): 285–305.

Calvo, Guillermo A., and Carmen M. Reinhart. "When capital inflows come to a sudden stop:
     consequences and policy options." (1999).

De Grauwe, Paul, "The Governance of a Fragile Eurozone," (2011), CEPS Working Documents,
     May.

Frankel, Jeffrey A., and Andrew K. Rose. "Is EMU more justifiable ex post than ex
     ante?" European Economic Review 41, no. 3 (1997): 753-760.

Frankel, Jeffrey A., and Andrew K. Rose. "The endogenity of the optimum currency area
     criteria." The Economic Journal 108.449 (1998): 1009-1025.

Gibson, Heather D., Theodore Palivos, and George S. Tavlas. "The crisis in the Euro area: an
     analytic overview." Journal of Macroeconomics 39 (2014): 233-239.


                                               13
Glick, Reuven and Andrew K. Rose. “Currency Unions and Trade: A Post-EMU Mea Culpa”,
     (2015), CEPR Discussion Paper 10615.

Glick, Reuven, and Andrew K. Rose. "Does a currency union affect trade? The time-series
     evidence." European Economic Review 46, no. 6 (2002): 1125-1151.

Jonung, Lars, and Eoin Drea. "It can’t happen, it’s a bad idea, it won’t last: US economists on the
     EMU and the Euro, 1989-2002." Econ Journal Watch7.1 (2010): 4-52.

Kenen, Peter. “The Theory of Optimum Currency Areas: An Eclectic View” in Mundell R. and
     Swoboda A. (eds.) Monetary Problems in the International Economy, (1969), University of
     Chicago Press, Chicago.
Krugman, Paul. "Revenge of the optimum currency area." NBER Macroeconomics Annual 27,
     no. 1 (2012): 439-448.

McKinnon Ronald “Optimum Currency Areas.” American Economic Review (1963) 53:717–25.
Mundell, Robert “A Theory of Optimum Currency Areas.” American Economic Review 51
     (1961): 657–75.

Pisani-Ferry, Jean. "The known unknowns and unknown unknowns of European Monetary
     Union." Journal of International Money and Finance 34 (2013): 6-14.

Rose, Andrew K., (2017), “Why do Estimates of the EMU Effect on Trade Vary so
     Much?” Open Economies Review, 28, issue 1, (2017): 1-18.




                                                14
