                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      CAN TRACKING RAISE THE TEST SCORES OF HIGH-ABILITY MINORITY
                              STUDENTS?

                                         David Card
                                        Laura Giuliano

                                     Working Paper 22104
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w22104


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2016




We are extremely grateful to Cynthia Park, Jacalyn Schulman and Donna Turner for their
assistance in accessing and interpreting the data used in this study, and to Sydnee Caldwell,
Alessandra Fenizia, Yosub Jung, Hedvig Horvath, Attila Lindner, Carl Nadler and Kevin Todd
for outstanding research assistance. We also thank Kelly Bedard, Carlos Dobkin, Jesse Rothstein,
Enrico Moretti, Chris Walters, and seminar participants at UC Berkeley, UC Riverside, UC Santa
Barbara, UMass Amherst, U. Virginia and the NBER Summer Institute for helpful discussions
and suggestions. The research reported here was supported by the Institute of Education
Sciences, U.S. Department of Education, through Grant R305D110019 to the National Bureau of
Economic Research. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research or the U.S. Department of
Education.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by David Card and Laura Giuliano. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Can Tracking Raise the Test Scores of High-Ability Minority Students?
David Card and Laura Giuliano
NBER Working Paper No. 22104
March 2016
JEL No. I21

                                           ABSTRACT

We study the impacts of a tracking program in a large urban school district that establishes
separate “gifted/high achiever” (GHA) classrooms for fourth and fifth graders whenever there is
at least one gifted student in a school-wide cohort. Since most schools have only a handful of
gifted students per cohort, the majority of seats are filled by high achievers ranked by their scores
in the previous year’s statewide tests. We use a rank-based regression discontinuity design,
together with between-cohort comparisons of students at schools with small numbers of gifted
children per cohort, to evaluate the effects of the tracking program. We find that participation in
a GHA class leads to significant achievement gains for non-gifted participants, concentrated
among black and Hispanic students, who gain 0.5 standard deviation units in fourth grade reading
and math scores, with persistent effects to at least sixth grade. Importantly, we find no evidence
of spillovers on non-participants. We also investigate a variety of channels that can explain these
effects, including teacher quality and peer effects, but conclude that these features explain only a
small fraction (10%) of the test score gains of minority participants in GHA classes. Instead we
attribute the effects to a combination of factors like teacher expectations and negative peer
pressure that lead high-ability minority students to under-perform in regular classes but are
reduced in a GHA classroom environment.


David Card
Department of Economics
549 Evans Hall, #3880
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
card@econ.berkeley.edu

Laura Giuliano
Department of Economics
University of Miami
P.O. Box 248126
Coral Gables, FL 33124-6550
l.giuliano@miami.edu
         The small fraction of minority students who score in the top percentiles of

college entry tests poses a challenge to the U.S. education system (see e.g., Bowen and

Bok 1998). Although significant test score gaps have already emerged by age five (Fryer

and Levitt 2006), recent studies show that racial disparities in the upper tail continue to

widen as students progress through school (Hanushek and Rivkin 2009; Clotfelter et al.

2009). At the same time, blacks and Hispanics are significantly under‐represented in

advanced academic programs at all levels of K‐12 education (US Department of

Education 2014). These patterns raise the question: is the low fraction of high‐

performing minorities at the end of high school due in part to the failure to identify and

adequately serve minority students with high learning ability?

         One approach for helping high‐ability students is tracking – assigning students to

different classes based on past achievement (see e.g., Slavin 1987).1 Despite the

widespread use of within‐school tracking in the U.S. (e.g., Dieterle et al. 2015), there is

no clear consensus in the literature on whether tracking leads to significant

achievement gains (Betts 2011).2 Moreover, in the case of minority students, a

particular concern is that any gains for students in upper track classes may be offset by


1
  Tracking can take various forms: between‐school; within‐school between classes; and within classes
(also known as ability grouping). For simplicity we use the term "tracking" in this paper to refer to within‐
school, between‐class tracking.
2
  As noted by Betts (2011), many studies ‐‐ particularly those using U.S. data ‐‐ rely on observational
designs that are easily criticized. Two recent non‐U.S. studies (Duflo, Dupas and Kremer 2011;
Vardardottir 2013) use more rigorous designs and find positive effects on upper‐tracked students. In a
related literature on tracking between high schools, a series of recent, carefully‐designed studies yield
mixed results. Several non‐U.S. studies find positive effects of gaining admission to schools with higher
achievement (e.g., Jackson 2010; Pop‐Eleches and Urquiola 2013), while two U.S. studies find negligible
impacts (Abdulkadiroglu et al. 2014; Dobbie and Fryer 2014).




                                                      1
losses for students in lower track classes, where most black and Hispanic children are

placed (Oakes 1985). While some older studies suggested that tracking programs harm

lower‐tracked students, Betts (2011) concludes that the effects in more recent studies

are small. Indeed, the most rigorously designed recent study ‐‐ a randomized study of

first graders in Kenya (Duflo et al. 2011) ‐‐ suggests that tracking benefits students in

upper and lower tracks. Whether this finding generalizes to other settings, however, is

still unclear.

        In this paper we present new evidence on the efficacy of selective tracking for

high achieving students, using data from a unique initiative in one of the nation's largest

school Districts (“the District”). In 2004 the District began requiring schools to establish

separate classrooms for any fourth or fifth grade gifted students. Crucially, the extra

seats in each class were allocated to non‐gifted students in the same school who scored

highest in statewide achievement tests in the previous year – a group known as high‐

achievers. Since most schools have only a handful of gifted students per grade, the

resulting “gifted/high achieving” (GHA) classes are largely populated by non‐gifted high‐

achievers, and function as upper track classes for students selected on the basis of past

achievement. Moreover, because GHA participants are drawn from the same school,

and schools in the District are highly segregated by race and socioeconomic class, the

program serves many low‐income and minority students who typically would be




                                              2
excluded from gifted and advanced academic programs.3

         We evaluate the effects of the District’s tracking program on the non‐gifted

“high achievers” in two complementary ways.4 First, we use the eligibility rules for GHA

classes to construct regression discontinuity (RD) estimates of the effect of participating

in a fourth‐grade GHA class relative to a regular class. While the RD estimates are highly

credible, their interpretation hinges on whether students who are left behind in regular

classes are affected by the presence of a GHA class. Our second approach directly

addresses this issue using a between‐school/cohort design that compares students in

fourth‐grade cohorts where there were no gifted children (and no GHA class) to

students in other cohorts with between 1 and 4 gifted students (and hence a GHA class

with about 20 high achievers). By focusing on students in different rank groups (e.g., 1‐

20, or 25‐44) we can identify both the direct effects of participating in GHA classes and

potential spillover effects on non‐participants.

         We reach two main conclusions. First, we find that placement in a fourth‐grade

GHA class has significant positive effects on the reading and math scores of high


3
  Minorities tend to be excluded from advanced programs for several reasons: the use of IQ cutoffs,
absolute admission criteria, competition across schools rather than within schools, the lack of programs in
many low‐performing schools, and the reliance on parent and teacher referrals (Donovan and Cross 2002;
Card and Giuliano 2014, 2015). In the District, for example, Blacks and Hispanics made up 58 percent of all
fourth graders in 2009‐2012, but only 40 percent of gifted fourth graders (despite a special program that
used universal screening to boost minority referrals). However, because of the GHA program, minority
representation in fourth grade GHA classrooms was 50 percent.
4
  We study the program’s impact on gifted participants in Card and Giuliano (2014). Using an IQ‐based RD
design, we find no gains to students who are marginally eligible to be classified as gifted. Bui et al. (2011)
also find no effects on test scores of gifted and talented programs in another large school district. Dottor
(2013), however, finds a significant effect on post‐secondary graduation from participation in the gifted
and talented program operated in San Diego public schools.


                                                      3
achievers, with the gains concentrated among black and Hispanic students. Treatment‐

on‐the‐treated estimates for minority students are in the range of 0.5 standard

deviation units – comparable to the impacts of "best practice" charter schools (Angrist

et al. 2013). The effects for white students, by comparison, are small and insignificant in

all our specifications. Importantly, the minority impacts persist to at least sixth grade.

Second, we find no evidence of either positive or negative spillover effects on other

students in the same school/grade cohort, including those who narrowly miss the cutoff

for admission to the GHA class.

       The literature suggests a number of channels through which tracking could affect

student achievement, including teacher quality, peer composition, and the “match”

between student ability and the level of instruction (see e.g., Betts 2011; Duflo, et al.

2011). Since white and minority GHA participants experience very similar changes in

teachers and classroom peers, however, the striking absence of any effect on white

students suggests that these standard channels are unlikely to explain the large and

persistent effects of GHA participation for minorities. This conclusion is confirmed by a

direct examination of the effects of changes in teacher quality and average peer

characteristics associated with moving from a regular class to a GHA class. Although we

find that teacher value added has a large impact on test scores, we show that there is no

discontinuity in teacher quality between GHA and non‐GHA classes for either whites or

minorities. Average peer characteristics like lagged test scores and the fraction of

females change significantly between regular and GHA classes but we find that the



                                              4
impacts of these characteristics are relatively small for both whites and minorities, and

explain only a small fraction of the achievement gains experienced by minority students

in GHA classes. The absence of large effects from these peer characteristics is also

consistent with our finding of no spillover effects on non‐GHA participants.

       Instead, we hypothesize that higher‐ability minority students face obstacles in

the regular classroom environment that cause them to underperform relative to their

potential, and that some of these obstacles – including low teacher expectations and

negative peer pressure – are reduced or eliminated in a GHA class. We show that

minority students have lower achievement scores than white students with the same

cognitive ability, and that placement in a GHA class effectively closes this minority

under‐achievement gap. A mediating role for teacher expectations is consistent with

evidence that shows teachers systematically under‐refer black and Hispanic students for

the District's gifted program (Card and Giuliano 2015). Further, an analysis of unexcused

absences and suspensions suggests that the impacts of GHA placement are partly

mediated through changes in student behavior and reflect a more supportive

environment for high achieving minority students.



I. Background, Research Design, and Analysis Samples

a. Background

       In 2004 the District introduced a new policy requiring schools to offer separate

classrooms for fourth or fifth grade if there was at least one gifted student in the school.




                                             5
Because of the strict IQ thresholds for gifted status imposed by state law, a typical

elementary school in the District had only 5 or 6 gifted children per grade, with even

fewer at the schools in poor neighborhoods.5 Two features of the policy, however,

meant that it effectively created a broader, within‐school tracking program. First, the

classes were required to be the same size as the regular classes for that grade (20‐24

students). And second, any open seats in the classes were to be filled by non‐gifted

students at the school with the highest scores on the previous year’s standardized tests

– i.e., the high achievers that are the focus of this paper.

         Figure 1 shows the distribution of fourth‐grade school/cohorts in the District

grouped by the number of gifted children in the cohort. We also superimpose the

fractions of GHA participants who are gifted or high achievers, cross classified by

minority status. Schools with relatively few gifted students per cohort (on the left side of

the graph) are mainly located in poor neighborhoods; their GHA classes are mostly filled

by minority (i.e. black or Hispanic) high achievers.6 Schools with more gifted students

per cohort (on the right side) are typically located in richer neighborhoods and have

more white students in GHA classes. Even at these schools, however, there are many

high achievers in GHA classes because the schools often set up two GHA classrooms.

         GHA teachers are drawn from the regular teaching staff: about 70% are observed


5
  State law requires regular students to have an IQ score of 130 or higher to be eligible for gifted status (2
standard deviations above the national mean). A lower 116 point threshold applies to English Language
Learners and participants in the federal free and reduced price lunch program.
6
  We henceforth use the term “minority” to refer to students who are black or Hispanic; Asians and other
non‐white minorities make up less than 6 percent of students in the District.


                                                      6
teaching a regular (i.e., non‐GHA) fourth‐grade class at some point in our sample period.

GHA teachers must complete a set of five courses on gifted education, but they receive

no extra salary.7 Students in GHA classes are responsible for mastering the same

statewide curriculum as those in regular classes, and are evaluated using the same

statewide tests. Accordingly, GHA classes also use the same textbooks as regular

classes, and are responsible for covering the same amount of the textbook in a school

year. Teachers in both GHA and regular classes are free to divide their class into

subject‐specific ability groups and often do so.

         The main difference between GHA and regular classes, interviews and policy

documents suggest, is that teachers in GHA classes have greater flexibility regarding the

pace of instruction and curricular enhancement.8 Because state policy requires that

gifted students in the classroom receive differentiated instruction, GHA teachers are

encouraged to cover the standard curriculum at a faster pace and to use the extra time

to explore topics in depth or for other curricular enrichment. While there is no

systematic information on the differences in pacing or enrichment, it is important to

note that both the rate of pacing and the nature of enrichment activities are left to the

discretion of GHA teachers and that they vary widely across teachers.



7
  The courses are also required for gifted endorsement by the state and are offered on line by the District.
These courses focus on issues associated with teaching gifted students, though as discussed in Section IV,
they may also have some impact on instruction for minority high achievers.
8
  Our description of the GHA program is based on state and District policy documents, discussions with
the District’s program director and two gifted coordinators, and on interviews with 30 teachers at 10
schools across the District. All 30 teachers had significant experience teaching both GHA and regular
classes. The least experienced had taught for two years in GHA classes and six years total.


                                                     7
b. Causal Mechanisms and Research Design

         Previous research on tracking programs (Betts, 2011) and the determinants of

student achievement (e.g., Betts, Zao and Rice 2003; Rivkin, Hanushek and Kain 2005)

suggests there are multiple channels through which GHA classes could affect student

achievement. One channel is teacher quality: if more effective teachers are assigned to

GHA classes, students will make bigger achievement gains in these classes.

         A second channel is through the "match" between students' prior knowledge or

ability and the level of instruction (Duflo et al. 2011). If teachers choose a level of

instruction appropriate for the middle of their class, the median ability student in a GHA

class may learn faster than she would in a regular classroom. 9 For marginally eligible

students, however, there is a risk of mismatch if the GHA teacher aims too high.10

Lower‐ability students may also benefit from improved matching when a GHA class is

established, though in our setting any such effect is limited by the small share of

students moved to GHA classes (20% in a typical school with 5 fourth‐grade classes).

         A third channel is through peer characteristics. A standard assumption is that

students are positively influenced by the mean ability of their classmates (e.g.,

Sacerdote 2011). In this case the establishment of a GHA classroom would be expected



9
  The choice of what students to target in a given class is endogenous, and could be affected by
institutional pressures, making precise predictions difficult in the absence of information on the target
levels actually used by teachers. Another factor is ability grouping, which is widely used in both regular
and GHA classes in the District, and arguably improves the match between teaching levels and student
abilities even in heterogeneous classes.
10
   Such concerns are often expressed in studies of programs to expand minority representation in elite
universities (e.g., Arcidiacono et al., 2012).


                                                     8
to raise the scores of higher‐achieving students (who are now grouped together) and

lower the scores of those who remain in regular classes. Other changes in peer

composition could produce similar effects. Such changes include a reduced presence of

disruptive students (Lazear 2001; Carrell and Hoekstra 2010) or a larger fraction of girls

(Hoxby 2000; Lavy and Schlosser 2011). Again, the spillover effect on students in regular

classes may be relatively small in our setting given the modest fraction of students who

are shifted to a GHA class. Moreover, recent findings suggest that the link between

mean peer characteristics and average achievement can easily break down in specific

settings.11

         Peer composition may also affect achievement through a “rank” effect. Hoxby

and Weingarth (2006) suggest that the lowest‐ranked students in a class may suffer

from invidious interpersonal comparisons. Such comparisons could affect marginally

eligible GHA participants and push down the estimated effects from an RD design,

similar to the predicted pattern arising from mismatch of student ability and the

teacher’s targeted level of instruction. Murphy and Weinhardt (2014) propose a related

“top of the class” effect which predicts that the highest ranked students who remain in

a regular class when a GHA class is established will perform better, again attenuating

the impacts from a RD design.

11
   Two recent, carefully designed studies of between school tracking (Abdulkadiroglu et al. 2014 and
Dobbie and Fryer 2014) find negligible impacts from large changes in peer characteristics for students
assigned to elite high schools. In the college context, Booij et al. (2015) find that tracking improves the
outcomes of lower‐achieving students, and attribute the effect to richer peer interactions among the
students in lower track classes. Carrell et al. (2013) find that lower‐achieving Air Force Academy students
do worse when assigned to squads with more high‐achieving peers.


                                                     9
       Finally, the GHA classroom environment may be uniquely beneficial for high‐

ability minorities if it removes obstacles that cause these students to under‐perform in

the regular classroom. One possible source of underperformance is negative peer

pressure. Fryer and Torelli (2010) argue that high‐achieving black students – particularly

boys – suffer peer sanctions if they perform well in class, while Bursztyn and Jensen

(2014) find that peer pressure against "academically oriented" choices is reduced when

students are in classes designated as “honors.” Under‐performance may also be

reinforced by lowered teacher expectations. In a companion paper, Card and Giuliano

(2015) find that minority students with high IQ but modest achievement were

systematically under‐referred for the District’s gifted program when the referral process

relied heavily on teacher nomination—suggesting that teachers often fail to recognize

the potential of minority students who under‐perform in class.

       In view of the wide variety of potential channels that could arise when high

achieving students are placed in separate classes, we present two complementary

research designs for analyzing the effects of fourth‐grade GHA classrooms. First, we use

a regression discontinuity approach based on eligibility rules for the fourth‐grade GHA

class. This approach is highly credible (DiNardo and Lee 2011) and leads to relatively

precise estimates. We use this design to estimate separate impacts for white and

minority students, and to assess the mediating role of several factors that could differ

between the regular and GHA classes—including teacher quality and peer

characteristics.



                                            10
         Despite the appeal of an RD design, the interpretation of the resulting estimates

depends critically on whether there are spillover effects on students who narrowly miss

the GHA cutoff.12 In our second "between‐school/cohort" design, we ask how specific

rank groups (e.g., students ranked 15‐20) perform when there is or is not a GHA

classroom available for their cohort. Specifically, we focus on school/cohorts with

between 0 and 4 gifted students. As shown in Figure 1, most of the top‐ranked students

in these school/cohorts are black or Hispanic, so this design is informative about GHA

impacts on minority students. Using this design we estimate effects for different rank

groups that are likely to participate in a GHA class if one is offered, which allows us to

assess “rank effects” and also provides a second estimate of the impact of participating

in the class. Moreover, we also estimate effects for rank groups that are likely to just

miss the cutoff for a GHA class if one is offered—providing direct evidence on spillover

effects.

c. Analysis Samples

         Our analysis is based on administrative data for students who completed third

grade in the years from 2008 to 2011; entered fourth grade the next year at one of the

District’s 140 larger elementary schools; and remained in the District through at least

12
  In general, the RD design identifies the difference in the effect of the presence of a GHA class on
marginally eligible and marginally ineligible students. To see this, note that (up to a scale factor reflecting
the first stage effect) the RD estimator identifies τ = lim r↓0 y(r) ̶ lim r↑0 y(r) where y(r) is the expected
achievement of students at rank r when a GHA class is present, and r=0 is the cutoff threshold.
Decompose τ= τ1 ̶ τ0 where τ1 = lim r↓0 y(r) ̶ yn(0), τ0 = lim r↑0 y(r) ̶ yn(0), and yn(0) is the expected
achievement of students of rank 0 in the absence of a GHA class (which is the same for marginally eligible
and ineligible students). τ1 is the treatment effect on barely eligible participants relative to the
counterfactual of no GHA, and τ0 is the corresponding treatment effect on barely ineligible non‐
participants.


                                                      11
the end of fourth grade.13 Our data set includes age, gender, race, ethnicity, home zip

code, eligibility for a free or reduced‐price lunch (FRL), English language learner (ELL)

status, and student scores on state‐wide reading and math tests (administered at the

end of third through tenth grades), writing (fourth grade), and science (fifth grade). We

also have scores from the Naglieri Nonverbal Ability Test (NNAT), an IQ‐like test that was

administered to second graders in the years from 2005 to 2009 as a screening test to

identify potentially gifted students (see Card and Giuliano, 2015).

         Table 1 shows characteristics of all third graders in the District from the included

school/cohorts (column 1), as well as characteristics of students in our RD analysis

samples (columns 2‐4) and our between‐school analysis samples (columns 5‐6). As

shown in column 1, the District is highly diverse, with 28% white non‐Hispanics, 39%

black non‐Hispanics, 27% Hispanics, and 3% Asians. Roughly half of third graders are

eligible for free or reduced price lunches and 10% are English language learners. The

mean score on the NNAT test (for students that took the test) was 105 – slightly above

the nationally normed mean of 100. Overall, about 6% of students were classified as

gifted by fourth grade and 13% were assigned to a GHA classroom.

         The middle rows of Table 1 report mean scores on third‐ and fourth‐grade

statewide achievement tests; mean third‐grade scores of students’ school‐wide peers;


13
   We exclude students who were in fourth grade at small schools (including charter schools) since these
schools do not have enough students to create both a GHA and regular class. However, we continue to
follow students in fifth and sixth grades as long as they remain at any District school. As discussed below,
we find no evidence that GHA classroom assignment affects attrition from the District either by the end of
fourth grade or beyond.


                                                    12
and mean third‐grade scores of participants in their schools’ fourth‐grade GHA

classrooms (if one was created).14 Following standard practice we standardize the

achievement scores to have mean 0 and standard deviation 1 within each grade/year

cohort. Finally, in the bottom rows of the table we report some characteristics of the

schools attended by students in our analysis samples. A typical school has 4‐6 fourth‐

grade classes, one of which is a GHA class, with 23‐24 students per class.

         To construct our RD analysis sample, we first identified fourth graders who had

test scores from third grade and who were in school/cohorts with a fourth‐grade GHA

class. Under the District's rules, open seats in the GHA classroom are supposed to be

filled by non‐gifted students in the same grade with the highest scores on the previous

year’s statewide tests, using a specific formula to combine math and reading scores. The

formula was only introduced in 2009 so we limit our entire analysis to cohorts in third

grade in 2008 or later. A few schools also appear to ignore the District formula, so we

exclude students at these schools. Using the District formula and an algorithm

described in Appendix A, we then calculated school/cohort‐specific cutoff scores for

admission to the fourth‐grade GHA class and selected the first 10 students with scores

above this cutoff and the first 10 with scores below it.15 We explore the use of a wider

range of ranks below.

         We emphasize that the ranks used to select the sample are based on the District

14
   For all students (column 1 of Table 1) the mean characteristics of school wide peers and class peers are
equal to the mean characteristics of all students in the District, so we do not display these.
15
   The number of students above the cutoff is less than 10 if the gifted class has <10 extra seats. Appendix
A also compares the algorithm we use to find the cutoff to three alternative methods.


                                                    13
formula and not on students' actual placement in the GHA class (which can deviate from

the formula). In total we have 4,144 students who are ranked within 10 places from the

estimated school/cohort cutoff. About two‐thirds are in school/cohorts with 5 or more

gifted students (column 3); the others are in school/cohorts with 1‐4 gifted students

(column 4).

       Relative to the all third‐grade students in the District, those ranked within 10

positions of the GHA cutoff (column 2) are more likely to be white, less likely to be FRL‐

eligible, and have higher test scores. They also have slightly better‐than‐average school

wide peers (reflecting the fact that students at schools with no GHA class are excluded).

Highly ranked students from schools with a larger number of gifted students (column 3)

are even more selected, while those from schools with fewer gifted students (column 4)

are closer to the District‐wide average.

       For our between‐school analysis sample (columns 5‐6) we focus on students

from school/cohorts with 0 to 4 fourth‐grade gifted students, and we use the District

formula to construct their within‐school/cohort ranks. Students ranked 1‐20 (column 5)

are likely to move to a GHA class if one is offered, while those ranked 25‐44 (column 6)

are likely to stay in a regular class regardless of the availability of a GHA class. Notice

that even the highly ranked students in these school/cohorts are over 70% black or

Hispanic, and have an average FRL rate of over 70%, reflecting the concentration of

schools with few gifted children per grade in lower‐income neighborhoods.




                                              14
II. RD‐Based Analysis of GHA Participation

a. Validity of RD Design

       In this section we present an RD‐based analysis of the effect of GHA participation

on non‐gifted high achievers. Figure 2 shows the frequency distribution of within‐

school/cohort ranks for fourth‐grade cohorts with a GHA class. The distribution is

smooth around the cutoff rank for GHA eligibility, as would be expected in a valid RD

design (Lee, 2008; McCrary, 2008). The fall‐off in frequencies to the right of the cutoff

arises because some school/cohorts have fewer than 10 open seats for high achievers in

the GHA class.

       Further evidence on the validity of our design is presented in Figure 3, which

shows the relationship between a student’s relative rank and four key variables: their

third‐grade reading and math scores (panels A and B); their NNAT test scores (panel C);

and their predicted average fourth‐grade reading and math scores, estimated from a

regression model that includes third‐grade scores, age, race, gender, FRL and ELL status,

and school dummy variables (Panel D). All four panels show a smooth evolution

through the cutoff rank, confirming that students just above and just below the cutoff

are very similar. More formal tests are presented below in Table 2.

b. Differential Attrition

       To be included in our analysis sample, a student must be enrolled in a regular

District elementary school at the beginning of fourth grade and remain at any District

school through the end of the school‐year when the outcome is measured. A threat to



                                             15
our design could arise if students assigned to GHA classes are more (or less) likely to

remain in the District than those in regular classes.16 We address this concern in

Appendix Figure 1, which shows the relationship between a student’s relative rank at

the start of fourth grade and the probability of remaining in the District through the end

of fourth, fifth or sixth grade (Panels A, B, and C respectively). We find no evidence of

discontinuities in the retention rate. Based on these comparisons, and on results from a

series of RD models, we conclude that differential attrition is not a concern.

c. First‐Stage Relationship and Impacts on Fourth‐grade Achievement

         Figure 4 plots the "first stage" relationship between student relative ranks and

the probability of placement in a GHA class. The graph shows a fuzzy discontinuity in

the relationship between rank and placement in a GHA class, with a 25% placement rate

just to the left of the threshold and a 60% rate just to the right. Inspection of the data

leads us to conclude that the fuzziness is attributable partly to non‐compliance with the

District formula. In particular, a pattern of increasing compliance over time suggests

that enforcement was initially weak (see Appendix A). The remaining fuzziness is due to

data issues (e.g., missing test scores and slippage in our creation of class rosters), which

causes some students to be misclassified and may also introduce measurement error in

the school‐specific cutoffs. As explained in Appendix A, our procedure for calculating

the cutoffs is designed to avoid creating spurious first stage discontinuities or biases in



16
 Davis et al. (2010) find that students eligible for the gifted program in a mid‐western school district are
more likely to stay in the district.


                                                     16
the reduced‐form RD estimates. The very smooth patterns in Figures 2 and 3 support

the validity of our procedure. We suspect, however, that slippage in the measurement

of GHA participation leads to some attenuation in the magnitude of the first‐stage

discontinuity – on the order of 10‐15% – that should be taken into account in

interpreting our two‐stage least squares estimates (see Appendix C for a formal

development).17

         Figure 5 shows how fourth‐grade test score outcomes vary with a student’s

relative rank within their cohort and school. Reading scores (panel A) and math scores

(panel B) show clear jumps at the cutoff rank, indicating a positive impact from

assignment to a GHA class. In contrast, there is no evidence of an effect on writing.

Panels D and E show the average test score gains in reading and math, formed by

subtracting each student’s third‐grade score from his or her fourth‐grade score. (There

is no third‐grade writing test so we cannot construct a change in writing scores). The

downward‐sloping pattern in these graphs is driven by mean regression in test scores:

the highest scores in any year incorporate measurement errors and “good luck” that do

not persist to the next year, so test score gains are negatively correlated with rank.

17
   We believe that misclassification errors are most likely when there are more students with missing
third‐grade test scores who are assigned to the GHA class, and when the estimated size of the GHA class is
over 24 students (the legal maximum). We therefore fit first‐stage and reduced‐form models allowing
interactions with the number of student with missing scores, and the number of students in excess of 24
assigned to the class. The implied first stage discontinuity in GHA participation is 0.36 for school cohorts
with no missing scores and a GHA class size ≤24 (versus 0.32 in a simpler specification with no
interactions). Both interaction terms are also negative and significant, and imply a reduction of about 0.01
in the size of the first‐stage effect per student with missing scores, and .03 per student in excess of 24 in
the GHA class. Importantly, when we add the same interactions to the reduced form models neither is
large in size or close to statistically significant, implying that there is no induced bias in the reduced‐form
effects.


                                                      17
Relative to this overall trend, however, the differenced models show clear

discontinuities at the GHA threshold, similar in size to the discontinuities in the

corresponding test score levels.

       Table 2 presents the estimated discontinuities in baseline test scores (columns 1‐

2), as well as the first‐stage discontinuity in the probability of placement in a GHA class

(column 3) and the associated reduced‐form discontinuities in fourth‐grade reading,

math, and writing (columns 4‐6). All the models are "local linear" RD specifications with

a bandwidth of 10 ranks to the right and left of the threshold for admission to the GHA

class. (We discuss alternative bandwidths below.) Row 1 presents basic specifications

with no other controls; the models in row 2 include a broad set of additional controls

(including school effects); and row 3 presents first differenced specifications.

       The baseline test score models (in columns 1 and 2) show only small

discontinuities at the threshold rank, consistent with the smooth patterns noted in

Figure 3. The first stage models in column 3 show a precisely estimated jump of about

33 percentage points in the probability of placement in the GHA class at the threshold.

Reassuringly, the magnitude of the jump is virtually identical in specifications with and

without student controls and school dummies—again minimizing concerns about

possible bias resulting from our method for calculating the thresholds.

       The reduced‐form models for reading and math in columns 4 and 5 show

relatively precisely estimated discontinuities with magnitudes of 0.07 to 0.11 σ's. Taking

account of the fuzzy first stage, the implied treatment‐on‐the‐treated effects are in the



                                             18
range of 0.3 σ's. (Corresponding two‐stage least squares estimates are reported in the

top row of Table 3.) In contrast, the impacts on writing achievement are small and

insignificant.

         Appendix Figure 2 shows the robustness of the reduced‐form impacts to

alternative bandwidth choices, using the specification in row 2 of Table 2. Across a range

of bandwidths from 5 to 15, the estimated impacts on reading and math are quite stable

and remain significant at conventional levels, while the estimated impacts on writing are

uniformly small.

d. Heterogeneity in Impacts

         The results in Figure 5 and Table 2 suggest that participants in GHA classes

experience significant average achievement gains in reading and math. A key question

is whether these gains are similar for different groups of students. We study this issue in

Table 3. Each row presents results for a different subgroup. We show the estimated

discontinuities in their baseline test scores in columns 1‐2; the first‐stage discontinuity

in their probability of placement in a GHA class in column 3; and the implied effects on

their reading and math scores in columns 4‐7. For ease of comparison across groups

with different first‐stage discontinuities, we report two‐stage least squares estimates of

the treatment‐on‐the‐treated effects for the outcomes.18

         For reference, row 1 of the Table presents results for our overall sample. On

18
  As noted above attenuation of the first stage due to misclassification may cause the 2SLS estimates to
overstate the true TOT effect by about 10‐15%. Our analysis suggests that the first stage attenuation is
only slightly larger for minorities than for whites (15% vs. 11%), consistent with greater mobility across
schools and classrooms (the main sources of misclassification) among minorities.


                                                    19
average, entry to a GHA classroom is associated with gains in fourth‐grade reading and

math scores of about 0.3 σ's per treated student. Row 2a and 2b present results for

white students and minority (blacks or Hispanic) students. The first‐stage models in

column 3 show that the two groups have similar jumps in the probability of placement

in a GHA class at the threshold rank. The impacts on achievement, however, are quite

different: there are small and insignificant effects for whites, but large positive effects

for minorities. This difference is confirmed visually in Figure 6, where we show reduced‐

form plots of average reading and math scores for the two groups. The plots for white

students show no evidence that placement in a GHA class matters. The plots for

minorities, in contrast, show clear jumps at the GHA threshold.19

        Rows 2c and 2d of Table 3 present separate estimates for black and Hispanic

students. Though the estimates are a little imprecise, they are very similar—leading us

to conclude that the benefits from participating in a GHA class are about the same for

blacks and Hispanics, and together account for virtually all of the average effect

observed in the pooled sample.20

        One concern with the comparison in rows 2a and 2b is that the minority students

in our RD sample are drawn from schools with fewer gifted students and higher

fractions of FRL‐eligible students. This raises the question of whether part of the

19
   One concern is that gains for high achieving whites may be attenuated by “topping out” on the
standardized tests. In fact only 2% of students achieve the top score in reading, though in math 10% are
topped out. Estimates from Tobit models (reported in Appendix Table 1) are very similar to the models in
Table 3 and show no indication that censoring accounts for the small impacts for whites.
20
   Blacks and Hispanics account for 56% of all students in our main RD sample. The 2SLS impacts in row 1
are very close to 0.56 times the corresponding impacts in row 3.


                                                   20
difference across groups is attributable to some factor other than race/ethnicity. In

rows 3a and 3b of Table 3 we compare the impacts of participating in GHA classes for

black and Hispanic students who are FRL‐eligible and ineligible. The estimated

treatment‐on‐the‐treated impacts are very similar for the two groups. In rows 4a and

4b we compare the estimates for minorities in cohorts with relatively few (1‐4) or

relatively many (5+) gifted children. Again, the treatment‐on‐the‐treated impacts are

similar.

           Finally, rows 5a and 5b present separate results for minority girls and minority

boys. Overall, the impacts appear to be larger for boys than girls, particularly in reading.

The large readings gains for boys are interesting because minority boys tend to have

particularly low average reading scores.21 Nevertheless, the gender‐specific samples are

relatively small, and one might be concerned about multiple testing. At a minimum it

seems safe to conclude that GHA classes are, if anything, more effective for minority

boys than minority girls.

           We have also fit a parallel set of models for subgroups of whites. The resulting

estimates are all small in magnitude and uniformly insignificant. Even for lower‐income

white students who are FRL eligible we find no evidence of an effect of participating in a

GHA class. Hence we conclude that race/ethnicity – not family income – is the

fundamental dimension of heterogeneity in the GHA treatment effect.



21
 Among minority students ranked 5 points below the cutoff, the average reading score for boys is .38σ
while for girls it is .54 σ. The average math score is .43σ for both these groups.


                                                  21
e. Impacts on Later Grades

         Next we look at the impacts of participating in a GHA classroom in fourth grade

on achievement scores in fifth and sixth grades.22 Table 4 presents 2SLS RD estimates

for the impacts on fifth and sixth grade reading and math, and fifth‐grade science. We

follow the same format as Table 3, presenting results for the overall sample in row 1,

and for various subgroups in later rows of the table. For the overall sample we find

mixed evidence that fourth‐grade GHA participation affects fifth‐grade test scores. The

impacts on reading are positive but modest in size and statistically insignificant, while

the effects for math are larger and marginally significant. For sixth grade, however, the

results are more clearly positive, with marginally significant impacts of about 0.2σ's for

reading and significant impacts of about 0.4σ's for math.

         Rows 2a and 2b present separate results for whites and minorities. Consistent

with the findings in Table 3, the effects of a fourth‐grade GHA class are relatively small

(and mainly negative) for whites, but the effects for black and Hispanic students are

positive and, at least in sixth grade, statistically significant. The impacts for minorities

are illustrated in Appendix Figure 3, which shows the first‐stage relationship between

GHA placement and relative rank for minority students who remained in the District

through sixth grade, as well as reduced‐form graphs of their NNAT scores and combined

22
  A possible concern about effects on later grades is differential attrition out of the District. Appendix
Table 1 presents RD models for the probability that students remain at a District school through the end
of fifth grade (column 1) and through the end of sixth grade (column 4). Consistent with the visual
evidence in Appendix Figure 1, we see no indication of a discontinuity in longer‐run attrition rates at the
threshold for admission to a GHA class in fourth grade.




                                                     22
math and reading scores in third through sixth grade. The pattern of sixth‐grade scores

is particularly suggestive of a persistent effect of admission to the fourth‐grade GHA

class. Reassuringly, we continue to find no evidence of discontinuities in either the

second‐grade NNAT or the third‐grade reading and math scores in this sample.

       The estimates in the later rows of Table 4 suggest that, as in Table 3, the longer

run impacts of fourth‐grade GHA participation are not too different for FRL‐eligible and

ineligible minority students, or for those in schools with more or less gifted students.

Comparisons by gender also reinforce the conclusion from Table 3 that GHA

participation has a larger effect for minority boys than for minority girls.

       One explanation for the persistent effects of fourth‐grade GHA classes is that

students who are placed in a GHA class in fourth grade are more likely to be placed in

advanced classes in later grades. The District offers GHA classes in fifth grade with the

same admission rules as the fourth‐grade classes, and advanced‐track sixth‐grade

classes for math where students are admitted on the basis of fifth‐grade standardized

scores. High achievers who participate in a fourth‐grade class are not guaranteed a seat

in the fifth‐grade class, but if the fourth‐grade GHA class causes large achievement gains

there will be an induced discontinuity in the probability of fifth‐grade placement (and

likewise for sixth‐grade advanced math).

       In Appendix Table 2 we show that there are in fact significant discontinuities in

the probability of placement in a fifth‐grade GHA class and in a sixth‐grade advanced




                                             23
math class at the threshold for admission to the fourth‐grade class.23 As expected,

these jumps are driven entirely by outcomes for black and Hispanic students: there are

no discontinuities in placement for white students. Even for minorities, however, the

jumps are relatively small, suggesting that participation in later advanced classes is not

the main explanation for the persistent effect of fourth‐grade GHA classes.24 Moreover,

the advanced class in sixth grade is only for math, and we think it is unlikely to have a

major effect on sixth‐grade reading scores. Instead, we interpret the impacts in later

grades as arising mainly from the fourth‐grade GHA class itself, either through a

dynamic "learning begets learning" process, or through behavioral or other changes

attributable to the GHA class that raise students' productivity at school.

f. Causal Mechanisms

        In this section we ask to what extent the impacts of fourth‐grade GHA

participation can be explained by the quality of GHA teachers and/or the characteristics

of peers in GHA classes. We follow a two‐step approach. First, using data on all fourth‐

grade classes in the District we estimate a series of value added (or “gain score”) models

in which the dependent variables are test score gains between third and fourth grade,


23
   The analysis sample for placement in a fifth grade GHA class is reduced by roughly 30% due to our
inability to match students to classrooms at schools where students rotate between teachers in fifth
grade (see Appendix A for details). For this reason, we are also unable to directly estimate the effect of
GHA assignment in fifth grade.
24
   We also investigated whether admission to a fourth‐grade GHA class affects the probability of
remaining at a regular District elementary school (versus a charter or Montessori school) in fifth grade.
We find a small but statistically insignificant discontinuity in this probability among minority students,
with those who just miss the cutoff being 2 percentage points more likely to transfer to a non‐traditional
school. If the alternative schools are of higher quality than the non‐GHA classrooms in the schools these
students would otherwise attend, this would tend to reduce our RD estimates for fifth‐grade outcomes.


                                                    24
and the explanatory variables include one of six class features—namely, a measure of

value added for the teacher or one of five peer composition variables.25 We estimate

separate models for each class feature, as well as a joint model that combines all six

features. We also compare pooled models for all students with separate models for

whites and minorities to check for heterogeneity in the effects of the various features.

These gain score models will provide unbiased estimates of the effects of teacher value

added and peer characteristics under the same assumptions that are widely adopted in

the "teacher effects" literature (e.g., Chetty, Friedman, and Rockoff, 2014). 26 As noted

by Rothstein (2015), these assumptions are unlikely to hold exactly, particularly in

models that examine only one class feature at a time, but we suspect that violations are

likely to lead us to overstate the causal effects of the various class features.

         In the second step, we re‐estimate the RD models in Table 3 including teacher

value‐added (TVA) or a peer composition variable, but restricting the coefficients to the

values estimated in the first stage. The estimated RD coefficients from these second

step models show the impact of GHA classes net of the effect of any differences in

teacher or peer characteristics between regular and GHA classes.


25
   These models also include controls for individual student characteristics and school fixed effects.
Teacher value‐added is estimated for each teacher in a given year using data in other years when the
teacher is observed teaching fourth‐grade in the District, including the four years prior to our sample (i.e.,
2005‐2008). Appendix B describes our model in more detail. In brief, we regress fourth‐grade scores (for
students in other years) on lagged test scores, individual student characteristics, school‐wide average
demographics, a dummy for GHA class, and teacher dummies. We use the estimated teacher effects (with
no "shrinkage adjustment") as measures of value added.
26
   Formally, the required assumption is that the unobserved determinants of a student's test score gain
between third and fourth grades are uncorrelated with the measured class features, conditional on the
observed control variables, which include school dummies and age, race, gender, FRL and ELL controls.


                                                     25
        We use this approach – instead of simply adding teacher or peer characteristics

to the RD models – for two reasons. First, data for the overall population of fourth‐grade

students yield much more precise estimates of teacher and peer effects. Second, in a

fuzzy RD design with incomplete compliance, a direct approach can yield biased

estimates for the control variables because teacher and peer characteristics are

endogenously determined by the actual assignment of students to classes.27 Average

peer test scores, for example, will be much higher for students who are placed in a GHA

class, regardless of whether their rank is above or below the GHA threshold, so this

variable is correlated with compliance status.

        For a classroom feature to explain part of the measured effect of GHA classes,

two things must be true. First, there must be a discontinuous change in the average

value of the characteristic between students who are barely eligible for a GHA class and

those who are barely ineligible. Second, the characteristic must be causally associated

with higher test scores. Evidence on the first issue is presented in Figure 7, which shows

the relationship between a student’s relative rank and each of the six features of the

student’s classroom: mean third‐grade test scores of classroom peers (panel A); the

within‐class standard deviation in third‐grade scores (panel B); the fraction of classroom

peers who were suspended in third grade (panel C); the fraction of female peers (panel

D); the fraction of minority male peers (panel E); and teacher value added (panel F).

        As expected given the admission process for GHA classes, mean lagged test

27
  See Rosenbaum (1984) for an analysis of this problem in the context of experimental and observational
designs.


                                                  26
scores of classroom peers jump up at the cutoff rank, while the dispersion in peer scores

falls. There is also a small reduction in exposure to peers who were suspended in the

previous grade, a small increase in the fraction of girls in the class, and a modest

reduction in the fraction of minority boys in the class. In contrast, estimated TVA is

smooth through the cutoff.

        Appendix Table 3 presents 2SLS‐RD models for the changes in these

characteristics at the threshold for admission to a GHA class for our overall sample and

for the subgroups identified in Tables 3 and 4.28 As suggested by the graphs in Figure 7,

we find that TVA evolves smoothly at the GHA threshold for all students in our sample.

The treatment‐on‐the‐treated (TOT) estimate is ‐0.01 with a standard error of 0.03,

ruling out discontinuities in TVA larger than +0.05. Compared to the TOT estimates for

fourth‐grade math and reading of about 0.30 (row 1 of Table 3) this is a small effect.

Importantly, we find small and insignificant changes in TVA at the GHA threshold for

both whites and minorities, and for various subgroups of minorities. These patterns

mean that teacher quality (as measured by TVA) cannot be the primary explanation for

the effect of GHA classes.


28
   Because we measure TVA using data on students taught by a given teacher in other years, we cannot
assign TVA to students whose teachers appear in the District in only one year. Rothstein (2015) shows
that treatment of missing data can affect the validity of TVA estimates. To assess whether selective
availability of TVA is an issue for our analysis, we show RD estimates for the probability of having an
estimate of TVA of in column 1 of this table; apart from one subgroup, none of these estimates is large or
significant. We conclude that missing TVA data is unlikely to be a problem for our analysis, and we focus
on the subset of students in our RD analysis sample with a TVA estimate for their fourth‐grade teacher.
This choice allows us to hold constant the sample as we compare models that adjust for the effects of
different classroom features, though our conclusions are quite robust to allowing for different samples in
different models.


                                                    27
         In contrast, we find that the five peer composition variables all change at the

GHA threshold. The largest change is for mean lagged test scores: the TOT estimate is

0.86 for all students, 0.88 for white students and 0.83 for black and Hispanic students.

In fact, we cannot reject an effect of 0.85 for any subgroup, suggesting that the impact

on peer lagged achievement is relatively homogeneous. The effects on the other

characteristics are smaller in magnitude, with some evidence of heterogeneity across

subgroups in the fraction of classmates who were suspended, and in the fraction of

minority male classmates.

         How much do the various classroom features matter for student achievement

gains? Coefficients from student achievement models fit to data on fourth graders in the

larger elementary schools in the District are presented in Appendix Table 4. We show

separate estimates for reading and math for all students, white students, and minority

students. We also compare coefficient estimates from value‐added specifications that

include each classroom feature separately, and from a specification that controls for all

six features at once.

         Consistent with the large literature on teacher effects, we find that the most

important classroom feature is teacher quality. A one‐unit increase in estimated TVA is

associated with a 0.4 increase in fourth‐grade reading scores, and a 0.6 to 0.7 increase

in math scores.29 The effects on both domains are highly significant and very similar in


29
  In principle the coefficients should be close to 1, after adjusting for sampling error in the estimates of
TVA (i.e., "shrinking" the estimates). We have not attempted to perform these adjustments, since we are
only interested in how controlling for TVA affects the main RD coefficients. For simplicity we also only


                                                    28
magnitude for white and minority students. In contrast, the effects of measured peer

characteristics are much smaller, particularly for reading achievement. For math

achievement, both the mean and standard deviation of lagged peer test scores appear

to matter, with coefficients of 0.08 to 0.12 for mean lagged peer scores, and similar

coefficients for the standard deviation of scores.30 The fractions of female peers and

minority male peers have very small and insignificant effects for both reading and math

scores of all groups.

         With these estimates in hand, we turn to the adjusted RD models in Table 5. The

top row of the table shows estimated reduced‐form impacts of participating in a GHA

class on fourth‐grade reading and math scores from our basic RD models, using the

specification in row 3 of Table 2. We show effects for all students and for white and

minority students separately. Each of the other rows reports the same RD coefficient

from specifications that control for the classroom feature indicated in the row heading,

using estimates of the effect of this feature reported in Appendix Table 4. Finally, the

bottom row of the table reports the RD coefficient from a model that controls for all six

classroom features, using coefficients from the joint model shown in Appendix Table 4.

         For reading achievement, teacher value added and the five peer characteristics

have essentially no power to explain the effects of GHA participation. For math

achievement, the addition of controls for the mean lagged scores of classroom peers

produce one estimate of TVA for each teacher based on their impact on combined student outcomes in
other years.
30
   The positive effect of within‐class dispersion on math scores is the opposite of what we would expect if
teachers can better match their lessons to a typical student in more homogeneous classes.


                                                    29
(row 3) explains about 25% of the effect of GHA participation on all students, and about

17% of the effect on minority students. However, in our preferred specification that

controls for all six classroom features together (row 8), the explained shares fall to

around 10%.31 Overall, we conclude that measures of teacher quality and classroom

composition explain none of the effect of GHA classes on reading, and at most a small

share of the effect on math achievement, particularly for minorities.

        We emphasize that the findings in Table 5 do not mean that teacher quality or

peer characteristics are unimportant. In the case of teacher quality, which has a strong

effect on student scores, the lack of impact on our RD estimates arises because there is

no discontinuity in TVA at the threshold for admission to GHA classes. There is a

relatively large discontinuity in peer quality at the GHA threshold, but mean third‐grade

scores of peers have no effect on reading achievement and only a modest effect on

math achievement. So the share of the GHA effect on reading scores explained by peer

quality is negligible, while the share of the effect on math is relatively small.



III. Between‐School/Cohort Design

        A concern with our RD estimates is that they may be driven in part by impacts of

GHA classes on non‐participants. The District's policy of offering a GHA classroom if and

only if there is at least one gifted child in the fourth‐grade cohort provides a design for

31
  The reduction in explanatory power from the combined model is explained by the fact that in the
models that control only for mean lagged peer scores, the estimated effects of mean lagged peer scores
are in the range from 0.12 to 0.13, while in the joint model the estimated effects of mean lagged peer
scores are smaller – see Appendix Table 3.


                                                  30
measuring potential spillover effects.32 Consider fourth graders ranked just below the

top 20 in their cohort at schools with either zero or a small number of gifted students in

their cohort. If there are no gifted children these students will participate in regular

classes with the top 20 high achievers. If there is at least one gifted child, however, the

top 20 students will be moved to a GHA class. We can thus compare how the test score

gains of students ranked just below 20 vary as the number of gifted children varies,

looking for an effect when the number exceeds 0.

        We can also use a between‐school/cohort design to estimate impacts on the test

score gains for different subgroups of students ranked in the top 20 students of their

cohort. These students will either participate in regular or GHA classes, depending on

whether is at least one gifted child. Comparisons between cohorts with or without a

gifted child therefore allow us to estimate the average treatment effect for the top 20

students in each school, or for narrower groups, like those ranked 1‐5.

        To implement this design, we identified a set of fourth‐grade school/cohorts

with 0 to 4 gifted students.33 We then identified the students in each cohort ranked

from 1 to 20 and from 25 to 44 on the previous year's achievement scores, and

computed the average changes in math and reading scores from third to fourth grade

for students in the two groups from different school/cohorts.

        The first‐stage relationship for this alternative design and the corresponding

32
  We are grateful to Kelley Bedard for a suggestion that motivated this section.
33
  This sample comprises 28,177 students in 255 fourth‐grade cohorts during the years 2009‐12 (when we
know the District’s ranking formula) and includes roughly half of all the fourth‐grade cohorts during these
years.


                                                    31
reduced‐form effects are illustrated in Figure 8. Panel A shows the fraction of the top 20

students in a school/grade cohort who were placed in a GHA class for cohorts with 0, 1,

2, 3, or 4 gifted children. The relationship is nearly linear for schools with 1 or more

gifted students, with an intercept of just under 40%. Since high achievers at schools with

0 gifted children have no chance of placement in a GHA classroom, the effect of having

at least 1 gifted child in the cohort is about 40 percentage points. Panel B shows the

corresponding relationship for students ranked 25‐44 in each school/grade cohort. This

relationship is also nearly linear for school/cohorts with 1‐4 gifted children, but at a

much lower level – reflecting the low probability that students ranked in this range will

be placed in a GHA classroom even if one is present. The implied effect of having at least

1 gifted child is only about 5%.34

        The corresponding reduced‐form impacts on the test score gains of the two

groups are illustrated in panels C and D. We combine math and reading to gain power,

and show regression‐adjusted impacts that control for cohort‐wide average test scores

in third grade, the cohort‐wide fraction of FRL students, cohort size, and year dummies.

For the 1‐20 rank group, the pattern in panel C suggests a reduced‐form impact of

around 0.1 σ's. The impact on the 25‐44 ranked group, by comparison, is close to 0.

        Table 6 presents a series of models for the outcomes of different rank groups at

school/cohorts with no more than 4 gifted children. Panel A presents results for

34
  The <100% impact on the 1‐20 group and the positive impact on the 25‐44 group are due to a
combination of non‐compliance and measurement error in the cutoff scores. As explained in Appendix A,
there are also a few cohorts where a student is classified as gifted but there is no gifted classroom—e.g.,
because the school received a waiver or because the student was identified after the school year began.


                                                    32
students ranked 1‐20 in their school/cohort; panel B presents results for the 25‐44 rank

group; panel C presents results for the combined 1‐44 group. For the dependent

variable identified in each column and the alternative specification in each row, we

show the coefficient of a dummy for having at least one gifted child in the

school/cohort. Column 1 presents models for third‐grade (i.e., pre‐intervention)

average reading and math scores. Column 2 presents models for the fraction of the

group that is placed in a GHA classroom. Finally, columns 3 and 4 show models for the

fourth‐grade average reading and math scores, and the change in average reading and

math scores between third and fourth grades.

       The models in row 1 of each panel include the same controls used in Figure 8 (a

linear control for the number of gifted students in the cohort; a set of year dummies;

and cohort‐level controls for average third‐grade test scores, mean FRL eligibility, and

total enrollment). The models in row 2 of each panel add school fixed effects, and

therefore identify the within‐school effects of a GHA class for fourth grade. The models

in row 3 have the same controls as in row 1, but are estimated on the subsample of

school/cohorts with either 0 or 1 gifted student.

       In column 1, the estimates for the baseline scores show only small differences

between school/cohorts with and without a GHA classroom. In column 2, the models

for the probability of placement in a GHA class show that for the 1‐20 rank group, the

presence of a gifted child raises the probability of being assigned by 30‐40 percentage

points. For the 24‐44 rank group the corresponding effect is 6‐8 points, while for the



                                            33
combined 1‐44 group the effect is 11‐12 points.

        The models in columns 3 and 4 suggest that the presence of a GHA class has a

positive impact on average scores of the top 20 students, no effect on students ranked

24‐44, and an effect on the overall 1‐44 group about one‐half as large as the effect on

the 1‐20 group. To interpret the impacts in Panel A, note that the estimate in row 1,

column 4 implies a TOT effect of 0.27 σ's on the combined reading and math scores of

the 1‐20 group. This is remarkably similar to the estimated TOT effects of 0.29 σ's and

0.34 σ's for reading and math, respectively, from our main RD specification (see row 1 of

Table 3). There are two offsetting factors that complicate this comparison. On one

hand, the fraction of minority students in our between‐school sample is higher than in

our RD sample (73% versus 56%). Taking this into account the comparable RD estimates

are arguably a little larger. On the other hand, the RD estimates are based on

comparisons for marginally eligible GHA participants. To the extent that the impacts of

a GHA class are bigger (or smaller) for marginally eligible students, the RD estimates will

be bigger (or smaller) than the average effects for the 1‐20 group.

        Table 7 uses the between‐school design to examine the impacts for narrower

rank groups. Specifically, in Panel A we divide highly ranked students in each

school/cohort into 4 groups, while in Panel B we divide the students ranked 21 and

lower into 5 quintiles within their school/cohort.35 Given the small samples for these


35
  We use quintile groups because the total number of students varies across school/cohorts (the mean is
110 and standard deviation is 39). Since the typical class has 23 students, the highest ranked quintile
group among the students ranked 21 or lower are, on average, the top 4‐5 students in each regular class.


                                                  34
subgroups we present specifications similar to the models in row 1 of panels A and B in

Table 6 (with a set of year dummies and cohort‐level controls).

       For reference, column 1 shows the fraction of black or Hispanic students in each

subgroup. This ranges from 68 to 75% within the subgroups of the top 20 group, and is

even higher for the lower ranked quintile groups. Column 2 shows the estimated

impacts of having a GHA class on third‐grade (pre‐intervention) average math and

reading scores. These are all small and insignificant. The first‐stage models for

placement in a GHA class show relatively large effects for the top 15 students (35‐44

percentage points); a smaller – but still highly significant – effect for the marginally

eligible 16‐20 rank group (around 23 points); and very small effects for the lower ranked

students.

       The reduced‐form impacts for reading and math scores (columns 4 and 5)

suggest that the effects of participating in a GHA class are smaller for highly ranked

students and larger for those who barely qualify. Normalizing the impacts by the first‐

stage effects, the TOT effects in column 6 range from 0.12 σ's for the top 10 students to

0.5 σ's for the next 10. Given the relatively large standard errors, the subgroup‐specific

estimates should be interpreted carefully. However, the evidence suggests that GHA

classes have, if anything larger impacts for lower‐ranked students – the opposite of the

pattern predicted by mismatch or invidious comparison effects.

       The results in panel B are also interesting and show no evidence of negative (or




                                             35
positive) spillover effects on lower‐ranked groups.36 The reduced‐form estimates for

the quintile groups are relatively precise, allowing us to rule out spillover effects any

larger than +/‐ 0.05 σ's for students who would be close to the top of the regular class in

the presence of a GHA class, for example.



Evidence from "Global" RD Estimates

         In light of these results it is interesting to return to the RD framework – this time

comparing actual fourth‐grade scores to predicted scores for students ranked above and

below the GHA eligibility cutoff. Figure 9 plots the means of observed and predicted

fourth‐grade math and reading scores for students ranked from 50 below the cutoff to

15 above it.37 We also show quadratic models for both actual and predicted scores, fit

separately to the students ranked above and below the cutoff. Panel A shows results

for all students while Panel B shows results for black and Hispanic students.

         The figures suggest that actual and predicted fourth‐grade scores are very similar

for all students ranked below the GHA cutoff. In particular, there is no evidence of

spillover effects on students just below the cutoff. For students above the cutoff,

however, the actual scores are above the predicted scores – with the largest gap among

students just above the cutoff, and little or no gap for students ranked 15 above the


36
   The first stage estimates imply that 5% of the quintile 1 group actually participate in a GHA class.
Assuming a treatment on the treated effect of 0.5 σ's we would expect to see reduced form impacts of
0.025 σ's, which we interpret as negligible.
37
   As in Figure 3, predicted scores are based on a regression model that includes third‐grade scores, other
student characteristics, and school dummies.


                                                    36
cutoff. These patterns are very similar to the pattern of reduced‐form effects in Table 8,

and provide additional confirmation that: (1) GHA classes have no spillover effects on

lower‐ranked students, and (2) the impacts of GHA participation are larger for

marginally eligible students, contrary to the predicted pattern from mismatch or

invidious comparison effects.



IV. Interpretation of the GHA Effects

       The results from our between‐school analysis confirm that the presence of a

GHA class leads to significant achievement gains for black and Hispanic students who

are admitted to these classes, with no spillover effects on non‐participants. In light of

these findings, we return to the question of how to interpret the impacts of a GHA class.

       The analysis in section IIf leads us to conclude that these impacts are not

mediated by teacher quality or the peer composition channels that have been

highlighted in the tracking literature. Moreover, neither these channels, nor

explanations based on the match between student ability and the level/pace of

instruction can readily explain the combination of large positive effects for minority

students and small, insignificant effects for whites, since these mechanisms should also

affect white students.

       Instead, we hypothesize that higher‐ability minority students face specific

obstacles in a regular classroom environment that lead them to under‐perform relative

to their potential, and that some of these impediments are reduced in a GHA class. A



                                            37
key feature of this hypothesis is that it is consistent with both the absence of effects on

white students, and the absence of spillover effects on students who remain in regular

classes when a GHA class is established.

        Evidence of systematic under‐performance by minority students is presented in

Appendix Table 5. Here we show a series of models that relate average third‐grade

reading and math scores to measures of cognitive ability based on NNAT scores (used by

the District between 2005 and 2009 to screen second graders for gifted status) and

dummies for race and ethnicity. These models show that black students’ third‐grade

achievement scores are 0.2 to 0.45 σ's below those of white students with similar

cognitive ability (depending on whether we also control for school dummies and FRL

status), while Hispanics have scores that are 0.15 to 0.25 σ's below those of whites.

        Turning to our RD sample, if we measure relative performance in fourth grade

using residuals from a regression of fourth‐grade reading and math scores on NNAT

scores, the white‐minority achievement gap is .39 σ's among students who just miss the

GHA cutoff.38 Estimates from linear RD models that use residual (NNAT‐adjusted)

achievement as the dependent variable show a significant discontinuity of 0.14 σ's for

minorities but none for whites. The estimate for minorities corresponds to a treatment‐

on‐treated effect of roughly .40—implying that the impact of the GHA classroom was

38
  Residual scores are estimates from a linear regression of the average of fourth‐grade reading and math
scores on the NNAT score, using all students with NNAT scores who are in fourth grade during our sample
period and not in a GHA classroom. Specification tests show that the white‐minority gap in relative
achievement is similar among high achievers and the broader student population. The RD sample in this
analysis is limited to the subset of students for whom NNAT scores available; this sample includes 978
white students and 1,634 minorities.


                                                  38
large enough to close the achievement gap for minority participants.39

         What specific obstacles might cause minorities to under‐perform in regular

classrooms? First, a pattern of under‐performance by minorities could be perpetuated

in the regular classroom because of lowered teacher expectations about student

potential. Such a pattern might be mitigated in a GHA class for at least two reasons.

Since teachers know that all students in the GHA class have relatively high achievement

scores, they may revise their views about the ability levels of their minority students.

Also, GHA teachers have received some training on the education of special populations

of gifted students emphasizing stereotyping and intercultural competence.

         Evidence consistent with a cycle of minority underperformance and low teacher

expectations comes from studying the impact of the District’s universal screening

program for identifying potentially gifted students. Introduced in 2005, this program

changed the process by which students are referred for gifted evaluation, replacing a

system based on teacher nominations with an automated process based on NNAT

scores. As discussed in Card and Giuliano (2015), it uncovered large numbers of minority

students with relatively high cognitive ability—ultimately leading to increases of 80%

and 130%, respectively, in the numbers of black and Hispanic gifted students in the

District. The newly identified gifted students had IQ scores similar to those who were




39
  To calculate the TOT effect, we normalize the RD estimate of 0.14 by a first‐stage estimate for
minorities of .35. The latter is the first‐stage estimate reported in row 2b of Table 3, scaled up by 15% to
adjust for attenuation due to misclassification (see footnotes 16 and 17).


                                                     39
identified in earlier cohorts, but lower achievement—suggesting that teachers are often

unaware of the cognitive ability of minority students who under‐perform in class.

         A large body of ethnographic research suggests another cause of minority under‐

performance in regular classrooms – namely, that minority students face peer pressure

against high academic performance (or "acting white").40 Arguably, such pressures are

reduced in a GHA class where all students are labelled as either gifted or high achieving.

Bursztyn and Jensen (2014), for example, find that Hispanic high school students in non‐

honors classes are less likely to enroll in SAT preparation classes when their enrollment

choices are revealed to classmates, but that the negative effect of information

revelation is eliminated in honors classes. Fryer and Torelli (2010) show that the social

pressure against academic achievement is particularly strong for boys, so this channel

could also explain the larger GHA impact for minority boys.

         If minority students have more positive interactions with teachers and peers in

the GHA classrooms, this might be reflected in observable student behavior such as

attendance and disciplinary actions. Appendix Table 6 presents estimates from

reduced‐form RD models in which the dependent variables measure the likelihood of

having more than one unexcused absence or being suspended more than once in grades

4‐6. We find significant negative discontinuities in these outcomes for minorities but

none for whites. Moreover, the discontinuities are especially large for minority boys,


40
  See Fryer and Torelli (2010) for a brief summary of this literature. Similar hypotheses could explain the
larger benefits for minority participants in studies of class size reductions (Krueger 1999; Krueger and
Whitmore 2000), and admission to selective colleges and universities (Dale and Krueger 2002).


                                                    40
who have the highest rates of suspension and unexcused absence when placed in

regular classrooms, and who also show the largest achievement gains from GHA

participation.

       These results suggest to us that the GHA impacts on achievement are at least

partly mediated by changes in high‐ability minority students' behavior and motivation to

perform well in school A recent study by Dee and Penner (2016) finds a similar pattern

of effects from a “culturally relevant” high school curriculum program for lower‐

achieving minority students. Interestingly, Angrist et al (2013, Table 5) find much larger

effects of urban charter schools on black and Hispanic students than on whites ‐‐ effects

that they attribute in part to a culture of high expectations at so‐called "No Excuses"

charter schools.



V. Conclusions

       The District's policy of creating GHA classrooms provides valuable new evidence

on the effects of a within‐school tracking program for high‐achieving students. We use

two complementary approaches to study the impact of GHA classes – a regression

discontinuity design and a between‐cohort design. Our RD design shows that

participation in GHA classes leads to significant achievement gains for minority

participants, with treatment‐on‐the‐treated effects of around 0.5 σ's on fourth‐grade

reading and math, and persistent impacts to at least sixth grade. We confirm these

effects using comparisons between school/cohorts with no gifted children (and no GHA



                                            41
class) and those with 1‐4 gifted children (and a GHA class with seats for 20‐23 high

achievers). This design also allows us to check for effects on students who remain in

regular classes when a GHA class is established. Importantly, we find no spillover effects

on non‐participants, including those who narrowly miss the cutoff for the class.

       We also use the RD design to investigate several possible explanations for the

large impact of GHA classes, including differences in the quality of teachers assigned to

these classes, and peer effects associated with the average ability of GHA classmates,

their gender and race composition, and the presence of disruptive students. Although

we find that teacher quality (measured by average value added) is an important

determinant of student achievement, there is no discontinuous change at the threshold

for entry to the GHA class, so this channel cannot explain the impacts we observe. We

find modest effects of lagged peer test scores on math achievement, accounting for a

relatively small share (around 10%) of the GHA impact on math, but none of the effect

on reading achievement. Moreover, neither these channels nor potential differences in

instruction or pacing can explain the combination of large, positive effects for minorities

and small, insignificant effects for white GHA participants. Instead, we argue that the

likely explanation for our findings is that higher‐ability minority students tend to under‐

perform academically in a regular classroom environment, and that some of the

obstacles faced by these students – including negative peer pressure and low

expectations of teachers – are reduced or eliminated in a GHA class.

       While an important limitation of our analysis is that it pertains to only a single



                                            42
school district, nevertheless the student population in the District is highly diverse and

arguably representative of the student population in many other large urban districts.

Overall, our results suggest that a comprehensive tracking program that establishes a

separate classroom in every school for the top‐performing students has the potential to

significantly boost the performance of higher‐achieving minority students – even in the

poorest neighborhoods of a large urban school district. Given the high degree of

economic and racial segregation in many urban districts, such a program could

effectively serve large numbers of high achieving and minority students, and it could do

so at little or no cost to other students or school district budgets.




                                             43
References

Abdulkadiroglu, Atila, Joshua D. Angrist and Parag A. Pathak. “The Elite Illusion:
Achievement Effects at Boston and New York Exam Schools.” Econometrica 82 (January
2014), pp. 137‐196.

Angrist, Joshua D., Parag Pathak, and Christopher R. Walters. "Explaining Charter School
Effectiveness." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 5 (October 2013), pp. 1‐
27.

Arcidiacono, Peter, Esteban Aucejo, Patrick Coate and V. Joseph Hotz. "Affirmative
Action and University Fit: Evidence from Proposition 209." NBER Working Paper 18523,
2012.

Betts, Julian R. “The Economics of Tracking in Education.” In Hanushek, Eric A., Stephen
Machin and Ludger Woessmann (eds.) Handbook of the Economics of Education, Volume
3, Amsterdam: North Holland, 2011, pp. 341‐381.

Betts, Julian R. Andrew C. Zhao and Lorien A. Rice. Determinants of Student
Achievement: New Evidence from San Diego. San Francisco: Public Policy Institute of
California, 2003.

Booij, Adam S., Edwin Leuven and Hessel Oosterbeek. "Ability Peer Effects in University:
Evidence from a Randomized Experiment." IZA Working Paper 8769, 2015.

Bowen, William G. and Derek Bok. The Shape of the River: Long‐term Consequences of
Considering Race in College and University Admissions. Princeton NJ: Princeton
University Press, 1998.

Bui, Sa A., Steven G. Craig, and Scott A. Imberman. “Is Gifted Education a Bright Idea?
Assessing the Impact of Gifted and Talented Progams on Achievement.” NBER Working
Paper 17089, May 2011.

Bursztyn, Leonardo and Robert Jensen. "How Does Peer Pressure Affect Educational
Investments?" NBER Working Paper 20714. November 2014.

Card, David and Laura Giuliano. "Does Gifted Education Work? For Which Students?"
NBER Working Paper 20453, September 2014.

Card, David and Laura Giuliano. "Can Universal Screening Increase the Representation of
Low Income and Minority Students in Gifted Education?" NBER Working Paper 21519,



                                           44
September 2015.

Carrell, Scott E., Bruce I. Sacerdote and James E. West. "From Natural Variation to
Optimal Policy? The Importance of Endogenous Peer Group Formation." Econometrica
81 (May 2013), pp. 855‐882.

Carrell, Scott E. and Mark Hoekstra. Externalities in the Classroom: How Children
Exposed to Domestic Violence Affect Everyone’s Kids.” American Economic Journal:
Applied Economics (January 2010), pp. 211‐228.

Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman, and Jonah E. Rockoff. “Measuring the Impacts of
Teachers I: Evaluating Bias in Teacher Value‐Added Estimates.” American Economic
Review 104 (September 2014), pp. 2593–2632.

Clotfelter, Charles T., Helen F. Ladd and Jacob L. Vigdor. "The Academic Achievement
Gap in Grades 3 to 8." Review of Economics and Statistics 91 (May 2009), pp. 398‐419.

Dale, Stacy Berg and Alan B. Krueger. "Estimating The Payoff Of Attending A More
Selective College: An Application Of Selection On Observables And Unobservables,"
Quarterly Journal of Economics 107 (November 2002), pp. 1491‐1527.

Davis, Billie, John Engberg, Dennis N. Epple and Ron Zimmer. “Evaluating the Gifted
Program of an Urban District Using a Modified Regression Discontinuity Design.” NBER
Working Paper 16414, September 2010.

Dee, Thomas and Emily Penner. “The Causal Effects of Cultural Relevance: Evidence
from an Ethnic Studies Program. NBER Working Paper 21865, January 2016.

Dieterle, Steven G., Cassandra Guarino, Mark Reckase and Jeffrey M. Wooldridge. "How
Do Principals Assign Students to Teachers? Finding Evidence in Administrative Data and
the Implications for Value Added." Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 34
(Winter 2015), pp. 461‐480.

DiNardo, John and David S. Lee. "Program Evaluation and Research Design." In Orley
Ashenfelter and David Card, editors, Handbook of Labor Economics Volume 4a. New
York: Elsevier, 2011.

Dobbie, Will and Roland G. Fryer Jr. “The Impact of Attending a School with High‐
Achieving Peers: Evidence from New York City Exam Schools.” American Economic
Journal—Applied Economics 6 (July 2014), pp. 58‐75.




                                          45
Donovan, M. Suzanne and Christopher T. Cross. Minority Students in Special and Gifted
Education. Washington DC: National Academies Press, 2002.

Dottor, Dallas. "Is Gifted and Talented Education a Gift that Keeps on Giving?"
Unpublished Manuscript, UC San Diego Department of Economics, July 2013.

Duflo Esther, Pascaline Dupas, and Michael Kremer. “Peer Effects, Teacher Incentives
and the Impact of Tracking: Evidence from a Randomized Evaluation in Kenya.”
American Economic Review 101 (August 2011), pp. 1739‐1174.

Fryer, Roland G. and Steven D. Levitt. "The Black‐White Test Score Gap Through Third
Grade." American Law and Economics Review 8 (2006), pp. 249‐281.

Fryer, Roland G. and Paul Torelli. "An Empirical Analysis of Acting White." Journal of
Public Economics 94 (June 2010), pp. 380‐396.

Hanushek, Eric and Stephen G. Rivkin. "Harming the Best: How Schools Affect the Black‐
White Achievement Gap." Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 28 (Winter 2009),
pp. 366‐393.

Hoxby, Caroline M. "Peer Effects in the Classroom: Learning from Gender and Race
Variation". NBER Working Paper 7867, August 2000.

Hoxby, Caroline M. and G. Weingarth. “Taking Race Out of the Equation: School
Reassignment and the Structure of Peer Effects,” Unpublished manuscript, 2006.

Jackson, C. Kirabo. “Do Students Benefit from Attending Better Schools? Evidence from
Rule‐based Student Assignments in Trinidad and Tobago.” Economic Journal, 120(549)
(2010), pp. 1399‐1429.

Krueger, Alan B. "Experimental Estimates of Education Production Functions." Quarterly
Journal of Economics 114 (May 1999), pp. 497‐532.

Krueger, Alan B. and Diane Whitmore. "The Effect of Attending a Small Class in the Early
Grades on College‐Test Taking and Middle School Test Results: Evidence from Project
STAR." Economic Journal 111 (January 2001), pp. 1‐28.

Lavy, Victor and Analia Schlosser. "Mechanisms and Impacts of Gender Peer Effects at
School." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 3(2) (April 2011), pp. 1‐33.

Lazear, Edward P. "Educational Production." Quarterly Journal of Economics 116 (August



                                            46
2001), pp. 777‐803.

Lee, David S. “Randomized Experiments from Non‐random Selection in U.S. House
Elections,” Journal of Econometrics 142(2) (February 2008), pp 675–697.

McCrary, Justin. “Manipulation of the Running Variable in the Regression Discontinuity
Design: A Density Test.” Journal of Econometrics 142(2) (2008), pp. 698–714..

Murphy, Richard and Felix Weinhardt. "Top of the Class: The Importance of Ordinal
Rank." Unpublished manuscript, 2014.

Oakes, Jeannie. Keeping Track: How Schools Structure Inequality. New Haven, CT: Yale
University Press, 1985.

Pop‐Eleches , Cristian and Miguel Urquiola. “Going to a Better School: Effects and
Behavioral Responses.” American Economic Review 103(4) (June 2013), pp. 1289‐1324.

Rivkin, Steven G., Eric A. Hanushek and John F. Kain. "Teachers, Schools and Academic
Achievement." Econometrica 73 (2) (March 2005), pp. 417‐458.

Rothstein, Jesse. “Revisiting the Impacts of Teachers.” Working Paper, 2015.

Rosenbaum, Paul R. "The Consequences of Adjustment for a Concomitant Vaariable that
has Been Affected by the Treatment." Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series A
147 (1984), pp. 656‐666.

Sacerdote, Bruce. "Peer Effects in Education: How Might They Work, How Big Are They,
and How Much Do We Know So Far?" In Eric A. Hanushek, Stephen Machin and Ludger
Woessmann, editors, Handbook of the Economics of Education. Volume 3. Amsterdam:
Elsevier, 2011.

Slavin, Robert E. “Ability Grouping and Student Achievement in Elementary Schools: A
Best‐Evidence Synthesis.” Review of Educational Research 57(3) (Fall 1987), pp. 293‐
336.

U.S. Department of Education, Office for Civil Rights. Data Snapshot: College and Career
Readiness. Issue Brief No. 3 (March 2014).

Vardardottir, Arna. “Peer Effects and Academic Achievement.” Economics of Education
Review (2013) 36: 108–121.




                                           47
                                                       Figure 1. Fraction of school/cohorts in sample and composition
                                                     of fourth-grade GHA classrooms, by number gifted in school/cohort



                                                .8




                                                                                                                                                              .12
Group proportion of students in GHA classroom




                                                                                                                                                                    Share of all school/cohorts in sample
                                                .6




                                                                                                                                                              .1
                                                .4




                                                                                                                                                              .08
                                                                                                                                                              .06
                                                .2




                                                                                                                                                              .04
                                                0




                                                      0               1     2         3         4        5       6       7      8-9       10-13 14-21 22-50
                                                                                               # gifted in school/cohort
                                                                                Minority High Achiever                          White High Achiever
                                                                                Minority Gifted                                 White Gifted
                                                                                Fraction of school/cohorts
                    Note: Four series showing composition of GHA classroom (left axis) are based on sample of 68,263 students
                    in a fourth-grade GHA classroom in the 2008/09 through 2011/12 school years. Share of school/cohorts (right
                    axis) is based on 527 cohorts during the same period. Minority is defined as black or Hispanic; Asians and
                    other non-white minorities make up less than ten percent of all students in GHA classroom s at all schools.




                                                                      Figure 2. Histogram of running variable for RD analysis
                                                                          (class rank in third-grade achievement scores)
                                                             200150
                                                      Frequency
                                                       100   50
                                                             0




                                                                      -10                 -5                    0                     5               10
                                                                                                    rank distance from cutoff

                                                          Note: Sample is all non-gifted students enrolled in fourth grade between 2009-2012 whose
                                                          class rank on third-grade achievement scores was within +/- 10 points of the placement cutoff
                                                          for the fourth-grade GHA classroom in their school/cohort (as in Table 1, column 2). Sample
                                                          size is 4,144.
                                  Figure 3. Student baseline scores and predicted scores
                                  A. Baseline reading score                                              B. Baseline math score
                     1.40                                                                  1.20
standardized score




                                                                      standardized score
                     1.20                                                                  1.00

                     1.00                                                                  0.80

                     0.80                                                                  0.60

                     0.60
                                                                                           0.40
                            -10       -5         0         5     10                                -10     -5         0         5     10
                                     rank distance from cutoff                                            rank distance from cutoff


                            C. Nonverbal ability index (NNAT)                                     D. Predicted average reading & math
                     118                                                                   1.00
standardized score




                                                                      standardized score
                     116
                                                                                           0.80
                     114

                     112
                                                                                           0.60
                     110

                     108                                                                   0.40
                            -10      -5         0         5      10                               -10      -5         0         5     10
                                    rank distance from cutoff                                             rank distance from cutoff

Note: Rank means and fitted values from linear regressions fit separately to students ranked above and
below the cutoff for placement in a fourth-grade GHA classroom. Baseline test scores (Panels A and B)
are third-grade scores standardized within district and year. Nonverbal ability index (Panel C) is scaled to a
national norm with a mean of 100 and standard deviation of 15. Predicted scores (Panel D) are from a
regression of fourth-grade scores on third-grade scores, observed student characteristics, and school
dummies. Sample in panels A, B and D is 4,144 students whose rank on third-grade scores was +/- 10
from cutoff and who were enrolled in the District in third and fourth grades. Panel C sample is restricted to
2,984 students who took the NNAT because they attended a District school in second grade in 2007-2009.
Figure 4. First-stage relationship for placement in GHA classroom

             0.80




             0.60
  fraction




             0.40




             0.20




             0.00
                    -10          -5                 0                    5                   10
                                        rank distance from cutoff

 Note: Rank means and fitted values from linear regressions fit separately to students ranked
 above and below the cutoff for placement in a fourth-grade GHA classroom. Sample is 4,144
 students whose rank on third-grade scores was +/- 10 from cutoff and who were enrolled in the
 District in third and fourth grades. All test scores are standardized within district and year. See
 text for more details.
                                           Figure 5. Fourth-grade standardized test scores
                                       A. Reading                                                          B. Math                                                         C. Writing
standardized score   1.00                                                              1.00                                                              0.60




                                                                  standardized score




                                                                                                                                    standardized score
                                                                                                                                                         0.50
                     0.80                                                              0.80

                                                                                                                                                         0.40

                     0.60                                                              0.60
                                                                                                                                                         0.30


                     0.40                                                              0.40                                                              0.20
                             -10      -5       0      5      10                                -10      -5       0      5      10                               -10      -5       0      5      10
                                   rank distance from cutoff                                         rank distance from cutoff                                        rank distance from cutoff


                             D. Reading (Differenced)                                            E. Math (Differenced)
                     0.20                                                              0.20

                     0.10                                                              0.10
standardized score




                                                                  standardized score




                     0.00                                                              0.00


                     -0.10                                                             -0.10

                     -0.20                                                             -0.20

                     -0.30                                                             -0.30
                             -10      -5       0      5      10                                -10      -5       0      5      10
                                   rank distance from cutoff                                         rank distance from cutoff


      Note: Rank means and fitted values from linear regressions fit separately to students ranked above and
      below the cutoff for placement in a fourth-grade GHA classroom. Sample is 4,144 students whose rank
      on third-grade scores was +/- 10 from cutoff and who were enrolled in the District in third and fourth
      grades. All test scores are standardized within district and year.
                                  Figure 6. Fourth-grade standardized test scores,
                                                  by minority status
                                   A. Reading, White                                                     B. Math, White
                     1.20                                                                 1.20
standardized score




                                                                     standardized score
                     1.00                                                                 1.00


                     0.80                                                                 0.80


                     0.60                                                                 0.60


                     0.40                                                                 0.40
                            -10    -5           0          5    10                               -10   -5           0          5    10
                                    rank distance from cutoff                                           rank distance from cutoff


                                  C. Reading, Minority                                                 D. Math, Minority
                     1.00                                                                 1.00
standardized score




                                                                     standardized score
                     0.80                                                                 0.80


                     0.60                                                                 0.60


                     0.40                                                                 0.40


                     0.20                                                                 0.20
                            -10    -5           0          5    10                               -10   -5           0          5    10
                                    rank distance from cutoff                                           rank distance from cutoff

  Note: Rank means and fitted values from linear regressions fit separately to students ranked above and
  below cutoff for placement in a fourth-grade GHA classroom. Sample is 1,397 white students and 2,323
  black or Hispanic students whose rank on third-grade scores was +/- 10 from cutoff and who were
  enrolled in the District in third and fourth grades. Test scores are standardized within district and year.
                             Figure 7. Characteristics of fourth-grade classmates and teachers

                                   A. Peer avg. lagged                                             B. Peer std. dev.                                                 C. Peer fraction
                                     reading & math                                             lagged reading & math                                             suspended in 3rd grade
                     1.00                                                              0.72                                                             0.030

                     0.80
standardized score




                                                                  standardized score
                                                                                       0.70
                     0.60                                                                                                                               0.025




                                                                                                                                   fraction
                     0.40                                                              0.68

                     0.20                                                                                                                               0.020
                                                                                       0.66
                     0.00
                                                                                       0.64
                     -0.20                                                                                                                              0.015
                             -10      -5       0      5      10                               -10      -5       0      5      10                                 -10       -5      0      5      10
                                   rank distance from cutoff                                        rank distance from cutoff                                          rank distance from cutoff


                                     D. Peer fraction                                                 E. Peer fraction                                            F. Teacher value added,
                                         female                                                        minority male                                                  reading & math
                     0.52                                                              0.34                                                             0.020




                                                                                                                                   standardized score
                     0.51                                                              0.32                                                             0.010
fraction




                                                                  fraction




                     0.50                                                              0.30                                                             0.000


                     0.49                                                              0.28                                                             -0.010


                     0.48                                                              0.26                                                             -0.020
                             -10      -5       0      5      10                               -10      -5       0      5      10                                 -10       -5      0      5      10
                                   rank distance from cutoff                                        rank distance from cutoff                                          rank distance from cutoff


               Note: Rank means and fitted values from linear regressions fit separately to students ranked above and
               below the cutoff for placement in a fourth-grade GHA classroom. Sample is 4,144 students whose rank
               on third-grade scores was +/- 10 from cutoff and who were enrolled in the District in third and fourth
               grades. All test scores are standardized within district and year. See text for more details.
Figure 8. Between-school/cohort analysis, placement in GHA classroom and
                   student achievement in fourth grade

              A. % in 4th grade GHA classroom,                      B. % in 4th grade GHA classroom,
                     students ranked #1-20                                students ranked #25-44
    70                                                     70
    60                                                     60
    50                                                     50
    40                                                     40
%




                                                     %
    30                                                     30
    20                                                     20
    10                                                     10
     0                                                      0
          0           1        2        3        4              0           1        2        3        4
                # gifted 4th graders in cohort                        # gifted 4th graders in cohort

      C. Difference, grade 3-4 reading & math,             D. Difference, grade 3-4 reading & math,
                students ranked #1-20                               students ranked #25-44
 0                                                    0


-.1                                                  -.1


-.2                                                  -.2


-.3                                                  -.3
      0             1         2        3         4          0             1         2        3         4
               # gifted 4th graders in cohort                        # gifted 4th graders in cohort

Note: Lines are fitted values from linear regressions of GHA placement (Panels A & B) or the average
change in reading and math scores between third and fourth grades (Panels C & D), on the number of
gifted students in the school/cohort, estimated for students in cohorts with 1-4 gifted students.
Regressions include year dummies and cohort-level controls (see text for details). Plotted points are
observed GHA placement rates or regression-adjusted means.
      Figure 9. Predicted and observed fourth-grade test scores

                                                              A. Full sample

                             1.00

                                                           predicted
       standardized score




                                                           observed
                             0.50




                             0.00




                             -0.50
                                     -50 -45 -40    -35 -30 -25 -20 -15 -10 -5         0   5   10   15
                                                           rank distance from cutoff

                                                   B. Black and Hispanic students only
                             1.00



                                                           predicted
        standardized score




                                                           observed
                             0.50




                             0.00




                             -0.50
                                     -50 -45 -40    -35 -30 -25 -20 -15 -10 -5         0   5   10   15
                                                           rank distance from cutoff

Note: Plotted points are means of predicted or observed test scores in fourth grade. Observed scores
are averages of standardized fourth-grade reading and math scores. Predicted scores are constructed
from a regression of fourth-grade average of reading and math score on: third-grade reading score,
third-grade math score, age, dummies for FRL, ELL, race/ethnicity, and gender, and a full set of school
dummies, using all fourth-grade students in District in 2009-2012 for whom third-grade scores are
available from the previous year. Lines are fitted values from quadratic models for predicted or
observed fourth-grade scores, fit separately to students ranked above and below the cutoff. Sample
size is 13,379 in Panel A, and 8,101 in Panel B.
Table 1. Sample Characteristics
                                                                                     Between‐school/
                                                    RD samples (students ranked     cohort sample (0‐4
                                                         +/‐ 10 from cutoff)         gifted in cohort)
                                       All in 3rd      All     Cohorts   Cohorts    Ranked     Ranked
                                       grade in      school    with 5+   with 1‐4   1‐20 in    25‐44 in
                                       2008‐11      /cohorts    gifted    gifted    cohort      cohort
                                          (1)          (2)        (3)       (4)       (5)         (6)
Student demographics
Female (%)                                48          51         51        52         52          50
White (%)                                 28          34         41        23         20          16
Black (%)                                 39          28         18        45         52          58
Hispanic (%)                              27          28         30        24         21          21
Asian (%)                                  3           5          7         3          3           2
Free lunch eligible (%)                   58          49         36        71         72          79
English language learner (%)              10           1          1         2          3           7
Median income in ZIP ($1,000s)           57.8        59.6       66.9      47.8       46.0        45.9

Mean NNAT (screening test)              104.6        113.3      116.1     109.4      112.0       103.5
 Percent taking test                     72           70         66        76         72          74

Third grade state test scores
Mean reading test                       ‐0.01        0.86       1.04      0.57       0.81        0.03
Mean math test                           0.00        0.80       0.99      0.49       0.74        0.04

Fourth grade state test scores
Mean reading test                        0.01        0.69       0.85      0.43       0.60        ‐0.06
Mean math test                           0.03        0.69       0.83      0.45       0.61        ‐0.05

Characteristics of school‐wide peers
Mean 3rd grade reading test               ‐‐         0.09       0.22      ‐0.12      ‐0.16       ‐0.16
Mean 3rd grade math test                  ‐‐         0.07       0.20      ‐0.15      ‐0.19       ‐0.19
Free lunch eligible (%)                   ‐‐          58         48        76         81          81
Characteristics of school's fourth
grade GHA classroom
Mean 3rd grade reading test               ‐‐         0.95       1.10      0.72       0.60        0.60
Mean 3rd grade math test                  ‐‐         0.91       1.04      0.70       0.57        0.57
Non‐gifted high achievers (%)             ‐‐          73         63        87         89          89


Number of observations                 70,058        4,144     2,553      1,591     4,767       5,016

                                                                                              (continued)
Table 1. Sample Characteristics, cont'd.
                                                                                                            Between‐school/
                                                                   RD samples (students ranked             cohort sample (0‐4
                                                                        +/‐ 10 from cutoff)                 gifted in cohort)
                                                  All in 3rd         All       Cohorts      Cohorts        Ranked       Ranked
                                                  grade in         school      with 5+      with 1‐4       1‐20 in      25‐44 in
                                                  2008‐11         /cohorts      gifted       gifted        cohort        cohort
                                                     (1)             (2)          (3)          (4)           (5)           (6)
Characteristics of school/cohorts
Total 4th grade enrollment                            ‐‐           132.62       143.92       114.48        108.67       108.67
Number of 4th grade classrooms                        ‐‐            5.77         6.26          4.98          4.72         4.72
Number of GHA classrooms                              ‐‐            1.16         1.26          1.00          0.65         0.65
Number of students per classroom                      ‐‐           23.58        23.54         23.64         23.27        23.27
Fraction of students in GHA classroom                 ‐‐            0.19         0.19          0.19          0.12         0.12

Number of observations                             70,058          4,144        2,553         1,591         4,767        5,016
Note: Sample in column 1 includes one observation per student observed in a non‐charter district elementary school in third grade
between 2008 and 2011. Sub‐samples in columns 2‐4 include students in fourth grade in 2009‐2012 in school/cohorts that
complied with District's ranking formula and had at least one fourth‐grade GHA classroom, and whose scores fell within +/‐ 10
rank points of the eligibility cutoff for their school/cohort. Sub‐samples in columns 5‐6 include students in 4th grade in 2009‐2012
in cohorts with between 0‐4 gifted students. Fourth‐grade test scores are reported only for those who stayed in the district and
advanced to fourth grade in the following year. Free lunch status (FRL) and English language learner (ELL) status are measured at
the end of third grade. Non‐verbal ability index (NNAT) is measured at the end of second grade for students who took the test
between 2007‐2009. State test scores are standardized across district within year and grade.
Table 2. Regression Discontinuity Estimates for Fourth Grade Outcomes
                                                Baseline Achievement                  First‐Stage                      Reduced‐Form Outcomes
                                                                                     Prob. in 4th
                                              3rd Grade         3rd Grade            Grade GHA              4th Grade          4th Grade          4th Grade
                                               Reading            Math                Classroom              Reading             Math              Writing
                                                  (1)               (2)                   (3)                   (4)                (5)                (6)

1. No controls                                   0.008             ‐0.046               0.323**               0.092**            0.073†              ‐0.011
                                                (0.029)           (0.043)               (0.025)               (0.034)            (0.039)            (0.054)

2. School and year fixed effects                 0.015             ‐0.044               0.319**               0.093**            0.087*              ‐0.012
   and student controls                         (0.027)           (0.040)               (0.026)               (0.031)            (0.035)            (0.051)

3. Differenced specification                       ‐‐                 ‐‐                    ‐‐                0.092**            0.105*                ‐‐
   (based on change in test scores)                                                                           (0.033)            (0.041)

Sample size                                     4,144              4,144                 4,144                 4,144             4,144              4,144

Note: Estimates from models of dependent variable in column heading as a function of a student's rank (within school/cohort) on third‐grade test scores. Entries
are estimated coefficients on a dummy for the student's rank exceeding the cohort‐specific cutoff for placement in the fourth‐grade GHA classroom. All models
include a linear term in rank interacted with the dummy. Models in rows 2‐3 control for student demographics (age, gender, race/ethnicity, and median
household income in ZIP code), dummies for year in fourth grade, and a complete set of school dummies. Models in row 2, columns 3‐6 also control for third‐
grade scores in math and reading. Analysis sample is described in column 2 of Table 1. Parentheses contain standard errors, clustered by school. † p < 0.10, * p <
0.05, ** p < 0.01.
Table 3. RD Heterogeneity Analysis for Fourth Grade Outcomes
                                      Baseline Scores           First Stage             Fourth Grade Test Scores (2SLS)
                                      3rd          3rd           Prob. in
                                     Grade        Grade            GHA                          Diff.                       Diff.
                                    Reading       Math          Classroom        Reading       Reading         Math         Math
                                      (1)          (2)              (3)            (4)           (5)            (6)          (7)
1. Full sample                        0.02        ‐0.04           0.32**          0.29**       0.29**          0.28*       0.34**
(n=4144)                             (0.03)       (0.04)          (0.03)          (0.10)       (0.10)          (0.11)      (0.13)

2. By Race/Ethnicity
2a. White                             0.02        ‐0.07           0.33**           ‐0.07        ‐0.07          ‐0.13        ‐0.04
(n=1397)                             (0.05)       (0.07)          (0.04)           (0.17)       (0.19)         (0.17)       (0.21)
2b. Black and Hispanic               ‐0.01        ‐0.02           0.30**          0.61**       0.64**         0.52**       0.56**
(n=2323)                             (0.04)       (0.04)          (0.04)          (0.15)       (0.16)         (0.16)       (0.17)
2c. Black Only                       ‐0.00         0.00           0.27**          0.65**       0.65**         0.69**       0.69**
(n=1180)                             (0.05)       (0.05)          (0.05)          (0.25)       (0.27)         (0.23)       (0.26)
2d. Hispanic Only                    ‐0.02        ‐0.07           0.31**          0.69**       0.76**          0.42†       0.53**
(n=1143)                             (0.05)       (0.05)          (0.06)          (0.20)       (0.22)          (0.22)      (0.24)

3. Black and Hispanic Only, by FRL Status
3a. FRL‐eligible               ‐0.05      ‐0.02                   0.24**          0.56**       0.70**          0.47*        0.55*
(n=1538)                       (0.04)    (0.05)                   (0.05)          (0.20)       (0.23)          (0.23)       (0.25)
3b. Non‐FRL‐eligible                  0.06        ‐0.02           0.44**          0.74**       0.67**         0.63**       0.63**
(n=785)                              (0.06)       (0.07)          (0.07)          (0.24)       (0.25)         (0.21)       (0.21)
4. Black and Hispanic Only, by Number of Gifted Students in School/Cohort
4a. 1‐4 Gifted                ‐0.08†    0.04        0.27**       0.62**   0.73**                              0.79**       0.80**
(n=1072)                       (0.04)  (0.06)        (0.05)       (0.19)  (0.19)                              (0.23)       (0.25)
4b. 5 or more Gifted                  0.05        ‐0.10†          0.32**          0.63**        0.59*          0.36†        0.49*
(n=1223)                             (0.06)       (0.06)          (0.05)          (0.23)        (0.25)         (0.21)       (0.23)

5. Black and Hispanic Only, by Gender
5a. Girls                       0.02              ‐0.00           0.31**           0.35+         0.31          0.43*        0.42+
(n=1216)                       (0.05)             (0.05)          (0.05)           (0.19)       (0.21)         (0.20)       (0.22)
5b. Boys                             ‐0.03        ‐0.03           0.27**          0.92**       1.04**          0.69*        0.77*
(n=1107)                             (0.05)       (0.06)          (0.05)          (0.26)       (0.29)          (0.29)       (0.30)
Note: Estimates from RD models with school and year fixed effects and student controls, as in Table 2, row 2 (see Table 2 note for
details). In all two‐stage least squares models (columns 4‐7) the first‐stage model is for the probability of being in the fourth‐grade
GHA classroom. Parentheses contain standard errors, clustered by school. † p < 0.10, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01.
Table 4. Two‐Stage Least Squares RD Heterogeneity Analysis for Fifth and Sixth Grade Outcomes
                                               Fifth Grade Outcomes                                      Sixth Grade Outcomes
                                              Diff.             Diff.                                        Diff.            Diff.
                                     Reading Reading Math       Math                Science       Reading Reading Math        Math
                                       (1)     (2)       (3)     (4)                   (5)          (6)       (7)      (8)     (9)

1. Full sample                         0.12        0.10       0.16       0.20†        0.13         0.23†       0.21†      0.41**      0.45**
(n=3598)                              (0.12)      (0.12)     (0.10)      (0.11)      (0.11)        (0.12)      (0.12)     (0.12)      (0.14)

2. By Race/Ethnicity
2a. White                             ‐0.11       ‐0.11      ‐0.10       ‐0.05       ‐0.23         ‐0.20       ‐0.20        0.12        0.17
(n=1187)                              (0.18)      (0.18)     (0.19)      (0.20)      (0.17)        (0.17)      (0.19)      (0.19)      (0.21)

2b. Black and Hispanic                 0.20        0.21      0.34*       0.38*       0.32†         0.62**     0.64**      0.68**      0.73**
(n=2047)                              (0.19)      (0.20)     (0.15)      (0.18)      (0.19)        (0.21)     (0.21)      (0.21)      (0.23)

3. Black and Hispanic Only, by FRL Status
3a. FRL eligible                 0.24      0.32               0.20        0.26        0.27         0.78*       0.89*      0.83**       0.90*
(n=1378)                        (0.29)    (0.32)             (0.25)      (0.29)      (0.31)        (0.33)      (0.36)     (0.31)       (0.36)

3b. Non‐FRL eligible                   0.35        0.27      0.63**      0.63**      0.43†         0.65*       0.56*       0.56*       0.56*
(n=669)                               (0.26)      (0.27)     (0.19)      (0.19)      (0.25)        (0.27)      (0.28)      (0.27)      (0.27)

4. Black and Hispanic Only, by Number of Gifted Students in School/Cohort
4a. 1‐4 Gifted                   0.20    0.18      0.24     0.42*     0.28                         0.67*       0.65*       0.58*      0.75**
(n=1070)                        (0.24)  (0.26)    (0.18)    (0.21)   (0.22)                        (0.27)      (0.29)      (0.25)     (0.28)

4b. 5 or more Gifted                   0.23        0.28      0.45†        0.37        0.36         0.56*       0.63*      0.80**       0.70*
(n=977)                               (0.28)      (0.30)     (0.24)      (0.28)      (0.30)        (0.28)      (0.29)     (0.31)       (0.34)

5. Black and Hispanic Only, by Gender
5a. Girls                        0.09              0.05      0.34+        0.34       ‐0.06          0.34        0.29        0.36        0.36
(n=1074)                        (0.21)            (0.24)     (0.19)      (0.21)      (0.19)        (0.25)      (0.28)      (0.23)      (0.25)

5b. Boys                               0.50       0.60+      0.49+       0.57*       0.90*         0.93**     1.07**      1.21**      1.28**
(n=973)                               (0.32)      (0.34)     (0.26)      (0.29)      (0.37)        (0.36)     (0.40)      (0.39)      (0.41)
Note: Estimates from two‐stage least squares RD models where the first‐stage effect is on the probability of being in the fourth‐grade GHA
classroom. All models control for school and year fixed effects and student characteristics (as in Table 2, row 2). Analysis samples include all
students in the main analysis sample who are in the relevant sub‐population and who are observed in the District through the end of sixth
grade. Parentheses contain standard errors, clustered by school. † p < 0.10, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01.
Table 5. RD Estimates of GHA Impact on Gain Scores in Reading and Math, Adjusted
for Effects of Changes in Classroom Characteristics
                                              Reading                                      Math
                                    All        Whites     Minorities           All        Whites     Minorities
                                 Students       only        only            Students       only        only
                                    (1)          (2)         (3)               (4)          (5)         (6)
Classroom Characteristic:
1. None                           0.10**        ‐0.00       0.19**           0.11**         0.01       0.17**
                                  (0.04)        (0.07)      (0.05)           (0.04)        (0.08)      (0.05)

2. Teacher value added            0.10**        ‐0.00       0.19**           0.12**         0.02       0.17**
                                  (0.04)        (0.07)      (0.05)           (0.04)        (0.08)      (0.05)

3. Average of peers'              0.09*         ‐0.01       0.18**           0.08+         ‐0.02       0.14**
  lagged test scores              (0.03)        (0.07)      (0.05)           (0.04)        (0.08)      (0.05)

4. Std. dev. of peers'            0.10**        ‐0.00       0.19**           0.12**         0.02       0.17**
  lagged test scores              (0.04)        (0.07)      (0.05)           (0.04)        (0.08)      (0.05)

5. Peer fraction suspended        0.10**        ‐0.00       0.19**           0.11**         0.01       0.17**
  in 3rd grade                    (0.04)        (0.07)      (0.05)           (0.04)        (0.08)      (0.05)

6. Peer fraction female           0.10**        ‐0.00       0.19**           0.12**         0.01       0.17**
                                  (0.04)        (0.07)      (0.05)           (0.04)        (0.08)      (0.05)

7. Peer fraction minority         0.10**        ‐0.00       0.19**           0.11**         0.01       0.17**
   male                           (0.04)        (0.07)      (0.05)           (0.04)        (0.08)      (0.05)

8. All mechanisms                 0.10**         0.00       0.19**           0.10*         ‐0.00       0.15**
                                  (0.03)        (0.07)      (0.05)           (0.04)        (0.08)      (0.05)

Number of observations             3685         1266         2040             3685         1266         2040

Notes. Table reports reduced‐form RD estimates from models for test score gains in reading and math between
3rd and 4th grade. Estimation samples (and indicated sample sizes) exclude students for whom teacher value
added (TVA) cannot be estimated because the teacher is only observed in one year. (See Appendix B for
description of the model used to estimate TVA.) Row 1 shows the estimates from models with controls as in
row 3 of Table 2. Rows 2‐6 report estimates from RD models that also control for the specified classroom
characteristic and constrain the coefficient to equal the estimated effect of that characteristic, as reported in
the odd columns of Appendix Table 3 (see text and Appendix Table 3 note for details). Row 7 controls for all
classroom characteristics simultaneously and constrains the coefficients to those reported in the even columns
of Appendix Table 3. Standard errors, clustered by school, in parentheses. † p < 0.10, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01.
Table 6. Effect of Having One or More Gifted Students in Fourth Grade
School/Cohort
                                              Average 3rd                             Average 4th       Difference,
                                                 Grade            Prob. in 4th           Grade          Grade 3‐4
                                               Reading &          Grade GHA            Reading &        Reading &
                                                 Math              Classroom             Math              Math
                                                  (1)                  (2)                (3)                (4)
A. Students Ranked 1‐20 in School/Cohort
1. Linear control for number           ‐0.021                       0.372**             0.092**           0.099**
   gifted + school/cohort controls    (0.023)                       (0.060)             (0.035)           (0.033)

2. Add school fixed effects                       ‐0.005            0.278**              0.072†            0.074†
                                                 (0.027)            (0.072)              (0.041)           (0.040)
number of observations                            4767                4767                4767              4767

3. School/cohort controls;                       ‐0.036†            0.438**              0.070*            0.080*
   schools with 0 or 1 gifted                    (0.019)            (0.052)              (0.034)           (0.032)
number of observations                            2251                2251                2251              2251
B. Students Ranked 25‐44 in School/Cohort
1. Linear control for number                      ‐0.000            0.071**               0.009             0.009
   gifted + school/cohort controls               (0.018)            (0.025)              (0.034)           (0.035)
2. Add school fixed effects                       0.001              0.058†               ‐0.017            ‐0.017
                                                 (0.020)             (0.031)             (0.039)           (0.040)

number of observations                            5016                5016                5016              5016

3. School/cohort controls;                        ‐0.001            0.089**               ‐0.009            ‐0.009
   schools with 0 or 1 gifted                    (0.016)            (0.014)              (0.029)           (0.031)

number of observations                            2243                2243                2243              2243

C. Students Ranked 1‐44 in School/Cohort
1. Linear control for number           ‐0.016                       0.214**               0.048            0.052†
   gifted + school/cohort controls    (0.015)                       (0.035)              (0.029)           (0.030)

2. Add school fixed effects                       ‐0.004            0.164**               0.021             0.022
                                                 (0.015)            (0.043)              (0.033)           (0.033)

number of observations                           10774               10774               10774             10774

3. School/cohort controls;                        ‐0.017            0.255**               0.025             0.030
   schools with 0 or 1 gifted                    (0.011)            (0.027)              (0.026)           (0.027)

number of observations                            4953                4953                4953              4953

Note: Estimates are coefficients on a dummy for having at least one gifted student in one's fourth‐grade school/cohort.
Estimation sample in rows 1 & 2 of each panel includes students in the specified rank group in one of 256 fourth‐grade
cohorts with between 0 and 4 gifted students. Sample in row 3 is restricted to cohorts with only 0 or 1 gifted students.
Controls in all models include cohort average of third‐grade reading and math scores, cohort % FRL, cohort size, and a
set of year dummies. The models in row 2 (but not row 3) add school fixed effects. Parentheses contain standard
errors, clustered by school. † p < 0.10, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01.
Table 7. Estimated Effect of Having at Least one Gifted Student in Fourth Grade School/Cohort, Allowing for Heterogeneity by
Relative Achievement within Classroom
                                                     Baseline:                First Stage:                   Reduced Form Outcomes:                             2SLS (TOT):
                      Percent Black or         Average 3rd Grade          Prob. in 4th Grade       Average 4th Grade Difference, Grade 4‐3                Difference, Grade 4‐3
                      Hispanic in Group         Reading & Math             GHA Classroom            Reading & Math      Reading & Math                       Reading & Math
                             (1)                      (2)                         (3)                     (4)                 (5)                                  (6)
A. Students Ranked 1‐20 within School/Cohort
   All                        72.4                     ‐0.021                   0.372**                   0.092**                   0.099**                       0.266**
                                                      (0.023)                   (0.060)                   (0.035)                   (0.033)                       (0.095)
   #1‐5                       67.5                     ‐0.034                   0.442**                     0.036                     0.051                        0.115
                                                      (0.049)                   (0.074)                    (0.058)                   (0.058)                      (0.127)
   #6‐10                      71.8                     ‐0.015                   0.416**                     0.049                     0.053                        0.127
                                                      (0.034)                   (0.070)                    (0.046)                   (0.048)                      (0.112)
   #11‐15                     74.7                     0.018                    0.348**                   0.164**                   0.162**                       0.464**
                                                      (0.025)                   (0.068)                   (0.045)                   (0.045)                       (0.150)
   #16‐20                     75.4                     ‐0.020                   0.233**                   0.122**                   0.128**                       0.547*
                                                      (0.029)                   (0.057)                   (0.045)                   (0.045)                       (0.232)

B. Students Ranked 21 and Lower within School/Cohort, by Quintile
   Quintile 1           77.0                           ‐0.009                   0.051**                     0.006                     0.007                           ‐‐
   (most highly ranked)                               (0.014)                   (0.012)                    (0.022)                   (0.023)

   Quintile 2                 81.1                     ‐0.011                   0.044**                     0.022                     0.023                           ‐‐
                                                      (0.012)                   (0.014)                    (0.031)                   (0.031)
   Quintile 3                 82.1                     ‐0.005                    0.022†                     0.026                     0.027                           ‐‐
                                                      (0.012)                    (0.012)                   (0.026)                   (0.027)

   Quintile 4                 85.4                     0.004                     0.023†                     0.021                     0.021                           ‐‐
                                                      (0.014)                    (0.013)                   (0.030)                   (0.030)
   Quintile 5                 87.1                    0.048†                     0.021†                     0.004                     ‐0.013                          ‐‐
   (lowest ranked)                                    (0.029)                    (0.011)                   (0.037)                   (0.037)

Note: Estimates in columns 2‐6 are coefficients on a dummy for having at least one gifted student in one's fourth grade school/cohort, from models with year dummies and cohort‐
level controls as in row 1 of Panels A & B in Table 6. See Table 6 note for details. Two‐stage least squares estimates in column 6 are normalized by the first‐stage effect shown in
column 3. Estimation samples are subgroups, based on third‐grade test‐score rank, from a sample of 28,177 students in one of 256 4th grade cohorts with between 0 and 4 gifted
students. Parentheses contain standard errors, clustered by school. † p < 0.10, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01.
FOR ONLINE PUBLICATION



                           Appendix Figure 1. Fractions of potential high achievers who
                                are observed through end of grades 4, 5, and 6
                                             A. 4th Grade                                                   B. 5th Grade
                           1.00                                                            0.95

                fraction




                                                                                fraction
                           0.95                                                            0.90



                           0.90                                                            0.85
                                   -10     -5         0         5          10                     -10     -5         0         5         10
                                          rank distance from cutoff                                      rank distance from cutoff


                                             C. 6th Grade
                           0.90
                fraction




                           0.85



                           0.80
                                   -10     -5         0         5          10
                                          rank distance from cutoff

            Note: Figures plot means and fitted values from local linear regressions fit separately to students
            ranked above and below the cutoff for placement in a GHA classroom in fourth grade. Sample is
            4,244 students whose rank was +/- 10 from threshold, and who were enrolled in the District in third
            grade in 2008-2011.




              Appendix Figure 2. Estimated discontinuities in fourth-grade scores
                   from local linear regressions with varying bandwidths
                                         A. Reading                                                           B. Math
              0.20                                                              0.20

              0.15                                                              0.15

              0.10                                                              0.10

              0.05                                                              0.05

              0.00                                                              0.00

                           5                   10                     15
                                                                                             5                     10                   15
                   bandwidth (rank points on each side of threshold)                       bandwidth (rank points on each side of threshold)


                                             C. Writing
                  0.20

                  0.10
                                                                                                             estimated discontinuity
                  0.00
                                                                                                             95% C.I.
                -0.10

                -0.20

                               5                    10                     15
                            bandwidth (rank points on each side of threshold)

            Note: Figures plot RD coefficients and 95% confidence intervals from local linear models estimated
            using bandwidths ranging from 5 to 15 rank points above and below the cutoff for placement in a
            fourth-grade GHA classroom. All models control for baseline scores, student characteristics, and
            school dummies, as in row 2 of Table 2.
                      Appendix Figure 3. Combined reading and math scores of minorities,
                                               by grade level
                                    A. First stage                                                        B. NNAT                                                        C. 3rd grade
                                  (GHA in 4th grade)                                                     (2nd grade)                                                   reading & math
                     1.00                                                             116.00                                                             1.20

                     0.80




                                                                 standardized score




                                                                                                                                    standardized score
                                                                                      114.00                                                             1.00

                     0.60
fraction




                                                                                      112.00                                                             0.80
                     0.40
                                                                                      110.00
                                                                                                                                                         0.60
                     0.20
                                                                                      108.00
                     0.00                                                                                                                                0.40
                            -10      -5       0      5      10                                 -10       -5      0     5       10                               -10      -5       0      5      10
                                  rank distance from cutoff                                          rank distance from cutoff                                        rank distance from cutoff


                                     D. 4th grade                                                      E. 5th grade                                                      F. 6th grade
                                   reading & math                                                    reading & math                                                    reading & math
                     0.90                                                             0.90                                                               0.90
standardized score




                                                                 standardized score




                                                                                                                                    standardized score
                     0.70                                                             0.70                                                               0.70



                     0.50                                                             0.50                                                               0.50



                     0.30                                                             0.30                                                               0.30
                            -10      -5       0      5      10                               -10      -5       0      5      10                                 -10      -5       0      5      10
                                  rank distance from cutoff                                        rank distance from cutoff                                          rank distance from cutoff

                     Note: Rank means and fitted values from linear regressions fit separately to students above and below
                     the cutoff for placement in a fourth-grade GHA classroom. Sample is 2,047 black or Hispanic students
                     whose rank on third-grade scores was +/- 10 from cutoff and who were enrolled in the District in third
                     through sixth grade. Panel B is further restricted to 1,473 students who took the NNAT in second grade in
                     2007-2009. NNAT-based score is scaled to a national norm with a mean of 100 and standard deviation of
                     15. Reading and math test scores are standardized within district and year before averaging.
Appendix Table 1. OLS and Tobit RD Estimates for Fourth Grade Outcomes
                                                                           Tobit, scores censored at               Tobit, scores censored at
                                                OLS                                maximum                              95th percentile
                                   4th          4th        4th            4th          4th         4th            4th          4th        4th
                                  Grade        Grade      Grade          Grade        Grade       Grade          Grade        Grade      Grade
                                 Reading       Math       Writing        Writing      Math        Writing        Writing      Math       Writing
                                   (1)          (2)        (3)            (3)          (4)         (5)            (6)          (7)        (8)

1. All students                   0.098**     0.081*       ‐0.005        0.095**      0.081*      ‐0.005         0.091**      0.088*       0.015
                                  (0.033)     (0.040)      (0.054)       (0.032)      (0.040)     (0.054)        (0.031)      (0.035)     (0.055)

Sample size                        4,144       4,144       4,144          4,144        4,144       4,144          4,144       4,144        4,144


2. White only                     ‐0.026       ‐0.068      ‐0.046         ‐0.029      ‐0.074      ‐0.051         ‐0.035       ‐0.056      ‐0.005
                                  (0.062)      (0.065)     (0.098)        (0.059)     (0.066)     (0.095)        (0.055)      (0.057)     (0.100)

Sample size                        1397        1397         1397           1397        1397        1397           1397         1397        1397


3. Minorities                     0.176**     0.142**       0.001        0.175**      0.144**      0.004         0.170**     0.147**       0.009
                                  (0.045)     (0.048)      (0.063)       (0.044)      (0.048)     (0.062)        (0.042)     (0.044)      (0.062)

Sample size                        2323        2323         2323           2323        2323        2323           2323         2323        2323

Note: Estimates from RD models with school and year fixed effects and student controls, as in Table 2, row 2 (see Table 2 note for details). Columns
(1)‐(3) reproduce the estimates from Table 2, row 2. Columns (4)‐(6) report estimates from Tobit models in which the data is assumed to be
censored at the maximum value of each test score; in columns (7)‐(9) the data is assumed to be censored at the minimum across the four sample
cohorts of the cohort 95th percen le. Parentheses contain standard errors, clustered by school. † p < 0.10, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01.
Appendix Table 2. RD Heterogeneity Analysis for Attrition and Classroom Placement in Fifth and Sixth Grades
                                                              Fifth Grade                                               Sixth Grade Outcomes
                                                              Prob. in 4th          Prob. in 5th                              Prob. in 4th   Prob. in 6th
                                       Prob. Stayed in        Grade GHA             Grade GHA            Prob. Stayed in      Grade GHA    Grade Advanced
                                          District             Classroom             Classroom              District           Classroom        Math
                                             (1)                   (2)                   (3)                   (4)                 (5)           (6)

1. Full sample                              0.002               0.309**               0.068*                   0.002               0.316**               0.052*
                                           (0.017)              (0.027)               (0.027)                 (0.021)              (0.027)               (0.024)
Sample size                                 4144                  3901                 2768                    4144                  3598                 3598

2. White only                               0.001               0.320**               ‐0.014                  ‐0.029               0.353**                0.005
                                           (0.027)              (0.045)               (0.049)                 (0.039)              (0.050)               (0.039)
Sample size                                 1397                  1321                  945                    1397                  1187                 1187

3. Black and Hispanic only                  0.003               0.290**               0.122**                  0.022               0.282**               0.077*
                                           (0.020)              (0.039)               (0.038)                 (0.026)              (0.040)               (0.037)
Sample size                                 2323                  2193                 1552                    2323                  2047                 2047

Note: Estimates from RD models with school and year fixed effects and student controls, as in Table 2, row 2 (see Table 2 note for details). The analysis samples in
columns 2, 5 and 6 consist of the subset of students from the main analysis sample who were observed in the District through the end of the relevant grade. The samples
in column 3 are reduced by roughly 30% due to our inability to match students to fifth‐grade classrooms at schools where students rotate between teachers in fifth grade
(see Appendix A for details). Parentheses contain standard errors, clustered by school. † p < 0.10, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01.
Appendix Table 3. Heterogeneity Analysis for Discontinuities in Potential Mechanisms
                                                                                        Peer                                             Peer
                                   Prob(TVA is              Peer avg.   Peer std.                                        Peer
                                                 Teacher                              fraction                                         fraction
                                      non‐                 lagged test dev. lagged                                     fraction
                                               value added                          suspended                                          minorty
                                    missing)                  scores   test scores                                      female
                                                                                   in 3rd grade                                          male
                                       (1)          (2)         (3)        (4)           (5)                              (6)             (7)
1. Full sample                         0.02            ‐0.01          0.86**          ‐0.08**          ‐0.02**          0.04*          ‐0.08**
(n=3685)                              (0.05)           (0.03)         (0.06)           (0.03)           (0.01)          (0.02)          (0.02)

2. By Race/Ethnicity
2a. White                              0.06            ‐0.01          0.88**           ‐0.08*            ‐0.01           0.03           ‐0.05*
(n=1266)                              (0.08)           (0.05)         (0.10)           (0.04)           (0.01)          (0.03)          (0.02)
2b. Black and Hispanic                 0.01            ‐0.01          0.83**           ‐0.05           ‐0.03*            0.03          ‐0.10**
(n=2040)                              (0.09)           (0.04)         (0.09)           (0.04)          (0.01)           (0.02)          (0.02)
2c. Black Only                         0.15            ‐0.05          0.70**           ‐0.07           ‐0.05*            ‐0.00           ‐0.06
(n=1017)                              (0.14)           (0.06)         (0.18)           (0.06)          (0.02)           (0.04)          (0.04)
2d. Hispanic Only                     ‐0.09             0.06          0.89**           ‐0.04             ‐0.01          0.07*          ‐0.16**
(n=1023)                              (0.13)           (0.05)         (0.10)           (0.07)           (0.01)          (0.03)          (0.03)

3. Black and Hispanic Only, by FRL Status
3a. FRL‐eligible                ‐0.09                  ‐0.06          0.81**           ‐0.01           ‐0.06**           0.03          ‐0.12**
(n=1340)                        (0.14)                 (0.07)         (0.13)           (0.06)           (0.02)          (0.04)          (0.04)
3b. Non‐FRL‐eligible                   0.04             0.05          0.86**           ‐0.12*            0.00            0.05          ‐0.10**
(n=700)                               (0.10)           (0.04)         (0.10)           (0.05)           (0.01)          (0.03)          (0.03)
4. Black and Hispanic Only, by Number of Gifted Students in School/Cohort
4a. 1‐4 Gifted                 0.33**       ‐0.02       0.79**       ‐0.03                             ‐0.05*            ‐0.01           ‐0.05
(n=931)                         (0.12)      (0.06)      (0.12)       (0.04)                            (0.02)           (0.03)          (0.04)
4b. 5 or more Gifted                  ‐0.13            ‐0.00          0.83**           ‐0.03             ‐0.01          0.07*          ‐0.14**
(n=1085)                              (0.13)           (0.05)         (0.13)           (0.07)           (0.01)          (0.03)          (0.03)

5. Black and Hispanic Only, by Gender
5a. Girls                       ‐0.01                  ‐0.06          0.80**           ‐0.06             ‐0.03          0.07*          ‐0.10**
(n=1073)                        (0.11)                 (0.06)         (0.08)           (0.07)           (0.02)          (0.03)          (0.03)
5b. Boys                               0.01             0.03          0.84**           ‐0.02             ‐0.03           0.02          ‐0.12**
(n=967)                               (0.13)           (0.06)         (0.15)           (0.07)           (0.02)          (0.03)          (0.04)
Note: Estimates from two‐stage least squares RD models with school and year fixed effects and student controls, as in Table 2, row 2 (see Table 2
note for details). Estimation samples (and indicated sample sizes) exclude students for whom teacher value added cannot be estimated because
the teacher is only observed in one year. (See Appendix B for description of the model used to estimate TVA.) In all models the first‐stage model is
for the probability of being in the fourth‐grade GHA classroom (first‐stage estimates are reported in column 3 of Table 3). Parentheses contain
standard errors, clustered by school. † p < 0.10, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01.
Appendix Table 4. Estimated Impact of Classroom Characteristics on Gain Scores in Reading and Math
                                              Reading                                                                                         Math
                                    Full sample              White only              Minority only                Full sample              White only              Minority only
                                   (1)        (2)           (3)       (4)            (5)       (6)               (7)        (8)           (9)      (10)           (11)       (12)
                               Univariate    Joint      Univariate    Joint      Univariate     Joint        Univariate    Joint      Univariate    Joint      Univariate    Joint
Classroom characteristic:       model        model       model        model       model         model         model        model       model        model       model        model

1. Teacher value added           0.40**      0.40**       0.41**      0.42**       0.39**      0.39**         0.69**      0.63**        0.73**      0.67**       0.67**      0.61**
                                 (0.03)      (0.04)       (0.05)      (0.05)       (0.04)      (0.04)         (0.05)      (0.05)        (0.07)      (0.06)       (0.05)      (0.05)

2. Average of peers'             0.04**      ‐0.00        0.04+       ‐0.00        0.05**        0.01         0.13**      0.09**        0.13**      0.08**       0.12**      0.09**
  lagged test scores             (0.01)      (0.01)       (0.02)      (0.02)       (0.02)       (0.02)        (0.02)      (0.02)        (0.03)      (0.02)       (0.02)      (0.02)

3. Std. dev. of peers'           ‐0.04+      ‐0.04+       ‐0.02       ‐0.03        ‐0.06*      ‐0.06*         0.09**      0.15**        0.09*       0.14**       0.10**      0.16**
  lagged test scores             (0.02)      (0.02)       (0.04)      (0.04)       (0.03)      (0.03)         (0.03)      (0.03)        (0.05)      (0.04)       (0.04)      (0.04)

4. Peer fraction                 ‐0.06       ‐0.02        ‐0.24       ‐0.20         ‐0.00        0.05          ‐0.28+      ‐0.14        ‐0.41       ‐0.21        ‐0.21       ‐0.09
  suspended in 3rd grade         (0.11)      (0.10)       (0.27)      (0.28)        (0.11)      (0.10)         (0.16)      (0.14)       (0.27)      (0.26)       (0.16)      (0.15)

5. Peer fraction female          ‐0.01        0.08         0.00        0.07          ‐0.02       0.09           ‐0.03       ‐0.01       ‐0.01        0.01        ‐0.05       ‐0.01
                                 (0.05)      (0.06)       (0.08)      (0.09)        (0.06)      (0.08)         (0.06)      (0.06)       (0.09)      (0.10)       (0.06)      (0.07)

6. Peer fraction minority         0.06       0.13*         0.07       0.13+          0.06       0.15+          ‐0.03        0.07        ‐0.07        0.04        ‐0.00        0.09
   male                          (0.05)      (0.06)       (0.07)      (0.08)        (0.05)      (0.08)         (0.06)      (0.06)       (0.09)      (0.09)       (0.07)      (0.08)

Notes. Coefficients from models of test scores gains between 3rd and 4th grade, estimated for all students enrolled in a regular district elementary school in fourth grade in 2009‐
2012. All models include school fixed effects, a dummy for whether the student is in a GHA classroom, and controls for student's age, gender, race/ethnicity, FRL and ELL status, and
median household income in the student's neighborhood. Models in odd‐numbered columns include only one classroom characteristic. Models in even‐numbered columns
simultaneously control for all six classroom characteristics. The full sample has 47,890 observations; the white student sample has 14,771 observations and the minority student
sample has 29,529 observations. All estimation samples exclude students for whom teacher value added cannot be estimated because the teacher is only observed in one year. (See
Appendix B for descrip on of the model used to es mate TVA.) Parentheses contain standard errors, clustered by school. † p < 0.10, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01.
Appendix Table 5. Estimated Achievement Gaps in Third Grade, by Race and Ethnicity
                                         (1)             (2)              (3)              (4)             (5)              (6)

Black                                ‐0.725**         ‐0.462**         ‐0.461**        ‐0.287**         ‐0.280**         ‐0.213**
                                      (0.029)          (0.020)          (0.020)         (0.012)          (0.009)          (0.008)

Hispanic                             ‐0.320**         ‐0.263**         ‐0.262**        ‐0.160**         ‐0.208**         ‐0.153**
                                      (0.017)          (0.013)          (0.013)         (0.009)          (0.008)          (0.008)

Asian                                 0.117**           ‐0.003           ‐0.006         0.037*            0.018          0.045**
                                      (0.023)          (0.015)          (0.015)         (0.015)          (0.016)         (0.016)

FRL eligible                                                                           ‐0.333**                          ‐0.244**
                                                                                        (0.013)                           (0.008)

Control for Ability Index              none             linear        quadratic        quadratic        quadratic       quadratic

school/cohort FEs                        no              no               no               no              yes              yes
Note: Estimated coefficients from regressions of average reading and math scores in third grade on race/ethnicity dummies, controlling
for nonverbal ability index. Ability index is constructed from second‐grade NNAT score and is scaled to a national norm with a mean of
100 and standard deviation of 15. Sample is 76,727 students who took the NNAT because they were enrolled in the District in second
grade between 2005‐2009, and who were enrolled in District for third grade the following year. Omitted race category is white.
Parentheses contain standard errors, clustered by school. † p < 0.10, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01.
Appendix Table 6. RD Heterogeneity Analysis for Unexcused Absences and
Suspensions in Grades 4‐6
                                                      Prob. >1 Unexcused             Prob. Suspended >1
                                                             Absence,                        time,
                                                           Grades 4‐6                     Grades 4‐6
                                                         (1)          (2)               (3)         (4)
                                                       mean                           mean
                                                                      RD                            RD
                                                      below                          below
                                                                  estimate                       estimate
                                                       cutoff                         cutoff

1. Full sample                                          0.66         ‐0.06+            0.08         ‐0.05**
(n=3596)                                                             (0.03)                          (0.01)

2. By Race/Ethnicity
2a. White                                               0.53         ‐0.00             0.03          ‐0.02
(n=1187)                                                             (0.06)                          (0.02)
2b. Black and Hispanic                                  0.74         ‐0.08*            0.11         ‐0.06**
(n=2045)                                                             (0.04)                          (0.02)
2c. Black Only                                          0.73         ‐0.06             0.16          ‐0.08*
(n=1060)                                                             (0.06)                          (0.04)
2d. Hispanic Only                                       0.74         ‐0.12*            0.05          ‐0.03
(n=985)                                                              (0.06)                          (0.03)

3. Black and Hispanic Only, by FRL Status
3a. FRL‐eligible                                        0.78         ‐0.02             0.14          ‐0.08*
(n=1376)                                                             (0.04)                          (0.03)
3b. Non‐FRL‐eligible                                    0.64        ‐0.23**            0.04          ‐0.04
(n=669)                                                              (0.08)                          (0.03)

4. Black and Hispanic Only, by Number of Gifted Students in School/Cohort
4a. 1‐4 Gifted                                 0.76        ‐0.03        0.16                         ‐0.07+
(n=950)                                                    (0.05)                                    (0.04)
4b. 5 or more Gifted                                    0.71         ‐0.11             0.06          ‐0.04
(n=1068)                                                             (0.07)                          (0.03)

5. Black and Hispanic Only, by Gender
5a. Girls                                               0.73         ‐0.01             0.06          ‐0.02
(n=1074)                                                             (0.05)                          (0.03)
5b. Boys                                                0.75         ‐0.13+            0.16          ‐0.10*
(n=971)                                                              (0.07)                          (0.04)
Note: Odd columns contain group means among students whose rank is up to ten places below the school‐specific
cutoff for placement in a GHA classroom in fourth grade; even columns contain estimated discontinutities at the
cutoff, from models with controls as in Table 2, row 2. Analysis samples include all students in the main analysis
sample who are in the relevant sub‐population and who are observed in the District through the end of sixth grade.
Parentheses contain standard errors, clustered by school. † p < 0.10, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01.
Appendix A: Matching Students to Classrooms and Identification of GHA Classrooms
For each course taken by each student, the data set contains a course identifier, a subject
identifier, and a teacher identifier, but it does not contain classroom identifiers. We therefore
matched students to classrooms by constructing all unique combinations of a school, year,
course and teacher identifier and matching each student to one of these combinations for each
of the three core subjects (Mathematics, Reading and Language Arts).
In a few schools, students rotate teachers in fourth grade so that the same teacher teaches a
given subject to multiple classes throughout the day. For students in these schools, which make
up about 5% of our sample, it is impossible to identify peers who sit in the same classroom at
the same time of day. We therefore excluded these schools from the sample.
In the remaining fourth-grade school/ cohorts, students are assigned the same teacher for all
three core subjects and each school-year-course-teacher combination is assigned to 23
students on average (standard deviation = 3). In principle, students in these cohorts have the
same group of peers in each core subject; but because the matching is imperfect (due to
reassignments, coding errors, etc.) we use average characteristics of peers in the three core
subjects as our measures of peer characteristics.
Finally, we classified non-gifted students as being placed in a GHA classroom if, in each of the
three core subjects, the student has at least one peer is classified as gifted and at least one of
the following conditions is also satisfied:

   •   at least one gifted peer has an Education Plan on file stating he or she is in a gifted/high
       achiever classroom;
   •   the average lagged tests scores of peers in the classroom are significantly higher than
       the average of all other students in the cohort.

These two conditions rule out a small number of cases in which a student has a gifted peer but
is not in a GHA classroom. This may occur when there are very few gifted students in the
cohort and either the student(s) were placed in the gifted program after the school year began
(too late for a GHA class to be formed) or the school was unable to hire a certified teacher and
obtained a waiver from the District requirement of having a separate GHA classroom.

We used a similar procedure to match students to classrooms in fifth grade and to construct an
identifier for being in a GHA classroom in fifth grade. Because the practice of rotating
classrooms is more common in fifth grade, only 71% of students observed through fifth grade
could be matched to a classroom. This is the reason for the reduced sample size in row 1,
column 3 of Table 3.
Construction of High Achiever Sample and Estimation of Cutoff Scores
To construct the estimation sample for the analysis of non-gifted high-achievers, we started
with all students who were in fourth grade in the 2008-09 through 2011-12 school years—a
total of 68,263 students in 527 school-year cohorts. We restrict the sample to these four years
because prior to 2008-09, the District did not prescribe a uniform ranking formula for
determining which non-gifted students were placed in the GHA classrooms.
We then eliminated school/ cohorts for which classrooms could not be identified and those that
did not have a gifted/high achiever classroom (either because there were no gifted students or
because there were enough gifted students to fill an entire classroom and the school opted for
a gifted-only classroom)—leaving 385 school/ cohorts.
In principle, the cutoff for placement in the GHA classroom of a given cohort is the test score of
the lowest-scoring non-gifted child in the GHA classroom, or the score just above that of the
highest-scoring child in a regular classroom. But non-compliance can cause these two scores to
differ—and use of either one of these measures leads to misleading mappings between relative
rank and placement in the GHA class. To circumvent this problem, we employ a two-step
procedure that starts with an initial estimate based on the number of seats in the classroom,
and then makes adjustments that reduce misclassification due to measurement error.
Specifically, for each of school/cohort, we estimated the cutoff rank for placement in the GHA
classroom as follows:
1. First, using the District’s prescribed rule, we assigned a within-cohort rank to each non-
   gifted fourth-grade student with non-missing third-grade test scores. The rule is a
   lexicographic formula that first groups students based on their “achievement levels” on the
   reading and math portions of the third grade statewide achievement test. These
   achievement levels range from 1-5 and are based on the scale scores (which range from 100
   to 500), with cutoffs set each year by the state. Students who achieve level 5 (the highest)
   in both reading and math are given highest priority, followed by students with a level 5 in
   reading and a 4 in math; those with a 4 in reading and 5 in math; those with a 4 in both
   reading and math, and so on. Within each of these groups, students are ranked using the
   sum of their scale scores in reading and math.
2. Next, we calculated an initial estimate of the cutoff rank, c, as the rank of the Nth ranked
   non-gifted student, where N is the number of non-gifted students in the GHA classroom.
3. Classroom reassignments and errors in matching students to classrooms lead to
   measurement error in the classroom size N and thus in the initial cutoff estimate c. To
   reduce this measurement error, we replaced c with c′∈(c-10, c+9), where c′ is chosen using
   an iterative procedure to minimize the misclassification rate of students whose scores are
   outside an interval around the potential cutoff. Specifically, letting c′=c be the initial
                                                                       ′               ′
                                                                   −2
    estimate of the cutoff rank, we replaced c′ with c′+1 if ∑𝑐𝑐𝑟𝑟=𝑐𝑐              𝑐𝑐 +2
                                                                      ′ −3 𝑇𝑇𝑟𝑟 < ∑𝑟𝑟=𝑐𝑐 ′ +1 𝑇𝑇𝑟𝑟 or with c′-1
         ′               ′
            −2
   if ∑𝑐𝑐𝑟𝑟=𝑐𝑐              𝑐𝑐 +2
               ′ −3 𝑇𝑇𝑟𝑟 > ∑𝑟𝑟=𝑐𝑐 ′ +1 𝑇𝑇𝑟𝑟 , where 𝑇𝑇𝑟𝑟 is a dummy variable for the student with rank r being

   in the GHA classroom. We repeated this step until no further reduction in mismatch was
   possible.
4. After estimating a cutoff for each cohort, we eliminated cohorts where there was still
   substantial mismatch or “non-compliance” with the assignment rule based on the estimated
   cutoff. For each cohort we examined placement rates of students with r∈(c′-10,c′+9), and
   we kept cohorts for which a one-tailed test of H0: �𝐸𝐸(𝑇𝑇𝑟𝑟 |𝑟𝑟 ≥ 𝑐𝑐 ′ ) − 𝐸𝐸(𝑇𝑇𝑟𝑟 |𝑟𝑟 < 𝑐𝑐 ′ )� = 0 has a
   z-statistic of >1. This resulted in our estimation sample of 4,144 fourth grade students in
   220 school/cohorts.
Finally, we investigated the causes of mismatch and the determinants of being excluded from
our sample. Our analysis showed four patterns. First, the rate at which cohorts are dropped
from the sample due to mismatch is highest in the first year that the rule was prescribed by the
District—suggesting some non-compliance due to weak initial enforcement. We dropped 60%
of the 2009 fourth-grade cohorts compared to 47% of the cohorts in 2010 and 32% in 2011 and
2012. Second, the mismatch rate is significantly higher in cohorts where the measured class
size is larger than the target class size of 20-24 students. Third, mismatch is also higher in
cohorts where we are missing test scores for students in the GHA classroom (which may occur,
for example, when a student transfers into the District in fourth grade from elsewhere in the
state). The effects of measured class size and missing test scores on mismatch both point to
measurement error and misclassification as an explanation for much of the “non-compliance”
with our estimated cutoffs. Finally, and importantly, the likelihood of being excluded from our
sample is not significantly correlated with school characteristics such as the fraction of students
who are FRL eligible or the fraction who are black or Hispanic.


Comparison with Alternative Methods for Identifying Cutoff Scores
As a check on our procedure, and to compare the robustness of our main findings to other
possible way of identifying the cutoff score for entry to the GHA class, we re-calculated the
cutoff scores using three alternative procedures. The first (alternative procedure 1), sets the
cutoff score as the score that, when used as a cutoff threshold, yields the highest fraction of
correct assignments (i.e., the highest compliance rate) among non-gifted students in the
school/cohort ranked 1-50 using the District’s ranking formula. (In cases where 2 or more
scores yield the same fraction of correct assignments we choose the highest). The second
(alternative procedure 2) sets the cutoff as the lowest rank among all non-gifted students
assigned to the GHA class, with the proviso that the cutoff must be no higher than 50
(otherwise we exclude the entire school/cohort). The third (alternative procedure 3) sets the
cutoff as 1 plus the highest rank among all non-gifted students who are not assigned to the
GHA class, with the proviso that the top-ranked student must be assigned to the GHA class
(otherwise we exclude the entire school/cohort).
The results from using each of these procedures are summarized in the following series of
tables and figures. We present figures that show the probability of placement in a GHA class,
the relationships with baseline reading and math scores, and the relationships with fourth-
grade reading and math scores, as well as tables showing estimation results for the
corresponding RD models.
Alternative procedure 1 (Appendix Figure A1 and Table A1) yields a first-stage relationship
between relative rank and the probability of placement in a GHA class that shows a large jump
at the cutoff, but is downward sloping to the right and left of the cutoff. This arises because a
procedure that maximizes the correct classification rate will always choose a cutoff such that
the student just to the right of the cutoff is assigned to the GHA class, and the student just to
the left is not. By contrast, our preferred procedure avoids this problem by maximizing the
compliance rate for students outside an interval around the threshold.
Procedure 1 also generates a discontinuous relationship between relative ranks and baseline
reading scores. The estimated reduced form impacts on fourth grade scores using this
procedure are positive, but show some sensitivity to the controls used in the RD model (unlike
the reduced-form impacts from our preferred procedure).
By construction alternative procedure 2 (Appendix Figure A2 and Table A2) yields a first-stage
relationship that shows zero probability of placement in a GHA class for all students ranked
below the cutoff and a 100% probability for the student in each school/cohort ranked just
above the cutoff. However, the average placement rate for students ranked 2-5 above the
cutoff is relatively flat at about 40%. This procedure generates a positive discontinuity in
baseline reading scores and a negative discontinuity in baseline math. The reduced-form
impacts on fourth-grade reading and math are positive, but smaller in magnitude than the
estimates from our preferred procedure, and also sensitive to specification.
By construction alternative procedure 3 (Appendix Figure A3 and Table A3) yields a first-stage
relationship that shows a 100% probability of placement in a GHA class for all students ranked
above the cutoff and a zero probability for the student ranked just below the cutoff in each
school/cohort. However, the average placement rate for students ranked 2-5 below the cutoff
is 55-60%. This procedure generates relatively small and insignificant discontinuities in baseline
reading and math scores. The reduced-form impacts on fourth-grade reading and math are
positive and significant, about the same magnitude as the estimates from our preferred
procedure, and not very sensitive to choice of specification for the RD model.
       Appendix Figure A1. GHA placement, baseline scores, and fourth grade outcomes by rank,
                            cutoff estimated using alternative procedure 1
                                         A. First stage                                          B. Baseline reading                                         C. Baseline math
                             1.00                                                        1.40                                                       1.20




                                                                    standardized score




                                                                                                                               standardized score
                             0.80                                                                                                                   1.10
                                                                                         1.20
                                                                                                                                                    1.00
        fraction




                             0.60
                                                                                         1.00
                             0.40                                                                                                                   0.90

                                                                                         0.80                                                       0.80
                             0.20
                                                                                                                                                    0.70
                             0.00                                                        0.60
                                    -10    -5     0     5     10                                -10    -5     0     5     10                               -10    -5     0     5     10
                                      rank distance from cutoff                                   rank distance from cutoff                                  rank distance from cutoff


                                    D. 4th Grade reading                                         E. 4th Grade math
                             1.00                                                        1.00
        standardized score




                                                                    standardized score



                             0.90                                                        0.90

                             0.80                                                        0.80

                             0.70                                                        0.70

                             0.60                                                        0.60

                             0.50                                                        0.50
                                    -10    -5     0     5     10                                -10    -5     0     5     10
                                      rank distance from cutoff                                   rank distance from cutoff




Appendix Table A1. Regression discontinuity estimates for GHA placement, baseline scores, and
fourth grade outcomes; cutoff estimated using alternative procedure 1
                                   Baseline
                                 achievement           First stage      Reduced-form estimates
                                3rd        3rd           Prob. in       4th        4th        4th
                               grade      grade           GHA          grade     grade      grade
                              reading     math         classroom      reading     math      writing
                                                              (1)                               (2)                  (3)                                   (4)            (5)              (6)
1. No controls                                              0.066*                           0.009               0.741**                              0.125**          0.089*         0.091†
                                                            (0.028)                         (0.035)               (0.014)                              (0.032)         (0.034)        (0.050)
2. School & year fixed                                      0.056*                           0.000               0.735**                              0.087**          0.066*              0.064
   effects; student controls                                (0.025)                         (0.032)               (0.014)                              (0.029)         (0.029)            (0.046)
3. Differenced specification                                   --                                --                   --                               0.054†          0.058†               --
                                                                                                                                                       (0.031)         (0.032)
Sample size                                                 6,029                           6,029                  6,029                               6,029            6,029             6,009

Note: Estimates from models of dependent variables as a function of a student's rank (within school-year
cohort) on third-grade test scores. See Table 2 note for details on model specifications. Entries are estimated
coefficients on a dummy for the student's rank exceeding the cohort-specific cutoff for placement in the fourth-
grade GHA classroom. The cutoff score is estimated as the score that yields the highest fraction of correct
assignments among non-gifted students in the school cohort ranked 1-50 using the District's ranking formula.
       Appendix Figure A2. GHA placement, baseline scores, and fourth grade outcomes by rank,
                            cutoff estimated using alternative procedure 2
                                          A. First stage                                          B. Baseline reading                                         C. Baseline math
                              1.00                                                        0.80                                                       0.65




                                                                     standardized score




                                                                                                                                standardized score
                              0.80                                                                                                                   0.60
                                                                                          0.70
         fraction




                              0.60                                                                                                                   0.55
                                                                                          0.60
                              0.40                                                                                                                   0.50
                                                                                          0.50                                                       0.45
                              0.20
                                                                                                                                                     0.40
                              0.00                                                        0.40
                                     -10    -5     0     5     10                                -10    -5     0     5     10                               -10    -5     0     5     10
                                       rank distance from cutoff                                   rank distance from cutoff                                  rank distance from cutoff


                                     D. 4th Grade reading                                         E. 4th Grade math
                              0.60
                                                                                          0.55
         standardized score




                                                                     standardized score



                              0.50                                                        0.50

                                                                                          0.45
                              0.40
                                                                                          0.40

                              0.30                                                        0.35
                                     -10    -5     0     5     10                                -10    -5     0     5     10
                                       rank distance from cutoff                                   rank distance from cutoff




Appendix Table A2. Regression discontinuity estimates for GHA placement, baseline scores, and
fourth grade outcomes; cutoff estimated using alternative procedure 2
                                   Baseline
                                 achievement           First stage      Reduced-form estimates
                                3rd        3rd           Prob. in       4th        4th        4th
                               grade      grade           GHA          grade     grade      grade
                              reading     math         classroom      reading     math      writing
                                                               (1)                               (2)                 (3)                                    (4)            (5)              (6)
1. No controls                                               0.037                         -0.058+                0.492**                             0.070**            0.026          0.057
                                                            -0.024                          -0.03                  -0.015                              -0.026           -0.031         -0.041
2. School & year fixed                                     0.046**                         -0.053*                0.486**                              0.061*           0.046†          0.051
   effects; student controls                                -0.017                          -0.026                 -0.015                              -0.024           -0.026         -0.039
3. Differenced specification                                    --                               --                   --                                0.043           0.064*              --
                                                                                                                                                       -0.027           -0.029
Sample size                                                  6,578                           6,578                 6,578                                6,578            6,578             6,578

Note: Estimates from models of dependent variables as a function of a student's rank (within school-year
cohort) on third-grade test scores. See Table 2 note for details on model specifications. Entries are estimated
coefficients on a dummy for the student's rank exceeding the cohort-specific cutoff for placement in the fourth-
grade GHA classroom. The cutoff rank is estimated as the lowest rank among all non-gifted students assigned
to the GHA class (see text of Appendix A for details).
       Appendix Figure A3. GHA placement, baseline scores, and fourth grade outcomes by rank,
                            cutoff estimated using alternative procedure 3

                                         A. First stage                                          B. Baseline reading                                         C. Baseline math
                             1.00                                                                                                                   1.40
                                                                                         1.60




                                                                    standardized score




                                                                                                                               standardized score
                             0.80
                                                                                         1.40                                                       1.20
        fraction




                             0.60
                                                                                         1.20
                             0.40
                                                                                                                                                    1.00
                             0.20                                                        1.00

                             0.00                                                        0.80                                                       0.80
                                    -10    -5     0     5     10                                -10    -5     0     5     10                               -10    -5     0     5     10
                                      rank distance from cutoff                                   rank distance from cutoff                                  rank distance from cutoff


                                    D. 4th Grade reading                                         E. 4th Grade math
                                                                                         1.40
                             1.20
        standardized score




                                                                    standardized score



                             1.10                                                        1.20

                             1.00
                                                                                         1.00
                             0.90
                                                                                         0.80
                             0.80

                             0.70                                                        0.60
                                    -10    -5     0     5     10                                -10    -5     0     5     10
                                      rank distance from cutoff                                   rank distance from cutoff




Appendix Table A3. Regression discontinuity estimates for GHA placement, baseline scores, and
fourth grade outcomes; cutoff estimated using alternative procedure 3
                                   Baseline
                                 achievement           First stage      Reduced-form estimates
                                3rd        3rd           Prob. in       4th        4th        4th
                               grade      grade           GHA          grade     grade      grade
                              reading     math         classroom      reading     math      writing
                                                              (1)                               (2)                  (3)                                   (4)            (5)              (6)
1. No controls                                              -0.012                          -0.035               0.605**                              0.102**          0.099*              0.029
                                                            (0.047)                         (0.041)               (0.018)                              (0.039)         (0.039)            (0.048)
2. School & year fixed                                       0.037                          -0.015               0.572**                              0.110**          0.108**             0.051
   effects; student controls                                (0.038)                         (0.037)               (0.018)                              (0.033)          (0.034)           (0.045)
3. Differenced specification                                   --                                --                   --                               0.088*          0.111**              --
                                                                                                                                                       (0.037)          (0.040)
Sample size                                                 4,844                           4,844                  4,844                               4,844            4,844             4,844

Note: Estimates from models of dependent variables as a function of a student's rank (within school-year
cohort) on third-grade test scores. See Table 2 note for details on model specifications. Entries are estimated
coefficients on a dummy for the student's rank exceeding the cohort-specific cutoff for placement in the fourth-
grade GHA classroom. The cutoff rank is estimated as the 1 plus the highest rank among all non-gifted students
who are not assigned to the GHA class (see text of Appendix A for details).
Appendix B: Construction of Teacher Value-Added
To construct a value-added model of teacher quality, we use data on all teachers who are observed
teaching fourth grade in two or more years between 2005 and 2012, and we estimate teacher fixed
effects from a model of average 4th-grade test scores in reading and math. Specifically, we estimate:
                                        2
(B1)    𝑌𝑌isjt = β0 + 𝑌𝑌isjt−1 β1 + 𝑌𝑌𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖−1 β2 + 𝑋𝑋isjt β3 + 𝑆𝑆isjt β4 + 𝑇𝑇isjt θ𝑗𝑗 + εisjt ,
where 𝑌𝑌isjt is the average of standardized test scores in reading and math for student i at school s with
teacher j in year t. 𝑇𝑇isjt is a vector of teacher dummy variables, and the parameters θ𝑗𝑗 are the estimates
of teacher value added (TVA). We control for a vector of student characteristics, 𝑋𝑋isjt , that includes
dummy variables for student gender, race, ethnicity, and for FRL, ELL, and gifted status. We also control
for a vector of school/cohort and classroom characteristics, 𝑆𝑆isjt , that includes: dummies for being in a
GHA classroom and for being in a non-GHA special-education classroom; interactions of the GHA
classroom dummy with the race indicators; and school/cohort-level controls for: the total number of
students enrolled in fourth grade; the number who are gifted; the fraction of students who are in a GHA
classroom; average lagged reading & math scores; and the fractions of students who are FRL, white,
black, and Hispanic.
We estimate equation (B1) separately for four samples—in each case excluding one of the four years of
our RD estimation sample (2009, 2010, 2011 or 2012). When assigning teacher value added to fourth-
grade teachers in a given year, we use the estimates from the sample that excludes that year.
Appendix Figure B1 shows the distribution of TVA among teachers of fourth-grade GHA and regular
classrooms in 2009-2012. The full distribution has a standard deviation of 0.14 σ. On average, teachers
of GHA classes have slightly higher (0.015 σ) TVA than those in non-GHA classes.



                                     Appendix Figure B1. Teacher value added in reading and math,
                                        fourth-grade
                                                   g GHA and regular classrooms in 2009-2012
                      8000
                      6000
                  Frequency
                     4000
                      2000
                      0




                              -.75        -.5     -.25             0           .25         .5   .75
                                                         teacher value added

                                                     non-GHA classes           GHA class
Appendix Table B1 presents estimates from of models in which teacher value-added is the dependent
variable and the controls include school fixed effects. The estimates confirm that within schools, GHA
classrooms are assigned slightly better teachers on average; however the difference is not statistically
significant. Further, estimates from models that include student’s lagged test scores indicates that the
sorting of better students to better teachers extends beyond the GHA classroom. In particular, column
(2) shows that lagged math scores are significantly correlated with measured teacher value added—
suggesting that students who are better in math receive slightly better teachers even if they are not
GHA participants. Finally, column (3) shows that conditional on lagged test scores, minorities are
assigned to teachers with slightly lower value-added—which is suggestive of race-based bias outside the
GHA classroom.


            Appendix Table B1. Within-school sorting of students and teachers
                                                              (1)         (2)                          (3)
            Student is in GHA classroom                      0.020       0.013                        0.013
                                                            (0.012)     (0.012)                      (0.012)

            3rd-grade math score (standardized)                                        0.006**      0.006**
                                                                                       (0.002)      (0.002)

            3rd-grade reading score (standardized)                                      0.001         0.001
                                                                                       (0.001)       (0.001)

            Student is a minority (Black or Hispanic)                                                -0.003*
                                                                                                     (0.001)

            Note: Dependent variable is estimated teacher value added for fourth-grade reading and math.
            All test scores are standardized across the district within year and grade. All regression models
            include school-year fixed effects. Estimation sample is 52,034 students enrolled in the district in
            fourth grade in 2009-2012. Parentheses contain standard errors, clustered by school. † p < 0.10, *
            p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01.
Appendix C: Effect of Misclassification Error on RD Estimates

    The following model formalizes the effect of misclassification errors on the
first stage and reduced form estimates from an RD analysis when observed GHA
participation status is potentially mis-measured.
    Let x denote the observed relative rank of a given student, and assume that
x = 0 corresponds to the cutoff rank. Let GHA∗ denote the student’s true GHA
status, and let GHA denote her observed status. Assume that:

                     P (GHA = 1|GHA∗ = 1, x) = q1 (x)
                     P (GHA = 1|GHA∗ = 0, x) = q0 (x).

Here, 1 − q1 (x) is the false negative rate for a student with rank x, and q0 (x) is
the corresponding false positive rate. We assume that q1 (x) > q0 (x) and that

                limx→0− qj (x) = limx→0+ qj (x) = qj (0), j = 0, 1

i.e., that the error rates for students ranked just below and just above the cutoff
rank are the same. Finally, assume that the true first stage relationship is:

                             P (GHA∗ = 1|x) = π(x)

with a discontinuity of size π1 at x = 0:

                              limx→0− π(x)      = π0

                             limx→0+ π(x) = π0 + π1 .
   Under these assumptions the relationship between observed GHA status and
rank is:
               P (GHA = 1|x) = q0 (x) + π(x)(q1 (x) − q0 (x)),
which implies that the first-stage discontinuity in observed GHA status at x = 0
is:
                             DF S = π1 (q(0) − q0 (0)).
If for example q1 (0) = 0.9 and q0 (0) = 0.1 (i.e., 10% false negative rate and a
10% false positive rate for students around the cutoff rank) then the observed
first stage discontinuity is attenuated by 20% relative to the true discontinuity.
    Next, assume that the conditional expectation of a student’s achievement
scores (y) given her actual GHA status and relative rank can be written as:

                        E[y|GHA∗ , x] = βGHA∗ + f (x)

where f (x) is some smooth function of relative rank, and β is the causal effect
of GHA participation. Using the expressions above,

                        limx→0− E[y|x]      =   βπ0 + f (0),
and

                     limx→0+ E[y|x]     =    β(π0 + π1 ) + f (0)

so the reduced form-discontinuity in test scores is:

                                  DRF       = βπ1

The probability limit of the two stage least estimate of the effect of participating
in a GHA class is the ratio of the discontinuities in the reduced form model and
the first stage model, which is:
                              DRF           β
                                   =                 .
                              DF S   q1 (0) − q0 (0)

Thus, the presence of misclassification error leads to an over-estimate of the
treatment-on-the-treated effect.
