                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




EXPLICIT VS. STATISTICAL PREFERENTIAL TREATMENT IN AFFIRMATIVE ACTION:
          THEORY AND EVIDENCE FROM CHICAGO'S EXAM SCHOOLS

                                           Umut Dur
                                        Parag A. Pathak
                                        Tayfun Sönmez

                                      Working Paper 22109
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22109


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2016




Our thanks to Katie Ellis, Brian Pool, Susan Ryan, and Chicago Public Schools for graciously
sharing their data and answering our questions. The views expressed here are those of the authors
and do not reflect the views of Chicago Public Schools or the National Bureau of Economic
Research. We thank Glenn Ellison for helpful comments and Alex Olssen for superb research
assistance. Pathak and Sonmez's work was supported by NSF grant SES-1426566. Sonmez also
acknowledges the research support of Goldman Sachs Gives via Dalinc Ariburnu - Goldman
Sachs Faculty Research Fund. Pathak is on the scientific advisory board of the Institute for
Innovation in Public School Choice.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Umut Dur, Parag A. Pathak, and Tayfun Sönmez. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Explicit vs. Statistical Preferential Treatment in Affirmative Action: Theory and Evidence
from Chicago's Exam Schools
Umut Dur, Parag A. Pathak, and Tayfun Sönmez
NBER Working Paper No. 22109
March 2016
JEL No. C78,D47,I21

                                            ABSTRACT

Affirmative action schemes must confront the tension between admitting the highest scoring
applicants and ensuring diversity. In Chicago's affirmative action system for exam schools,
applicants are divided into one of four socioeconomic tiers based on the characteristics of their
neighborhood. Applicants can be admitted to a school either through a slot reserved for their tier
or through a merit slot. Equity considerations motivate equal percentage reserves for each tier,
but there is a large debate on the total size of these reserve slots relative to merit slots. An issue
that has received much less attention is the order in which slots are processed. Since the
competition for merit slots is influenced directly by the allocation to tier slots, equal size reserves
are not sufficient to eliminate explicit preferential treatment. We characterize processing rules
that are tier-blind. While explicit preferential treatment is ruled out under tier-blind rules, it is
still possible to favor certain tiers, by exploiting the distribution of scores across tiers, a
phenomenon we call statistical preferential treatment. We characterize the processing order that is
optimal for the most disadvantaged tier assuming that these applicants systematically have lower
scores. This policy processes merit slots prior to any slots reserved for tiers. Our main result
implies that Chicago has been providing an additional boost to the disadvantaged tier beyond
their reserved slots. Using data from Chicago, we show that the bias due to processing order for
the disadvantaged tier is comparable to that from the 2012 decrease in the size of the merit
reserve.


Umut Dur                                                Tayfun Sönmez
North Carolina State University                         Boston College
College of Management                                   Department of Economics
umutdur@gmail.com                                       140 Comm. Ave.
                                                        Chestnut Hill, MA, 02467
Parag A. Pathak                                         tayfun.sonmez@bc.edu
Department of Economics, E52-426
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
ppathak@mit.edu
1        Introduction
Affirmative action schemes, whereby groups that have historically faced discrimination are given
preferential treatment, are widespread in education in the United States and around the world.
Typically, affirmative action schemes reserve a fraction of seats for disadvantaged groups and
assign the remaining seats solely via merit. For instance, many engineering colleges in India set
aside seats on the basis of gender and caste (Bertrand, Hanna, and Mullainathan 2010, Bagde,
Epple, and Taylor 2015). Brazil uses a mix of racial and income criteria to determine reserves
at its public universities (Aygün and Bo 2013). In the United States, the explicit use of race in
an affirmative action system is increasingly being substituted with other criteria.1 In Texas, if
a student is in the top 10% of her graduating class, she is eligible for automatic admission to
any public university in Texas (Cortes 2010, Kapor 2015). At Chicago’s elite exam schools, 70%
of seats are reserved to be assigned based on the socioeconomic characteristics of an applicant’s
neighborhood, and the rest of the seats are assigned solely based on merit.
        In each of these examples, affirmative action beneficiaries could have also qualified for a
seat without affirmative action. For instance, a high-scoring Texas high schooler might have
been granted admission at the flagship University of Texas-Austin campus solely based on the
strength of her application, and she would be admitted even if she were not in the top ten percent
of her class. In Chicago, a high-scoring African-American applicant from a poor neighborhood
may qualify for an exam school based on merit, without using up an affirmative action seat.
The ability to be admitted to a school via multiple routes raises the question of which seats
should be used for whom and in what order. In this paper, we characterize the admissions
policies that admit the greatest number of disadvantaged applicants when applicants can qualify
for more than one slot. Our analysis examines how these policies change when authorities can
either use explicit preferential treatment or not and must instead rely on statistical differences in
scores between applicants, what we call statistical preferential treatment. Then, we examine the
consequences of alternative affirmative action policies using data from Chicago’s exam schools.
        Chicago is a compelling setting for examining affirmative action in school admissions for
several reasons. It is undergoing one of the nation’s most significant experiments in place-based
affirmative action at the K-12 level, following a 2009 court decree that eliminated its longstanding
system of racial quotas. Since 2009, each Chicago census tract is assigned to one of four tiers
using an index combining five socioeconomic variables defined at the tract level. Schools fill 40%
of their slots with the applicants having the highest composite scores. They fill the remaining
60% of slots by dividing the slots equally across the four tiers and filling the slots with the
highest-scoring remaining students living in census tracts belonging to each tier. In 2012, CPS
increased the tier set-aside to 70% and added a sixth factor to the socioeconomic index. Given
the school’s high visibility and frequent appearance on lists of the best public U.S. high schools, it
    1
    Place-based schemes are also the subject of on-going litigation regarding their constitutionality, as in the 2015
U.S. Supreme Court review of Fisher vs. University of Texas.


                                                         2
is not surprising that Chicago’s reforms are being seen as a model for other cities. For instance,
Kahlenberg (2014) argues that Chicago’s place-based affirmative action system is a template
for other cities like New York, where there are concerns about students at their flagship exam
schools not reflecting underlying district demographics.2 Moreover, the adoption of schemes
like Chicago’s seem to be a likely consequence of the 2007 U.S. Supreme Court ruling in Parents
Involved in Community Schools vs. Seattle School District No. 1, which prohibited explicit racial
criteria in K-12 admissions. Indeed, the U.S. Departments of Justice and Education have held
up race-neutral criteria based on geographic factors, as seen in Chicago, as a model for other
districts (OCR 2011).3 Finally, Chicago’s assignment scheme is a variant of the student-proposing
deferred acceptance algorithm, which is strategy-proof for participants.4 This feature allows for
the straightforward computation of the consequences of counterfactual affirmative action policies
without needing to model how applicants would submit preferences under these alternatives.
       This paper examines affirmative action plans when some targeted beneficiaries may also
qualify without affirmative action. If a policymaker is interested in the most favorable rule for
the most disadvantaged, only the lowest tier applicants should be admitted. This policy involves
explicit preferential treatment because it is not tier-blind, as applicants from tiers other than the
lowest tier are not admitted. It also does not reflect a major rationale for exam schools: to group
together and provide a curriculum tailored to high-ability students. Ellison and Pathak (2016)
show that if student outcomes depend on how closely curricula are tailored to student ability,
and a policymaker values both outcomes and diversity, then a plan that admits applicants based
on admissions scores and then provides affirmative action to groups with systematically lower
admissions scores is optimal.
       The competition between these two objectives – grouping together the highest achievers and
having diversity – is also reflected in systematic reviews of the policy. For example, a report
from a Blue Ribbon Commission (BRC) appointed to review Chicago’s policy states:

            The BRC believes the district should strike a balance between these two extremes
            [100% rank order and 100% tier]. The BRC wants these programs to maintain
            their academic strength and excellent record of achievement, but also believes
            that diversity is an important part of the historical success of these programs.
            (page 2, BRC (2011))
   2
     The NAACP Legal Defense Fund filed an Office for Civil Rights complaint with the US Department of
Education in September 2012, asserting that the admissions process at NYC’s exam schools violates the Civil
Rights Act of 1964 because it uses a single admissions test. Pending New York State legislation (Senate Bill
S7738) proposes to broaden the criteria for admissions.
   3
     Kahlenberg (2008) reports that more than 60 public school districts use socioeconomic status as an admissions
factor.
   4
     The mechanism design approach to student assignment was initiated by Balinski and Sönmez (1999) and
Abdulkadiroğlu and Sönmez (2003). Both papers advocate the adoption of deferred acceptance (CA) in the
context of priority based student assignment. As of February 2016, many urban school districts including Boston
and New York utilize DA (Abdulkadiroğlu, Pathak, Roth, and Sönmez 2005, Abdulkadiroğlu, Pathak, and Roth
2005, Pathak and Sönmez 2008, Abdulkadiroğlu, Pathak, and Roth 2009, Pathak and Sönmez 2013, Pathak 2016).



                                                        3
    Our first result shows that even with equally sized reserves, explicit preferential treatment
is still possible because of how applicants are processed. Whether reserved seats of a given tier
are assigned before or after merit seats directly influences competition for merit seats in a way
that can either benefit or hurt applicants of that tier. That is, equally sized reserves are not
sufficient to eliminate discrimination by tier. We show that among equally sized reservations,
the best processing order for a given tier admits applicants from other tiers first, considers the
merits seats next, and assigns seats reserved for the given tier last. Therefore, in Chicago, the
best rule for applicants from the most disadvantaged tier (tier 1) first allocates seats to tier 2,
tier 3, and tier 4, then allocates the merit seats, and finally allocates the tier 1 seats.
    The best admissions policy for tier 1 applicants might appear to avoid explicit preferential
treatment because the same number of slots are reserved for each tier. However, we show that
it is not tier-blind, just like a policy that only admits tier 1 applicants. Even with equally
sized reserves, tier 1 applicants face much weaker competition for the merit slots, once higher
score applicants from other tiers are assigned reserve slots. Our second result characterizes the
restrictions imposed by tier-blind rules. Tier-blind rules are balanced: the same number of slots
from each tier are processed between any two merit slots. Tier-blindness therefore rules out
policies involving different reserve sizes. It also rules out policies where there the number of
seats processed after merit seats differs by tier as in the unconstrained optimum.
    For given reserve sizes, tier-blindness does not uniquely determine an affirmative action policy.
We next introduce the idea of statistical preferential treatment, which involves choosing an
admissions policy among tier-blind ones, exploiting the difference in distribution across scores.
As with statistical discrimination (Arrow 1973, Phelps 1972), statistical preferential treatment
involves using statistical differences between groups to achieve distributional objectives. We
characterize the tier-blind policy that is best for the most disadvantaged under an additional
assumption on the distribution of admission scores. We assume that for any given score, tier
1 students have the lowest representation compared to all other tiers. Under this assumption,
we show that allocating merit seats ahead of tier seats is the best tier-blind rule for the most
disadvantaged applicants. This result shows that Chicago’s current policy has been favoring
the applicants from the most disadvantaged neighborhoods. Under an analogous assumption for
scores for the highest tier, we also show that this policy is the worst tier-blind rule for the highest
tier.
    We then investigate another issue motivated by a policy change in Chicago. In 2012, the dis-
trict reduced the total fraction of merit seats from 40 to 30% to improve chances for students from
the most disadvantaged neighborhoods. Our last result shows that this increases the assignment
of the most disadvantaged neighborhoods under Chicago’s affirmative action implementation.
We also show that the change in the fraction of the most disadvantaged tiers affected by reduc-
tion in the merit fraction is comparable to the fraction affected by switching the processing order
without changing the merit fraction. Therefore, the bias in favor of the most disadvantaged due


                                                  4
to statistical preferential treatment is comparable to that from more explicit policy changes.
    Finally, we turn to an empirical investigation of data from CPS. While our analysis focuses
on a single school’s choice function, we show that our theorems closely explain the differences
between affirmative action policies, especially at the most sought-after schools where are our
modeling assumptions are more likely to hold.
    Our paper is related to a number of recent studies of affirmative action in centralized as-
signment systems including Ehlers, Hafalir, Yenmez, and Yildirim (2014), Erdil and Kumano
(2012), Hafalir, Yenmez, and Yildirim (2013), Kamada and Kojima (2014), and Kojima (2012).
The model we study is based on a continuum model version of the matching with slot-specific
priorities model introduced by Kominers and Sönmez (2015). Chicago’s system motivated their
model in an earlier version of that paper Kominers and Sönmez (2013), although they do not
provide any analytical results for the application at CPS. Dur, Kominers, Pathak, and Sönmez
(2014) establish comparative statics of precedence and priority motivated by the simpler context
of walk-zone priority in Boston, but they do not provide any criteria for selecting among prece-
dences. Like Echenique and Yenmez (2015), we characterize optimal choice rules focusing on a
given school. However, we take the affirmative action system as given and consider variations
in implementation, while Echenique and Yenmez (2015) derive affirmative action systems from
primitive axioms for diversity without considering the issues we examine here. Continuum mod-
els, like ours, are also used in a number of other recent papers including Abdulkadiroglu, Che,
and Yasuda (2015), Azevedo and Leshno (2015), and Che, Kim, and Kojima (2015).
    The next section develops the model. Section 3 examines explicit preferential treatment and
characterizes the best tier-sighted choice function for a given tier. Section 4 characterizes choice
functions that are tier-blind and characterizes the best and worst choice function under this
constraint. Section 5 reports on data from Chicago Public Schools. The last section concludes.
Proofs are given in the appendix.


2     Model
2.1   Setup
We work with a continuum model to simplify the analysis. There is a mass n of students. Let
I denote the set of students. Throughout the analysis, we fix I. Each student belongs to a
socioeconomic category or tier t ∈ T = {1, 2, .., t̄}. In Chicago, a student’s tier depends on
the attributes of her census tract. When a student applies to an exam school, she must take a
competitive admissions exam. The district then takes an equally-weighted combination of the
admissions test score, the applicant’s 7th grade GPA, and a standardized test score to generate a
composite score, which we denote by k ∈ K = [k, k̄], where K is the continuum interval of the
possible scores. For a given student i, his tier is given by t(i) and his composite score is given by
                                                P
k(i). A tier t has mass nt of students, where t∈T nt = n. For any subset of students J ⊆ I, we


                                                 5
denote the set and mass of tier t ∈ T students with Jt and nJt , respectively. For given tier t, we
denote the composite score density function of students in It with ft : K → R+ and assume that
the density function has no atom. For a given subset of students J ⊆ It , let ftJ : K → R+ be the
atomless density function of tier t students in J. With slight abuse of notation, we represent the
                                                              ´ `0
mass of tier t students with scores between ` and `0 < ` with ` ft (k)dk. It is worth emphasizing
that, contrary to standard notation, we evaluate integrals starting from higher scores, following
real-life admissions procedures.
    We are interested in understanding the properties of a school’s choice function. In the case of
a decentralized assignment system, our analysis captures considerations relevant for a particular
school. A centralized matching system based on the deferred acceptance algorithm can be in-
terpreted as an iterated implementation of choice functions across all schools, where in the first
iteration students apply to their top choices and in each subsequent iteration, students rejected
in earlier iterations apply to their next choices.5 In Section 5, we examine the extent to which our
analysis of a single school’s choice function captures insights relevant for Chicago’s affirmative
action system, which employs the deferred acceptance algorithm to assign ten schools.
    In our continuum model, school capacity is modeled as a set of unit capacity intervals, which
we refer to as slots. Let S denote the finite set of slots each with a unit mass of seats to fill.
Then, the school has a mass |S| of seats to fill. There are t̄ + 1 types of slots: tier 1 slots, tier
2 slots, ...., tier t̄ slots, and merit slots. Function τ : S → T ∪ {m} specifies the type of each
slot. We denote the set of tier t slots as St and the set of merit slots as Sm . Observe that
St = {s ∈ S | τ (s) = t} and Sm = {s ∈ S | τ (s) = m}. For each tier t, each slot s ∈ St
prioritizes all students in its tier It over all other students. For each s ∈ St , students in tier t
are ordered by composite score. Students outside tier t are ordered by composite score, but each
comes after students in tier t. Priority for each merit slot s ∈ Sm , on the other hand, is solely
based on composite scores.
    When a merit slot sm considers a set of applicants J, it admits the highest-scoring unit mass
subset of its applicants. Similarly, when a tier slot st considers a set of applicants J, it admits
the highest-scoring unit mass of its applicants from tier t. The cutoff scores for both types of
slots are determined by this process. Observe that for a merit slot sm , the cutoff score kJsm for
J is given by
                                                    sm
                                            t̄ ˆJ
                                               k
                                            X
                                                         ftJ (k)dk = 1,
                                             t=1
                                                   k̄
    5
      In centralized assignment systems, a change in one school’s choice function in the deferred acceptance algo-
rithm may generate a sequence of rejections and proposals, which might result in ambiguous overall effects across
schools. Kominers and Sönmez (2015) and Dur, Kominers, Pathak, and Sönmez (2014) present examples of this
phenomenon. When a matching model includes a large number of participants, there are empirical and theoretical
arguments (e.g., Roth and Peranson (1999) and Kojima and Pathak (2009)), suggesting that such sequences or
rejections and proposals are rare.




                                                           6
and for a tier slot st , the cutoff score kJst for J is given by
                                               st
                                          ˆkJ
                                                    ftJ (k)dk = 1.
                                          k̄

    To simplify the analysis, we rely on the following assumption throughout the paper.


Assumption 1 (Oversubscription): For each t ∈ T ,


                                          nt ≥ |St | + |Sm |.


This assumption states that for each tier t, the mass of tier t students is at least as great as the
mass of slots they are competing for.



2.2     Choice Function
A choice function formally specifies the set of selected students from any given set of applicants at
a given schools. To define the choice function, it is necessary to specify how slots are processed.
The slots in S are processed according to a linear order . on S, that we refer to as a precedence.
Given two slots s, s0 ∈ S, the expression s . s0 means that slot s is to be filled before slot s0
whenever possible. We say that s precedes s0 or s is processed before s0 . The precedence rank
of a slot is the number of slots that precede it plus one. We say s is the `th (merit) slot if the
number of (merit) slots preceding it is `−1. We say a pair of merit slots s, s0 ∈ Sm are subsequent
if there does not exist another merit slot s̃ ∈ Sm such that s . s̃ . s0 . Similarly, we say a pair of
tier slots s, s0 ∈ S \ Sm are subsequent if there does not exist another tier slot s̃ ∈ S \ Sm such
that s . s̃ . s0 .
    Often the choice function is exogenously specified in matching and market design problems.
In our context, however, the choice function depends on the set of slots, the types of these
slots, and their precedence. Therefore, when describing a choice function, there are three inputs:
the set of slots S, the τ function that specifies the types of these slots, and the linear order .
that specifies the precedence of these slots. For a given triple (S, τ, .), the choice from a set
of students J is denoted by C(S, τ, ., J). Throughout the analysis, the set of slots S is fixed.
Moreover, with the exception of Section 3.2, the function τ is fixed. Therefore, we drop S and τ
as arguments of the choice function, referring to choice as C(., J), except in Section 3.2.
    Construction of C(., J): For a given triple (S, τ, .) and set of students J, the choice C(., J)
will be constructed as follows: Each slot will be filled in order of precedence . given the criteria
described above. That is, when it is the turn of a merit slot, it will be filled with the highest-
scoring unit mass subset of applicants that are so far unchosen. When it is the turn of a tier t


                                                        7
slot, it will be filled with the highest-scoring unit mass subset of applicants from tier t that are
so far unchosen.

    Under Assumption 1, for any tier t, there are more tier t applicants than the mass of slots
they are competing for. Therefore, all tier t slots will be filled by tier t candidates.


3     Explicit Preferential Treatment
3.1     The Best and Worst Precedence for a Given Tier
Affirmative action schemes are designed to favor applicants from particular groups. To have the
greatest representation from a particular tier, it is of course possible to only admit applicants
from that tier. However, as discussed in the introduction, this policy conflicts with the competing
goals of both grouping together the highest achievers and having diversity. Moreover, a policy
that only admits applicants from one tier is not tier-blind, as we more formally describe below.
We therefore hold the fraction of reserved seats from each tier fixed at equal sizes and characterize
the best and worst precedence policies for a given tier.
    A preliminary structural result provides a convenient simplification for describing precedence
orders. To determine the outcome of a given choice function, it is sufficient to specify the number
of slots from each tier between any two subsequent merit slots and not their exact location relative
to one another. To express this formally, we first define what it means for two precedences to be
equivalent.

Definition 1 For a given set of slots S and their types τ , the precedence . is equivalent to
precedence .̂ if precedence .̂ can be obtained from precedence . by a sequence of swaps of the
precedence ranks of any pair of tier slots s, s0 ∈ S\Sm where there is no merit slot sm such that
s . s m . s0 .

Equivalence of two precedences simply means that

    1. they have the same number of merit slots with identical precedence ranks, and

    2. for any given tier t, the number of tier t slots between any two subsequent merit slots is
       identical under both precedences, as is the number of tier t slots before the first merit slot
       and the number of tier t slots after the last merit slot.

The next proposition justifies this equivalence terminology.

Proposition 1 Fix the set of slots S and their types τ . Let . and .̂ be two equivalent prece-
dences. Under Assumption 1,
                                         C(., I) = C(.̂, I).



                                                  8
    Our first main result characterizes the precedence orders that attain the maximal and minimal
mass of assignments for applicants of a given tier. The statement of this result is simplified,
thanks to Proposition 1.

Theorem 1 Fix the set of slots S, their types τ , and tier t∗ ∈ T .

    • Let .̄ be a precedence order where each slot of each tier t 6= t∗ precedes each merit slot and
      each merit slot precedes each slot of tier t∗ .

    • Let . be a precedence order where each slot of each tier t∗ precedes each merit slots and
      each merit slot precede each slots of any tier t 6= t∗ .

Then under Assumption 1, among all precedence orders,

   i) the maximal tier t∗ assignment is attained under .̄,

  ii) the minimal tier t∗ assignment is attained under ..

    The proof of this and all other results in contained in the appendix.6 An important issue
with the optimal precedence order .̄ for tier t∗ is that it tweaks the competition for merit seats
to the benefit of applicants from tier t∗ by dropping the best applicants from other tiers from
competition. In contrast, the precedence order . is the other extreme that tweaks the competition
for merit slots to the detriment of tier t∗ applicants. Hence, this theorem raises the question of
whether either of these two precedences can be considered “equitable,” despite the even share of
tier slots across all tiers.

3.2    Eliminating Explicit Preferential Treatment
For a given set of equally-sized reserve slots, Theorem 1 characterizes the best and worst prece-
dence policy for a particular tier. That tier either receives favorable or unfavorable treatment
for the competition at merit seats under these two policy extremes. In our view, the biased
competition for merit seats due to these precedences is akin to the more visible bias associated
with uneven tier reserve sizes. As such, we would like to eliminate uneven treatment of different
tiers due to either visible or subtle design parameters. We therefore focus on the class of rules
that do not differentiate across tiers.
    Explicit preferential treatment across tiers will be eliminated only when the label of tiers play
no role in the choice function. This idea motivates the following definition of tier-blindness. A
merit-preserving bijection π : T ∪ {m} → T ∪ {m} is a one-to-one and onto function where
π(m) = m. This bijection simply relabels the tiers.
    6
      In the appendix, we show a somewhat stronger result that the set of tier t∗ students chosen by the choice
function induced by .̄ includes the set of tier t∗ students chosen under any other precedence ., and the set of tier
t∗ students chosen under any other precedence . includes the set of tier t∗ students chosen by the choice function
induced by ..


                                                         9
Definition 2 A precedence . is tier-blind if and only if for any set of slots S, for any type
function τ , for any merit-preserving bijection π, and for any group of students J,
                                                                   
                                     C S, τ, ., J = C S, π(τ ), ., J .

In plain English, relabeling tiers does not change the outcome.
   Tier-blindness is an anonymity condition across tiers, and it restricts the structure of prece-
dence orders. We next identify the mechanical structure implied by tier-blindness.

Definition 3 Precedence . is a balanced if for any two tiers t, t0 ∈ T :

   i) there is an equal number of tier slots for tiers t and t0 between any two subsequent merit
        slots,

  ii) there is an equal number of tier slots for tiers t and t0 before the first merit slot, and

 iii) there is an equal number of tier slots for tiers t and t0 after the last merit slot.

Due to Proposition 1, the relative position of tier slots between any pair of subsequent merit
slots is immaterial.
   Precedence orders characterized in Theorem 1 are clearly not balanced. To give some exam-
ples of balanced precedence orders, let us suppose that there are two tiers and denote generic
slots for tier 1 as s1 and generic slots for tier 2 as s2 . In this environment, the following three
precedences are all balanced:

  1) s1 . s2 . s2 . s1 . sm . sm ,
     |      {z       }
        # tier 1=#tier 2

  2) sm . sm . sm . s1 . s1 . s1 . s2 . s2 . s2 ,
                    |           {z            }
                            # tier 1=#tier 2

  3) s1 . s2 . s1 . s2 . sm . s1 . s1 . s2 . s2 . s1 . s2 . sm . sm . sm . s2 . s2 . s1 . s1 .
     |      {z       }        |           {z            }                  |      {z       }
        # tier 1=#tier 2             # tier 1=#tier 2                        # tier 1=#tier 2

   Our next result shows that tier-blindness and balancedness are equivalent.

Proposition 2 Fix the set of slots S and their types τ . Under Assumption 1, a precedence order
is tier-blind if and only if it is balanced.

   This proposition implies that under tier-blindness, a set of slots must have an equal number
of slots from each tier. Given an equal fraction of reserved seats for each tier, there are still
many precedence orders that are tier-blind, but they may differ in how they distribute access
to students from different tiers. How these tier-blind admission policies distribute access is a
consequence of the statistical properties of score distributions across tiers, an issue we examine
next.

                                                        10
4     Statistical Preferential Treatment
4.1     The Best and Worst Tier-Blind Precedence
In the last section, we suggested that there are many possible tier-blind admissions policies, which
are by definition devoid of explicit preferential treatment. Within this class, however, policies
may lead to substantially different access across tiers due to the distribution of scores across tiers.
Statistical preferential treatment, one of the central concepts we formulate in our paper,
involves choosing a policy among tier-blind precedence policies with the potential objective of
optimizing seats assigned to students of a specific tier, utilizing the differences between the
distribution of scores across tiers.
     Unlike explicit preferential treatment, which is easy-to-understand, the implications of sta-
tistical preferential treatment are not as straightforward. The effects of this aspect of affirmative
action policies may be as large as other, more explicit policy levers. It is, therefore, important to
understand statistical preferential treatment to avoid unintentionally tweaking outcomes in favor
of certain groups. Some policymakers may find this more subtle policy lever easier to navigate
since reaching desired outcomes might not create a visible wedge between different groups. We
therefore caution that policies critically relying on statistical preferential treatment may be prone
to abuse without the benefit of full transparency.
     Without additional structure on the problem, it is not possible to differentiate between ap-
plicants of different tiers under a tier-blind precedence by the very nature of this concept. The
following empirically-motivated condition on the distribution on scores allows us to characterize
the best tier-blind precedence for the lowest socioeconomic tier.

Assumption 2 ft (k) ≥ f1 (k), ∀k ∈ K and ∀t ∈ T .

     Assumption 2 states that for any given score, tier 1 students have the lowest representation
compared to all other tiers. For notational convenience, we state this assumption for all scores
in K, but it only needs to hold for all “sufficiently high” scores within the relevant range where
applicants may be admitted.


Theorem 2 Fix the set of slots S and their types τ . Under Assumptions 1 and 2, among tier-
blind precedence orders,

    i) the maximal tier 1 assignment is attained when all merit slots precede all tier slots, and

    ii) the minimal tier 1 assignment is attained when all tier slots precede all merit slots.


     Under Assumption 2, at any given score, there is lower representation of tier 1 applicants
compared to other tiers. When an even share of reserve slots across tiers are filled before merit
slots, the gap at the upper tail of the score distribution widens between tiers. As such, the larger

                                                  11
the share of reserve slots that are processed prior to merit seats, the lower is the access for tier
1 applicants for merit slots. Hence, maximal access is attained when all merit slots precede tier
slots, just as minimal access is attained when all tier slots precede merit slots.
    How do applicants from the highest tier fair under these admissions policies? To answer this
question, it is necessary to specify how scores from highest tier compares with those of other
tiers. The following empirically-motivated assumption is the mirror image of Assumption 2.

Assumption 3 ft̄ (k) ≥ ft (k), ∀k ∈ K and ∀t ∈ T .

    Assumption 3 states that for any given score, there is higher representation of tier t̄ students
compared to all other tiers. As with Assumption 2, we state this assumption for all scores K, but
it only needs to hold for all scores within the relevant range where applicants may be admitted.
    Our next result shows that under Assumption 3, there is a clear conflict of interest between
the highest socioeconomic tier and the lowest socioeconomic tier under our specified precedence
policies.


Theorem 3 Fix the set of slots S and their types τ . Under Assumptions 1 and 3, among tier-
blind precedence orders,

   i) the maximal tier t̄ assignment is attained when all tier slots precede all merit slots, and

  ii) the minimal tier t̄ assignment is attained when all merit slots precede all tier slots.


    This result is the natural counterpart to Theorem 2, but for the highest socioeconomic tier.
Theorems 2 and 3 show that the best tier-blind policy for the lowest tier is worst for the highest
tier, and vice versa. In Section 5, we report the difference in access across tiers between the best
and worst tier-blind precedence for each school. We show that the difference between the best
and worst precedence policies come even among tier-blind policies can be substantial.
    When Chicago Public Schools launched the tier-based affirmative action system in 2009, the
system adopted a precedence where all merit slots precede all tier slots. We denote this as the
CPS precedence. Given a reservation size and tier-blindness, Theorems 2 and 3 imply that the
CPS precedence is the best policy for tier 1 applicants and the worst policy for tier 4 applicants.
That is, given Chicago’s tier reserves, our results show that Chicago’s policy is biased in favor
of applicants from the most disadvantaged neighborhoods at the expense of applicants from the
most advantaged neighborhoods.

4.2    Increasing the Size of Reservations
In the 2011-12 school year, Chicago Public Schools increased the size of tier reservations from
60% to 70%. That is, the share of tier slots increased from 15% to 17.5% for each tier. This
change was made at the urging of a Blue Ribbon Commission (BRC 2011), which examined the

                                                12
racial makeup of schools under the 60% reservation compared to the old Chicago’s old system of
racial quotas. They advocated for the increase in tier reservations on the basis it would be

       improving the chances for students in neighborhoods with low performing schools, in-
       creasing diversity, and complementing the other variables.

     Our next result shows that under the CPS precedence, increasing the size of reservations
results in greater access for the lowest tier students, but diminishes access for the highest tier
students.


Proposition 3 Under the CPS precedence, and Assumptions 1-3, an equal sized increase in the
number of tier slots,

    i) weakly increases the mass of tier 1 assignment and

    ii) weakly decreases the mass of tier t̄ assignment.

     The intuition for Proposition 3 is simple. Under Assumption 2, higher tier students on
average have higher scores than tier 1 students. Therefore, tier 1 students have less to lose from
a reduction in the share of merit seats compared to other tiers. In contrast, under Assumption
3, tier t̄ students have on average higher scores than other tiers, and as such, they have more to
lose from a reduction in the share of merit seats.
     Proposition 3 together with Theorem 2 imply that the best tier-blind rule for tier 1 students
equal size reserves with no merit seats. That is, in the case of Chicago with four tiers, the best
tier-blind precedence policy is a 25% reservation for each tier and, thus, no merit slots. Indeed,
in the policy discussion about modifying the plan, some advocated for the complete elimination
of merit seats and equal-sized shares for each tier (see, e.g., BRC (2011)).


5     Evidence from Affirmative Action in Chicago
5.1     Examining Modeling Assumptions
In this section, we investigate the extent to which our theoretical results provide insights about
Chicago’s affirmative action system and quantify how the precedence affects the allocation of
students from different tiers to particular schools. Our data consists of application files from
Chicago Public Schools for the 2012-2013 school year, and contain student rankings, tier, and
composite scores. A total of 16,818 applicants ranked schools, with 3,876 from tier 1, 4,292 from
tier 2, 4,648 from tier 3, and 4,002 from tier 4. There are ten schools with a total of 4,025 seats.
     In 2012-13, CPS used six factors to place neighborhoods into tiers: (1) median family income,
(2) percentage of single-parent households, (3) percentage of households where English is not the
first language, (4) percentage of homes occupied by the homeowner, (5) level of adult education

                                                  13
attainment, and (6) average ISAT scores for attendance area schools. Based on these factors,
each census tract was given a score, scores were ranked, and then census tracts were divided into
four groups, each with approximately the same number of school-age children. Tier 1 tracts have
the lowest socioeconomic index, while tier 4 tracts have the highest socioeconomic index. At
each school, for 30% of the seats, the admissions criteria was merit-based using composite scores.
The remaining 70% of the seats were divided into four equally-sized reserves, one for each tier.
At each 17.5% reserve for a given tier, the admissions criteria was merit-based within that tier.
Students could rank up to six choices, and applications were processed via the student-proposing
deferred acceptance (DA) algorithm using the CPS precedence.
       Chicago’s affirmative action system differs from our model in one important way. We’ve
focused on the properties of one school’s choice function, but CPS uses DA to assign ten schools.
This fact raises the question of how best to interpret our modelling assumptions using data
from a centralized match. As we mentioned before, DA can be interpreted as the iterated
application of choice functions across all schools, where in the first iteration students apply to
their top choices and in each subsequent iteration, students rejected in earlier iterations apply
to their next choices. Under DA, it is sufficient to look at the cumulative set of proposals
to a school during the algorithm to determine who is assigned to that school. Indeed, this
property motivated Hatfield and Milgrom (2005) to define DA as the “cumulative offer” algorithm.
Consequently, we investigate our three assumptions by considering the set of applicants who are
subject to each school’s choice function – that is, those who apply to that school during CPS’s
DA implementation.7
       There is strong support for Assumption 1, which states that there are more tier t students
than the number of tier t and merit slots at a school for any t. For each of the ten schools, the
number of applicants from each tier is greater than the number of merit seats and seats reserved
for that tier. In most cases, the number of applicants is far greater than the number of seats. For
instance at Payton, there are 2,091 applicants from tier 4 competing for 106 seats and the ratio
of applicants to seats is similar for the other three tiers. Tier 4 applicants are less interested in
schools with lower admissions cutoffs. At King, the number of tier 4 applicants is only about
double the number of seats for which they compete. Moreover, at less competitive schools, the
composition of applicants includes a larger share from lower tiers than higher tiers. At both King
and South Shore, there are nearly three times as many applicants from tier 1 than tier 4.8
       There is also strong support for Assumption 2, which states that tier 1 students have lower
scores compared to all other tiers over a relevant range. For each tier, Figure 1 plots a smoothed
estimate of the score distribution for each school ordered by merit cutoff.9 The tier 1 line is below
   7
      This set of application is identical to the “sharp sample” defined in Abdulkadiroğlu, Angrist, and Pathak
(2014).
    8
      South Shore is a new school that opened in 2012-13 and therefore may have experienced unusually low demand
in its initial year.
    9
      Since scores are discrete, we report a local linear smoother with bin size of 0.5 using STATA’s lowess command.
Scores range from 0 to 900, but we plot the range above 600 since no applicants below that score are admitted.


                                                         14
the corresponding lines for each other tier at nine schools, when we define the relevant range as
scores above the cutoff for merit seats. Since this cutoff will likely be high when merit slots are
processed first, it is also worth examining a more conservative definition of the relative range as
scores greater than the minimum score needed to qualify for a merit seat. This is a conservative
assumption because under the CPS precedence, the lowest scoring applicant from a given tier
may have a score well below what is needed to obtain a merit seat. In such a case, applicants with
scores near this threshold are unlikely to influence the competition for merit seats under different
precedence orders. For the more conservative definition, the tier 1 line is below the other lines
for the six most competitive schools. For these six schools, we therefore expect a close match
between the best and worst tier-blind precedence computed in Theorem 2 and the Chicago data.
For the other four schools, tier 1 applicants score systematically lower than applicants from other
tiers, even though Assumption 2 is not exactly satisfied. Since Assumption 2 is sufficient, but
not necessary, it is still possible that the optimal tier-blind precedences calculated in Theorem 2
account for empirical patterns at these schools.
   For the most competitive schools, there is strong support for Assumption 3, which states that
tier 4 students have higher scores compared to the other tiers. If the relevant range starts from
the minimum score needed to qualify, the tier 4 line is above the lines from other tiers for the
five most competitive schools. If the relevant range starts from the minimum score needed to
qualify for a merit seat, the tier 4 line is also above all the other lines at Westinghouse. Theorem
3 is, therefore, likely most relevant for these schools.

5.2   Comparing Alternative Affirmative Action Policies
The Best and Worst Precedence for Tier 1 under 30% Merit

Figure 2 reports the fraction of seats assigned to tier 1 students under the best and worst policy
and the best and worst tier-blind policy for tier 1 applicants, when 30% of seats are reserved for
merit. The figure tabulates the fraction of seats assigned to tier 1 students across all schools and
then reports a breakdown by school, where schools are ordered from left to right by selectivity.
At Payton, for instance, the cutoff for tier 1 seats is 801, while the cutoff for tier 4 seats is 892.
Since merit seats precede tier seats under the CPS precedence, the merit cutoff is even higher at
898. At Northside and Young, there is also a roughly 100 point gap between the score of the last
admitted tier 4 and tier 1 applicant at their respective tier seats. To obtain a merit seat at either
school, an applicant must have nearly a perfect score (897 and 886, respectively). South Shore
and King are the least competitive schools, both with tier 1 cutoffs of 650 and merit cutoffs of
704 and 714, respectively.
   Across all schools, an additional 124 tier 1 students are assigned under the best tier 1 prece-
dence compared to the best tier-blind precedence for tier 1. This comparison can be seen by
comparing columns 1 and 2 of Figure 1 and recalling that a total of 4,025 students are assigned.
It’s worth noting that for a single school’s choice function, Proposition 1 implies that it is not

                                                 15
necessary to specify the ordering of the tier seats that precede the merit seats. We therefore re-
port the allocation generated by precedence Tier2-Tier3-Tier4-Merit-Tier 1 in the first column.
Under the best policy for tier 1 applicants, a total of 875 tier 1 applicants are assigned to any
school, so the reduction in the number of tier 1 students assigned due to tier-blindness, the “cost
of tier-blindness,” of 124 students is substantial.
   For particular schools, the cost of tier-blindness depends on school selectivity. At the most
competitive schools, the reduction in how many tier 1 applicants are assigned in the best tier-
blind policy is small. At Payton, one fewer tier 1 student is assigned in the best tier-blind
policy. At Northside, four fewer tier 1 students are assigned in the best tier-blind policy. There
is a substantial difference, however, at somewhat less competitive schools. At Westinghouse,
33 fewer students are assigned under the best tier-blind policy for tier 1. Figure 1 shows that
there are more high-scoring applicants from higher tiers at score ranges needed to qualify for the
most competitive schools. The difference in scores across tiers narrows at score ranges needed
to qualify for less competitive schools. At the most competitive schools, almost all of the merit
seats are allocated to students from tiers other than tier 1, leaving little room for precedence to
influence the applicant pool at merit seats. At less competitive schools, the impact of precedence
is larger because the competition for merit seats across tiers is more even.
   The range of outcomes from the best and worst tier-blind policy shows the potential scope
for statistical preferential treatment. This range can be seen by comparing the second and third
columns of Figure 2, which are the best and worst tier-blind precedence for tier 1. A total of 39
fewer tier 1 students are assigned in worst tier-blind policy compared to the best tier-blind policy
for tier 1. For particular schools, statistical preferential treatment allows for a smaller range of
outcomes at more selective schools. At Payton, there is no difference for tier 1 applicants.
At Northside, the tier-blind range is 3 students, and at Young, it is 1 student. At the other
extreme, the largest range is at Westinghouse and Lindblom, where 8 more tier 1 students could
be assigned to each school in the best tier-blind policy for tier 1 compared to the worst one.
   While there is a substantial gap between the best policy for tier 1 and the best tier-blind
policy, there is almost no difference between the worst policy for tier and the worst tier-blind
policy. This fact can be seen by comparing the third and fourth columns of Figure 2. Only
three fewer students are assigned in the worst policy for tier 1 compared to the worst tier-blind
policy for tier 1. The outcome is the same at 17.5% for all schools, except South Shore and
King. This means that tier 1 students are essentially shut out entirely from merit seats under
these two worst precedence policies. Appendix Figure B1 shows that tier 1 applicants obtain
systematically higher choices in a way that parallels the pattern in Figure 2.

The Best and Worst Precedence for Tier 1 under 40% Merit

Our theoretical analysis studied how precedence policies influence the competition for merit
seats. When the share of merit seats increases to 40%, precedence has a larger effect on the


                                                 16
allocation of tier 1 applicants. This can be seen in Figure 3, where we tabulate the outcome
of the four precedence policies in Figure 2, but for 40% merit. As described above, the initial
CPS affirmative action system was launched with 40% merit, but it switched to 30% in 2010-
2011. The figure shows that for all schools, the gap between the best and worst policy for tier 1
applicants is at least as large when 40% of seats are assigned via merit compared to 30%. This
fact can be seen by comparing the first and fourth columns of Figures 2 and 3. At most schools,
the scope for statistical preferential treatment is also larger with more merit seats. This fact can
be seen by comparing the second and third columns of Figure 3 with the corresponding columns
of Figure 2.
       Figure 3 shows that the King does not follow the pattern predicted by our theoretical results
when 40% of seats are assigned via merit. Fewer tier 1 students assigned to King compared to
the worst tier-blind policy for tier 1. This discrepancy is not inconsistent with our theoretical
results given that Assumption 2 fails in a significant part of the potentially relevant score range
at King.
       Are the differences between precedence policies quantitatively large or small? Recall that
a Blue Ribbon Commission reviewing Chicago’s policy made the controversial recommendation
to decrease the merit percentage from 40% to 30%. Under the CPS precedence, 63 more tier
1 students are assigned to an exam school when the merit percentage is 30%. Had CPS not
decreased the merit percentage, 118 more students would be assigned in the best tier 1 precedence
compared to the CPS precedence. Therefore, it would have been possible to hold the merit
fraction fixed and increase access for tier 1 applicants simply by changing the precedence order.
This comparison involves explicit preferential treat tier 1 applicants. When 40% of seats are
merit, 34 more tier 1 students are assigned under the CPS precedence compared to the worst
tier-blind policy for tier 1.10 Even relative to the more salient tool of decreasing merit seats,
the scope for statistical preferential treatment is more than half the effect of changing the merit
fraction. Given the policy review and debate leading to the adoption of the 30% merit reservation,
these magnitudes suggest that precedence is far from a trivial consideration.

The Best and Worst Precedence for Tier 4 Under 30% Merit

The last issue we examine is how applicants from tier 4 fair under different precedences. Figure 4
shows that with 30% merit seats, the worst precedence for tier 1 assigns most of the merit seats
to tier 4 applicants at the most competitive schools. Given the merit fraction, the maximum
assignment for a given tier is 47.5% (=30+70/4). Tier 4 applicants are just below that fraction
at Payton, Northside, and Young at 46.61%, 44.23% and 43.70%, respectively. The fractions are
  10
     The range between the best and worst tier-blind precedence for tier 1 with 40% merit is smaller than the
range with 30% merit, where it is 39 students, because of King. Ignoring assignments at King, the range is larger
when the merit share is 40%. Excluding King, 51 more tier 1 applicants are assigned under the best tier-blind
precedence for tier 1 compared to the worst tier-blind policy for tier 1 under 40% merit, and the comparable range
is 35 under 30% merit.



                                                       17
also high at Jones and Lane. This fact illustrates that the preponderance of high-scoring tier 4
applicants limits competition for merit seats, not only for tier 1 applicants but also for tier 2 and
tier 3 applicants.
    Since Assumption 3 is not satisfied for the bottom five schools, there is greater discordance
with Theorem 3 at these schools. More tier 4 applicants are assigned to Brooks, Westinghouse,
and Lindblom under the worst tier-blind policy for tier 4 applicants than under the best tier-blind
policy for tier 4 applicants. This pattern is driven by two forces. First, far fewer tier 4 applicants
find these schools appealing, as revealed in their ranking behavior. Roughly 2,000 applicants
apply to Payton, Northside, Young, Jones, or Lane in the process of DA, while the demand
for Brooks, Westinghouse, Lane, South Shore and King is about one quarter that amount. At
Brooks, Westinghouse, and Lindblom, there are roughly twice as many applicants from either
tier 1, tier 2, or tier 3 than from tier 4. Second, interactions across schools due to the match
further exacerbate differences across tiers. When tier 4 applicants are rejected at Payton, they go
on to apply to these less competitive schools. Appendix Figure B2 shows that tier 4 applicants
do obtain systematically higher choices under the best tier 4 precedence compared to the worst
tier 4 precedence. Our theoretical results for tier 4 applicants therefore appear most relevant
only for the five most competitive schools.
    In summary, the forces highlighted by our theoretical results appear to describe how access
changes for tier 1 applicants for the overwhelming majority of schools even though we focused our
analysis on one school and CPS is simultaneously assigning ten schools. Although understanding
access for the most disadvantaged is our primary goal in this paper, the empirical patterns in
Chicago also align with our theoretical results for tier 4 applicants at the most competitive
schools. This is noteworthy because affirmative action as a policy is usually hotly contested at
the most selective schools and may be less necessary to achieve diversity at less selective schools.


6    Conclusion
Chicago Public Schools has embarked on a landmark placed-based affirmative action system for
assignment to its highly sought-after exam schools. The system has an important feature shared
by other affirmative action systems: an applicant can be assigned to a slot via multiple routes.
In Chicago, an applicant can qualify for a school without affirmative action or she can qualify by
taking an affirmative action slot. This aspect of the system motivated our investigation of how
applicant processing affects the implementation of affirmative action.
    We have shown that it is not sufficient to specify that reserves are equally sized to eliminate
explicit preferential treatment. Moreover, even in systems that do not explicitly discriminate,
there are many possible implementations of affirmative action driven by statistical differences in
scores by applicant tier, a phenomenon known as statistical preferential treatment. Our formal
results characterize the best and worst precedence policy for a given reserve size and the best


                                                 18
and worst tier-blind precedence policy for applicants from a given tier. In doing so, we show that
CPS’s current policy has been favoring the most disadvantaged applicants. We also show that
the bias in favor of applicants from the most disadvantaged tier is comparable to the outright
increase in the size of tier reservations in 2012.
   This paper contributes to a new focus in the analysis of priority-based resource allocation
problems like student assignment. A large portion of that literature has taken the social objec-
tives embodied in the priorities as given and then examined the properties of different market-
clearing mechanisms. This paper, like Echenique and Yenmez (2015), focuses on how various
social objectives are captured by a school’s choice function. In Chicago, we’ve seen that the
biases associated with processing applicants are present even under tier-blind admissions poli-
cies, opening the door to statistical preferential treatment. In Boston, deeper understanding of
how a school’s choice function adjudicated claims between applicants from inside and outside the
walk-zone played a role in the elimination of walk-zone priority entirely (Dur, Kominers, Pathak,
and Sönmez 2014). Our findings show that analyzing the properties of these choice functions is
necessary to determine how an assignment system distributes access across applicants.




                                                 19
                               Figure 1(a): Distribution of Composite Scores for Each Tier.
 Score distribution shown for applicants who apply to school during course of mechanism. Dashed vertical line indicates
minimum score to qualify for any seat while solid vertical line indicates minimum score to qualify for a merit seat under CPS
                        precedence. Lines from local linear smoother (lowess) with bin size of 1.
                               Figure 1(b): Distribution of Composite Scores for Each Tier
 Score distribution shown for applicants who apply to school during course of mechanism. Dashed vertical line indicates
minimum score to qualify for any seat while solid vertical line indicates minimum score to qualify for a merit seat under CPS
                        precedence. Lines from local linear smoother (lowess) with bin size of 1.
                                         Figure	  2:	  Frac,on	  of	  Seats	  Assigned	  to	  Tier	  1	  Students	  	  
                                                               (30%	  Merit	  /	  70%	  Tier)	  
28%	  




26%	  




24%	  




22%	  




20%	  




18%	  




16%	  




14%	  
          All	             Payton	           Northside	           Young	                    Jones	                       Lane	                Brooks	        Wes@nghouse	   Lindblom	                   King	         South	  Shore	  

             Tier2-­‐Tier3-­‐Tier4-­‐Merit-­‐Tier1	  	       Merit-­‐Tier1-­‐Tier2-­‐Tier3-­‐Tier4	                                   Tier1-­‐Tier2-­‐Tier3-­‐Tier4-­‐Merit	  	       Tier1-­‐Merit-­‐Tier2-­‐Tier3-­‐Tier4	  	  
             (Best	  for	  Tier	  1)	                      (Best	  Tier-­‐blind	  for	  Tier	  1	  -­‐	  CPS)	                (Worst	  Tier-­‐blind	  for	  Tier	  1)	     (Worst	  for	  Tier	  1)	  
                                        Figure	  3:	  Frac,on	  of	  Seats	  Assigned	  to	  Tier	  1	  Students	  
                                                             	  (40%	  Merit	  /	  60%	  Tier)	  
28.0%	  



26.0%	  



24.0%	  



22.0%	  



20.0%	  



18.0%	  



16.0%	  



14.0%	  




            Tier2-­‐Tier3-­‐Tier4-­‐Merit-­‐Tier1	  	     Merit-­‐Tier1-­‐Tier2-­‐Tier3-­‐Tier4	                        Tier1-­‐Tier2-­‐Tier3-­‐Tier4-­‐Merit	  	       Tier1-­‐Merit-­‐Tier2-­‐Tier3-­‐Tier4	  	  
            (Best	  for	  Tier	  1)	                    (Best	  Tier-­‐blind	  for	  Tier	  1	  -­‐	  CPS)	     (Worst	  Tier-­‐blind	  for	  Tier	  1)	     (Worst	  for	  Tier	  1)	  
                         Figure 4: Fraction of Seats Assigned to Tier 4 Students
                                          (30% Merit / 70% Tier)
50%



45%



40%



35%



30%



25%



20%



15%




      Tier4‐Merit‐Tier1‐Tier2‐Tier3   Merit‐Tier1‐Tier2‐Tier3‐Tier4         Tier1‐Tier2‐Tier3‐Tier4‐Merit   Tier1‐Tier2‐Tier3‐Merit‐Tier4
      (Worst for Tier 4)              (Worst Tier‐blind for Tier 4 ‐ CPS)   (Best Tier‐blind for Tier 4)    (Best for Tier 4)
References
Abdulkadiroglu, A., Y.-K. Che, and Y. Yasuda (2015): “Expanding “Choice” in School
  Choice,” American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 7(1), 1–42.

Abdulkadiroğlu, A., J. Angrist, and P. Pathak (2014): “The Elite Illusion: Achievement
  Effects at Boston and New York Exam Schools,” Econometrica, 82(1), 137–196.

Abdulkadiroğlu, A., P. A. Pathak, and A. E. Roth (2005): “The New York City High
  School Match,” American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 95, 364–367.

        (2009): “Strategy-proofness versus Efficiency in Matching with Indifferences: Redesign-
  ing the New York City High School Match,” American Economic Review, 99(5), 1954–1978.

Abdulkadiroğlu, A., P. A. Pathak, A. E. Roth, and T. Sönmez (2005): “The Boston
  Public School Match,” American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 95, 368–371.

Abdulkadiroğlu, A., and T. Sönmez (2003): “School Choice: A Mechanism Design Ap-
  proach,” American Economic Review, 93, 729–747.

Arrow, K. J. (1973): “The Theory of Discrimination,” in Discrimination in Labor Markets, ed.
  by O. Ashenfelter, and A. Rees, pp. 3–33. Princeton University Press.

Aygün, O., and I. Bo (2013): “College Admission with Multidimensional Reserves: The Brazil-
  ian Affirmative Action Case,” Working paper, Boston College.

Azevedo, E., and J. Leshno (2015): “A Supply and Demand Framework for Two-Sided Match-
  ing Markets,” forthcoming, Journal of Political Economy.

Bagde, S., D. Epple, and L. Taylor (2015): “Caste- and Gender-Based Affirmative Action
  and College Quality in India,” forthcoming, American Economic Review.

Balinski, M., and T. Sönmez (1999): “A Tale of Two Mechanisms: Student Placement,”
  Journal of Economic Theory, 84, 73–94.

Bertrand, M., R. Hanna, and S. Mullainathan (2010): “Affirmative Action in Education:
  Evidence from Engineering College Admissions in India,” Journal of Public Economics, 94(1-
  2), 16–29.

BRC (2011): “Blue Ribbon Commission Report on the 2011-2012 Magnet and Selective Enroll-
  ment Admissions Policy,” Chicago Public Schools, Last accessed: 11/18/2015.

Che, Y.-K., J. Kim, and F. Kojima (2015): “Stable Matching in Large Economies,” Working
  Paper, Columbia University.



                                             25
Cortes, K. (2010): “Do Bans on Affirmative Action Hurt Minority Students? Evidence from
  the Texas Top 10% Plan,” Economics of Education Review, 29(6), 1110–1124.

Dur, U., S. Kominers, P. Pathak, and T. Sönmez (2014): “The Demise of Walk Zones in
  Boston: Priorities vs. Precedence in School Choice,” NBER Working Paper 18981.

Echenique, F., and B. Yenmez (2015): “How to Control Controlled School Choice?,”
  American Economic Review, 105(8), 2679–2694.

Ehlers, L., I. Hafalir, M. B. Yenmez, and M. A. Yildirim (2014): “School Choice
  with Controlled Choice Constraints: Hard Bounds versus Soft Bounds,” Journal of Economic
  Theory, 153, 648–683.

Ellison, G., and P. Pathak (2016): “The Inefficiency of Race-Neutral Affirmative Action:
  Evidence from Chicago’s Exam Schools,” Working paper, MIT.

Erdil, A., and T. Kumano (2012): “Prioritizing Diversity in School Choice,” Unpublished
  working paper, Cambridge University.

Hafalir, I., B. Yenmez, and M. A. Yildirim (2013): “Effective Affirmative Action in School
  Choice,” Theoretical Economics, 8(2), 325–363.

Hatfield, J. W., and P. Milgrom (2005): “Matching with Contracts,” American Economic
  Review, 95, 913–935.

Kahlenberg,      R. (2008):     “A Report to the Chicago Public Schools on Using
  Student Socioeconomic Status as a Factor in Student Assignment,”            Available at:
  http://s3.documentcloud.org/documents/524908/kahlenberg.pdf, Last accessed: November
  2015.

          (2014): “Elite, Separate, and Unequal: New York City’s Top Public Schools Need
  Diversity,” New York Times, June 22.

Kamada, Y., and F. Kojima (2014): “Efficient Matching under Distributional Constraints:
  Theory and Applications,” American Economic Review, 105(4), 67–99.

Kapor, A. (2015): “Distributional Effects of Race-Blind Affirmative Action,” Working paper,
  Yale University.

Kojima, F. (2012): “School Choice: Impossibilities for Affirmative Action,” Games and
  Economic Behavior, 75(2), 685–693.

Kojima, F., and P. A. Pathak (2009): “Incentives and Stability in Large Two-Sided Matching
  Markets,” American Economic Review, 99, 608–627.


                                             26
Kominers, S. D., and T. Sönmez (2013): “Designing for Diversity in Matching,” Working
  Paper, Boston College.

             (2015):   “Matching   with   Slot-Specific   Priorities:   Theory,”   forthcoming,
  Theoretical Economics.

OCR (2011): “Guidance on the Voluntary Use of Race to Achieve Diversity and Avoid Racial
  Isolation in Elementary and Secondary Schools,” Memorandum of U.S. Department of Justice
  and U.S. Department of Education, Office of Civil Rights.

Pathak, P. A. (2016): “What Really Matters in Designing School Choice Mechanisms,” forth-
  coming, Advances in Economics and Econometrics, 11th World Congress of the Econometric
  Society.

Pathak, P. A., and T. Sönmez (2008): “Leveling the Playing Field: Sincere and Sophisticated
  Players in the Boston Mechanism,” American Economic Review, 98(4), 1636–1652.

         (2013): “School Admissions Reform in Chicago and England: Comparing Mechanisms
  by their Vulnerability to Manipulation,” American Economic Review, 103(1), 80–106.

Phelps, E. S. (1972): “The statistical theory of racism and sexism,” American Economic Review,
  62, 659–691.

Roth, A. E., and E. Peranson (1999): “The Redesign of the Matching Market for American
  Physicians: Some Engineering Aspects of Economic Design,” American Economic Review, 89,
  748–780.




                                             27
A     Appendix
We begin by introducing some additional notation. We fix the set of slots S and type function
τ . We denote the set of students chosen for slot s ∈ S by choice function C(·) from set J under
precedence order . with Cs (., J). Similarly, we denote the set of tier t students in C(., J) with
C t (., J) and the set of tier t students in Cs (., J) as Cst (., J).
    For our analysis below, it is convenient to define tier and merit slot groups:

Definition 4 Given S, τ and ., a subset of tier slots G ⊆ S \ Sm is called a tier slot group if
it consists of either

    i) all tier slots that have higher precedence than the highest precedence merit slot, or

  ii) all tier slots that have lower precedence than the lowest precedence merit slot, or

 iii) all tier slots between any subsequent merit slots.

Definition 5 Given S, τ and ., a subset of merit slots H ⊆ Sm is called an merit slot group
if it consists of either

    i) all merit slots that have higher precedence than the highest precedence tier slot, or

  ii) all merit slots that have lower precedence than the lowest precedence tier slot, or

 iii) all merit slots between any subsequent tier slots.

We begin with a preliminary Lemma that shows that comparing the set of chosen students by
two choice functions is equivalent to comparing the size of the two chosen sets.


Lemma 0 Fix the set of slots S and their types τ . Let . and .0 be two precedence orders. Then,
for any t ∈ T ,
                           |C t (., I)| ≤ |C t (.0 , I)| ⇐⇒ C t (., I) ⊆ C t (.0 , I).

Proof. Fix a tier t ∈ T . Observe that for any precedence order, if any student i of tier t is
chosen under the choice function C(.) then all students of tier t with higher composite scores
than student i are chosen under the choice function C(.). This observation immediately implies
the desired result.                                                                             

    Next, we state a lemma that is used in the proofs of Theorems 1, 2, and 3.

Lemma 1 Fix the set of slots S and their types τ . Partition S into three sets S 1 , S 2 , and S 3
such that there are no merit slots in S 3 . Let . be a precedence order such that

                        s1 . s2 . s3       for all s1 ∈ S 1 , s2 ∈ S 2 , and s3 ∈ S 3 .

                                                       28
Let .0 be another precedence order that differs from . only in the precedence rankings of slots in
S 2 . Under Assumption 1, for all t ∈ T ,
                                                             [                      [
                         C t (., I) ⊆ C t (.0 , I) ⇐⇒               Cst (., I) ⊆           Cst (.0 , I).
                                                            s∈S 2                  s∈S 2


Proof. Each slot in S 1 not only has the same precedence ranking in . and .0 , but is also
processed before slots in S 2 ∪ S 3 . Therefore, for all t ∈ T ,
                 [                     [                           [                        [
                        Cst (., I) =           Cst (.0 , I) =⇒            Cst (., I) =             Cst (.0 , I) .
                s∈S 1                  s∈S 1                      s∈S 1                    s∈S 1


Moreover, since there are no merit slots in S 3 , for all t ∈ T ,
                                  [                        [
                                         Cst (., I) =             Cst (.0 , I) = |S 3 ∩ St |
                                 s∈S 3                    s∈S 3

by Assumption 1. Therefore for all t ∈ T ,
                [                        [                           [                        [
                      Cst (., I) ≤             Cst (.0 , I) ⇐⇒              Cst (., I) ≤             Cst (.0 , I) .
                s∈S                      s∈S                        s∈S 2                    s∈S 2

Hence Lemma 0 implies, for all t ∈ T ,
                                                             [                      [
                         C t (., I) ⊆ C t (.0 , I) ⇐⇒               Cst (., I) ⊆           Cst (.0 , I).
                                                            s∈S 2                  s∈S 2

                                                                                                                      

A.1    Proof of Proposition 1
We use the following Lemma to prove Proposition 1.

Lemma 2 Fix the set of slots S and their types τ . Let .̂ be a precedence order in which a tier
slot ŝ immediately precedes another tier slot s0 . Let .0 be a precedence order obtained from .̂
by swapping the precedence ranks of ŝ and s0 and leaving the precedence ranks of all other slots
unchanged. Under Assumption 1, C(.̂, I) = C(.0 , I).


Proof. Let ŝ be the hth slot under .̂. Consider the outcome of choice function C(·) under
problems (.̂, I) and (.0 , I). Since the first (h − 1) slots are the same under both .̂ and .0 ,
Cs (.̂, I) = Cs (.0 , I) for all s ∈ S with s .̂ ŝ (and, therefore s .0 s0 ). Hence, the same subset
of students, denoted by I 0 , is available to be selected for the hth slot by choice function C(·) in
both problems (.̂, I) and (.0 , I). If ŝ, s0 ∈ St for some t ∈ T , then the highest-scoring two unit
masses of tier t applicants in I 0 are selected both for ŝ and s0 by C(·) under both .̂ and .0 . If

                                                             29
ŝ ∈ St̂ and s0 ∈ St0 where t̂ 6= t0 , then, in both problems C(·) selects the highest-scoring unit
mass of tier t̂ applicants in I 0 and the highest-scoring unit mass of tier t0 applicants in I 0 for ŝ
and s0 , respectively. Hence, in both cases

                                  Cŝ (.̂, I) ∪ Cs0 (.̂, I) = Cŝ (.0 , I) ∪ Cs0 (.0 , I),

and the same subset of students is available to be selected for the (h+2)th slot by C(·) under both
.̂ and .0 . Since the last (|S| − h − 1) slots are the same under both .̂ and .0 , Cs (.̂, I) = Cs (.0 , I)
for all s ∈ S with s0 .̂ s (and, therefore ŝ .0 s). Hence,
                                            [                    [
                                                  Cs (.̂, I) =         Cs (.0 , I).
                                            s∈S                  s∈S

                                                                                                        

Proof of Proposition 1. Since any equivalent precedence order of . can be obtained from
consecutive swapping the ranks of the adjacent tier slots, Lemma 2 implies the desired result.

A.2        Proof of Theorem 1
We use the following remark and Lemmata to prove Theorem 1. We skip the proof of the
following remark for brevity.

Remark 1 Fix the set of slots S and their types τ . Let . and .0 be precedence orders over S
such that the hth slots under . and .0 have the same type for all h ∈ {1, 2, ..., |S|}. Then, for any
subset of students J ⊆ I, C(., J) = C(.0 , J).

Lemma 3 Fix the set of slots S, their types τ , and tier t∗ ∈ T such that S includes only merit
and tier t∗ slots under τ . Let . be the precedence order over S such that merit slots precede
all tier t∗ slots and .̃ be the precedence order over S such that all tier t∗ slots precede all merit
slots.11 Then, for any given J ⊆ I with nJt∗ ≥ |Sm | + |St∗ | = |S|,
            ∗             ∗
  (i) C t (.̃, J) ⊆ C t (., J),

 (ii) C t (., J) ⊆ C t (.̃, J) for all t ∈ T \ {t∗ }.

Proof. With slight abuse of notation, let Cm (., J) and Cm (.̃, J) be the set of students selected
for the merit slots from J by C(·) under . and .̃, respectively. Since nJt∗ ≥ |S|, all slots are filled
and tier t ∈ T \ {t∗ } students are only selected for merit slots by C(·) under . and .̃. Hence, it
                       t (., J) ⊆ C t (.̃, J) for all t ∈ T \ {t∗ }.
suffices to show that Cm           m

  11
       See Figure A.1 for examples of . and .̃.




                                                            30
                 .:     m       m          m        t∗        t∗         .̃:        t∗    t∗          m   m   m

                        Figure A.1: Illustration of precedence orders . and .̃

    We denote the infimum scores of students in Cm (., J) and Cm (.̃, J) with `m and `˜m , respec-
tively. Since the merit slots are filled first under . and the tier slots are filled first under .̃, we
have

                                t̄ ˆ
                                X
                                      `˜m                                t̄ ˆ
                                                                         X
                                                                                `m

                                            ftJ (k)dk        ≥ |Sm | =               ftJ (k)dk.                   (1)
                                t=1                                      t=1
                                      k̄                                       k̄

It is worth reminding that, contrary to standard notation, we evaluate integrals starting from
higher scores, following real-life admissions procedures. Equation (1) implies that `m ≥ `˜m . For
each t ∈ T \ {t∗ }, if i ∈ Cm
                            t (., J), then k(i) ≥ `    ˜                 t
                                                   m ≥ `m and hence i ∈ Cm (.̃, J). That is,
 t (., J) ⊆ C t (.̃, J) for all t ∈ T \ {t∗ }, and therefore
Cm           m

                                                  t      ∗     t         ∗
                                                 Cm (.̃, J) ⊆ Cm (., J).

Since all tier t∗ slots are filled with tier t∗ students,

                          t ∗          t        ∗                              ∗                  ∗
                         Cm (.̃, J) ⊆ Cm (., J)                    =⇒        C t (.̃, J) ⊆ C t (., J).

Similarly, for any t ∈ T \ {t∗ },

                           t           t
                          Cm (., J) ⊆ Cm (.̃, J)                   =⇒        C t (., J) ⊆ C t (.̃, J).

                                                                                                                   


Lemma 4 Fix the set of slots S, their types τ , and tier t0 ∈ T such that S includes at least
                                                                             1 and S 2 . Let .
two merit slots under τ . Let Sm be partitioned into two non-empty subsets, Sm      m
                                                       1 precede all tier slots and all tier slots
be a precedence order over S such that merit slots in Sm
                            2 . Let .̃ be a precedence order over S such that all tier t ∈ T \ {t0 }
precede the merit slots in Sm
slots precede the merit slots and merit slots precede the tier t0 slots. Then, for any J ⊆ I with
nJt ≥ |Sm | + |St | for all t ∈ T ,
                                                         0               0
                                                    C t (., J) ⊆ C t (.̃, J).


Proof. We first consider precedence order .. When we move tier t0 slots within the tier slot group
such that they are preceded by all other tier slots, by Proposition 1 the mass of tier t0 students
selected from J by choice function C(·) does not change. Then, when we move tier t0 slots after

                                                                   31
                                  .:      m           m 6= t0           t0        t0 6= t0   t0    m      m

                                  .̂:     m           m 6= t0 6= t0               m    m     t0    t0     t0

                                  .̃: 6= t0 6= t0 m m m m t0                                       t0     t0

                             Figure A.2: Illustration of precedence orders ., .̂, and .̃

                      2 , by Lemma 3.(i) the mass of tier t0 students selected from J by choice
the merit slot group Sm
function C(·) weakly increases. Let .̂ denote the precedence order obtained from . by these
                         0                      0                                                              0   0
moves.12 Then, C t (., J) ⊆ C t (.̂, J). It therefore suffices to show that C t (.̂, J) ⊆ C t (.̃, J).
       Under both .̃ and .̂, tier t0 slots have the lowest precedence and are filled with tier t0 students.
Hence, it is sufficient to compare the mass of tier t0 students chosen for the merit slots by C(·)
under .̃ and .̂.
       Denote the infimum score of tier t ∈ T \ {t0 } students assigned to tier t slots by C(·) under .̃
and .̂ with k̃t and k̂t , respectively. Since some merit slots precede the tier slots under .̂ whereas
no merit slot precedes any tier slot for tier t 6= t0 under .̃, we have


                             ˆk̂t                               ˆk̃t
                                    ftJ (k)dk       ≥ |St | =          ftJ (k)dk      for all t ∈ T \ {t0 }.           (2)
                             k̄                                 k̄


Equation (2) implies that k̃t ≥ k̂t for all t ∈ T \ {t0 }. Let `˜t and `ˆt be the infimum score of
the tier t ∈ T \ {t0 } students chosen by C(·) under .̃ and .̂, respectively. First note that, tier
t ∈ T \ {t0 } students will not be selected for tier t0 slots by C(·) under either .̃ or .̂. We consider
two possible cases.
Case 1 (`ˆt > `˜t for some t ∈ T \ {t0 }): Since k̃t ≥ k̂t , there exist some students with score
lower than `ˆt who are chosen for merit slots by C(·) under .̃, but not .̂. In other words, the
infimum score of students chosen for the merit slots by C(·) under .̃ is less than C(·) under .̂.
Since the merit slots precede tier t0 slots under both .̃ and .̂, all tier t0 students chosen for the
                                                                                                               0   0
merit slots by C(·) under .̂ are also chosen by merit slots by .̃. Hence, C t (.̂, J) ⊆ C t (.̃, J).

Case 2 (`ˆt ≤ `˜t for each t ∈ T \ {t0 }): Under this case, C t (.̃, J) ⊆ C t (.̂, J). Since all slots
are filled, each tier t0 students selected by C(·) under .̂ is also selected by C(·) under .̃, i.e.,
   0               0
C t (.̂, J) ⊆ C t (.̃, J).                                                                                              

Remark 2 Lemma 4 holds even if S does not include any tier t0 slots.
  12
       We illustrate examples of precedence orders ., .̂, and .̃ in Figure A.2.


                                                                             32
     Note that under any precedence order ., for any slot s ∈ S when the available set of students
to be admitted to s by choice function C(·) and the slots with weakly lower precedence than s
are considered Assumption 1 holds. Hence, we can use Lemma 3 and 4 while proving Theorem
1.

Proof of Theorem 1.(i): Consider an arbitrary precedence .0 . Without loss of generality, by
Remark 1, we assume the relative precedence order of merit slots are the same under both .̄ and
.0 . If there are no merit slots (i.e., if Sm = ∅), then C(.0 , I) = C(.̄, I) by Proposition 1. We have
two cases to consider.


     .00 : t1    t2   t1     t∗     t3    m     m     t2       t∗ t3     t∗ t2
                                                                                   By P roposition 1
                                                                                    t∗ assignment
                                                                                   doesn0 t change


     .01 : t1    t2   t1     t3     t∗    m     m     t2       t3   t2   t∗   t∗
                                                                                   By Lemma 3.(i)
                                                                                   t∗ assignment
                                  Lemma 3.(i) invoked here                         weakly increases


     .02 : t1    t2   t1     t3     m     m      t∗ t2         t3   t2   t∗   t∗
                                                                                   By P roposition 1
                                                                                    t∗ assignment
                                                                                   doesn0 t change


     .03 : t1    t2   t1     t3     m     m     t2    t2       t3   t∗   t∗ t∗
                                                                                   By Lemma 3.(ii)
                                                                                   t∗ assignment
                                   Lemma 3.(ii) invoked here
                                                                                   weakly increases


     .04 : t1    t2   t1     t3     t2    t2    m     m        t3   t∗   t∗ t∗
                                                                                   By Lemma 3.(ii)
                                            Lemma 3.(ii) invoked here              t∗ assignment
                                                                                   weakly increases

     .05 : t1    t2   t1     t3     t2    t2    t3    m        m    t∗   t∗ t∗

                         Figure A.3: Illustration of Case 1 of Theorem 1.(i)

Case 1 (There is one merit slot group under .0 ): Here is our proof strategy for Case
1. We will construct a sequence of precedences where the first element is .00 ≡ .0 and the last
element is .̄. We will show that t∗ assignment weakly increases under choice function C(·) as we
move from one element of the sequence to the next one.


                                                     33
        Let .00 ≡ .0 be the first element of the sequence. Construct .01 from .00 by moving each slot
of type t∗ to the end of their tier slot group so that each tier slot of type t∗ has lower precedence
than each tier slot of any other type t within their tier slot group. See construction of precedence
.01 from .00 in Figure A.3.
                      ∗            ∗
Claim 1 C t (.01 , I) = C t (.00 , I).

Proof of Claim 1: Since .00 and .01 are equivalent, the desired result immediately follows from
Proposition 1.                                                                                                        ♦
        There is potentially a tier slot of type             t∗   immediately before the only merit slot group under
.01 .    If such a slot does not, then       .02    ≡     .01 .   Otherwise, construct .02 from .01 by moving all the
adjacent tier t∗ slots from immediately before the unique merit slot group to immediately after
it. See construction of precedence .02 from .01 in Figure A.3.
                      ∗            ∗
Claim 2 C t (.02 , I) ⊇ C t (.01 , I).

Proof of Claim 2: Let S 0 be the set of merit slots (in the unique merit slot group) together
with all of the adjacent type t∗ slots that are immediately before the merit slot group for the
case of .01 and immediately after it for the case of .02 . By Lemma 3.(i), we have
                                           [          ∗
                                                                         [          ∗
                                                   Cst (.02 , I) ⊇               Cst (.01 , I).                      (3)
                                           s∈S 0                         s∈S 0


Equation (3) together with Lemma 1 complete the proof of Claim 2.                                                     ♦
        Next we consider the set of tier slots after the unique merit slot group under                 .02 .   Construct
.03     from   .02   by reorganizing tier slots in this set so that

      1) slots of the same type are processed subsequently as a group, and

      2) slots of type t∗ have the lowest precedence and thus are processed at the end.

See construction of precedence .03 from .02 in Figure A.3.
                      ∗            ∗
Claim 3 C t (.03 , I) = C t (.02 , I).

Proof of Claim 3: Since .02 and .03 are equivalent, the desired result immediately follows from
Proposition 1.                                                                                                        ♦

        The argument for the remaining steps will be identical, and hence we only state it once.

        Let t0 be the tier that is processed after the unique merit slot group .03 . If t0 = t∗ , then
.03 ≡ .̄ and we are done. Otherwise, construct .04 from .03 by moving all the adjacent tier t0 slots
from immediately after the unique merit slot group to immediately before it. See construction
of precedence .04 from .03 in Figure A.3.

                                                                    34
                ∗              ∗
Claim 4 C t (.04 , I) ⊇ C t (.03 , I).

Proof of Claim 4: Let S 0 be the set of merit slots (in the unique merit slot group) together
with the with all of the adjacent type t0 immediately after the merit slot group for the case of
.03 and immediately before it for the case of .04 . By Lemma 3.(ii), we have
                                        [          ∗
                                                                   [          ∗
                                                Cst (.04 , I) ⊇            Cst (.03 , I).                              (4)
                                        s∈S 0                      s∈S 0


Equation (4) together with Lemma 1 complete the proof of Claim 4.                                                       ♦
       Repeated application of the last step of the construction for each t 6= t∗ gives us the desired
result.13

       .0 :   t1    m     m        t∗   t3        m      t2        t∗ t3            m       t∗ t2
                                                                                                    By Lemma 4
                                                                                                    t∗ assignment
                                                        Lemma 4 invoked here                        weakly increases


       .00 : t1     m     m        t∗   t3        t2     t3        m        m       t∗      t∗ t2
                                                                                                    By Lemma 4
                                                                                                    t∗ assignment
                                    Lemma 4 invoked here                                            weakly increases


       .000 : t1    t3    t2       t3   m         m      m         m        t∗      t∗      t∗ t2

                           Figure A.4: Illustration of Case 2 of Theorem 1.(i)


Case 2 (There is more than one merit slot group under .0 ): Here is our proof strategy
for Case 2. Given .0 with at least two merit slot groups, we will construct a precedence .00 which
has one less merit slot group than under .0 , and that weakly increases t∗ assignment under choice
function C(·). Repeated application of this construction will eventually transform Case 2 to Case
1 where we have already obtained the desired result.
       Construct .00 from .0 by moving all tier t∗ slots between the last two merit slot groups
immediately after the last merit slot group, and moving all other tier slots immediately before
the penultimate merit slot group. Observe that under the new precedence .00 , there is one less
merit slot group than under .0 . See construction of precedence .00 from .0 in Figure A.4.
                ∗              ∗
Claim 5 C t (.00 , I) ⊇ C t (.0 , I).

Proof of Claim 5: Let St`∗ and S−t
                                `                ∗
                                  ∗ denote tier t slots and other tier slots between the last

two merit slot groups under .0 . Let S 0 be the last two merit slot groups together with the tier
  13
     In Figure A.3 the last step is applied twice: first when .04 is constructed from from .03 , and second when .05
is constructed from from .04 .


                                                              35
slot group between them for the case of .0 or equivalently the last merit slot group together with
the tier slots in St`∗ and S−t
                            `                     00
                               ∗ for the case of . . By Lemma 4, we have


                                         [         ∗
                                                                       [       ∗
                                                Cst (.00 , I) ⊇             Cst (.0 , I).                           (5)
                                        s∈S 0                       s∈S 0


Equation (5) together with Lemma 1 complete the proof of Claim 5.                                                    ♦
       Repeated application of this construction decreases the number of merit slot groups, and
eventually gives us a precedence order with one merit slot group. Hence, application of the steps
in Case 1 to this precedence order gives us the desired result.14                                                    
Proof of Theorem 1.(ii): Consider an arbitrary precedence .0 . Without loss of generality, by
Remark 1, we assume the relative precedence order of merit slots are the same under both . and
.0 . If there are no merit slots (i.e., if Sm = ∅), then C(.0 , I) = C(., I) by Proposition 1. We have
two cases to consider.
Case 1 (There is one merit slot group under .0 ): In this case, the construction of the
sequence of the precedences as well as the proof itself are completely analogous to that in Case
1 of the proof of Theorem 1.(i) with a reverse construction. Instead of repeating the entire
argument, we illustrate the modified construction with Figure A.5.


Case 2 (There is more than one merit slot group under .0 ): Here is our proof strategy
for Case 2. We will construct a sequence of precedences where the first element is .00 ≡ .0 and
the last element is .. We will show that t∗ assignment weakly decreases under choice function
C(·) as we move from one element of the sequence to the next one.
       Let .00 ≡ .0 be the first element of the sequence. We consider the tier slot groups under .00 .
Construct .01 from .00 by reorganizing tier slots in each tier slot group so that

   1) slots of the same type are processed subsequently as a group, and

   2) slots of type t∗ have the highest precedence and thus are processed at the beginning.

See construction of precedence .01 from .00 in Figure A.6.
                   ∗             ∗
Claim 6 C t (.01 , I) = C t (.00 , I).
Proof of Claim 6: Since .00 and .01 are equivalent, the desired result immediately follows from
Proposition 1.                                                                                                       ♦
       There is potentially a tier slot of type         t0   6=   t∗   immediately before the last merit slot group
under    .01 .   If such a slot does not exist, then     .02   ≡    .01 .   Otherwise, construct .02 from .01 by moving
all of the adjacent tier t0 slots from immediately before the last merit slot group to immediately
after it. See construction of precedence .02 from .01 in Figure A.6.
  14
     In Figure A.4, this construction is applied twice: first when .00 is constructed from .0 , and second when .000
is constructed from .00 .


                                                               36
 .00 : t1      t2      t1      t∗    t3      m           m    t2       t∗ t3            t∗ t2
                                                                                                  By P roposition 1
                                                                                                   t∗ assignment
                                                                                                  doesn0 t change


 .01 : t1      t2      t1      t∗    t3      m           m    t∗       t∗ t2           t3    t2
                                                                                                  By Lemma 3.(i)
                                                                                                  t∗ assignment
                                            Lemma 3.(i) invoked here                              weakly decreases


 .02 : t1      t2      t1      t∗    t3       t∗         t∗ m         m         t2     t3    t2
                                                                                                  By P roposition 1
                                                                                                   t∗ assignment
                                                                                                  doesn0 t change

        ∗
 .03 : t          t∗   t∗ t3         t2      t1          t1   m       m         t2     t3    t2
                                                                                                  By Lemma 3.(ii)
                                                                                                  t∗ assignment
                                           Lemma 3.(ii) invoked here
                                                                                                  weakly decreases

        ∗
 .04 : t          t∗   t∗ t3         t2      m           m    t1      t1        t2     t3    t2
                                                                                                  By Lemma 3.(ii)
                                Lemma 3.(ii) invoked here                                         t∗ assignment
                                                                                                  weakly decreases

 .05 : t∗         t∗   t∗ t3         m       m           t2   t1      t1        t2     t3    t2
                                                                                                  By Lemma 3.(ii)
                                                                                                  t∗ assignment
                            Lemma 3.(ii) invoked here
                                                                                                  weakly decreases

 .06 : t∗         t∗   t∗ m          m t3                t2   t1      t1        t2     t3    t2



                             Figure A.5: Illustration of Case 1 of Theorem 1.(ii)

              ∗                  ∗
Claim 7 C t (.02 , I) ⊆ C t (.01 , I).

Proof of Claim 7: Let S 0 be the last the last merit slot group together with all of the adjacent
type t0 slots immediately before the merit slot group for the case of .01 and immediately after it
for the case of .02 . By Lemma 3.(ii), we have
                                          [          ∗
                                                                    [          ∗
                                                  Cst (.02 , I) ⊆           Cst (.01 , I).                            (6)
                                          s∈S 0                     s∈S 0



                                                               37
       .00 :   t2        t1       m     t3     m    t2     t∗ t3      m     t∗ t2
                                                                                            By P roposition 1
                                                                                             t∗ assignment
                                                                                            doesn0 t change


      .01 :    t1        t2       m     t3     m     t∗ t2      t3    m     t∗ t2
                                                                                            By Lemma 3.(ii)
                                                                                            t∗ assignment
                                                           Lemma 3.(ii) invoked here        weakly decreases


      .02 :    t1        t2       m     t3     m     t∗ t2      m     t3    t∗ t2
                                                                                            By Lemma 3.(ii)
                                                     Lemma 3.(ii) invoked here              t∗ assignment
                                                                                            weakly decreases

      .00 :    t1        t2       m     t3     m     t∗ m       t2    t3    t∗ t2
                                                                                            By Remark 2
                                                                                            t∗ assignment
                                             Remark 2 invoked here
                                                                                            weakly decreases

      .000 :   t1        t2       m     t3     t∗   m     m     t2    t3    t∗ t2
                                                                                            By P roposition 1
                                                                                             t∗ assignment
                                                                                            doesn0 t change


      .001 :   t1        t2       m     t∗     t3   m     m     t2    t3    t∗ t2
                                                                                            By Lemma 3.(ii)
                                                                                            t∗ assignment
                                         Lemma 3.(ii) invoked here
                                                                                            weakly decreases

      .000 :   t1        t2       m     t∗     m    m     t3    t2    t3    t∗ t2
                                                                                            By Remark 2
                                                                                            t∗ assignment
                                  Remark 2 invoked here
                                                                                            weakly decreases

      .000
       0 :
               t1        t2       t∗    m      m    m     t3    t2    t3    t∗ t2

                               Figure A.6: Illustration of Case 2 of Theorem 1.(ii)

Equation (6) together with Lemma 1 complete the proof of Claim 7.                                               ♦
   Repeated application of this step of the construction for each t 6=                 t∗   gives us a precedence
order denoted with       .00 .   If there exists unique merit slot group under    .00 ,   then application of the
steps in Case 1 to       .00   gives us the desired result. Otherwise, under      .00     there potentially exists
a tier slot of type      t∗    immediately after the penultimate merit slot group. If such a slot does
not exist, then   .000   ≡ .00 . Otherwise, construct .000 from .00 by moving all of the adjacent tier
t∗ slots from immediately after the penultimate merit slot group to immediately before it. See

                                                          38
construction of precedence .000 from .00 in Figure A.6.
              ∗              ∗
Claim 8 C t (.000 , I) ⊆ C t (.00 , I).

Proof of Claim 8: If .000 ≡ .00 then the result is immediate. Let S 0 be the last two merit slot
groups together with type t∗ slots between them for the case of .00 and the last merit slot group
together with all of the adjacent type t∗ slots immediately before it for the case of .000 . By Lemma
3.(ii), we have
                                      [         ∗
                                                                [          ∗
                                             Cst (.000 , I) ⊆           Cst (.00 , I).                  (7)
                                     s∈S 0                      s∈S 0

Equation (7) together with Lemma 1 complete the proof of Claim 8.                                        ♦
    Repeated application of these steps of the construction for last two merit slots decreases the
number of merit slot groups and eventually gives us a precedence order with a unique merit slot
group. Then application of the steps in Case 1 to this final precedence order gives us the desired
result.                                                                                                  

A.3       Proof of Proposition 2
It is immediate from Proposition 1 that balancedness implies tier-blindness. To prove tier-
blindness implies balancednes, we show that any unbalanced precedence order is not tier-blind.
For a given S and τ , let . be a precedence order which is not balanced. Let sh denote the hth
slot under .. Let St = {s ∈ S|τ (s) = t} for each t ∈ T . Let π be a merit-preserving bijection
with π(t̂) = t̃, π(t̃) = t̂, and π(t) = t for all t ∈ T \ {t̂, t̃}. Note that sh is a tier slot under (τ, .)
if and only if sh is a tier slot under (π(τ ), .) for each h ∈ {1, 2, ..., |S|}. We show that there
exists a subset of students J ⊆ I such that C(S, τ, ., J) 6= C(S, π(τ ), ., J) and, therefore, . is
not tier-blind. There are two possible cases.
Case 1 (|St | = |St0 | for all t, t0 ∈ T ): Suppose under (τ, .) the first b ≥ 0 slots constitute
a balanced precedence order and for any b0 > b the first b0 slots fail to constitute a balanced
precedence order. We call the portion of . with the lower precedence than slot sb the unbalanced
portion of .. Note that the unbalanced portion of . starts with a tier slot under both τ and
π(τ ), i.e., τ (sb+1 ) 6= m and π(τ (sb+1 )) 6= m.
    There exists at least one merit slot in the unbalanced portion of . under τ (and, therefore
π(τ )). Otherwise, . would be a balanced precedence order under τ . Denote the merit slot with
the highest precedence under . in the unbalanced portion with s̃. Let ut be the number of tier
t ∈ T slots between sb and s̃ under (τ, .). Due to the unbalancedness, ut 6= ut0 for some t, t0 ∈ T .
Without loss of generality, we take ut̂ > ut̃ .
    Now consider a subset of students J with the following score distribution:
      Pt̄ ´ k∗ J                      J       J                       ∗           0 00
   i)    t=1 k̄ ft (k)dk = b, and ft0 (k̃) = ft00 (k̃) for all k̃ ∈ [k , k̄] and t , t ∈ T ,
      ´ k0                   ´ k0
  ii) k∗ ft̃J (k)dk = ut̂ and k∗ ftJ (k)dk = 0 for all t ∈ T \ {t̃},

                                                          39
         ´ k00                            ´ k00
  iii)    k0     ft̂J (k)dk = |S| and      k0     ftJ (k)dk = 0 for all t ∈ T \ {t̂}.


                               ft̃
                                            b/t̄              ut̂
                                     k̄                 k∗                    k0              k 00




                               ft̂                                                      |S|
                                             b/t̄

                                     k̄                 k∗                    k0                 k 00

                               ft
                       t∈
                        / {t̃, t̂}          b/t̄

                                     k̄                 k∗                    k0               k 00

                          Figure A.7: Score distribution for Case 1 of Proposition 3

    From J, under both τ and π(τ ), C(·) selects all students with score between [k ∗ , k̄] to the first
b slots, i.e., the slots in the balanced portion. Moreover, a positive mass of tier t̃ students with
score between [k 0 , k ∗ ) will be chosen for the merit slots in the unbalanced portion by C(·) under
τ . However, none of the tier t̃ students will be selected for the merit slots in the unbalanced
portion by C(·) under π(τ ). Hence, the mass of tier t̃ students in C(S, τ, ., J) is strictly more
than (bm /t̄) + |St̃ | and the mass of tier t̃ students in C(S, π(τ ), ., J) is exactly (bm /t̄) + |St̃ |.
Therefore,
                                                  C(S, τ, ., J) 6= C(S, π(τ ), ., J).



Case 2 (|St | 6= |St0 | for some t, t0 ∈ T ): Without loss of generality we take |St̃ | > |St̂ |.
                                                 ´ k∗                   ´ k∗
Then, consider the following score distribution: k̄ ft̃J (k)dk = |S| and k̄ ftJ (k)dk = 0 for all
t ∈ T \ {t̃}. Then, the mass of tier t̃ students in C(S, τ, ., J) is |Sm | + |St̃ | and the mass of tier t̃
students in C(S, π(τ ), ., J) is |Sm | + |St̂ | . Since |St̃ | > |St̂ |,

                                                  C(S, τ, ., J) 6= C(S, π(τ ), ., J).

                                                                                                        

A.4        Proofs of Theorems 2 and 3
We use the following Lemmatta to prove Theorems 2 and 3.

                                                                    40
Lemma 5 Fix the set of slots S, type function τ , and precedence order . such that . is a balanced
precedence. Let G = {G1 , G2 , ..., Gh } be the set of all tier slot groups where all slots in Gr precede
the ones in Gr+1 . For any tier t ∈ T , let `r and `˜r denote the supremum score of tier t students
                                                                      t             t
available to be admitted and the infimum score of tier t students admitted to the tier slot group
Gr from I by C(·), respectively. If ft̂ (k) ≥ ft0 (k) for all k ∈ K, then for any r ∈ {1, 2, ..., h}

                                                           `rt̂ ≥ `rt0 and `˜rt̂ ≥ `˜rt0 .


                                                  G1                                  G2

                         .: m           t̂                t0          m        t̂           t0

                                                                                                               ft̂


                                                                                                               ft0



                       k̄ `1t̂ = `1t0             `˜1t̂        `2t̂ `˜1t0 = `2t0    `˜2t̂              `˜2t0


Figure A.8: Illustration of Score Distributions for ft̂ and ft0 , and the Infimum and Supremum
Scores

Proof. For each r ∈ {1, 2, ..., h}, we denote the merit slot group between Gr−1 and Gr by H r
where G0 is the beginning. The proof is by induction. We start with tier slot group G1 . There
exists `1m ∈ K such that

                                                                  `1m
                                                          t̄ ˆ
                                                          X
                                                                          ft (k)dk = |H 1 |.
                                                          t=1
                                                                 k̄

    If H 1 = ∅, then all students are available to be selected for tier slot group G1 . Otherwise, all
students with score at least `1m < k̄ are selected for the merit slots preceding G1 . In either case,
`1t̂ ≥ `1t0 since ft̂ (k) ≥ ft0 (k) for all k ∈ K. Moreover, balancedness implies

                                             ˜1
                                        ˆ`t
                                                                           |G1 |
                                                  ft (k)dk =                                for all t ∈ T.           (8)
                                                                             t̄
                                        `1t

Equation (8) and the facts that `1t̂ ≥ `1t0 and ft̂ (k) ≥ ft0 (k) for all k ∈ K imply that `˜1t̂ ≥ `˜1t0 .
   Suppose the result holds for all the tier slot groups preceding tier slot group Gr̄ where r̄ ≤ h.
That is, `r̄−1 ≥ `r̄−1
           t̂      t0  and `˜r̄−1 ≥ `˜r̄−1
                                  t̂    0  . Then, there exists `r̄ ∈ K such that
                                                  t                                               m




                                                                              41
                                                                      r̄
                                                               t̄ ˆm
                                                                  `
                                                               X
                                                                           ft (k)dk = |H r̄ |.
                                                               t=1 ˜r̄−1
                                                                  `t

That is, all tier t ∈ T students with score at least min{`r̄m , `˜r̄−1
                                                                  t    } are selected for slots preceding
Gr̄ . Since `˜r̄−1
                 t̂
                   ≥ `˜ 0 , min{`r̄ , `˜ } ≥ min{`r̄ , `˜ 0 }. Therefore, f (k) ≥ ft0 (k) for all k ∈ K
                       r̄−1
                                    t
                                        r̄−1
                                                  m
                                                         r̄−1
                                                          t̂                  m     t                    t̂
implies that          `r̄t̂   ≥    r̄
                                  `t0 .   Balancedness implies

                                                      ˜r̄
                                                    ˆ`t
                                                                           |Gr̄ |
                                                            ft (k)dk =                  for all t ∈ T.        (9)
                                                                             t̄
                                                   `r̄t


Equation (9) and the facts that `r̄t̂ ≥ `r̄t0 and ft̂ (k) ≥ ft0 (k) for all k ∈ K imply that `˜r̄t̂ ≥ `˜r̄t0 .
This completes the proof.15                                                                                    

Lemma 6 Fix the set of slots S and their types τ such that |Sm | ≥ 1 and |St | = |St0 | ≥ 1 for
all t, t0 ∈ T . Let . be a precedence order over S in which all merit slots precede all tier slots and
.̃ be a precedence order over S in which all tier slots precede all merit slots.16 Let J ⊆ I be a
subset of students such that nJt ≥ |St | + |Sm | for all t ∈ T and k ∈ K.

  (i) Under Assumption 2, i.e., f1J (k) ≤ ftJ (k) for all t ∈ T and k ∈ K, the mass of tier 1
         students in C(., J) is weakly greater than in C(.̃, J).

 (ii) Under Assumption 3, i.e., ftJ (k) ≤ ft̄J (k) for all t ∈ T and k ∈ K, the mass of tier t̄
         students in C(.̃, J) is weakly greater than in C(., J).



                                            .:     m           m      t1      t3        t2    t2    t3   t1



                                            .̃:    t1          t3     t2      t2        t3    t1    m    m

                                          Figure A.9: Illustration of precedence orders . and .̃


Proof. Let `m and `˜m denote the infimum of the scores of students selected for the merit slots
from J by C(·) under . and .̃, respectively. For each t ∈ T , let `t and `˜t be the infimum of scores
of students selected for the tier t slots from J by C(·) under . and .̃, respectively. Let gt and
  15
       See Figure A.8 for the illustration of the desired result.
  16
       See Figure A.9 for examples of . and .̃.



                                                                              42
g̃t denote the infimum of the scores of tier t ∈ T students in C(., J) and C(.̃, J), respectively.
Note that, gt = `t and g̃t ≤ `˜t for all t ∈ T . Since merit slots are processed first under ., we have

                                                 ˆ`t
                                                        ftJ (k)dk = |St |              for all t ∈ T.                                        (10)
                                                 `m


Similarly, since tier slots are processed before the merit slots under .̃, we have

                                                 ˆ`˜t
                                                        ftJ (k)dk = |St |              for all t ∈ T.                                        (11)
                                                 k̄



                                                                                                            R `t̂
                                                                                                  A+B =      `m        ft̂J (k)dk = |St̂ |
                   A                                                                       ft̂J B + C =     R `t̃
                                                                                                             `m        ft̃J (k)dk = |St̃ |
.:
                                                                                                  |St̂ | = |St̃ | =⇒ A + B = B + C =⇒ `t̂ ≥ `t̃
                                                                                           ft̃J
                   B                C
      k̄      `m              `t̂          `t̃
                                                                                                            R `˜t̂
                                                                                                  D+E =      k̄
                                                                                                                       ft̂J (k)dk = |St̂ |
                                                                                                            R `˜
                                                                                                  E+F =      k̄
                                                                                                                  t̃
                                                                                                                       ftJ (k)dk = |St̃ |
                                                                                           ft̂J |St̂ | = |St̃ | =⇒ D + E = E + F =⇒ `˜t̂ ≥ `˜t̃
             D
.̃:                                                                                        ft̃J A + B = |St̂ | = D + E =⇒ `˜t̂ ≥ `t̂
             E            F
                                                                                                  D + E = |St̃ | = E + F =⇒ `˜t̃ ≥ `t̃
      k̄           `˜t̂             `˜t̃


                               Figure A.10: Infimum scores under precedence orders . and .̃.

           Equations (10) and (11) imply that `˜t ≥ `t for all t ∈ T .17 Next, we prove Part (i) and then
Part (ii).

Part (i): Comparison of Tier 1 Assignment in C(., J) and C(.̃, J)
           By contradiction, suppose that the mass of tier 1 students in C(.̃, J) is greater than the mass
in C(., J). That is,
                                                         ˆg1                    ˆg̃1
                                                               f1J (k)dk   <           f1J (k)dk.                                            (12)
                                                         k̄                     k̄

Equation (12) implies that g1 > g̃1 . The facts that `˜1 ≥ `1 , `1 = g1 , and g1 > g̃1 imply that
`˜1 ≥ `1 > g̃1 , and therefore, there exist tier 1 students with scores between [g̃1 , `1 ) selected for
      17
           One can see this relation in Figure A.10.


                                                                           43
merit slots by C(·) under .̃. Hence, under .̃, the infimum of tier 1 students selected for the merit
slots by C(·) is g̃1 . Since ft (k) ≥ f1 (k) for all t ∈ T and k ∈ K, for all t ∈ T the infimum score
of tier t students in C(.̃, J) is at most g̃1 . Then, we have

                                                      t̄ ˆ
                                                      X
                                                             g̃1

                                                                   ftJ (k)dk ≤ |S|.                                   (13)
                                                      t=1
                                                            k̄

Equation (12) and g1 > g̃1 imply that

                                        t̄ ˆ
                                        X
                                                  g̃1                         t̄ ˆ
                                                                              X
                                                                                      g1

                                                        ftJ (k)dk >                        ftJ (k)dk.                 (14)
                                           t=1                                t=1
                                                 k̄                                  k̄

Equations (13) and (14) imply that

                                                                 t̄ ˆ
                                                                 X
                                                                          g1

                                                      |S| >                    ftJ (k)dk.                             (15)
                                                                  t=1
                                                                         k̄


       For all t ∈ T , Equation (10) and the fact that ft (k) ≥ f1 (k) for all k ∈ K imply that `t ≥ `1 .18
Since gt = `t for all t ∈ T , `t ≥ `1 implies that

                                    t̄ ˆ
                                    X
                                            g1                          t̄ ˆ
                                                                        X
                                                                                gt

                                                 ftJ (k)dk         ≥                 ftJ (k)dk = |S|.                 (16)
                                     t=1                                t=1
                                           k̄                                  k̄

Equations (15) and (16) imply that

                                                          t̄ ˆ
                                                          X
                                                                    g1

                                                |S| >                    ftJ (k)dk ≥ |S|.
                                                            t=1
                                                                   k̄

This is a contradiction.

Part (ii): Comparison of Tier t̄ Assignment in C(., J) and C(.̃, J)
       We consider two possible cases. First, we consider the case in which for all t ∈ T \ {t̄} the
mass of tier t students in C(.̃, J) is weakly less than the one in C(., J). Since all slots are filled
by C(·) under . and .̃, then the mass of t̄ students in C(.̃, J) is weakly greater than the mass
in C(., J). Now we consider the case in which there exists some tier t0 ∈ T \ {t̄} such that the
  18
     Since ft (k) ≥ f1 (k) for all k ∈ K and t ∈ T , in Figure A.10, tier t̃ plays the role of tier 1, and tier t̂ plays the
role of tier t. Hence, Figure A.10 illustrates the relation between `t and `1 .




                                                                         44
mass of tier t0 students in C(.̃, J) is strictly is greater than the mass in C(., J). Then,

                                               ˆgt0                  ˆg̃t0
                                                      ftJ0 (k)dk <           ftJ0 (k)dk.                                  (17)
                                               k̄                    k̄


Equation (17) implies that gt0 > g̃t0 . `˜t0 ≥ `t0 , `t0 = gt0 , and gt0 > g̃t0 imply that `˜t0 ≥ `t0 > g̃t0 ,
and therefore there exist tier t0 students with scores between [g̃t0 , `t0 ) assigned to merit slots by
C(·) under .̃. Since ft̄ (k) ≥ ft0 (k) for all k ∈ K, the infimum score of tier t̄ students assigned in
C(.̃, J) is at most g̃t0 . Equation (10) and the fact that ftJ0 (k) ≤ ft̄J (k) for all k ∈ K imply that
`t0 ≤ `t̄ .19 Since `t = gt for all t ∈ T , `t0 ≤ `t̄ implies gt0 ≤ gt̄ . Since g̃t0 < gt0 , gt0 ≤ gt̄ and the
infimum score of tier t̄ students assigned in C(.̃, J) is at most g̃t0 , the mass of tier t̄ assignment
in C(.̃, J) is weakly is greater than the mass in C(., J).                                                                   

Lemma 7 Fix the set of slots S and their types τ such that |Sm | > 1 and |St | = |St0 | ≥ 1 for all
t, t0 ∈ T under τ . Let Sm
                         1 and S 2 be two nonempty disjoint subsets of S . Let . be a precedence
                                m                                       m
                                      1 precede all tier slots and all tier slots precede the merit
order over S in which merit slots in Sm
          2 , and .̃ be a precedence order over S in which all tier slots precede the merit slots.20
slots in Sm
Let J ⊆ I be a subset of students such that nJt ≥ |St | + |Sm | for all t ∈ T and k ∈ K.

  (i) Under Assumption 2, i.e., f1J (k) ≤ ftJ (k) for all t ∈ T and k ∈ K, the mass of tier 1
       students in C(., J) is weakly greater than in C(.̃, J).

 (ii) Under Assumption 3, i.e., ftJ (k) ≤ ft̄J (k) for all t ∈ T and k ∈ K, the mass of tier t̄
       students in C(.̃, J) is weakly greater than in C(., J).



                        .:        m      m          t1    t3    t2           t2     t3     t1   m   m


                        .̃:       t1     t3         t2    t2    t3           t1     m      m    m   m

                              Figure A.11: Illustration of precedence orders . and .̃


Proof. Denote the infimum score of tier t students in C(., J) and C(.̃, J) with gt and g̃t ,
                                                                                                      1|
respectively. Let et and ẽt be the infimum score of tier t students assigned to first t̄ × |S1 | + |Sm
slots by C(·) under . and .̃, respectively. Let `t and `˜t denote the infimum score of tier t students
assigned to tier t slots by C(·) under . and .̃, respectively. Since all tier slots are processed first
   19
      Since ftJ0 (k) ≤ ft̄J (k) for all k ∈ K, in Figure A.10, tier t̃ plays the role of tier t0 , and tier t̂ plays the role of
tier t̄. Hence, Figure A.10 illustrates the relation between `t0 and `t̄ .
   20
      See Figure A.11 for the examples of . and .̃.


                                                                45
under .̃ but some merit slots are processed first under ., `˜t ≥ `t for all t ∈ T . Next, we prove
Part (i) and then Part (ii).

Part (i): Comparison of Tier 1 Assignment in C(., J) and C(.̃, J)
   By contradiction, suppose that the mass of tier 1 students in C(.̃, J) is is greater than the
mass under C(., J). That is,
                                            ˆg1                         ˆg̃1
                                                   f1J (k)dk       <            f1J (k)dk.                (18)
                                            k̄                          k̄

   Equation (18) implies that g1 > g̃1 . By Lemma 6, ẽ1 ≥ e1 . By our construction, e1 ≥ g1 .
Then, we have ẽ1 ≥ e1 ≥ g1 > g̃1 . Hence, there exist tier 1 students with score between [g̃1 , g1 )
assigned to the last merit slot group by C(·) under .̃, and therefore the infimum of tier 1 students
selected for the last merit slot group by C(·) under .̃ is g̃1 . Since ft (k) ≥ f1 (k) for all t ∈ T and
k ∈ K, then for all t ∈ T the infimum score of tier t students in C(.̃, J) is at most g̃1 . That is,

                                                 t̄ ˆ
                                                 X
                                                          g̃1

                                                                ftJ (k)dk ≤ |S|.                          (19)
                                                   t=1
                                                         k̄

By Lemma 5, et ≥ e1 for all t ∈ T . Since tier 1 students with score between [g̃1 , g1 ) are not
assigned to the last merit slot group under . and et ≥ e1 ≥ g1 > g̃1 for all t ∈ T , students with
score between [g̃1 , g1 ) cannot be selected by C(·) under .. That is,

                                                 t̄ ˆ
                                                 X
                                                          g̃1

                                                                ftJ (k)dk > |S|.                          (20)
                                                   t=1
                                                         k̄

Equations (19) and (20) imply that

                               t̄ ˆ
                               X
                                      g̃1                                       t̄ ˆ
                                                                                X
                                                                                       g̃1

                                            ftJ (k)dk           > |S| ≥                      ftJ (k)dk.
                               t=1                                              t=1
                                     k̄                                               k̄

This is a contradiction.

Part (ii): Comparison of Tier t̄ Assignment in C(., J) and C(.̃, J)
   On the contrary, suppose that the mass of tier t̄ students in C(., J) is is greater than the
mass in C(.̃, J). That is,
                                            ˆgt̄                        ˆg̃t̄
                                                   ft̄J (k)dk >                 ft̄J (k)dk.               (21)
                                            k̄                          k̄

Equation (21) implies that gt̄ < g̃t̄ . Since ft̄J (k) ≥ ftJ (k) for all t ∈ T and k ∈ K, the last
slots under both precedence order are merit slots, gt̄ and g̃t̄ are the infimum scores of students


                                                                   46
assigned to the merit slots under . and .̃, respectively. Then, the mass of tier t ∈ T students in
C(., J) is                                        g                                        
                                                  ˆ t̄                 ˆ`t                 
                                       max                 ftJ (k)dk,          ftJ (k)dk        .                                     (22)
                                                                                           
                                                      k̄                k̄

Similarly, the mass of tier t ∈ T students in C(.̃, J) is
                                                                                           
                                                  ˆg̃t̄
                                                                       ˆ`˜t                
                                                                                            
                                       max                 ftJ (k)dk,          ftJ (k)dk        .                                     (23)
                                                  
                                                                                           
                                                                                            
                                                      k̄                k̄


Since gt̄ < g̃t̄ , the first term of Equation (22) is (weakly) greater than the first term of Equation
(23). Similarly, since `˜t ≥ `t the second term of Equation (22) is (weakly) greater than the
second term of Equation (23). Hence, for all t ∈ T ,
                      g                                                                                               
                      ˆ t̄                 ˆ`t                               ˆg̃t̄
                                                                                                     ˆ`˜t               
                                                                                                                         
               max             ftJ (k)dk,         ftJ (k)dk       ≥ max                  ftJ (k)dk,          ftJ (k)dk       .        (24)
                                                                             
                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                         
                          k̄                k̄                                      k̄                k̄


Equation (24) implies that the mass of each tier t students in C(., J) is weakly greater than
the mass in C(.̃, J). However, since the same number of slots are filled under . and .̃ and the
mass of tier t̄ students in C(., J) is strictly greater than the mass in C(.̃, J), at least one tier’s
assignment needs to be smaller in C(., J). This is a contradiction.                                                                    

Proof of Theorem 2. Fix a set of slots S and a type function τ such that Sm 6= ∅. We first
show that among the balanced precedence orders the maximal tier 1 assignment is attained when
all merit slots precede the tier slots.


    .00 : m      t2       t1      t4    t3         m        m      t2           t4 t3               t1 m
                                                                                                                   By Lemma 6.(i)
                                                                       Lemma 6.(i) invoked here                    tier1 assignment
                                                                                                                   weakly increases


    .01 : m      t2       t1      t4    t3         m        m      m           t2         t4 t3              t1
                                                                                                                  By Lemma 6.(i)
                                                                                                                  tier1 assignment
                           Lemma 6.(i) invoked here                                                               weakly increases


    .02 : m      m        m       m     t2         t1       t4     t3          t2         t4 t3              t1

         Figure A.12: Maximal Tier 1 Assignment under Balanced Precedence Orders




                                                                  47
Maximal Tier 1 Assignment: Let .̄ be a balanced precedence order such that all merit slots
precede the tier slots. Consider an arbitrary balanced precedence order .0 such that at least one
merit slot is preceded by a tier slot. We will construct a sequence of precedences where the first
element is .00 ≡ .0 and the last element is .̄. We will show that tier 1 assignment weakly increases
under choice function C(·) as we move from one element of the sequence to the next one.
    Let .00 ≡ .0 be the first element of the sequence. Let H and G denote the the last merit slot
group and the tier slot group immediately before it under .00 , respectively. Construct .01 from
.00 by moving merit slot group H from immediately after the tier slot G group to immediately
before it. See construction of precedence .01 from .00 in Figure A.12.

Claim 9 C 1 (.01 , I) ⊇ C 1 (.00 , I).

Proof of Claim 9: First note that the score distributions of available students to be admitted
by C(·) to tier slot group G under .00 and to merit slot group H under .01 satisfy Assumption 2.
Let S 0 = H ∪ G. By Lemma 6.(i) we have
                                         [                         [
                                                 Cs1 (.01 , I) ⊇           Cs1 (.00 , I).                           (25)
                                         s∈S 0                     s∈S 0


Equation (25) together with Lemma 1 complete the proof of Claim 9.                                                      ♦
    Repeated application of this step of the construction for the last merit slot group preceded
by a tier slot group gives us a precedence order equivalent to .̄. Hence, this fact together with
Proposition 1 gives us the desired result.


    .00 : m       t2    t1     t4    t3          m      m      t2           t4 t3           t1 m
                                                                                                    By Lemma 7.(i)
                                                         Lemma 7.(i) invoked here                   tier 1 assignment
                                                                                                    weakly decreases


    .01 : m       t2    t1     t4    t3          t2      t4 t3              t1 m            m   m
                                                                                                    By Lemma 7.(i)
                         Lemma 7.(i) invoked here                                                   tier 1 assignment
                                                                                                    weakly decreases


    .02 : t2      t1    t4     t3    t2          t4 t3             t1 m           m         m   m

           Figure A.13: Minimal Tier 1 Assignment under Balanced Precedence Orders


Minimal Tier 1 Assignment: Let . be a balanced precedence order such that all tier slots
precede the merit slots. Consider an arbitrary balanced precedence order .0 such that at least
one tier slot is preceded by a merit slot. We will construct a sequence of precedences where the
first element is .00 ≡ .0 and the last element is .. We will show that tier 1 assignment weakly

                                                             48
decreases under choice function C(·) as we move from one element of the sequence to the next
one.
    Let .00 ≡ .0 be the first element of the sequence. Let G and H denote the the last tier slot
group and the merit slot group immediately before it under .00 , respectively. Construct .01 from
.00 by moving tier slot group G from immediately after the merit slot group H to immediately
before it. See construction of precedence .01 from .00 in Figure A.13.

Claim 10 C 1 (.01 , I) ⊆ C 1 (.00 , I).

Proof of Claim 10: First note that the score distributions of available students to be admitted
by C(·) to merit slot group H under .00 and to tier slot group G under .01 satisfy Assumption 2.
Let S 0 be the set of slots in H together with all slot groups after H for the case of .00 and be
the set of slots in G together with all slot groups after G for the case of .00 . If S 0 = H ∪ G by
Lemma 6.(i), otherwise by Lemma 7.(i) we have
                                          [                     [
                                              Cs1 (.01 , I) ⊆           Cs1 (.00 , I).                               (26)
                                      s∈S 0                     s∈S 0


Equation (26) together with Lemma 1 complete the proof of Claim 10.                                                    ♦
    Repeated application of this step of the construction for the last tier slot group preceded by
a merit slot group gives us a precedence order equivalent to .. Hence, invoking Proposition 1 to
the final precedence order obtained through this step gives us the desired result.                                     
Proof of Theorem 3. Fix a set of slots S and a type function τ such that Sm 6= ∅. We first
show that among the balanced precedence orders the minimal tier t̄ assignment is attained when
all merit slots precede the tier slots.


       .00 : m    t2    t1    t4     t3       m      m      t2           t4 t3           t1 m
                                                                                                By Lemma 6.(ii)
                                                                Lemma 6.(ii) invoked here       tier t̄ assignment
                                                                                                weakly decreases


       .01 : m    t2    t1    t4     t3       m      m      m           t2       t4 t3     t1
                                                                                                By Lemma 6.(ii)
                                                                                                tier t̄ assignment
                         Lemma 6.(ii) invoked here                                              weakly increases


       .02 : m    m     m     m      t2       t1     t4     t3          t2       t4 t3     t1

           Figure A.14: Minimal Tier t̄ Assignment under Balanced Precedence Orders

Minimal Tier t̄ Assignment: Let .̄ be a balanced precedence order such that all merit slots
precede the tier slots. Consider an arbitrary balanced precedence order .0 such that at least one

                                                          49
merit slot is preceded by a tier slot. We will construct a sequence of precedences where the first
element is .00 ≡ .0 and the last element is .̄. We will show that tier t̄ assignment weakly decreases
under choice function C(·) as we move from one element of the sequence to the next one.
    Let .00 ≡ .0 be the first element of the sequence. Let H and G denote the the last merit slot
group and the tier slot group immediately before it under .00 , respectively. Construct .01 from
.00 by moving merit slot group H from immediately after the tier slot G group to immediately
before it. See construction of precedence .01 from .00 in Figure A.14.

Claim 11 C t̄ (.01 , I) ⊆ C t̄ (.00 , I).

Proof of Claim 11: First note that the score distributions of available students to be admitted
by C(·) to tier slot group G under .00 and to merit slot group H under .01 satisfy Assumption 3.
Let S 0 = H ∪ G. By Lemma 6.(ii) we have
                                            [                          [
                                                    Cst̄ (.01 , I) ⊆           Cst̄ (.00 , I).                                (27)
                                            s∈S 0                      s∈S 0


Equation (27) together with Lemma 1 complete the proof of Claim 11.                                                             ♦
    Repeated application of this step of the construction for any last merit slot group preceded
by a tier slot group gives us a precedence order equivalent to .̄. Hence, this fact and Proposition
1 gives us the desired result.


       .00 : m     t2     t1     t4    t3           m      m       t2           t4 t3            t1 m
                                                                                                         By Lemma 7.(ii)
                                                            Lemma 7.(ii) invoked here                    tier t̄ assignment
                                                                                                         weakly increases


       .01 : m     t2     t1     t4    t3           t2      t4 t3               t1 m             m   m
                                                                                                         By Lemma 7.(ii)
                           Lemma 7.(ii) invoked here                                                     tier t̄ assignment
                                                                                                         weakly increases


       .02 : t2    t1     t4     t3    t2           t4 t3              t1 m            m         m   m

            Figure A.15: Maximal Tier t̄ Assignment under Balanced Precedence Orders


Maximal Tier t̄ Assignment: Let . be a balanced precedence order such that all tier slots
precede the merit slots. Consider an arbitrary balanced precedence order .0 such that at least
one tier slot is preceded by a merit slot. We will construct a sequence of precedences where the
first element is .00 ≡ .0 and the last element is .. We will show that tier t̄ assignment weakly
increases under choice function C(·) as we move from one element of the sequence to the next
one.

                                                                 50
    Let .00 ≡ .0 be the first element of the sequence. Let G and H denote the the last tier slot
group and the merit slot group immediately before it under .00 , respectively. Construct .01 from
.00 by moving tier slot group G from immediately after the merit slot group H to immediately
before it. See construction of precedence .01 from .00 in Figure A.15.

Claim 12 C t̄ (.01 , I) ⊇ C t̄ (.00 , I).

Proof of Claim 12: First note that the score distributions of available students to be admitted
by C(·) to merit slot group H under .00 and to tier slot group G under .01 satisfy Assumption 3.
Let S 0 be the set of slots in H together with all slot groups after H for the case of .00 and be
the set of slots in G together with all slot groups after G for the case of .00 . If S 0 = H ∪ G by
Lemma 6.(ii), otherwise by Lemma 7.(ii) we have
                                               [                         [
                                                      Cst̄ (.01 , I) ⊇               Cst̄ (.00 , I).            (28)
                                              s∈S 0                      s∈S 0


Equation (28) together with Lemma 1 complete the proof of Claim 12.                                               ♦
    Repeated application of this step of the construction for any last tier slot group preceded by
a merit slot group gives us a precedence order equivalent to .. Hence, this fact and Proposition
1 gives us the desired result.                                                                                    


A.5      Proof of Proposition 3
Fix the set of slots S and precedence order .. Let h, e ∈ N such that h ≥ e × t̄. Let τ and τ̂ be
two type functions such that

    • The first h and h − (e × t̄) slots under (τ, .) and (τ̂ , .) are merit slots, respectively, and

    • |{s ∈ S : τ (s) = t}| + e = |{s ∈ S : τ̂ (s) = t}| for all t ∈ T .

    Let St = {s ∈ S : τ (s) = t} and Ŝt = {s ∈ S : τ̂ (s) = t} for all t ∈ T . We denote the
infimum scores of students selected from I for the merit slots by C(·) under τ and τ̂ with ` and
ˆ respectively. Then,
`,

                          t̄ ˆ
                          X
                                     `                             t̄ ˆ
                                                                   X
                                                                                `ˆ

                                         ft (k)dk = h and                            ft (k)dk = h − (e × t̄).   (29)
                          t=1                                      t=1
                                k̄                                         k̄

By Assumption 1, under both τ and τ̂ , tier t slots are filled with only the tier t students. Hence,
for each t ∈ T , the mass of tier t students in C(S, ., τ, I) is

                                                         ˆ`
                                                              ft (k)dk + |St |.                                 (30)
                                                         k̄


                                                                   51
Similarly, for each t ∈ T the mass of tier t students in C(S, ., τ̂ , I) is

                                                      ˆ`ˆ
                                                                 ft (k)dk + |Ŝt |.                  (31)
                                                       k̄

                               ˆ Hence, we can rewrite the first part of Equation (29) as
Equation (29) implies that ` < `.

                                t̄ ˆ
                                X
                                            `ˆ                           t̄ ˆ
                                                                         X
                                                                                 `

                                                 ft (k)dk +                          ft (k)dk = h,   (32)
                                 t=1                                     t=1 ˆ
                                       k̄                                    `

and Equation (30) as
                                   ˆ`ˆ                                  ˆ`
                                            ft (k)dk +                       ft (k)dk + |St |.       (33)
                                    k̄                                  `ˆ

The second part of Equation (29) and Equation (32) imply that

                                                 t̄ ˆ
                                                 X
                                                                 `

                                                                     ft (k)dk = e × t̄.              (34)
                                                 t=1 ˆ
                                                     `

   Assumption 2 and Equation (34) imply that the mass of tier 1 students selected from I for
the merit slots by C(·) under τ is at most

                                                        ˆ`ˆ
                                                                     f1 (k)dk + e.                   (35)
                                                            k̄

By Equations (33) and (35), the mass of tier 1 students in C(S, ., τ, I) is at most

                                                 ˆ`ˆ
                                                       f1 (k)dk + e + |S1 |.
                                                 k̄

   Assumption 3 and Equation (34) imply that the mass of tier t̄ students selected from I for
the merit slots by C(·) under τ is at least

                                                            ˆ`ˆ
                                                                     ft̄ (k)dk + e.                  (36)
                                                            k̄

By Equations (33) and (36), the mass of tier t̄ students in C(S, ., τ, I) is at least



                                                                         52
                                          ˆ`ˆ
                                                ft̄ (k)dk + e + |St̄ |.
                                          k̄

    By construction, |Ŝt | = |St | + e for all t ∈ T . Hence, we can rewrite Equation (31) for tier 1,
i.e., the mass of tier 1 students in C(S, ., τ̂ , I), as

                                          ˆ`ˆ
                                                f1 (k)dk + e + |S1 |,
                                          k̄

which is equal to the maximal tier 1 assignment in C(S, ., τ, I). Similarly, we can rewrite
Equation (31) for tier t̄, i.e., the mass of tier t̄ students in C(S, ., τ̂ , I), as

                                          ˆ`ˆ
                                                ft̄ (k)dk + e + |St̄ |,
                                          k̄

which is equal to the minimal tier t̄ assignment in C(S, ., τ, I).                                   




                                                        53
                                 Figure B1: Choice Received by Tier 1 Students
                                             (30% Merit / 70% Tier)
1800


1600


1400


1200


1000


800


600


400


200


   0
            1                          1-2                       1-3                    1-4                      1-5                      1-6

       Tier1-Merit-Tier2-Tier3-Tier4         Tier1-Tier2-Tier3-Tier4-Merit   Merit-Tier1-Tier2-Tier3-Tier4        Tier2-Tier3-Tier4-Merit-Tier1
       (Worst for Tier 1)                    (Worst Tierblind for Tier 1)    (Best Tierblind for Tier 1 - CPS)    (Best for Tier 1)
                                 Figure B2: Choice Received by Tier 4 Students
                                             (30% Merit / 70% Tier)
1800


1600


1400


1200


1000


800


600


400


200


   0
             1                         1-2                         1-3                   1-4                      1-5                     1-6

       Tier4-Merit-Tier1-Tier2-Tier3         Merit-Tier1-Tier2-Tier3-Tier4        Tier1-Tier2-Tier3-Tier4-Merit    Tier1-Tier2-Tier3-Merit-Tier4
       (Worst for Tier 4)                    (Worst Tierblind for Tier 4 - CPS)   (Best Tierblind for Tier 4)      (Best for Tier 4)
