                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              THE ENVIRONMENTAL COST OF GLOBAL FUEL SUBSIDIES

                                        Lucas W. Davis

                                      Working Paper 22105
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22105


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2016




I have not received any financial compensation for this project nor do I have any financial
relationships that relate to this research. This manuscript is under preparation for "Renewables
and Diversification in Heavily Energy Subsidized Economies", a special issue of the Energy
Journal. I have not received any financial compensation for this project nor do I have any
financial relationships that relate to this research. The views expressed herein are those of the
author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Lucas W. Davis. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
The Environmental Cost of Global Fuel Subsidies
Lucas W. Davis
NBER Working Paper No. 22105
March 2016
JEL No. H23,Q31,Q41,Q48,Q52,Q53,Q54,Q58,R41

                                            ABSTRACT

Despite increasing calls for reform many countries continue to provide subsidies for gasoline and
diesel. This paper quantifies the external costs of global fuel subsidies using the latest available
data and estimates from the World Bank and International Monetary Fund. Under preferred
assumptions about supply and demand elasticities, current subsidies cause $44 billion in external
costs annually. This includes$8 billion from carbon dioxide emissions, $7 billion from local
pollutants, $12 billion from traffic congestion, and $17 billion from accidents. Government
incentives for alternative fuel vehicles are unlikely to cost-effectively reduce these externalities as
they do little to address traffic congestion or accidents, and only indirectly address carbon
dioxide and local pollutants.


Lucas W. Davis
Haas School of Business
University of California
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
and NBER
ldavis@haas.berkeley.edu
1       Introduction

In August 2015, the United Arab Emirates (U.A.E.) raised domestic gasoline and
diesel prices by 25%. U.A.E.’s energy minister, Suhail Al-Mazrouei, explained
that the change was about “building a strong economy that is not dependent
on government subsidies.”1 Then, at the beginning of 2016, Saudi Arabia raised
domestic gasoline and diesel prices by 40%, in an effort to, “achieve wide structural
reforms in the national economy and reduce its dependence on oil.”2

These are unpredented increases for two of the world’s largest oil producers. Cheap
gasoline and diesel have long been a permanent fixture throughout the Middle
East and Northern Africa, so when the two largest OPEC producers reduce fuel
subsidies this is a significant change not just for U.A.E. and Saudi Arabia, but for
all of OPEC and beyond. Several leading economists are arguing that this is an
historic opportunity to eliminate global fuel subsidies worldwide.3

Subsidy reform is happening now because of low crude oil prices. As recent as
2014, crude oil prices were above $100/barrel, but since plummeting at the end
of 2014 have remained below $50/barrel and as of March 2016 are just above
$30/barrel, the lowest price since 2003. Low crude oil prices reduce government
revenue in oil producing economies, increasing budget deficits and making fuel
subsidies harder to afford. This fiscal urgency was the main motivation for U.A.E.
    1
     Bloomberg Business, “U.A.E. Removes Fuel Subsidy as Oil Drop Hurts Arab Economies”
by Claudia Carpenter and Sarmad Khan, July 21, 2015.
   2
     Wall Street Journal, “Saudi Arabia Cuts Spending, Raises Domestic Fuel Prices”, by Ahmed
Al Omran and Summer Said, December 28, 2015.
   3
     See, e.g., Jeffrey Frankel, “Gas Taxes and Oil Subsidies: Time for Reform” August 10, 2015
and Rabah Arezki and Maurice Obstfeld, “The Price of Oil and the Price of Carbon” December
3, 2015.




                                              1
and Saudi Arabia, and is usually a major part of the motivation for energy subsidy
reform.

Much less emphasized in the policy discussion, however, are the large external
costs from gasoline and diesel subsidies. Removing fuel subsidies helps balance
government budgets, but it also yields enduring benefits in the form of reduced
emissions of carbon dioxide and other externalities. Worldwide the transportation
sector is responsible for 23% of total energy-related carbon dioxide emissions, more
than 7 gigatons annually (IPCC, 2015), so getting prices right in this sector is
critical.

This paper quantifies the environmental and other external costs of global fuel
subsidies using the latest available data and estimates from the World Bank and
International Monetary Fund. Under baseline assumptions about supply and de-
mand elasticities, current subsidies cause $44 billion in external costs annually.
This includes $8 billion from carbon dioxide emissions, $7 billion from local pol-
lutants, $12 billion from traffic congestion, and $17 billion from accidents.

To put these estimates into context, the paper also calculates the deadweight loss.
Fuel subsidies are inefficient because they lead to excess consumption, enabling
purchases for which the private benefits are lower than private cost. This inef-
ficiency occurs with or without externalities, and reflects the lost value in the
economy whenever fuels are sold to buyers with low willingness-to-pay. Dead-
weight loss is found to be $26 billion annually so, combined with external costs,
the total economic cost of fuel subsidies is $70 billion annually.

The paper then turns to discuss prospects for alternative fuel vehicles in countries



                                          2
that heavily subsidize gasoline and diesel. The current vehicle stock in heavily en-
ergy subsidized economies is, not surprising, overwhelmingly composed of gasoline-
and diesel- vehicles. The paper reviews the relevant academic literature to eval-
uate the potential prospects for electric vehicles (EVs), natural gas vehicles, and
flex-fuel vehicles operating with biofuels.

Although it might be possible to diversify the vehicle stock with sufficient govern-
ment incentives, this approach is unlikely to cost-effectively reduce externalities.
Alternative fuel vehicles do little, or may even exacerbate traffic congestion and
accidents, the two largest components of externalities. In addition, incentives for
alternative fuel vehicles only indirectly address carbon dioxide and local pollutants
and do so at a high cost per vehicle.

The particular country context also matters a great deal. One of the key findings
in an emerging literature on EVs is that the environmental impact depends largely
on the electricity generation portfolio (Holland et al., 2015). Most countries that
subsidize fuels also have relatively carbon-intensive electricity, so a transition to
electric vehicles would be unlikely to significantly reduce carbon dioxide emissions.
Overall, the analysis points to “green” vehicle incentives being a poor substitute
for subsidy reform.

The paper contributes to a growing literature on global fuel subsidies. Most of
the work has focused on quantifying the dollar value of subsidies (IEA, 2012,
2014; Clements et al., 2013), but studies have also calculated deadweight loss
(Davis, 2014; Coady et al., 2015) and studied distributional effects (IEA, 2011;
del Granado et al., 2012; Sterner, ed, 2012). Most recently, Parry et al. (2014a)
estimates external damages from energy for 156 countries and Coady et al. (2015)

                                          3
uses these estimates to calculate the total economic and environmental cost of
global energy subsidies. This paper leans heavily on these previous studies, while
doing a deeper dive on the transportation sector and with much more emphasis
on heavily energy subsidized economies.

The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes the conceptual framework in-
cluding graphical and analytical definitions of deadweight loss and external costs.
Section 3 discusses the data used for the analysis and presents statistics on gasoline
and diesel prices, the total dollar value of subsidies, and deadweight loss. Section
4 then presents the main results, describing the marginal damages estimates from
Parry et al. (2014a) that are used for the calculations, then calculating external
costs by country. Section 5 discusses the prospects for renewables and diversifi-
cation in the transportation sector in heavily energy subsidized economies, and
Section 6 concludes by summarizing the key lessons.




2    Conceptual Framework

Economic efficiency requires that households and firms pay energy prices that re-
flect their full cost to society, including both private and external costs. This
section reviews the standard economic framework for quantifying the costs that
arise from departures from efficient pricing. The section is concerned, in particu-
lar, with failures to price energy at its full private cost. When gasoline and diesel
are priced below private cost this creates waste in the form of deadweight loss and
external costs. The section begins by describing these inefficiencies graphically and
discussing the key factors determining the magnitude of these inefficiencies. Next


                                          4
a specific functional form is adopted for the demand curve and analytical repre-
sentations are derived for deadweight loss and external costs. Finally, the section
goes through a specific example, Saudi Arabia, and shows how the calculations
work in practice.



2.1     The Economic Cost of Fuel Subsidies

2.1.1    Graphical Analysis


Figure 1 describes the market for fuels. Consider this as the market for gasoline
in Saudi Arabia, for example, or in some other heavily energy subsidized economy
where the price of fuels (p0 ) is below private cost. Here the subsidized price has
been drawn to be approximately one-third of private cost, making the subsidy
particularly consequential. Fuels consumption at the subsidized price q0 is well
above the level of consumption that would be obtained were fuels priced at private
cost (q1 ).

Pricing below private cost is inefficient because it enables transactions for which
the buyers willingness-to-pay is below private cost. This inefficiency is represented
in the figure as the deadweight loss triangle. These transactions destroy economic
value by taking a good that costs (p1 ) and giving it to a buyer who values it at
somewhere between p0 and p1 . Each time one of these transactions occurs the
economy is made worse off, and the area of the deadweight loss triangle equals
this total welfare cost.

Pricing below private cost also imposes external cost. This inefficiency is reflected
in Figure 1 as the rectangle between q0 and q1 and between private cost and social

                                         5
cost. The subsidized price leads to excess fuels consumption, and thus increased
carbon dioxide emissions and other externalities. The area of this rectangle equals
total external costs, and depending on the magnitude of the externalities and other
factors, this inefficiency can be bigger or smaller than deadweight loss.



2.1.2   Post-Tax versus Pre-Tax Subsidies


An alternative calculation would have been to measure the deadweight loss relative
to the full social cost of fuels. This would incorporate, in addition, the smaller
triangle to the left of the external cost rectangle above the demand curve. This is
a relatively small area compared to the other inefficiencies for a country with large
subsidies, but for a country like the United States, where fuels are priced above
private cost but below social cost, this triangle becomes the most important part
of the analysis.

Previous studies have used the terms “pre-tax” and “post-tax” to make this dis-
tinction. Pre-tax subsidies are when energy is priced below private cost, whereas
post-tax subsidies are when energy is priced below social cost. Previous studies
have found that post-tax subsidies are several times larger than pre-tax subsidies.
Clements et al. (2013), for example, finds that pre-tax subsidies worldwide were
$480 billion in 2011 whereas post-tax subsidies were $1.9 trillion. Coady et al.
(2015) finds that pre-tax subsidies are $541 billion in 2013 while post-tax subsi-
dies are much larger, $4.9 trillion in 2013. These estimates are for all energy types
including not only transportation fuels but also coal and natural gas, and thus are
very large.



                                         6
This broader exercise of quantifying the post-tax subsidies is extremely important,
but is a considerably different thought experiment. In this paper, the focus is on
heavily energy subsidized economies that price fuels below private cost. Accord-
ingly, the relevant counterfactual is removing subsidies, not the decision to, in
addition, impose fuel taxes that would achieve the socially optimal level of con-
sumption. Thus all of the estimates in this paper refer to “pre-tax” subsidies.



2.1.3   Key Assumptions


The size of the deadweight loss triangle in Figure 1 depends critically on private
cost, so it is important to be clear about what this means. As usual in economics,
the appropriate measure of cost is opportunity cost, i.e. the loss of potential gain
from the next best alternative. Gasoline and diesel are both widely traded in
international markets, so global spot prices provide the appropriate measure of
opportunity cost. Spot prices are the appropriate measure of opportunity cost,
regardless of whether the country is a net exporter of petroleum products. Most
heavily energy subsidized economies are oil producers, and in many cases, these
countries have oil fields with production costs well below market crude oil prices.
This doesn’t matter, however, for calculating deadweight loss. Regardless of pro-
duction costs, there is always the alternative of selling oil (or refined products) in
international markets, so this foregone revenue, and not production cost, is the
correct measure of private cost.

Both in the figure and in the empirical analysis which follows, the supply of fuels
has been assumed to be perfectly elastic. This is a common assumption in this
literature (Clements et al., 2013; Davis, 2014; Coady et al., 2015) and is likely to

                                          7
be a very accurate approximation. The infrastructure for transportation, refining,
and distribution of fuels can be scaled up at near constant marginal cost, so what
matters is the long-run supply elasticity for crude oil. This elasticity is difficult to
measure empirically, but in the long-run there is clearly a great deal of scope for
global oil producers to respond to crude oil prices. This is particularly true with
improved shale oil techniques and other emerging technologies that have opened
up vast new production areas (see, e.g. Covert et al., 2016). Incorporating less
than perfectly elastic supply would decrease the estimated economic costs only
modestly because fuel consumption in most countries is small relative to the world
oil market.

The empirical analysis which follows assumes that the price elasticity of demand
for fuels is moderately elastic. This choice clearly matters for the magnitude
of these inefficiencies. In particular, the more elastic is demand, the larger the
deadweight loss and external costs from pricing below cost. Demand for crude oil
is relatively inelastic in the short-run (Hamilton, 2009), but much more elastic in
the long-run. Estimates in the literature for the long-run elasticity of demand for
transportation fuels tend to range from -0.6 to -0.8 (Sterner, 2007; Brons et al.,
2008). The analysis which follows adopts -0.6, though estimates are also reported
for -0.4 and -0.8.

Another more subtle choice reflected in Figure 1 is that external costs have been
assumed to be constant. For carbon dioxide emissions this makes perfect sense.
From a global perspective, these costs are probably slightly increasing, but when
considering a single sector for a single country, these costs should be viewed as
essentially constant. For all other externalities, however, costs are almost surely


                                           8
not constant, and in future work it would be interesting to begin to incorporate
these non-linearities.

Another important priority for future work is to understand the fiscal impacts of
fuel subsidies. Neither of the areas indicated in Figure 1 capture the fiscal impacts
of fuel subsidies. As mentioned in the introduction, fuel subsidies can have a large
impact on government budgets, requiring taxes to be higher than they would oth-
erwise, and inhibiting the ability of government to address other fiscal objectives.
Expenditures on energy subsidies in some countries exceed public expenditures on
health, education, and other key components of government spending.



2.2     Calculating Deadweight Loss and External Costs

2.2.1   Functional Form


Demand is assumed to take the form of a constant elasticity demand function,


                                      q = Ap                                    (1)


with a scale parameter A that varies across countries and fuels, price p, and elas-
ticity . The constant elasticity demand function has been widely used in related
studies (Clements et al., 2013; Davis, 2014; Coady et al., 2015) and coincides
closely with a substantial empirical literature that has tended overwhelmingly to
estimate log-log models. In theory, this  should be the compensated demand elas-
ticity (i.e. Hicksian) that reflects substitution but not income effects. However,
most of the empirical literature has focused on estimating uncompensated elastici-


                                         9
ties. With gasoline and diesel, one would generally expect compensated elasticities
to be smaller than uncompensated elasticities, which provides another reason for
emphasizing the results from the -0.6 elasticity rather than the -0.8.

The first step is to take the assumed price elasticity of demand, e.g., −0.6, as well
as current prices p0 and consumption levels q0 to calculate the complete set of scale
parameters. Subscripts have been ignored for expositional clarity, but this scale
parameter A is allowed to vary across countries and fuels,


                                     A = qp− .                                  (2)


The demand functions (i.e. equation 1) are then used to predict consumption at
market prices (p1 ) and to calculate deadweight loss. Just as in Figure 1, deadweight
loss is the rectangle (p1 − p0 )q0 , minus the area to the left of the demand curve
between the subsidized price p0 and market price p1 . This can be described with
the following equation,

                                                  Z p1
                          DW L = (p1 − p0 )q0 −          Ap dp.                 (3)
                                                    p0



Evaluating the integral yields,

                                             A      (1+)    (1+)
                  DW L = (p1 − p0 )q0 −           [p1     − p0 ].                (4)
                                          (1 + )

Another, equivalent approach for calculating the same area is to start with the
inverse demand function,
                                   p = (A−1 Q)1/                                (5)



                                         10
and calculate the area below the demand curve between q0 and q1 , and then sub-
stract this from the rectangle (q1 − q0 )p1 ,

                                                   Z q0
                                                                1   1
                           DW L = (q0 − q1 )p1 −            A−  q  dq.         (6)
                                                       q1



Evaluating the integral yields,

                                                   1 1
                          DW L = (q0 − q1 )p1 − A−  [q0η − q1η ].               (7)
                                                     η

              1
where η =     
                  + 1. With the example below equations (4) and (7) are shown to be
numerically equivalent. Finally, just as in Figure 1, external costs are calculated
as excess consumption multiplied by an estimate of marginal damages per unit of
fuels, δ.
                                        (q0 − q1 )δ.                             (8)



2.2.2       An Example


It is helpful to go through an example. In Saudi Arabia the price of gasoline
(p0 ) in November 2014 was $0.16/liter, and consumption in 2014 (q0 ) was 24,443
million liters. Rearranging the demand function to solve for A with a -0.6 elasticity
yields,
                           A = q0 p0 − = 24443 ∗ 0.160.6 = 8140.                (9)




                                            11
So at the global spot market price $0.57 the demand equation implies that con-
sumption would be equal to,


                       q1 = Ap1  = 8140 ∗ 0.57−0.6 = 11, 405.                       (10)


Thus this demand function implies that, in the long run, gasoline consumption
would fall from 24,443 million liters to 11,405 million liters were prices to increase
to $0.57. Using equation (4), deadweight loss is equal to,

                                         8140
   DW L = ($0.57 − $0.16) ∗ 24443 −            [$0.57(0.4) − $0.16(0.4) ] = $3546.   (11)
                                         (0.4)

Or, $3.6 billion in deadweight loss in the gasoline market for 2014.

Using equation (7), deadweight loss is equal to,

                                           −1    1
DW L = (24443 − 11405) ∗ $0.57 − 8140 −0.6           [24443−2/3 − 11405−2/3 ] = $3546.
                                                −2/3
                                                                                  (12)
Or $3.6 billion. As expected, both approaches yield the same measure for dead-
weight loss. External costs for gasoline for Saudi Arabia (δ) are $0.56/liter, as will
be shown later. So external costs are,


                      EX = (24443 − 11405) ∗ $0.56 = $7301                           (13)


or $7.3 billion annually.




                                          12
3     Data

3.1       Gasoline and Diesel Prices

Gasoline and diesel prices come from the World Bank World Development Indi-
cators which, in turn, gets these data from the German Agency for International
Cooperation (GIZ). Prices are domestic consumer prices and reflect the total price
at the pump including all taxes and/or subsidies. Data are collected every two
years and the latest available data come from surveys administered November
2014. Gasoline prices are available for 170 countries and diesel prices are available
for 167 countries. In a small number of cases 2014 price data are not available
and prices from 2012 are used instead; this includes Bahrain, Grenada, and Libya
for gasoline and Bahrain, Grenada, Libya, Belize, Brunei, and North Korea for
diesel.

Figure 2 shows the twenty countries with the lowest gasoline and diesel prices
worldwide. In November 2014 average prices for gasoline and diesel (unweighted)
were $1.28 per liter and $1.17 per liter, respectively, so all of these countries have
prices that are well below the global average. Indeed, most of these countries have
prices that are less than half average global prices and less than one-quarter of
the price in countries with large fuels taxes like Norway where in November 2014
gasoline prices were $2.27 per liter and $2.11 per liter, respectively.

The lowest prices on the planet in November 2014 were in Venezuela; $0.02 per
liter for gasoline and $0.01 per liter for diesel. Venezuela has long subsidized
transportation fuels and, not coincidentally, gasoline consumption consumption in



                                         13
Venezuela is 40% higher than any other country in Latin America, and three times
the regional average.

Many of the countries listed in Figure 2 are members of the Organization of
Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC). Currently OPEC has twelve members:
Algeria, Angola, Ecuador, Iran, Iraq, Kuwait, Libya, Nigeria, Qatar, Saudi Arabia,
United Arab Emirates and Venezuela. All twelve appear among the first twenty
countries with lowest gasoline prices worldwide. And for diesel, ten of the twelve
appear among the first twenty countries for diesel, all except for Nigeria (# 31
worldwide with $0.84/liter) and Iraq, for which no diesel price is available.

The United States manages to just barely make the top 20 for lowest gasoline
prices. U.S. retail gasoline prices are above international spot prices so the United
States does not subsidize gasoline. But at the same time, it also has very low taxes
by international standards. Compared to other OECD countries, for example, the
United States has by far the lowest gasoline taxes (see, e.g. Knittel, 2012).



3.2    Fuel Subsidies

Global spot prices for gasoline and diesel in November 2014 were $0.57 and $0.59,
respectively. These spot prices come from DOE/EIA (2016a) and are average
spot prices for conventional gasoline and low-sulfur diesel at New York Harbor in
November 2014. In practice, spot prices for fuels tend not to vary much geograph-
ically reflecting the low cost of long-distance transportation via ocean tanker. See,
for example, DOE/EIA (2013), Figure 8, which plots daily transatlantic spot price
differentials for gasoline and diesel between New York Harbor and Rotterdam; dif-


                                         14
ferences are centered around zero and rarely vary more than $.05 per liter in either
direction.

Figure 3 shows the ten countries with largest fuel subsidies in 2014. The implied
subsidy per liter was calculated as the difference between domestic consumer prices
and international spot prices. Transport, distribution, and retailing costs were
incorporated following Clements et al. (2013). The total subsidy amount was then
calculated by multiplying the per-liter subsidy by total road-sector consumption
of each fuel. Data on road-sector gasoline and diesel consumption comes from the
World Bank World Development Indicators and are for 2010, the most recent year
for which these data are available.4

Total fuels subsidies worldwide in 2014 were $65 billion, split approximately evenly
between gasoline and diesel. There were, in 2014, a total of 16 countries that
subsidize gasoline and 21 countries that subsidize diesel, but the ten countries
in Figure 3 represent more than 90% of all subsidies. Saudi Arabia alone had
$20 billion in subsidies in 2014. Saudi Arabia has long subsidized fuels and, not
surprisingly, has some of the highest fuels consumption per capita in the world.
Since 1971, fuels consumption in Saudi Arabia has increased nine-fold and, today,
Saudi Arabia is the sixth largest oil consumer in the world while being only the
nineteenth largest economy (Gately et al., 2012). Figure 3 shows fuel subsidies per
capita. Saudi Arabia remains in the top spot with annual fuel subsidies totaling
more than $600 per capita. Several smaller countries move up, including Kuwait,
Bahrain, and Qatar, while several larger countries move down, including Iran and
   4
    More recent data on gasoline and diesel consumption are not publicly-available but can be
purchased from a company called the International Road Federation http://www.irfnews.org/.
DOE/EIA has publicly available data on road-sector gasoline consumption and distillate fuel oil
consumption, but the latter includes heating oil use in addition to road-sector diesel consumption.


                                                15
Algeria.

Total global fuel subsidies decreased significantly between 2012 and 2014 because
of the decrease in crude oil prices. Davis (2014) finds that total fuel subsidies in
2012 were $110 billion, so close to twice as high as in 2014. Falling crude oil prices
reduce the opportunity cost of fuel, and thus the implicit value of fuel subsidies.
Another factor contributing to the decrease in subsidies between 2012 and 2014
is that several countries took steps to reduce subsidies. Most notably, Indonesia
sharply increased gasoline and diesel prices in the summer of 2013. Indonesia was
third on the list in 2012 for total fuel subsidies after only Saudi Arabia and Iran,
so this was a significant reform.



3.3    Deadweight Loss

Total global deadweight loss from fuel subsidies in 2014 is calculated to be $26
billion. This is split roughly evenly between gasoline ($12.5 billion) and diesel
($13.5 billion). Figure 5 reports deadweight loss by country. Saudi Arabia takes
the top spot with $8.8 billion in deadweight loss with Venezuela right behind with
$8.4 billion. These two countries, Saudi Arabia and Venezuela, represent about
two-thirds of total global deadweight loss. Figure 6 shows deadweight loss per
capita. Saudi Arabia and Venezuela are again in the top two spots, with about
$300 in annual deadweight loss per capita.

It is perhaps surprising that deadweight loss is so high in Venezuela given that
the total dollar value of subsidies is considerably larger in Saudi Arabia. However,
deadweight loss increases approximately with the square of the per liter subsidy


                                         16
amount so, for example, a $1.00 per liter subsidy is more than twice as costly
as a $0.50 per liter subsidy. Venezuela has the cheapest fuels on the planet so
the subsidies in Venezuela impose particularly large economic costs even though
the total quantity of fuels consumption is much lower than in Saudi Arabia. In
Venezuela right now there is someone driving around who values gasoline at only
$.10 per liter. Gasoline spot prices in March 2016 are about $.35 per liter, so each
time this person uses a liter of gasoline the world becomes worse off by $.25.

All of these countries are major oil producers and most are OPEC members. From
an economic perspective, there is little reason why fuel subsidies would be corre-
lated with oil production. Transportation costs are small compared to the market
price of refined products, so the opportunity cost of selling a gallon of gasoline is
similar whether or not it came from domestically-produced oil. Nevertheless, fuel
subsidies have long been viewed in many oil-producing countries as a way to share
the resource wealth with a nation’s citizens. These deadweight loss estimates show,
however, that these are not benign transfers from producers to consumers. Fuel
subsidies significantly distorting behavior, causing large-scale waste and imposing
significant economic costs.

Table 1 provides summary statistics and deadweight loss estimates by country.
The price elasticity of demand of -0.6 implies that fuels consumption would be
much lower without subsidies. The implied changes in consumption are perhaps
too dramatic for Venezuela, but for other countries the predicted changes seem
plausible. For example, according to these estimates Saudi Arabia would decrease
gasoline consumption from 24 billion liters annually to 11 billion liters annually
and Iran would decrease gasoline consumption from 22 billion liters to 17 billion


                                         17
liters annually. These seem completely plausible, particularly when viewed cor-
rectly as long-run responses which would encompass not only changes in driving
behavior but also increased fuel-efficiency of the vehicle stock, changes in commut-
ing patterns, and, in the very long run, changes in urban form and choices about
where households and firms locate.




4     External Costs

This section now turns to quantifying the external costs of global fuel subsidies.
Carbon dioxide emissions are an important component of these costs, but the ex-
ternalities from driving also include emissions of local pollutants, traffic congestion,
accidents, and road damage.



4.1    Marginal Damages

As described earlier, external costs can be quantified as excess consumption mul-
tiplied by marginal damages per unit of fuels (δ). The analysis in the previous
section provides country-specific measures of excess consumption for gasoline and
diesel. This information is combined with estimates of marginal damages from an
ambitious recent project undertaken by a team of researchers at the International
Monetary Fund (Parry et al., 2014a). The objective of the study was to measure
the external costs of energy, including not only gasoline and diesel, but also coal
and natural gas and the authors find that the external costs of energy worldwide
are dominated by coal with its large carbon and air pollution impacts. Previous



                                          18
studies had measured marginal damages for particular energy types and for par-
ticular individual countries, but Parry et al. (2014a) is the first comprehensive
attempt to measure marginal damages for several different types of energy and for
a large set of countries.

Table 2 reports marginal damages per liter for five different categories of exter-
nalities. Parry et al. (2014a) reports marginal damages for gasoline and diesel by
category for 156 countries and this table reports weighted means and standard
deviations, with weights equal to gasoline and diesel consumption in each country.
In a small number of cases country-level estimates are not available and regional
averages are used instead. Total marginal damages are $0.58 per liter for gasoline
and $0.73 per liter for diesel. These are substantial marginal damages and, as
emphasized by Parry et al. (2014a) and Coady et al. (2015), well in excess of cur-
rent gasoline and diesel taxes in most countries. In the broader analysis of energy
subsidies, however, it is coal, not fuels, that dominates the welfare impact. While
several countries including the U.K., Germany, and Norway, have fuels taxes that
are set close to or even in excess of marginal damages, no country in the world
taxes coal at close to Pigouvian prices. Moreover, the local pollutant impacts from
coal are large enough that, for most countries, carbon pricing would be welfare im-
proving even if you ignore the benefits that accrue to other countries Parry et al.
(2015).

The first category in Table 2 is carbon dioxide emissions, which impose marginal
damages equal to $.09 and $.10 per liter for gasoline and diesel, respectively. For
these estimates Parry et al. (2014a) adopted a social cost of carbon of $35 per
metric ton from Greenstone et al. (2013). Carbon dioxide emissions are a global


                                        19
pollutant so these costs are the same for all countries, making carbon dioxide
unlike all of the other marginal damages from driving.

Local pollutant costs average $.04 and $.20 per liter for gasoline and diesel. Parry
et al. (2014a) quantify these costs using city-level data on the size of proximate
populations and previous estimates from the literature on both the relationship
between air pollution exposure and health outcomes and on the monetized value
of health. In practice, mortality risks are the largest component in this exer-
cise, and the value of a statistical life is assumed to vary across countries with
different income levels based on a parametric relationship. This focus on the mor-
tality risks from air pollution is consistent with a growing body of evidence in
the epidemiological and broader scientific literature, for example, World Health
Organization (2014) estimates that outdoor air pollution causes 3.7 million deaths
annually.

Traffic congestion adds $.27 and $.26 per liter. For these estimates, Parry et al.
(2014a) use city- and country-level data on travel delays to estimate the reduc-
tion in aggregate travel speeds caused by each additional driver on the road. On
average each kilometer of driving is found to increase delays for other drivers by
0.0041 hours. These delays are then monetized using country-specific wages and
other estimates of the value-of-time from the existing literature. Consistent with
a broader literature, congestion costs are estimated to be especially large in urban
areas in high-income countries. For example, Parry and Small (2009) estimate
that drivers in London during rush hour impose marginal damages equal to $10.00
per liter.

The marginal damages from accidents are estimated to be $.18 and $.13 per liter.

                                        20
These estimates come an analysis of country-level fatality data, combined with
previous estimates in the literature for the value of statistical life. Care is taken
to focus on the external costs of accidents and to ignore accident risks borne by
drivers themselves. The estimates for marginal damages from accidents range
widely across countries driven by differences in accident risk and the value of a
statistical life.

Finally, Parry et al. (2014a) assume that road damage from gasoline is zero, and
quantifies road damages from diesel using previous estimates in the literature.
Large vehicles have been shown to be responsible for the vast majority of vehicle-
related road damage, and thus the marginal damages for diesel but not gasoline.
Road damage costs end up being small compared to the other components of
marginal damages, with average costs only $.04 per liter for diesel.



4.2     Total External Costs from Fuel Subsidies

Table 3 reports the total external costs from fuel subsidies in 2014. These costs
were calculated using the country-specific marginal damages estimates described
in the previous section, multiplied by the quantity of excess consumption in each
country as in equation (8), and then summed up to reflect total costs by fuel type
and external cost component.

Total external damages from fuel subsidies are $44 billion annually, evenly split
between gasoline and diesel. Combined with total deadweight loss ($26 billion),
the total economic cost of fuel subsidies is $70 billion annually. This is larger than
the total dollar value of the subsidies ($66 billion), so it costs more than $1 in


                                         21
economic cost for each $1 that is transfered from producers to consumers. This is,
therefore, a very expensive way to share resource wealth.

External costs include $8 billion from carbon dioxide emissions, $7 billion from lo-
cal pollutants, $12 billion from traffic congestion, and $17 billion from accidents. It
is perhaps surprising that two-thirds of external costs come from traffic congestion
and accidents. These components are rarely mentioned in policy discussions about
fuel subsidies, but there is a growing consensus that these are the largest compo-
nents of the external cost of driving (Parry and Small, 2005; Parry et al., 2007;
Parry and Small, 2009; Anderson and Auffhammer, 2013; Parry et al., 2014a).
Marginal damages in countries that subsidize fuels tend to be lower than global
averages for traffic congestion, but higher than global averages for accidents. This
reflects the fact that, on average, population density and traffic delays tend to be
lower in these countries than global averages; and that traffic accidents tend to be
relatively more common.

Figure 7 shows external costs by country. Separate bars indicate carbon diox-
ide, local pollutants, traffic congestion, and accidents. Traffic congestion costs are
large. Riyadh, Caracas, Tehran, and even Kuwait City are well-known for severe
traffic jams and this is visible in the form of large traffic congestion costs in Saudi
Arabia, Venezuela, Iran, and Kuwait. Other countries tend to have lower traf-
fic congestion costs. Accidents are estimated to be particularly costly in Saudi
Arabia, Iran, Algeria, and Libya reflecting high baseline levels of vehicle accident
fatalities.

Total external costs per capita in Figure 8 range from $100 to $600 annually across
countries. Small countries like Kuwait, Qatar, and Bahrain move up, while large

                                          22
countries like Venezuela, Egypt, and Iran move down. Kuwait has the highest
external costs per capita. This reflect large fuel subsidies, but also that Kuwait
has a relatively high population density and high average income level, so local
pollution and traffic congestion are higher than in most other countries.

Finally, Table 4 shows how estimates change with alternative assumptions about
the long-run price elasticity of demand for gasoline and diesel. Under the preferred
demand elasticity (-0.6), global fuel subsidies yield 63,300 million liters of excess
consumption, $25.6 billion in deadweight loss and $44.2 billion in external costs.
The more elastic is demand, the larger are these economic costs. With a long-run
elasticity of -0.8, total economic costs are $82.2 billion in 2014.




5     Prospects for Renewables and Diversification

This section discusses prospects for alternative fuel vehicles to reduce the negative
externalities from gasoline and diesel subsidies. Could a country like Saudi Arabia
reduce these externalities without eliminating fuels subsidies? The focus continues
to be on heavily energy subsidized economies where, not surprisingly, the current
vehicle fleet is overwhelmingly composed of gasoline- and diesel-powered vehicles.
Although there are many different types of alternative fuel vehicles including nat-
ural gas and biofuels, the section focuses mostly on electric vehicles (EVs) as they
have the greatest potential for significant environmental benefits (Tessum et al.,
2014; Covert et al., 2016).

There is little question that, with sufficient government incentives, it would be
possible to diversify the vehicle stock. The United States, Norway, Netherlands,

                                          23
and Japan all offer subsidies for EVs, and all have experienced large increases
in EV sales.5 In the United States, for example, federal tax credits have been
available for EVs since 2009. Tax credits range from $2,500 to $7,500 based on the
size of the battery, with longer-range vehicles like the Chevrolet Volt and Tesla
Model S qualifying for the full $7,500 credit. In addition, several U.S. states offer
extra subsidies and preferential access to carpool lanes and free charging is widely
available.

Norway also has generous subsidies for EVs. Most significantly, EVs are exempt
from Norway’s otherwise hefty 25% import tax on all new cars and trucks. EVs
in Norway also qualify for reduced license fees, preferential access to carpool lanes
and free charging in municipal facilities. Combine these incentives with Norway’s
very high gasoline prices, and it is no surprise that Norway has the highest market
penetration of EV’s worldwide.6

Teasing out the exact causal relationship between government incentives and EV
adoption is difficult because of potential endogeneity and omitted variables, but
it seems uncontroversial to assert that government incentives have played a major
role in fostering EV adoption in these countries. Moreover, an older literature on
hybrid vehicle adoption makes it clear that vehicle sales indeed respond signifi-
cantly to government incentives (Chandra et al., 2010; Gallagher and Muehlegger,
2011).
   5
     As of September 2015 the top five countries for EV sales were the United
States, China, Japan, Norway, and the Netherlands. See http://www.hybridcars.com/
one-million-global-plug-in-sales-milestone-reached/
   6
     See Stoll, John D. “Tesla Breaks Norway’s All-Time Sales Record,” Wall Street Journal,
April 2, 2014; Catherine Wolfram, “Energy Tourism: The Tesla Taxi in Oslo”, Energy Institute
Blog, April 13, 2015; and Jolly, David “Norway is a Model for Encouraging Electric Car Sales,”
New York Times, October 16, 2015.



                                             24
What is much less clear is whether government incentives for alternative fuel ve-
hicles would be a cost-effective approach for reducing externalities. The biggest
limitation with promoting alternative fuel vehicles is that it would do little to re-
duce traffic congestion and accidents, the two largest components of externalities.
Subsidies for alternative fuel vehicles might even exacerbate these externalities if
the subsidies reduce the total cost of vehicle ownership or the marginal cost of driv-
ing below current levels. Norwegians probably drive more total kilometers today
than they would have otherwise because of the generous incentives for EVs.

Incentives for alternative fuel vehicles would also only indirectly address envi-
ronmental externalities. Gasoline emits less carbon dioxide than coal, but more
carbon dioxide than natural gas, so the impact of EVs on carbon dioxide emis-
sions is ambiguous (Babaee et al., 2014; Tessum et al., 2014). The local pollutant
impacts are complicated as well. Vehicle emissions occur at ground level, and
thus tend to be more damaging than power plant stack emissions. However, these
potential advantages from EVs are mitigated by emissions control equipment at
the tailpipe. When vehicles have high-quality catalytic converters then the local
pollution benefits from EVs are reduced significantly. Moreover, local pollution
damages in both cases depend on the size of the affected populations as well as on
prevailing meteorological conditions.

Holland et al. (2015) is the most comprehensive attempt to quantify these tradeoffs
empirically. The study assesses the environmental impact of EVs by combining
an econometric analysis of the marginal emissions from electricity with a state-of-
the-art air pollution model. Overall, the results are surprisingly mixed for EVs.
In states like California, with high population density and relatively clean elec-


                                         25
tricity, EVs represent an environmental benefit of about $3000 over the lifetime
of the vehicle. However, in states like North Dakota with low population density
and relatively carbon-intensive electricity, EVs represent an environmental cost of
$4,700.

No similar analysis has been performed for Saudi Arabia, Venezuela, or other
heavily energy subsidized economies. However, the characteristics of the electricity
sectors in these countries suggests that EV impacts are likely to be somewhere
between North Dakota and California. Most countries that subsidize fuels also tend
to have relatively carbon-intensive electricity generation, so power plant emissions
would increase substantially with more EVs. Venezuela is an important exception,
with 65% of its electricity from hydroelectric power. But most other heavily energy
subsidized economies are dominated by fossil fuels. Saudi Arabia, for example,
generates all of its electricity from oil and natural gas, and Iran generates 90%+
of its electricity from oil and natural gas.7

In addition to being inefficient, subsidizing alternative fuel vehicles would also
likely be highly regressive. U.S. tax credits for alternative fuel vehicles, for exam-
ple, have gone overwhelmingly to high-income households. Borenstein and Davis
(2015) find that 90% of U.S. electric vehicle tax credits since 2009 have gone to
the top income quintile. Even after the subsidy, EVs are expensive compared
to similar-sized gasoline-powered vehicles so they are purchased mostly by high-
income households.

Overall, this discussion points to “green” vehicle incentives being quite a poor
  7
    This information about electricity generation in Saudi Arabia, Iran, and Venezuela comes
from DOE/EIA International Energy Statistics, accessed online March 2016 at https://www.
eia.gov/beta/international/analysis.cfm.


                                            26
substitute for subsidy reform. Incentives for alternative fuel vehicles would not
address congestion or accidents and the environmental impacts are ambiguous.
Moreover, incentives for alternative vehicles would require substantial fiscal ex-
penditures. It takes large government incentives to induce households and firms
to adopt alternative fuel vehicles, and this is particularly true in heavily energy
subsidized economies where cheap fuels make conventional vehicles so inexpensive
to operate.




6    Conclusion

Recent subsidy reform in U.A.E. and Saudi Arabia provides a clear roadmap for
other countries looking to roll back energy subsidies. Most immediately these
reforms offer fiscal relief, helping to balance government budgets and freeing up
public funds for investments in education, health, and other productive uses. Over
the longer-run, these reforms offer enduring benefits in the form of reduced eco-
nomic waste and decreased externalities.

This paper focuses on this last component, the external costs of fuel subsidies. The
results are striking, indicating that external costs are large in magnitude, almost
twice as large as total deadweight loss. Also striking is the degree to which external
costs are driven by traffic congestion and accidents. These externalities are rarely
mentioned in policy discussions about fuel subsidies but they are quantitatively
important components, as will come to no surprise to people have spent time
driving or being a pedestrian in Riyadh or Caracas.

It is important not only to increase prices, but also to remove government discretion

                                         27
in fuels markets. In U.A.E., for example, prices have been increased to market
levels but are not truly deregulated. Instead, prices continue to be set by a Fuels
Prices Committee, which meets on the 28th of each month. This may sound
relatively benign, but when crude prices increase again this committee is going to
come under political pressure to freeze retail rates, thus threatening to undo the
hard-won economic gains from reform.

Inevitably efforts to reform energy subsidies also run up against distributional
concerns. Citizens of Saudi Arabia, for example, strongly believe that this resource
wealth “belongs to the people”. The broader lesson from this analysis, however,
is that fuel subsidies are an expensive way to transfer resources. According to
these estimates, it costs more than $1 in inefficiencies for each $1 transferred to
consumers. This is very expensive, particularly when alternative approaches exist
that could achieve the same distributional goals at much lower cost.




                                        28
References
Anderson, Michael L and Maximilian Auffhammer, “Pounds that Kill: The
 External Costs of Vehicle Weight,” Review of Economic Studies, 2013, 81 (2),
 535–571.
Babaee, Samaneh, Ajay S Nagpure, and Joseph F DeCarolis, “How Much
 Do Electric Drive Vehicles Matter to Future U.S. Emissions?,” Environmental
 Science & Technology, 2014, 48 (3), 1382–1390.
Borenstein, Severin and Lucas W Davis, “The Distributional Effects of U.S.
 Clean Energy Tax Credits,” in “Tax Policy and the Economy, Volume 30,”
 University of Chicago Press, 2015.
Brons, Martijn, Peter Nijkamp, Eric Pels, and Piet Rietveld, “A Meta-
 Analysis of the Price Elasticity of Gasoline Demand: A SUR Approach,” Energy
 Economics, 2008, 30, 2105–2122.
Burke, Paul J and Shuhei Nishitateno, “Gasoline Prices, Gasoline Consump-
 tion, and New-Vehicle Fuel Economy: Evidence for a Large Sample of Coun-
 tries,” Energy Economics, 2013, 36, 363–370.
Chandra, Ambarish, Sumeet Gulati, and Milind Kandlikar, “Green
 Drivers or Free Riders? An Analysis of Tax Rebates for Hybrid Vehicles,” Jour-
 nal of Environmental Economics and management, 2010, 60 (2), 78–93.
Clements, Benedict, David Coady, Stefania Fabrizio, Sanjeev Gupta,
  and Baoping Shang, “Energy Subsidy Reform: Lessons and Implications,”
  International Monetary Fund, 2013.
Coady, David, Ian WH Parry, Louis Sears, and Baoping Shang, “How
 Large Are Global Energy Subsidies?,” International Monetary Fund, 2015.
Covert, Thomas, Michael Greenstone, and Christopher R Knittel, “Will
 We Ever Stop Using Fossil Fuels?,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2016, 30
 (1), 117–138.
Dahl, Carol A, “Measuring Global Gasoline and Diesel Price and Income Elas-
 ticities,” Energy Policy, 2012, 41, 2–13.
Davis, Lucas, “The Economic Cost of Global Fuel Subsidies,” American Eco-
 nomic Review Papers and Proceedings, 2014, 104 (5), 581–85.
del Granado, Francisco Javier Arze, David Coady, and Robert Gilling-
  ham, “The Unequal Benefits of Fuel Subsidies: A Review of Evidence for De-
  veloping Countries,” World Development, 2012, 40 (11), 2234–2248.


                                      29
Gallagher, K. and E. Muehlegger, “Giving Green to Get Green? Incentives
 and Consumer Adoption of Hybrid Vehicle Technology,” Journal of Environ-
 mental Economics and Management, 2011, 61 (1), 1–15.
Gately, Dermot, Nourah Al-Yousef, and Hamad MH Al-Sheikh, “The
 Rapid Growth of Domestic Oil Consumption in Saudi Arabia and the Opportu-
 nity Cost of Oil Exports Foregone,” Energy Policy, 2012, 47, 57–68.
Greenstone, Michael, Elizabeth Kopits, and Ann Wolverton, “Developing
 a Social Cost of Carbon for U.S. Regulatory Analysis: A Methodology and
 Interpretation,” Review of Environmental Economics and Policy, 2013, 7 (1),
 23–46.
Hamilton, James D., “Understanding Crude Oil Prices,” Energy Journal, 2009,
 30, 179–206.
Holland, Stephen P, Erin T Mansur, Nicholas Z Muller, and Andrew J
 Yates, “Environmental Benefits from Driving Electric Vehicles?,” National Bu-
 reau of Economic Research Working Paper, 2015.
IEA, “World Energy Outlook 2011,” 2011.
  , “World Energy Outlook 2012,” 2012.
  , “World Energy Outlook 2014,” 2014.
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Climate Change 2014: Miti-
  gation of Climate Change, Vol. 3, Cambridge University Press, 2015.
Knittel, Christopher R, “Reducing Petroleum Consumption from Transporta-
 tion,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2012, 26, 93–118.
Parry, Ian, Chandara Veung, and Dirk Heine, “How Much Carbon Pricing is
 in Countries Own Interests? The Critical Role of Co-Benefits,” Climate Change
 Economics, 2015, 6 (4).
  , Dirk Heine, Eliza Lis, and Shanjun Li, Getting Energy Prices Right: From
  Principle to Practice, International Monetary Fund, Washington D.C., 2014.
  , , Shanjun Li, Eliza Lis et al., “How Should Different Countries Tax Fuels
  to Correct Environmental Externalities?,” Economics of Energy & Environmen-
  tal Policy, 2014, 3 (2).
Parry, Ian WH and Kenneth A Small, “Does Britain or the United States
 Have the Right Gasoline Tax?,” American Economic Review, 2005, 95 (4), 1276–
 1289.



                                     30
   and , “Should Urban Transit Subsidies Be Reduced?,” American Economic
  Review, 2009, 99 (3), 700.
  , Margaret Walls, and Winston Harrington, “Automobile Externalities
  and Policies,” Journal of Economic Literature, 2007, 45(2), 373–399.
Plante, Michael, “The Long-Run Macroeconomic Impacts of Fuel Subsidies,”
  Journal of Development Economics, 2014, 107C, 129–143.
Sterner, Thomas, “Fuel Taxes: An Important Instrument for Climate Policy,”
  Energy Policy, 2007, 35 (6), 3194–3202.
  , ed., Fuel Taxes and the Poor: The Distributional Effects of Gasoline Taxation
  and their Implications for Climate Policy, Resources for the Future Press (RFF
  Press), Washington, USA, 2012.
Tessum, Christopher W, Jason D Hill, and Julian D Marshall, “Life Cycle
  Air Quality Impacts of Conventional and Alternative Light-Duty Transportation
  in the United States,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 2014,
  111 (52), 18490–18495.
U.S. Department of Energy, Energy Information Administration, “Inter-
 national Energy Outlook,” DOE/EIA-0484, 2016.
  , “Petroleum and Other Liquids, Spot Prices,” 2016. Accessed online at https:
  //www.eia.gov/petroleum/gasdiesel/ in February 2016.
  , “Weekly Petroleum Status Report,” DOE/EIA-0208, April 24, 2013.
World Bank, “World Development Indicators,” http://data.worldbank.org/. ac-
 cessed online in February 2016.
World Health Organization, “Air Pollution Estimates, Burden of Disease from
 Ambient Air Pollution,” March 2014.
         Figure 1: Deadweight Loss and External Cost from Fuel Subsidies

   Price
                                 External Costs From
                              Pricing Below Private Cost

                                                                       Social Cost




                                                                     Private Cost (p1)


                                                     Deadweight Loss From
                                                    Pricing Below Private Cost

Subsidized
 Price (p0)
                                                                          Demand


                         q1                  q0
                                                                   Quantity
                             Figure 2: Lowest Global Gasoline and Diesel Prices



          Venezuela                                                           Venezuela


              Libya                                                        Saudi Arabia


       Saudi Arabia                                                               Libya


             Kuwait                                                              Algeria


       Turkmenistan                                                             Bahrain


              Qatar                                                                 Iran


             Algeria                                                             Kuwait


            Bahrain                                                        Turkmenistan


              Oman                                                                Egypt


                Iran                                                             Brunei


             Brunei                                                             Ecuador


                Iraq                                                              Oman


United Arab Emirates                                                              Qatar


             Nigeria                                                               Syria


            Ecuador                                                              Angola


           Malaysia                                                              Bolivia


             Bolivia                                                             Sudan


             Yemen                                                            Indonesia


             Angola                                                          Kazakhstan


       United States                                                United Arab Emirates


                           $0.20       $0.40       $0.60    $0.80                             $0.20       $0.40       $0.60    $0.80
                       Gasoline Price Per Liter, November 2014                             Diesel Price Per Liter, November 2014
           Figure 3: Total Fuel Subsidies in 2014, Top Ten Countries



Saudi Arabia

        Iran

  Venezuela

     Algeria

      Egypt

  Indonesia

     Kuwait

      Libya

   Malaysia

      Qatar
                                                            Gasoline     Diesel

           $0              $5                $10                 $15        $20
                                     Subsidy Amount, Billions




        Figure 4: Fuel Subsidies Per Capita in 2014, Top Ten Countries



Saudi Arabia

     Kuwait

    Bahrain

      Qatar

  Venezuela

      Libya

     Brunei

      Oman

        Iran

     Algeria
                                                            Gasoline     Diesel

           $0                   $250                     $500              $750
                                    Subsidy Amount Per Capita
     Figure 5: Deadweight Loss from Fuel Subsidies in 2014, Top Ten Countries



  Saudi Arabia

    Venezuela

           Iran

        Algeria

         Egypt

         Libya

        Kuwait

       Bahrain

         Qatar

      Ecuador
                                                                Gasoline   Diesel

              $0                   $3                           $6            $9
                                        Deadweight Loss, Billions




Figure 6: Deadweight Loss from Fuel Subsidies Per Capita in 2014, Top Ten Countries



  Saudi Arabia

    Venezuela

       Bahrain

        Kuwait

         Libya

         Qatar

        Brunei

        Oman

           Iran

        Algeria
                                                                Gasoline   Diesel

              $0                  $100                     $200              $300
                                     Deadweight Loss Per Capita
     Figure 7: External Costs from Fuel Subsidies in 2014, Top Ten Countries



  Saudi Arabia

    Venezuela

          Iran

       Algeria

       Kuwait

        Egypt

         Libya

     Indonesia
                                                                       Carbon Dioxide
        Qatar                                                          Local Pollutants
                                                                       Traffic Congestion
     Malaysia
                                                                       Accidents

             $0                   $5                             $10                 $15
                                         External Costs, Billions




Figure 8: External Costs from Fuel Subsidies Per Capita in 2014, Top Ten Countries



       Kuwait

  Saudi Arabia

        Qatar

    Venezuela

         Libya

      Bahrain

        Oman

        Brunei
                                                                       Carbon Dioxide
          Iran                                                         Local Pollutants
                                                                       Traffic Congestion
       Algeria
                                                                       Accidents

             $0                  $200                         $400                   $600
                                        External Costs Per Capita
           Table 1: Summary Statistics and Deadweight Loss Estimates


                   Price        Consumption              Predicted          Deadweight
                 per Liter          in 2014           Consumption at            Loss
                (Nov 2014)    (millions of liters)     Market Price           in 2014
                                                     (millions of liters)   (billions $)
                    (1)               (2)                    (3)                 (4)


                               Panel A. Gasoline

Venezuela          $   .02          15532                   1751                6.7
Saudi Arabia       $   .16          24443                  11405                3.5
Iran               $   .37          22410                  17404                 .5
Kuwait             $   .22           4231                   2390                 .4
Libya              $   .12           1460                    573                 .3
Algeria            $   .27           3372                   2154                 .2
Oman               $   .31           3482                   2416                 .2
Qatar              $   .23           1686                    978                 .1
Bahrain            $   .27            900                    487                 .1
Turkmenistan       $   .22           1022                    577                 .1


                                 Panel B. Diesel

Saudi Arabia       $ .07            18350                  5107                 5.2
Iran               $ .19            19074                  9573                 2.5
Venezuela          $ .01             3412                   258                 1.7
Algeria            $ .16             7898                  3610                 1.2
Egypt              $ .25             7067                  3598                 1.2
Libya               $ .1             2812                   969                  .7
Kuwait             $ .19             1837                   931                  .2
Ecuador            $ .29             2880                  1881                  .2
Indonesia          $ .62            14791                  12988                .1
Bahrain            $ .17              550                   222                  .1
                           Table 2: Marginal Damages per Liter


                                              Gasoline            Diesel
                                                (1)                (2)


              Carbon Dioxide Emissions          $.09              $.10
                                                (.00)             (.00)

              Local Pollutants                  $.04              $.20
                                                (.09)             (.24)

              Traffic Congestion                $.27              $.26
                                                (.20)             (.22)

              Accidents                         $.18              $.13
                                                (.14)             (.08)

              Road Damage                       $.00              $.04
                                                (.00)             (.03)

              Total                             $.58              $.73
                                                (.23)             (.35)

              Soure: Author’s calculations based on Parry et al. (2014a).




         Table 3: Total External Costs from Fuel Subsidies in 2014, in Billions


                                 Gasoline                Diesel              Total
                                   (1)                    (2)                 (3)


Carbon Dioxide Emissions           $3.6                  $4.2                 $7.9
Local Pollutants                    $1.1                 $6.1                 $7.2
Traffic Congestion                 $7.7                  $4.6                $12.3
Accidents                          $10.1                 $6.4                $16.5
Road Damage                         $0.0                 $0.3                 $0.3

Total                              $22.5                 $21.7               $44.2
    Table 4: Alternative Assumptions about Long-Run Price Elasticity of Demand


                           Total Excess            Total               Total
                          Consumption of        Deadweight           External
                           Gasoline and             Loss               Costs
                           Diesel in 2014         in 2014             in 2014
                         (millions of liters)   (billions $)        (billions $)
                                 (1)                 (2)                 (3)


Demand Elasticity -0.4         63,300              $19.6               $34.0

Demand Elasticity -0.6         82,300              $25.6               $44.2

Demand Elasticity -0.8         96,800              $30.2               $52.0
