                        NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           NEGOTIATOR BEHAVIOR
                            UNDER ARBITRATION




                              David E. Bloom

                         Christopher L. Cavanagh




                         Working Paper No. 2211




                  NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                        1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                           Cambridge, MA 02138
                                April 1987




NSF Grant SES-8309148 provided partial support for this research. The
authors are indebted to Robert Gibbons for helpful discussion. This paper
is forthcoming in American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, May 1987.
The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program in
Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                               NBER Working Paper #2211
                                               April 1987




                  Negotiator Behavior Under Arbitration




                                ABSTRACT




       The emerging empirical literature on the economics of arbitration has

  focused primarily on the behavior of arbitrators under alternative forms

  of arbitration. This article suggests that it is natural for empirical

  economists to now expand their focus to include issues related to the

 behavior of negotiators. In this connection, three key aspects of

 negotiator behavior are discussed: (1) the decision to settle a dispute

 voluntarily or to proceed to arbitration; (2) the strategy for selecting

  an arbitrator; and (3) the final bargaining position to advance before an

  arbitrator.




David E. Bloom                                 Christopher L. Cavanagh
Department of Economics                        Department of Economics
Harvard University                             Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138                            Cambridge, MA 02138
                     Negotiator Behavior Under Arbitration

                 David E. Bloom and Christopher L. Cavanagh


     Bilateral bargaining lies at the heart of many important economic

institutions. Even when there are substantial gains to trade, disputes are a

natural and persistent element of bargaining situations. In order to

economize on the cost of disputes, a number of mechanisms for preventing or

resolving disputes have evolved. The public court system is perhaps the

best-known of these mechanisms, although private adjudication systems also

exist. Moreover, because of increasing costs and congestion in the public

court system, private mechanisms for adjudicating disputes have, in recent

years, abounded in both number and scope.


     One of the most popular private mechanisms for adjudicating disputes is

arbitration. For example, in the area of labor-management relations, there

were over 100,000 arbitration cases in the U.S. in 1985 -- about four times

the number that took place just fifteen years earlier. Indeed, over the past

two decades, nearly half the states in the U.S. have established interest

arbitration mechanisms to resolve pay disputes involving groups of public

employees. Arbitration is also widely used to resolve commercial disputes

and, more recently, to resolve selected categories of civil disputes that

might otherwise congest the public court system.


     Although arbitration mechanisms can vary substantially in design, they

all tend to involve a third-party to a dispute determining its resolution.

Arbitration guarantees finality in the resolution of a dispute, generally in a

timely and legitimate fashion that limits the erosion of a bargaining

relationship that might result from the existence of a dispute.

                                1
   Arbitration is a fascinating mechanism for economists to study. First,

the possibilities for empirical analysis are often quite extraordinary. For

example, in comparison to the public court system, there is more heterogeneity

in the types of "arbitration experiments" available and less heterogeneity in

the data (i.e., similar disputes are dealt with according to a wide variety of

arbitration mechanisms). Moreover, the outcomes of wage and salary

arbitration are relatively easy to quantify for purposes of empirical analysis

and permit econometric models to build on much existing research on wage

determination. Thus, the study of arbitration -- a relatively simple

mechanism for resolving disputes - - may yield important insights into more

complex legal mechanisms that are relatively difficult to model and to subject

to empirical analysis.


     Second, arbitration systems provide excellent settings for testing some

of the most basic propositions of game theory. Arbitration is essentially a

game with simple and well-specified rules in which a small number of players

can be easily identified. The availability of "real-world" data on situations

in which there are incentives to behave strategically provides remarkable

opportunities for the analysis of game-theoretic behavior.


     Third, insofar as arbitration mechanisms can be structured in different

ways, studying arbitration might lead to improved designs. Indeed, theoretical

work on arbitration has raised a number of policy-relevant issues whose

resolution ultimately depends upon the results of empirical analysis.


     The emerging empirical literature on the economics of arbitration has

been primarily concerned with modeling the behavior of arbitrators under



                                       2
alternative forms of arbitration. It seems natural that the empirical

literature turn next to consideration of the behavior of negotiators under

arbitration (which typically depends critically on expectations about

arbitrator behavior). Our chief purpose in the remainder of this article is

to identify some of the issues that might sensibly be raised by empirical

economists studying arbitration from the point of view of the negotiating

parties.


     In a typical bargaining/arbitration situation, there are three key

problems that negotiators must solve. First, they must decide whether to

settle their dispute voluntarily or to proceed to arbitration. Second, they

must adopt a strategy for selecting an arbitrator. Third, they must bargain

prior to arbitration and, if they are unable to settle voluntarily, they must

formulate final positions to advance in arbitration. The remainder of this

article will discuss each of these three choice variables in turn.1



                        I. Negotiation vs. Arbitration



     The American system of industrial relations exhibits a strong normative

preference for resolving disputes without the aid of third parties. Thus,

Stevens' (1966) observation that arbitration mechanisms can be designed in

ways that discourage their use was greeted enthusiastically by the proponents

of arbitration. Briefly, Stevens likened arbitration to the strike as a

mechanism for imposing costs of disagreement on bargainers and thereby

promoting voluntary settlements. These costs are composed of the direct costs

of using an arbitration mechanism and the indirect costs that are generated by



                                      3
the interplay of arbitral uncertainty and disputants' risk aversion.


     Subsequent work by Farber and Katz (1979) formalized Stevens' notion by

deriving expressions for a contract zone, i.e., a locus of potential

settlement points, all of which are preferred by both parties to the

settlement expected under arbitration. A contract zone may be generated

either by the costs of arbitration or by at least one bargainer having overly

pessimistic expectations about an arbitrator's award. Conversely, a contract

zone will tend to be small or nonexistent when at least one bargainer has

overly optimistic expectations about an arbitrator's award.


     These early analyses assumed that voluntary settlements would be reached

whenever there was a contract zone. Thus, divergent and mutually inconsistent

expectations seemed to be a key determinant of the resort to arbitration.

More recent work has pointed out that the existence of a contract zone is

necessary, but not sufficient, for arbitration to lead to a voluntary

settlement because there may be substantial direct costs of negotiation as

well as uncertainty about settlement points within the contract zone; it

follows that wider contract zones do not, ceteris paribus, imply lower impasse

probabilities (Bloom, 1981).


     One of the most striking facts about arbitration requiring explanation is

the substantial fraction of bargaining cases that end up being arbitrated:

the steady-state rate of arbitration usage seems to vary between 15 and 30

percent in states with compulsory interest arbitration laws. In view of this

fact, the theory that divergent expectations about arbitrator behavior explain

the use of arbitration is less than satisfactory. It seems unlikely that



                                      4
bargainers would consistently be overly optimistic about the size of an

arbitration award in the context of what is essentially a repeated game. Even

in the context of one-shot bargaining, rational bargainers will tend to

reconcile their prior expectations about an arbitrator's behavior in the

negotiations leading up to arbitration (e.g., see Geanakopolos and

Polemarchakis, 1982). Thus, alternative explanations are worth exploring.


     Arbitration usage rates are not notably different in states with

conventional arbitration provisions and those with final-offer arbitration

provisions.2 This fact tends to contradict two early, but still

influential, views about arbitration:   (1) the view that final-offer

arbitration would induce risk-averse bargainers to make concessions until

their bargaining positions eventually overlapped, thereby eliminating the need

for arbitration, and (2) the view that split-the-difference behavior on the

part of conventional arbitrators (whether actual or perceived) would tend to

"chill" negotiators from making concessions in the bargaining that precedes

arbitration and thereby increase the probability of a dispute ending up in

arbitration.


     Another early theory held that arbitration would have a "narcotic effect"

on bargainers, according to which bargainers would habitually avoid the

arduous demands of bargaining in favor of arbitrated outcomes. Simple

descriptive statistics do seem to indicate that there is substantial variation

in arbitration usage across bargaining units. Whether this tendency is indeed

evidence of a genuine narcotic effect is difficult to test because it requires

establishing serial correlation in the use of arbitration --   after   controlling

for heterogeneity across bargaining units.


                                        5
      Future analyses of the resort to arbitration might usefully build upon

 the notion that bargaining parties are not internally homogeneous entities

with identical preferences. Bargainers often have constituencies whose future

 political support they desire. Insofar as arbitrators can be viewed as paid

 "scapegoats," the parties' final positions and their resort to arbitration

might be modeled in a principal-agent framework. In this spirit, Crawford

 (1982b) develops a formal game-theoretic model of bargaining impasses based on

 the notion that parties may rationally commit to irreconciliable bargaining

positions. The political pressure of the constituency makes concession after

commitment costly and so can lead to impasse.


     To date, there have been few attempts to empirically implement a

structural model of the arbitrate/negotiate decision. Although some studies

have been conducted using experimental data, further analysis, especially

using available data from actual arbitration systems, is much needed.



                       II. The Selection of Arbitrators


     One of the most salient differences between arbitration and the public

court system is that disputants typically have some say in the appointment of

arbitrators. The two leading arbitrator selection mechanisms operate by

having an impartial agency (such as the American Arbitration Association)

supply disputants with identical lists of an odd number of arbitrators (along

with information on their backgrounds, fees, etc.). Alternate strike

mechanisms work by having each party alternately cross a name off the list

with the last name remaining becoming the appointed arbitrator. Rank-veto



                                      6
 mechanisms work by having the parties each veto a prespecified number of

 arbitrators, rank the remaining ones in order of their preference, and then

 refer the list back to the agency which then makes an appointment in

 accordance with those preferences. The opportunity for disputants to express

 their preferences for different arbitrators suggests an element of strategic

 interaction according to which negotiators may veto or give relatively

 unpreferred rankings to highly preferred arbitrators in an attempt to

 manipulate the selection process.


      The analysis of arbitrator selection is interesting for several reasons.

 First, it yields direct information on the characteristics of arbitrators that

negotiators find desirable. Second, measuring the similarity of union and

employer preferences for individual arbitrators may yield insights into

whether collective bargaining and arbitration are primarily institutions of

conflict or cooperation. Third, it can provide information on the strategic

sophistication of negotiators and on the importance of strategic interaction

in bargaining. Finally, as we argue below, the process of arbitrator

selection may be closely related to the use of arbitration.


     The empirical literature on the selection of arbitrators is still in its

infancy and much important work remains to be done. In a recent paper

(l986b), we analyzed a set of data on actual union and employer rankings of

different panels of arbitrators under a rank/veto mechanism. The results

indicate that unions and employers have similar preferences: in favor of

lawyers, more experienced arbitrators, and arbitrators who seem to have

favored their side in the past. In addition, both sides exhibit strong

preferences about having economists serve as arbitrators, with employers being


                                      7
in favor and unions being against. The analysis also tests whether the

observed rankings data reveal the negotiators' true preferences over

arbitrators. The results provide no support for the hypothesis of strategic

misrepresentation of preferences by either side. Nonetheless, further

empirical analysis of arbitrator selection is desirable, especially in the

context of alternate strike mechanisms in which empirically falsifiable

hypotheses about strategic behavior can be tested directly.


     In another paper (1986a), we researched two aspects of the arbitrator

selection phase of an arbitration system: (1) the strategies and outcomes of

the selection "sub-game" and (2) the impact of selection mechanisms on the

bargaining environment. Our results on the selection sub-game indicate that

there is frequently no incentive to strategically misrepresent preferences --

depending on the bargainers' preferences over arbitrators and on how much
information they have about the other side's preferences. Thus, our earlier

empirical results do not necessarily imply that negotiators are

unsophisticated or irrational in their behavior. On the other hand,

individually rational behavior in situations in which negotiators do have

incentives to strategically misrepresent their preferences can result in

inefficient selections.


     This work also led us to conclude that arbitration is not necessarily

best viewed in a purely static framework in which the size of the contract

zone is fixed by an unchanging amount of arbitral uncertainty. We developed a

model of the bargaining/arbitration process that has three distinct stages:

(1) bargaining that takes place before the panel of prospective arbitrators is

announced; (2) bargaining that takes place after the panel of prospective


                                      8
arbitrators is announced but before a particular arbitrator is selected; and

(3) bargaining that takes place after a particular arbitrator is selected.

Corresponding to each separate stage is a specific degree of uncertainty about

the final resolution of the dispute.   Furthermore, the degree of uncertainty

tends to decrease as the parties move from one stage to the next.

Although empirical analysis of the relationship between arbitrator selection

mechanisms and the probability of impasse have yet to be conducted, we suspect

that a dynamic mechanism that confronts bargainers with a varied set of

bargaining environments is likely to provide them with better opportunities to

reach agreement than a static mechanism that presents them with a single

alternative. In practice, there is a substantial amount of voluntary

settlement in each of the distinct stages of the bargaining/arbitration

process.



           III. Determination of Negotiators' Arbitration Positions


     The earliest models of negotiators' arbitration positions presuppose that

arbitrator preferences are imperfectly known to the disputants and depend

solely on the exogenous facts of a dispute. In such a model, the mean of the

distribution of arbitrator preferences becomes the focal point around which

negotiators bargain, both in the negotiations that precede arbitration as well

as in the arbitration process itself. If that focal point is different from

the average settlement that would be negotiated in the absence of arbitration,

the "option to arbitrate" will bias negotiated settlements. In addition, the

negotiated settlements may not be Pareto efficient if there are multiple

issues in dispute (see Crawford, 1979, 1982a).



                                       9
     Final-offer arbitration provides negotiators with an incentive to

moderate their positions since less extreme positions presumably have higher

probabilities of being selected by an arbitrator. However, because smaller

payoffs are associated with more moderate positions, negotiators also have

some incentive to adopt extreme positions. In the context of single-issue

disputes, Nash final offers have the following properties: (1) the final offer

of the more risk-averse negotiator will lie closer to the mean of the prior

distribution of arbitrator preferences than the final offer of the less

risk-averse negotiator; (2) increasing arbitral uncertainty by lowering the

density of arbitrator preferences at the mean of the Nash pair of final offers

causes those offers to diverge; and (3) even if both negotiators are risk

neutral, arbitral uncertainty will cause their final offers to diverge

(symmetrically) from the median of the arbitrator's preference distribution

(see Farber l98l).


     Under conventional arbitration, negotiators have literally no incentive

to express a final position if arbitrator preferences are conditioned solely

on exogenous background information. The fact that they almost always do

suggests that the true model of arbitrator preferences may be somewhat

different. An alternative (but equally polar) model of the behavior of

conventional arbitrators is one in which they simply "split-the-difference"

between the parties' final positions. The fact that conventional arbitration

decisions typically lie near the average of the parties' final positions

provides at least some empirical support for this view, although proper

evaluation of this piece of data requires a model of negotiator behavior.


     It seems obvious that the negotiators optimal final offers will diverge


                                      10
if arbitrators mechanically "split-the-difference." An intermediate model, in

which an arbitrator's preferred settlement depends on both the exogenous facts

and the parties' final positions, would seem to be more plausible. This

formulation suggests that arbitrators extract a useful signal about negotiator

preferences from their final positions. If so, it follows that negotiators

will have an incentive to communicate strategically to the arbitrator through

their final offers.


     The notion that negotiator final offers are attempts to "position the

arbitrator," suggests that arbitrator and negotiator behavior should be

modeled as a three-party game. It also suggests that econometric attempts to

estimate the parameters of arbitrator preference functions by studying how

arbitrator's behave when confronted with different sets of facts and final

positions may be misspecified insofar as the final positions are endogenously

determined. Put another way, it remains an open empirical question whether

arbitrators should mainly be viewed as individuals who (1) impose on the

negotiators their exogenous preferences or (2) seek to learn about the

disputants' preferences from the relationship between the facts and final

positions in an attempt to search for outcomes that maximize the disputants'

welfare. Gibbons (1986) has begun the important task of modeling arbitrator

behavior in the context of a three-party game of arbitration, although further

work remains to be done.


     In this connection, it is worth reflecting on the relation between the

bargaining process that precedes arbitration and the arbitration game itself.

Indeed, it is only reasonable to suppose that split-the-difference behavior on

the part of arbitrators will "chill" negotiators from making concessions in


                                     11
the bargaining that precedes arbitration if one imagines that (1) negotiating

concessions cannot be "taken back" in arbitration and (2) arbitrators extract

information from the parties' pre-arbitration behavior. In practice, both

conditions are likely to be satisfied, suggesting a close coupling of behavior

in negotiations and arbitration. Perhaps a small change in the design of

arbitration mechanisms, in which arbitration hearings would be conducted

without reference to the negotiations that preceded arbitration (i.e., de

novo), would uncouple the two games and better serve the interests

of both the negotiators and public policy.


     Simple facts about the relation between negotiators' final positions

under conventional and final-offer arbitration could be a good starting point

for further theoretical work. Table I reports the average of employer and

union final offers (EFO and TJFO) in the two types of salary arbitration cases

that took place in New Jersey in the years 1981-1984. As the table makes

clear, the parties' positions in conventional arbitration (CONV) tend to lie

outside the bounds of their positions in final-offer arbitration (FOA). This

pattern is consistent with the predictions of the very simplest arbitration

models according to which final-offer arbitration induces concessionary

behavior by risk-averse bargainers while conventional arbitration chills the

negotiation process that precedes arbitration. It remains to be seen whether

more complete models of negotiator behavior under arbitration can further

enrich our interpretation of these facts.




                                      12
                        Table I

       Union and Employer Final Salary Offers
          (expressed as percent increases)

          1981       1982          1983   1984


                            CONV

 EFO       6.4        5.1           6.3    6.2

 UFO       9.6        9.2           9.0    8.3

                            FOA



 EFO      7.2        7.2            6.5    6.6
 UFO      9.0        9.3           8.3     7.8



Source:   Authors'  calculations based on New Jersey
                 arbitration awards.




                            13
                                    Notes




1Provided arbitration is not compelled by law, the parties must jointly

(and privately) decide whether they will use arbitration to resolve their

disputes. The decision to arbitrate can be made either before or at the time

a particular dispute arises. Although ex ante agreements to arbitrate

disputes raise interesting economic issues, they are beyond the scope of this

article.


2
    Under conventional arbitration, the arbitrator simply renders a decision

that consists of his or her best judgement of a fair settlement.   In

contrast, the arbitrator is constrained to render a decision that consists of

one or the other of the parties' final offers, without compromise, under

final-offer arbitration.


    Although the negotiators' final offers are interdependent in this simple

model, they may be independent of each other in a system of tn-offer

arbitration such as the one that operates in Iowa. Ashenfelter, Dow, and

Gallagher (1986) have done an interesting empirical analysis of the Iowa

system that attempts to test a simple model of optimal negotiator behavior.




                                       14
                                  References



Ashenfelter, Orley, James Dow, and Daniel Gallagher, "Arbitrator and
     Negotiation Behavior Under an Appelate System," Unpublished mimeo,August
     1986.

Bloom, David E, "Is Arbitration Really Compatible with Bargaining?"
     Industrial Relations, Fall 1981, 20, 233-244.

__________     and Christopher L. Cavanagh, "An Analysis of the Selection of
     Arbitrators," American Economic Review, June 1986, 76, 408-422.

___________________________________________ "An Analysis of Alternative
     Mechanisms for Selecting Arbitrators," Harvard Institute of Economic
     Research Discussion Paper No. 1224, April 1986.

Vincent P. Crawford, "On Compulsory Arbitration Schemes," Journal of
     Political Economy , February 1979, 87 , 131-160.

                     "Compulsory Arbitration, Arbitral Risk and Negotiated
     Settlements: A Case Study in Bargaining Under Imperfect Information,"
     Review of Economic Studies, January l982a, 49, 69-82.

_________________    "A Theory of Disagreement in Bargaining," Econometrica,
     May 1982, 50, 607-637.

Farber, Henry S., "An Analysis of Final-Offer Arbitration," Journal of
     Conflict Resolution , December 1980, 35 , 683-705.

_______________ and Harry C. Katz, "Interest Arbitration, Outcomes, and the
     Incentive to Bargain," Industrial and Labor Relations Review, October
     1979, 33, 55-63.

Geanakoplos, John and Heracles Polemarchakis, "We Can't Disagree Forever,"
     Journal of Economic Theory, October 1982, 28, 192-200.

Gibbons, Robert, "Arbitration as a Signaling Game," Unpublished mimeo, April
     1986.

Stevens, Carl M., "Is Compulsory Arbitration Compatible with Bargaining?"
     Industrial Relations , February 1966, 5 , 38-52.




                                     15
