NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

BEYOND JOB LOCK:
IMPACTS OF PUBLIC HEALTH INSURANCE ON OCCUPATIONAL AND INDUSTRIAL MOBILITY
Ammar Farooq
Adriana Kugler
Working Paper 22118
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22118

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2016

Kugler received initial funding from the Center for American Progress to support this research.
We are grateful to George Akerlof, Michael Bailey, Heather Boushey, Adam Cole, Emily
Conover, Tom DeLeire, Giacomo De Giorgi, Nada Eissa, Bill Gale, Paul Hagstrom, Takao Kato,
Wilbert van der Klaauw, Joe Stiglitz, and Nicholas Turner for helpful conversations and
comments as well as to seminar participants at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the U.S.
Department of Treasury Office of Tax Analysis, the joint Hamilton College/Colgate College
seminar, and the Annual DC Health, Education, Labor and Development (HELD) Policy Day for
helpful comments. We are also grateful to Hilary Hoynes for providing us with information on
TANF maximum benefits, benefit reduction rates and flat earnings disregards, and income and
age Medicaid thresholds through 2007, which we updated until 2012. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Ammar Farooq and Adriana Kugler. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Beyond Job Lock: Impacts of Public Health Insurance on Occupational and Industrial Mobility
Ammar Farooq and Adriana Kugler
NBER Working Paper No. 22118
March 2016
JEL No. I13,J6
ABSTRACT
We examine whether greater Medicaid generosity encourages mobility towards riskier but better
jobs in higher paid occupations and industries. We use Current Population Survey Data and
exploit variation in Medicaid thresholds across states and over time through the 1990s and 2000s.
We find that moving from a state in the 10th to the 90th percentile in terms of Medicaid income
thresholds increases occupational and industrial mobility by 7.6% and 7.8%. We also find that
higher income Medicaid thresholds increase mobility towards occupations and industries with
greater wage spreads and higher separation probabilities, but with higher wages and higher
educational requirements.

Ammar Farooq
Georgetown University
37th and O Streets, NW
Washington, DC 20056
af448@georgetown.edu

Adriana Kugler
Georgetown University
McCourt School of Public Policy
37th and O Streets NW, Suite 311
Washington, DC 20057
and NBER
ak659@georgetown.edu

1. Introduction
Most countries provide some form of government health insurance, with
many countries providing nationalized health insurance that covers the entire
population. There are moral as well as economic arguments for the provision of
public health insurance. On the economic side, adverse selection in insurance
markets is an important reason why the provision of health insurance is thought to
improve efficiency. Moreover, in the past few decades, new evidence has shown
that employer-provided health insurance, which has been the predominant form of
accessing health care in the U.S., may reduce labor mobility and generate both ‘job
lock’ and ‘employment lock’, i.e., the phenomena of not changing jobs and staying
employed simply to be able to retain health benefits. The introduction of the
Affordable Care Act (ACA) in the U.S. has expanded health insurance to about 18
million individuals, who were not previously covered. Relying on previous work,
one may expect increased job separations and decreased labor force participation
following the ACA.
In this paper, we examine another effect of public health insurance on labor
mobility beyond the ‘job lock’ and ‘employment lock’ phenomena. We focus on
the insurance role of public health benefits in allowing individuals to undertake
risky decisions they would otherwise not make. In particular, we focus on
individuals’ decisions to move to riskier but higher paid occupations and industries.
Changing occupations and industries are investment decisions that are inherently

2

risky, since a worker moving to a new occupation/industry will generally have to
invest in new skills and the returns to these skills will be uncertain. Indeed, a recent
study by Hoynes and Luttmer (2011) found that individuals derive both
redistributive and insurance value from public insurance programs, including
Medicaid and SCHIP, and that the insurance value has increased over time. In this
paper, we focus on the insurance value of Medicaid/SCHIP and test whether greater
generosity in Medicaid/SCHIP encourages individuals to change occupations and
industries. Moreover, we examine if individuals move to riskier occupations and
industries and if these occupations and industries are higher paying and have higher
educational requirements.
For our analysis, we use the Current Populations Survey’s (CPS) Merged
Outgoing Rotation Group (MORG) files and exploit variation in Medicaid/SCHIP
across states and over time through the 1990s and 2000s to study the impact of
Medicaid/SCHIP on occupational and industrial mobility. We measure the
generosity of public health insurance provided through Medicaid/SCHIP 2 using
income and age thresholds prescribed by state legislation to determine whether
children qualify for the program in each state at each point in time. Occupational
and industrial mobility are measured as year-to-year changes in 3-level digit
occupations and industries. Mobility towards riskier occupations and industries are

2 We will not differentiate between the two programs but rather refer to both programs as simply

Medicaid.

3

measured as yearly transitions to a 3-level digit occupation/industry that has higher
variance of wages or higher separation rates over the entire period of analysis. In
addition, we measure whether workers transition towards occupations with higher
median earnings and requiring the same or higher educational credentials compared
to their previous jobs.
The identification strategy we use is essentially a difference-in-difference
strategy comparing occupational and industrial mobility in states with minimal
Medicaid benefits and states with more generous Medicaid benefits before and after
the changes. The key identifying assumption is, thus, that before the policy change
labor mobility levels or trends for those in less and more generous states were
similar. We control for state- and time-effects, as well as region-specific trends to
address this. A potential concern with our identification strategy is that there may
be other policies introduced at the same time as the increased Medicaid generosity,
which may be driving the increase in labor mobility. Therefore, we control for other
policies that may have changed across states over this time period. In particular, we
include the progressivity of the tax system as the differential in tax liabilities faced
by individuals in the 75th and 25th percentiles; the median tax liabilities, and the
generosity of TANF as controls. Another possible concern is that changes in
Medicaid generosity may have themselves been the result of poor economic
conditions or changes in the composition of populations that require health benefits.
To address this concern, we regress the Medicaid income and age thresholds on the

4

state unemployment rate, gross state product and characteristics of the state
population in the state. We do not find any evidence that these factors explain
income or age thresholds, thus allaying concerns of the potential endogeneity of
such policies.
Our results show that increased access to health insurance for the poor
increases occupational and industrial mobility. The results show that moving from
a state in the 10th percentile to a state in the 90th percentile in terms of the generosity
of the Medicaid income threshold increases the probability of moving to another
occupation by 0.036 or by 7.6%. The results also show that moving from a state in
the 10th to the 90th percentile in its Medicaid income threshold generosity increases
the probability of moving to another industry by 0.037 or by 7.8%. Moreover, we
find that the effects on occupational and industrial mobility are greater for women.
For example, moving from a state in the 10th to the 90th percentile in terms of
Medicaid income threshold generosity increases the probability that women change
industries by 10.2%. In addition, we do a falsification test by examining the impacts
of Medicaid for those close and far away from the thresholds, since those far away
from the thresholds should not be affected. We find that the impacts of increased
Medicaid income threshold generosity on occupational and industrial mobility are
positive, large and significant for those in the lowest quintile of the income
distribution and, as one would expect, they are all insignificant (and mostly
negative) for those in the higher quintiles of the income distribution.

5

The premise is that Medicaid generosity increases occupational and
industrial mobility because public health insurance allows workers to make risky
decisions that have a higher payoff. Thus, we estimate the likelihood that workers
will move to occupations and industries with a higher variance of wages and with
higher average separation rates. We find that moving from a state in the 10th to the
90th percentile in terms of generosity of Medicaid income thresholds increases the
likelihood of moving to occupations and industries with a greater wage spread by
14.3% and 10.6%, respectively. We also find that increasing the generosity of
Medicaid increases the likelihood that workers move towards sectors with higher
average separation rates. Moreover, we find that these workers are not transitioning
towards worse jobs, but rather towards occupations and industries with higher
median wages. Furthermore, increased Medicaid generosity in terms of both
income and age thresholds increases the likelihood that workers move towards jobs
with the same or higher educational requirements than those in their previous jobs.
Thus, increased Medicaid generosity encourages workers to move up the job ladder.
Finally, we exploit a reverse natural experiment that occurred in Tennessee,
where Medicaid generosity declined substantially, to examine if occupational and
industrial mobility fell in this state. We find that after the fall in Medicaid
generosity in Tennessee in 2000, occupational and industrial transitions fell and
that workers moved towards occupations and industries with smaller wage spreads
and lower likelihood of separations. Moreover, the fall in Medicaid generosity

6

increased worker transitions towards lower paid occupations and industries and
towards jobs with lower educational requirements. Thus, this reverse experiment
shows that lower generosity not only decreased occupational and industrial
mobility, but also increased mobility towards less risky and less desirable jobs.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we provide a
review of the literature and highlight the contribution of our paper. In Section 3, we
describe the MORG data and the construction of the various variables used in our
analysis. In Section 4, we describe our identification strategy. In Section 5, we
present the results of Medicaid generosity on occupational and industrial mobility.
Section 6 concludes.
2. Literature Review and Medicaid Changes after the 1990s
a. Literature on Relation between Public Health Insurance and Mobility
The effect of health insurance on labor mobility has been an active area of
research for the last two decades. Health insurance can affect labor market
outcomes directly through its effect on health of the individual or it can affect labor
market outcomes indirectly by altering the payoff structures, modifying labor
supply patterns and affecting labor market churn. The indirect effects of health
insurance provision on labor market outcomes are mostly relevant in the case of the
United States labor market, where health insurance has been provided mostly by

7

employers until the passage of the Affordable Care Act. Currie and Madrian (1999)
provide an excellent review of the institutional details of the U.S. health insurance
system and how it interacts with the labor market decisions of individuals.
The literature that has focused on the effects of health insurance on labor
mobility, and that is most relevant to our paper, falls under two strands. One strand
of the literature has focused on the effects of public health insurance on labor
supply. Lack of health insurance from sources other than the employer may force
individuals to stay employed just to receive employer-provided health insurance.
Moreover, Medicaid may discourage labor force participation since receipt depends
on income thresholds. The earlier empirical literature, using variation in qualifying
conditions for Medicaid and Medicare, has generally found that the availability of
alternative sources of health insurance depresses labor supply (see Yelowitz (1995),
Currie and Madrian (1999) and Gruber (2000) for reviews of this literature). Two
recent papers relying on policy changes in Tennessee and Oregon examine whether
there is ‘employment lock’, the phenomenon of staying employed instead of nonemployed just to be able to keep health insurance. Garthwaite et al. (2014) find
evidence that labor supply and consequently employment of workers increased
following a large public health disenrollment that occurred in Tennessee in 2005
compared to other Southern states. By contrast, Baicker et al. (2013) find that
access to Medicaid has no impact on employment or earnings analyzing data from

8

the Oregon health insurance randomized experiment, perhaps because the
experiment took place in 2008 in the midst of the Great Recession.
The second branch of the literature focusing on the relation between health
insurance on labor mobility has focused on the aforementioned ‘job lock’
hypothesis. There has been a divide in the literature about the existence and the
magnitude of the ‘job lock’ hypothesis, i.e., the phenomenon of not separating from
a job, even if the job is a bad match, simply to keep health benefits. The literature
on ‘job lock’ has relied on three identification strategies. First, a number of papers
exploit variation on whether the worker has health insurance through a source other
than his/her employer. Second, a number of other papers use worker’s valuation of
health benefits as a source of variation. Finally, only three papers use policy
variation to examine the existence of ‘job lock’.
The majority of papers relying on access to alternative sources of health
insurance compare male workers who have access to health insurance through their
spouse. Several studies, including Madrian (1994), Cooper and Monheit (1993),
Buchmueller and Valletta (1996), Gruber and Madrian (1994) and Anderson (1997)
have found that employer-provided health insurance depresses job turnover. The
results of the impact of health insurance from a spouse on reduced job separations
range between 25%-50%. Holtz-Eakin (1994) is the only paper using this strategy,

9

which finds no evidence of ‘job lock’, perhaps because of the use of PSID data
(known to generate measurement error in job changes).
The papers relying on the differential valuation of benefits by individuals
also provide evidence on ‘job lock’. Madrian (1994) shows evidence of ‘job lock’
for married men with employer provided-health insurance who had a pregnant wife.
Stroupe et al. (2001) instead finds evidence of ‘job lock’ for those with chronic
health conditions, or family members with chronic health conditions, who relied on
employer-provided health insurance. By contrast, Kapur (1998) finds no evidence
using a similar strategy. A problem with this and the previous approach is that those
with pregnant spouses, chronic health conditions, and insured spouses are likely to
be different from the comparison groups used in these studies.
There are only three papers in the ‘job lock’ literature that rely on policy
changes as a source of exogenous variation in health insurance access during
periods of non-employment. Gruber and Madrian (1994) analyzed an exogenous
change in law across states that allowed unemployed workers to have health
insurance coverage from their past employer until they found a new job through the
Consolidated Omnibus Reconciliation Act of 1985 (COBRA). They find that job
separations increased by 12-15%, non-employment spells increased by 15% and
reemployment earnings doubled one year after the introduction of COBRA. Bansak
and Raphael (2008) instead rely on the expansion of State Children’s Health

10

Insurance Programs over the 1990s and find that separations increased by 5-6%
after the introduction of these state programs for fathers whose children qualified
for SCHIP and whose spouses did not have employer-provided health insurance. A
paper by Hamersma and Kim (2009) finds evidence that parental Medicaid
expansions led to increases in job mobility of unmarried women, but not for married
women or men.
Our analysis is closest to the studies just described and to recent studies
examining the impact of public health insurance on labor supply.
b. Medicaid/SCHIP Threshold Changes in the 1990s and 2000s
In our analysis, we rely on the increased generosity of Medicaid over the
1990s and 2000s. Medicaid was introduced in the U.S. following the Social
Security Amendment of 1965 to provide health insurance to low-income
individuals. From 1965 to 1985, only cash aid recipients of Aid to Families with
Dependent Children (AFDC) were eligible for Medicaid. Starting in 1985, many
states expanded eligibility of Medicaid to children and pregnant mothers with
income thresholds above the AFDC income eligibility limits and with children
below a certain age limit. We use the state income and age thresholds for children
to capture the generosity of states in terms of public health insurance. The higher
the state income and age limits, the more individuals and families are likely to
benefit from Medicaid in a state.

11

During the late 1990s and the 2000s, many states chose to increase the
income threshold, which determine the level of income as a percentage of the
poverty line at which children within households qualify for Medicaid. Similarly,
during this period several states chose to increase the age threshold, the maximum
age that allows children in households under the income threshold to qualify for
Medicaid. Figures 1 and 2 show the evolution of the Medicaid income and age
thresholds over time for the lowest 10th percentile of states in terms of generosity
as well as for the 50th and 90th percentiles.3 Figure 1 shows that there is substantial
variation in Medicaid income thresholds. Back in 1997, the income threshold
relative to the poverty line was 133% for the lowest 10th percentile of states, but
185% for states in the median and 200% for states in the 90th percentile. Moreover,
the generosity of Medicaid has increased substantially, particularly in the top 90th
percentile of states. The generosity has increased from 200% in 1997 to 235% in
2005 and to 300% in 2011. By contrast, states in the lowest 10th percent have
remained with an income threshold of 133% in the past decade and a half. States in
the bottom in terms of their generosity have remained fairly constant – Alabama,
Alaska, Colorado, Idaho, Montana, Nevada, North Dakota, Utah, Virginia and
Wyoming were all in this group in 1997 and remain in this group in 2011. However,

3

The data on income and age Medicaid thresholds through 2007 was kindly provided by Hilary
Hoynes. We then updated the income and age Medicaid thresholds at the state level until 2012, by
obtaining data from http://ccf.georgetown.edu/.

12

some states have moved out of this group including Illinois, Louisiana, Ohio and
South Dakota. Moreover, the states in the top group have changed substantially,
with only Hawaii and Vermont remaining in the top 90th percentile in terms of
Medicaid income thresholds. Arkansas, California, Minnesota, Rhode Island,
Tennessee and Washington all moved out of this group and the District of
Columbia, Iowa, Maryland, New Hampshire and Wisconsin moved into the group
of most generous states. At the bottom, age thresholds were zero for the least
generous states and 18 for the most generous and there have been some increases
from 5 to 6 years at the median (see Figure 2). Our identification strategy is, thus,
essentially a difference-in-difference strategy, which compares the changes in
outcomes before and after the changes in income and age thresholds among less
and more generous states.
The novelty of our paper is not only to exploit policy changes to examine
the impact of public health benefits, but to go beyond the effects of public health
insurance on job separations and to examine the incentives it generates in terms of
increased risk taking. 4 In this paper, we analyze the impacts of public health

4

In a working paper by Kugler (2013), one of the authors reports earlier results showing impacts of
various transfer programs on labor mobility. The current paper focuses on Medicaid, conducts
additional robustness checks and examines many other outcomes not examined in the earlier
working paper.

13

insurance in encouraging mobility towards occupations and industries which are
not only riskier but also higher paying and have higher educational requirements.
3. Data Description
We use the Merged Outgoing Rotation Group (MORG) files of the Current
Population Survey and merge these with the March CPS files to conduct this
analysis. Households in the CPS are interviewed for four months, then let go for
eight months, and are then interviewed again for another four months. Every month
about one eighth of the households enter the sample and about one eighth leave the
sample. The fourth and eighth interviews include information on wage income and
hours worked and are called the outgoing rotations. The MORG files allow one to
match households and individuals from one year to the next by matching the
information from the 4th interview and the 8th interview. We merged the 4th to the
8th interview in the months of March that had unique household and individual
identifiers. Then, we checked that individuals had the same gender and race. If they
did not, we discarded them. We also checked that the absolute difference in age
from one year to the next was either one or two and deleted those who had
differences in age that were greater or smaller than two.5 Finally, we merged these
panels with the March supplements.

5

We lose around 3% to 4% in each pair of years from mismatches in age, gender, and race.

14

In the MORG sample, we have access to extensive demographic and labor
market information, including information on the industry and the occupation of
the worker. We are, thus, able to control for education, age, the number of children,
gender, race, ethnicity and country of birth in all our regressions.
We use the March CPS supplement because it asks a series of questions on
different income sources. This allows us to construct the tax liabilities and TANF
benefits variables, which are important control variables since state taxes and
TANF benefits changed during this time period. We construct state income tax
liabilities using the TAXSIM software from the National Bureau of Economic
Research (NBER) at the 75th and 25th percentiles of the national income distribution
to construct a measure of tax progressivity, and at the 50th percentile of the national
income distribution to construct the median income. The benefits under TANF are
constructed using information on maximum benefits, benefit-reduction rates and
flat earnings disregards which vary over time and across states,6 as well as using
earned and unearned income for the 25th percentile of the national income
distribution by year from the March CPS.7

6

We are grateful to Hilary Hoynes for providing the information on maximum benefits, reduction
rates and earnings disregards through 2007. We obtained the information on maximum benefits,
benefit reduction rate and earnings disregards for 2008-2012 from the Welfare Rules Database
(http://anfdata.urban.org/wrd/WRDWelcome.cfm) to allow us to update the TANF variable until
2012.
7
See Appendix for a detailed description of the construction of these variables.

15

Our dependent variables include indicators of whether a person changed 3digit occupations and 3-digit industries from one year to the next. Since occupation
and industry codes have changed over time, we use crosswalks to make sure that
occupation and industry codes are consistent over time. 8 Then, we construct
transition

probabilities

of

whether

the

person

moved

to

a

riskier

occupation/industry from one year to the next. We measure riskiness of occupations
and industries in two ways. First, we measure the variance of wages in each 3-digit
occupation and industry over the entire period of our analysis. Then, we define a
variable measuring transitions towards riskier occupation/industry, which takes the
value of one if the current occupation/industry has a greater variance of wages than
the previous occupation/industry and zero otherwise. Hence, whenever there is no
change in occupation/industry, this variable also takes the value of zero. We also
measure riskiness in an occupation/industry by looking at separation rates within
occupations/industries. The second variable measuring transition to a riskier
occupation/industry takes the value of 1 if a person moved towards a 3-digit
occupation/industry with a higher average separation rate than the one in which
they were working at before. This variable can only take a value of 1 if there is an
industry or occupation switch by the worker.

8

We use the crosswalks developed by Autor and Dorn (2013) for occupations and we use the
IPUMS crosswalk for industries.

16

Our final set of dependent variables measure whether workers make
transitions towards better jobs. We measure the quality of jobs in two ways. First,
we measure transitions towards 3-digit occupations/industries with higher median
wages than the previous job. Median wages are calculated for each 3-digit
occupation/industry over the entire period of analysis. Second, we measure whether
workers move towards occupations in which the educational requirement is the
same or higher than the educational requirement in their previous occupation. This
is a measure of whether the workers moved towards a job that is better or higher up
in the job ladder. We construct this measure by using data from the U.S. Labor
Department’s O*NET database, which identifies the educational requirements for
jobs in different occupations. The O*NET program collects data on entry
requirements, work styles and task content within occupations by surveying each
occupation’s working population. For educational requirements, we rely on the
following question asked of current employees: “If someone was being hired to
perform this job, indicate the level of education that would be required.” The survey
respondents are reminded that this does not refer to the level of education that an
incumbent or current employee has achieved. Respondents are given the following
options: less than high school, high school, some college, associate’s degree,
bachelor's degree, and graduate degree. To assign a required level of education to
each occupation, we use the distribution of responses of the incumbents and use the
mode of the responses as the required level of education for each occupation. This

17

way of measuring education requirements is consistent with the approaches taken
in the over-education literature.9
Table 1 provides descriptive statistics of the variables used in our analysis
for the period from 1996 to 2012. In the sample, almost half of the individuals are
women, 80% are married, have on average almost one child, are on average 43.5
years old and have on average 13.5 years of education, 84.4% of the individuals are
white, 9.8% African American and 8.7% Hispanic. Only 13.1% are union members
and 14.9% are foreign-born. A substantial fraction of those who change jobs
experience occupational and industry changes from year to year – 47.6%
experience occupational changes and 33.4% industry changes. These numbers are
in line with previous numbers documented in the literature measuring occupational
and industrial mobility using CPS data. 10 Moreover, the likelihood of moving
towards an occupation with greater variance of wages and higher average
separation rates are 21.7% and 23%, while the likelihood of moving towards a
riskier industry as measured in terms of a greater variance of wages and higher
separation rates are 16% and 16.3%. Finally, the likelihood of transitioning to a

9

See Leuven and Oosterbeek (2011) for a review of this literature.
See Kambourov and Manovskii (2011). Note that they caution against using March CPS to
measure annual mobility without matching individuals present in two consecutive years. When they
match individuals present in two consecutive years and measure occupational and industrial
mobility, their number is close to ours.
10

18

higher paying occupation and industry are 21.5% and 16%. The likelihood of
moving to a better-matched occupation is 33.1%.
The Medicaid income threshold, as described in the previous section, is the
maximum income relative to the poverty line that allows children within a
household to qualify for Medicaid. The average income threshold is 191% of the
Federal Poverty Line (FPL) over the entire period. The Medicaid age threshold is
the maximum age of the children who can qualify for Medicaid given that they live
in households with income below the aforementioned Medicaid income threshold.
The average age threshold is 4.7 years over the entire period of analysis. The
thresholds are statutory and, thus, determined by law. They are the source of
variation that we use to determine public health insurance generosity in our
analysis. Thus, we might expect the occupation and industry change outcomes to
differ between more and less generous states if Medicaid, indeed, changes the
behavior of workers in terms of their willingness to move occupations or industry.
Occupational and industry changes are higher in states with Medicaid income
thresholds above the mean, although only industry changes are significantly
different between those above and below the mean. Moreover, movement towards
riskier industries in terms of the variance of wages and separations is significantly
greater in states where the Medicaid income threshold is above the mean. Finally,
the transitions toward higher paying industries are significantly greater in states that
are above average in terms of Medicaid generosity. By contrast, average transitions

19

towards riskier occupations and better matches are about the same in states with
above average and below average Medicaid thresholds when not controlling for
anything else.
However, Table 1 also shows that worker characteristics in more and less
generous states also vary. More generous Medicaid states have older workers, more
dependent children, more foreign-born workers, higher unionization rates and more
Hispanics and less whites and African-American workers. Thus, these differences
highlight the importance of controlling for different worker characteristics in the
analysis. Table 1 also shows that the difference in mean taxes at the 75th and 25th
percentile of the distribution over the period of analysis is 49.6% and the average
median tax is 11%. While the tax progressivity is higher in states that are more
generous in their provision of Medicaid benefits, the median tax rate is actually
lower in these states. TANF income threshold was 239.6% of the FPL in states that
also offered more generous Medicaid and 106.2% of the FPL in states that offered
less generous Medicaid. Differences in tax structure and transfer programs, thus,
highlight the need to control for these policy variables in our analysis.
4. Identification Strategy
Our approach to establish a causal relation between labor mobility and
public health insurance relies on statutory Medicaid program qualification rules, as
opposed to the actual benefits received by an individual. As shown above, there

20

were a number of states that remained constant at the low threshold of 133% of the
FPL and the minimum child age, thus keeping the 1987 rules. However, many other
states did increase their generosity by raising the income threshold beyond the
AFDC threshold at the time, and by allowing older children to also qualify for
Medicaid. Thus, we compare those states that became more generous to those that
did not in terms of qualification for Medicaid. This is essentially a difference-indifference approach with several before and after periods and several treatments.
We estimate the following regression of occupation/industry mobility on
the Medicaid income and age thresholds, other policy changes, individual
characteristics, state and time fixed effects, and region-specific trends:

Yisrt = + φ × Medicaid Income Thresholdst + ψ × Medicaid Age Thresholdst
+ δ × Tax Progressivityst + + π × Median Taxst + ρ × TANF Benefitsst
+ βXisrt + κs + τt + Ωrt + εisrt

where the Medicaid Income Thresholdst is maximum income relative to the poverty
line that allows children within a household to qualify for health insurance through
Medicaid in state s at time t; Medicaid Age Thresholdst is the maximum age of a
child who can qualify for Medicaid in state s at time t; the Tax Progressivityst is the
difference in the average overall tax rate between the top and bottom quartile of the
income distribution; Median Taxst is the average tax at the 50th percentile of the

21

income distribution; and TANF Benefitsst are as described in the previous section.
In addition, the X’s include controls for age, education, number of children, gender,
and indicators for foreign-born, union member, marital status, Hispanics, and
African Americans. We control for state and time effects, κs and τt , to contrast
states with more and less generous thresholds before and after the statutory changes.
To allow for potential differential trends in states with more and less generous
Medicaid, we include, Ωrt, region-specific time trends that allow the time trend to
vary in each of the large nine regions of the country as defined by the Census
Bureau (New England, Mid-Atlantic, East North Central, West North Central,
South Atlantic, East South Central, West South Central, Mountain, and Pacific).
While we control for other potential confounders that may have changed at
the same time as the Medicaid statutory changes, a potential problem is that the
statutory changes may had responded to underlying economic conditions or
conditions in the labor market. We check for this possibility by estimating
regressions of the Medicaid income and age thresholds on the unemployment rate,
real gross state product, the percentage of the labor force in goods producing
industries, and the percentage of the population that is white, male, and married as
well as the average education level in the state. Table 2 shows results of these
regressions for the income and age thresholds, respectively. Columns (1)-(5) show
that none of these variables are significant in predicting Medicaid income threshold.
Columns (6)-(10) show no effects of the variables on the Medicaid age thresholds

22

either. The only exception is the average education level, which is marginally
significant in Columns (5) and (10) for both the Medicaid income and age
thresholds in the specification with lagged GDP. Thus, there is little evidence that
economic, labor market and demographic factors are behind the adoption of more
generous Medicaid policies.

5. Impacts of Taxes and Transfers on Occupational and Industrial Mobility
a.

Occupational and Industrial Mobility
A key element of a healthy labor market is the ability for workers to move

across occupations and industries over their working lives. As people find out what
their talents are and observe how their experiences evolve in the labor market, they
may realize that their skills and characteristics do not fit well in a particular
occupation or industry but that their skills may be better suited for another
occupation or industry. Thus, people may consider moving to a new occupation or
utilize their talents in a different industry, yet they may be reluctant to do so because
there is uncertainty about the quality of their match with a new occupation or
industry. Employer-provided health insurance, however, stops many from changing
jobs and may restrain many from leaving a job to retrain or to even move to another
job with health insurance coverage but which may be risky because it is in a new
area of expertise. Public health insurance may encourage individuals to undertake
the risky investments necessary to change occupations or industries.

23

Table 3 shows that increased Medicaid generosity, indeed, induces
individuals to change occupations more often than they would otherwise. Columns
(1)-(3) show the results with basic demographic controls and adding state, time and
region-specific trends, respectively. Columns (4) and (5) add policy controls
including tax progressivity, the median tax and TANF benefits. The results become
slightly smaller as more controls are added, but they are robust to all these controls
and show a consistent picture. An increase in the Medicaid income threshold
increases the likelihood that an individual changes occupations. By contrast,
increasing Medicaid generosity by increasing the age threshold does not impact
occupational change. The effect with the full set of demographic and policy controls
in Column (5) shows that moving from a state with the lowest income threshold,
133% of the FPL, to a state in the 90th percentile in terms of the income threshold,
or moving from Alabama to Vermont (if they were the same in every other respect),
increases the propensity to change occupations by 7.6%. This is almost equivalent
to increasing the income threshold by 2 standard deviations, which increases
occupational mobility by 6.9%. In the last column of Table 3, we interact the
thresholds with an indicator for women, to check if the effects vary by gender, but
find no difference between women and men in terms of the effects of Medicaid
generosity on their occupational mobility.
Table 4 shows the effect of Medicaid generosity on industrial mobility. The
results show that an increase in the Medicaid income threshold also increases

24

industrial mobility. The results are robust to the inclusion of demographic and
policy controls. The result in column (5) with the full set of controls shows that
moving from a state with the most basic Medicaid protection, as was present in all
states in 1965, to a state with the 90th percentile in terms of Medicaid income
thresholds, increases industrial mobility by 7.8%. Moreover, column (6) shows that
the effect of Medicaid on industrial mobility is greater for women. For women,
living in a state in the 10th instead of the 90th percentile in Medicaid income
thresholds would increase their mobility by 0.05 or 10.2%. As for occupational
mobility, however, increased generosity in terms of age thresholds has no impact
on mobility.
Since the thresholds should be most important for those who are close to
the threshold and likely to benefit, we examine differential effects of the income
threshold for those at different quintiles of the income distribution. We begin by
interacting the Medicaid income threshold variable with the quintiles of the income
distribution. Then, we compare the marginal effect of the Medicaid income
threshold at different quintiles relative to the highest quintile. This serves as a
falsification test since we should not expect to find effects in the higher quintiles.11

11

Note that those in the lowest quintile earn $20,703 or less in 1999 dollars and the poverty line for
a married couple with one child in 1999 was $13,410. Thus, to qualify for Medicaid such family
would have to earn less than $17,835.30 in the least generous states and $25,210.80 in the median
state. This means that those at the lowest quintile are, indeed, more likely to be exposed to Medicaid
over this time period.

25

Figure 3 shows the results of the impact of income thresholds on occupational
mobility at various quintiles of the income distribution. It clearly shows a markedly
higher impact for those at the lowest quintile than for those at higher quintiles. The
marginal effect of the Medicaid income threshold on the probability to change
occupations is about 1 percentage point higher for people in the lowest quintile
compared to those in the highest quintile. By contrast, the effects for quintiles
higher than the lowest quintile relative to the highest quintile are negative but close
to zero and the relative effects at the second and fourth quintiles are not
distinguishable from zero. Figure 4 shows similarly the impact of the Medicaid
income threshold on industrial mobility by quintile. As before, the marginal effect
of the Medicaid income threshold on the likelihood of moving industries is highest
for the lowest quintile. Workers in the lowest quintile are 2.3 percentage points
more likely to change industries due to more generous Medicaid income thresholds
than those in the highest quintile. By contrast, the relative effects for those in the
higher quintiles is close to zero. These results confirm that the effect of Medicaid
generosity on industrial and occupational mobility is mostly driven by the changes
in threshold levels and not by other things affecting all individuals with high and
low income in generous states.
In the Appendix Tables, we also examine whether the effects were larger
for women than men; for married or not married individuals, and for those with and
without children. The results in Appendix Table 1 show that the effects on

26

occupational mobility are greater for women than men, when estimating a fully
saturated model allowing other factors to affect women and men differently.
Appendix Table 1 also shows bigger effects of the Medicaid income thresholds on
occupational mobility of married than non-married workers, although the latter
effects are not significant. Moreover, this table shows bigger effects of Medicaid
on occupational mobility for those with children than for those without children.
The results in Appendix Table 2 similarly show that the results on industrial
mobility are bigger for women than men, but that the results are bigger for those
who are not married and without children although these differences are not
significant.
b.

Moving to Riskier and Better Jobs?
If the insurance value of Medicaid is indeed driving individuals to undertake

riskier decisions by moving them toward new occupations and industries, they
should be moving towards riskier occupations and industries but also towards those
that are more desirable.
Table 5 shows transition probabilities towards riskier occupations and
industries. Columns (1) and (2) show results where the dependent variable takes the
value of 1 if the person moved to an occupation with a higher variance of wages
and if the person moved to an occupation with higher separation rates. The results
show that both higher Medicaid and age thresholds increase the likelihood that a

27

person will move towards an occupation with a wider wage spread. The effects are
such that moving from the lowest 10th to the highest 90th percentile in terms of
income and age thresholds increases the likelihood of moving towards riskier
occupations by 14.2% and 3.4% respectively.12 By contrast, the thresholds have no
impact on the likelihood of moving to occupations with higher separation rates.
Columns (3) and (4) show the results for the likelihood of moving towards
industries with higher variance of wages and higher separation rates. The results
show that higher income thresholds increase transitions towards riskier industries
defined both in terms of wages and separations. There is, however, a small negative
impact of the age threshold on the likelihood of moving to industries with bigger
wage spreads. These results are largely indicative of mobility towards riskier
occupations and industries when Medicaid is more generous.
Since another possible interpretation is that people are just pushed towards
low quality jobs, we also test if these are not just riskier jobs but actually better
jobs. Columns (5)-(9) in Table 5 shows results of the impacts of Medicaid on the
likelihood of transitioning towards more desirable jobs. Columns (5) and (6) in
Table 5 show results for transitions towards occupations and industries that have
higher median wages on average. The results show, indeed, that moving from the

12

Some examples of such transitions in our data are janitors becoming truck drivers or carpenters
or construction workers; cashiers becoming salespersons or housekeepers; and maids becoming
health and nursing aides.

28

10th to the 90th percentile in terms of the Medicaid income threshold increases
transitions towards higher median pay occupations and industries by 11.7% and
8.1%, respectively.13 Another good measure of job quality is whether the job is a
good fit in terms of someone’s skills. Therefore, we look at transitions to
occupations that have similar or higher educational requirements compared to the
educational requirements in the previous job held by the worker. Columns (7)-(9)
in Table 5 show the results for the likelihood of moving towards occupations in
which the educational requirements of the job are above or equal to the education
requirements at the previous job.14 We find that increasing Medicaid generosity
increases the likelihood that the worker moves to a job in which s/he is using the
same or possibly higher level of skills compared to her/his previous job. Columns
(8) and (9) show this effects separately for non-college and college graduates. The
effects are slightly bigger for non-college graduates.
Overall, the evidence indicates that workers are moving towards riskier
occupations, with higher wages and which are presumably better matches for them.

13

Some examples of such transitions in our data are health and nursing aides becoming medical
technicians or secretaries and receptionists; child care workers becoming teachers; waiters and
waitresses becoming retail salespersons; or cashiers becoming salespersons.
14
Note that workers can still be over- or under- qualified in their current and past jobs. We do not
take a stand on whether over- or under- qualification is a bad/good outcome.

29

c.

The Tennessee Experiment: A Sharp Reduction of Medicaid
While many states increased their Medicaid income thresholds during the

late 1990s and 2000s, as discussed above some states actually reduced their
Medicaid generosity. Tennessee was the state with the biggest changes in its
Medicaid income threshold. The income threshold in Tennessee was at 400% of the
FPL in the late 1990’s but it fell to 200% of the FPL in 2000 and fell additionally
to 185% of the FPL in 2002, staying at that level from then on.15 Thus, contrary to
many states in which the generosity of public health insurance increased during the
past few decades, we should expect for occupational and industrial mobility to fall
in Tennessee.
Table 6 shows difference-in-difference results of the Tennessee experiment,
using data from 1997 onwards, where the specification includes a Tennessee
indicator, a post-2000 indicator and an interaction of these two, as well as all the
demographic and policy controls included in the previous analysis. In this
experiment, we compare Tennessee only against the control states that did not
change their Medicaid income thresholds during the entire period of analysis, which

15

Note that this change in Medicaid is different from the one examined by Garthwaite et al. (2014)
who examine the disenrollment of all adults from Medicaid in 2005. We also tested the effects of
the adult disenrollment on our outcome variables and found similar results to our experiment above.

30

includes the following 10 states: Arizona, California, Kansas, Mississippi, North
Dakota, Rhode Island, Texas, West Virginia and Wyoming.
The results in Table 6 are consistent with the reduction in occupational and
industrial mobility after the much less generous Medicaid system in Tennessee after
2000. Columns (1) and (2) show a reduction in occupational and industrial mobility
by 6.9% and 10.3%, respectively, in Tennessee after 2000. We also find that
workers moved away from riskier occupations and industries in Tennessee after
2000. In particular, columns (3) and (4) show that workers were 8.6% and 3.9%
less likely to move towards occupations with greater wage spreads and higher
separation rates in Tennessee after 2000, although the latter effect is not significant.
Columns (5) and (6) show that workers in Tennessee were 7.9% and 5.6% less
likely to move towards industries with high wage spreads and high separation rates
after 2000. Finally, columns (7)-(9) show that workers are also less likely to move
towards better jobs. Workers are 3.8% and 5.1% less likely to move towards
occupations and industries with higher median wages in Tennessee after 2000 (see
columns (7) and (8)). Column (9) also shows that workers in Tennessee are 9.3%
less likely to move towards jobs that have the same or higher educational
requirements after 2000, an indication that workers are moving down the job ladder
as Medicaid becomes less generous. Overall, this experiment shows that a sharp
reduction in the generosity of Medicaid decreases occupational and industrial
mobility and increases mobility towards safer and less desirable jobs.

31

6. Conclusion
In this paper, we go beyond the positive impacts of Medicaid in terms of
reducing ‘job lock’ and ‘employment lock’, and examine the role of Medicaid in
increasing occupational and industrial mobility. While occupational and industrial
mobility helps to reduce mismatches and is crucial for the healthy working of the
labor market, changing occupations and industries is risky and requires workers to
undertake investments that workers are not always willing to make.
Here, we examined whether increased generosity of public health insurance
in the form of Medicaid incentivizes individuals to undertake risk and change
occupations and industries. The paper uses statutory changes in Medicaid income
and age thresholds during the 1990s and 2000s to examine how the generosity of
health insurance affects occupational and industrial mobility. We are careful to
control for other policy changes that were happening during this time period and
we check whether Medicaid income and age threshold changes were driven by
demographic factors, or by economic or labor market conditions. We find that these
factors cannot explain these statutory changes.
We find substantial effects of an increase in income thresholds on
occupational and industrial mobility of 7.6% and 7.8%, respectively, when income
thresholds are increased from the level in states at the 10th to level in states at the
90th percentile of Medicaid income threshold generosity. We also do a falsification

32

test by checking that those farther away from the threshold are not affected by
Medicaid changes. We find big effects for workers in the lowest income quintile
and, thus, close to the threshold, but no effects for those with much higher incomes
relative to the threshold. We also find bigger effects for women and for those with
children.
Importantly, the increases in Medicaid eligibility also increase movement
towards jobs in occupations and industries that are riskier but also better. We find
that increased Medicaid income thresholds increase mobility towards occupations
and industries that are riskier in terms of having a higher variance of wages and
higher separation rates. Moreover, when Medicaid generosity rises, workers not
only move to riskier occupations and industries but towards better jobs. We find
that an increase in the Medicaid income threshold increases movement towards
occupations and industries with higher median wages. Also, while it has been
argued that public health insurance can improve the quality of matches, there is
little evidence of this except for Gruber and Madrian (1994) who found that access
to COBRA increases subsequent wages. In this paper, we actually measure match
quality by comparing the educational requirements in the occupation the person
moves to and the educational requirements in the previous occupation. We find that
an increase in Medicaid income thresholds increases the likelihood that a worker
will move to an occupation that has educational requirements that coincide or
exceed the educational requirements in the previous occupation. Thus, we find

33

evidence that increased generosity of Medicaid helps workers move up the
occupation ladder.
Moreover, we examine a natural experiment due to a large reduction in
Medicaid generosity in Tennessee, as the Medicaid income threshold fell from
400% to 200% of the FPL. We find that the reversal in generosity in Medicaid in
Tennessee after 2000, not only decreased occupational and industrial mobility but
it also decreased transitions towards riskier and better jobs. Thus, denying public
health insurance benefits to more households in Tennessee reduced labor mobility
and moved people towards safer jobs down the job ladder.
This analysis indicates that decreased uncertainty in the form of public
health insurance should help encourage occupational and industrial mobility and
greater flexibility in the labor market, but also allow workers to move towards
riskier, better paid jobs and better matches.

34

References
Adams, Scott. 2004. “Employer-Provided Health Insurance and Job Change,”
Contemporary Economic Policy, 22(3): 357-69.
Anderson, Patricia. 1997. “The Effect of Employer-provided Health Insurance on
Job Mobility: Job-lock or Job-push?” Mimeo, Dartmouth.
Autor, David and David Dorn. 2013. “The Growth of Low-Skill Service Jobs and
the Polarization of the US Labor Market,” American Economic Review, 103(5):
1553-1597.
Baicker, Katherine, Amy Finkelstein, Jae Song, and Sarah Taubman. "The Impact
of Medicaid on Labor Market Activity and Program Participation: Evidence from
the Oregon Health Insurance Experiment." American Economic Review 104, no. 5
(2014): 322-28.
Bansak, Cynthia and Steven Raphael. 2008. “The State Children’s Health Insurance
Program and Job Mobility: Identifying Job Lock among Working Parents in NearPoor Households,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 61(4): 564-79.
Bird, Edward. 2001. “Does the Welfare State Induce Risk-Taking?” Journal of
Public Economics, 80: 357-84.
Buchmueller, Thomas and Robert Valleta. 1996. “The Effects of Employerprovided Health Insurance on Worker Mobility,” Industrial and Labor Relations
Review, 439-55.
Cooper, Philip and Alan Monleit. 1993. “Does Employment-related Health
Insurance Inhibit Job Mobility?” Inquiry, 30: 400-416.
Cullen, Julie and Roger Gordon. 2002. “Taxes and Entrepreneurial Activity:
Theory and Evidence from the U.S.,” Mimeo.
Currie, Janet and Brigitte Madrian. 1999. “Health, Health Insurance and the Labor
Market,” in O. Ashenfelter and D. Card, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics,
Volume 3, Chapter 50, pp. 3309-3416.
Fairlie, Robert, Kanika Kapur and Susan Gates. 2010. “Is Employer-based Health
Insurance a Barrier to Entrepreneurship?” Journal of Health Economics, 30(1):
146-62.

35

Feenberg, Daniel and Elisabeth Coutts. 1993. “An Introduction to the TAXSIM
Model,” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 12(1).
Garthwaite, Craig, Tal Gross, and Matthew J. Notowidigdo. 2014. “Public Health
Insurance, Labor Supply, and Employment Lock,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 129(2): 653-96.
Gillespie, Donna and Byron Lutz. 2002. “The Impact of Employer-Provided Health
Insurance on Dynamic Employment Transitions,” Journal of Human Resources,
37(1): 129-62.
Gross, Tal, and Matthew J. Notowidigdo. 2011. “Health Insurance and the
Consumer Bankruptcy Decision: Evidence from Expansions of Medicaid,” Journal
of Public Economics, 95(7): 767-78.
Gruber, Jonathan. 2000. “Health Insurance and the Labor Market.” Handbook of
Health Economics, 1: 645-706.
Gruber, Jonathan and Brigitte Madrian. 1994. “Health Insurance and Job Mobility:
the Effects of Public Policy on Job Lock,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review,
48(1): 86-102.
Gruber, J. and B. Madrian. 2004. “Health Insurance, Labor Supply, and Job
Mobility: A Critical Review of the Literature,” in C. McLauglin, ed., Health Policy
and the Uninsured, Urban Institute Press, Washington DC..
Hamersma, Sarah and Matthew Kim. 2009. “The Effect of Parental Medicaid
Expansions on Job Mobility,” Journal of Health Economics, 28(4): 761-70.
Holtz-Eakin, Douglas. 1994. “Health Insurance Provision and Labor Market
Efficiency in the U.S. and Germany,” in R. Blank, ed., Protection versus Economic
Flexibility: is there a Tradeoff? Chicago: Chicago University Press, pgs. 157-87.
Holtz-Eakin, Douglass, John Penrod and Harvey Rosen. 1996. “Health Insurance
and the Labor Supply of Entrepreneurs,” Journal of Public Economics, 62(1-2):
209-235.
Hoynes, Hilary and Erzo Luttmer. 2011. “The Insurance Value of State Tax-and
Transfer Programs,” Journal of Public Economics, 95: 1466-1484.

36

Kambourov, Gueorgui and Iourii Manovskii. 2013. “A Cautionary Note on Using
(March) Current Population Survey and Panel Study of Income Dynamics Data to
Study Worker Turnover,” Macroeconomic Dynamics, 17: 172-194.
Kapur, Kanika. 1998. “The Impact of Health Insurance on Job Mobility: A Measure
of Job Lock,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 51(2): 282-98.
Kugler, Adriana. 2013. “The Impact of Redistributive Tax and Transfer Programs
on Risk-Taking and Labor Mobility,” Center for American Progress Working
Paper.
Leuven, Edwin, and Hessel Oosterbeek. 2011. “Overeducation and Mismatch in
the Labor Market,” Handbook of the Economics of Education, 4: 283-326.
Lurie, Ithai and Bradley Hein. 2014. “Does Health Reform Affect SelfEmployment?” Evidence from Massachusetts,” Small Business Economics.
Niu, Xiaotong. 2014. “Health Insurance and Self-Employment: Evidence from
Massachusetts,” forthcoming, Industrial and Labor Relations Review.
Madrian, Brigitte. 1994. “Employment Based Health Insurance and Job Mobility:
is there Evidence of Job Lock?” Quarterly Journal of Economic, 109(1): 27-54.
NBER. 2013. “Explanation of Relevant MORG Data File Variables,”
http://data.nber.org/morg/docs/morg99.pdf
and
http://data.nber.org/morg/cos/cpsx.pdf.
Penrod, J.R. 1995. “Health Care Costs, Health Insurance and Job Mobility",
Mimeo, University of Michigan.
Stroupe, Kevin and Eleanor Kinney and Thomas Kniesner. 2001. “Chronic Illness
and Health Insurance-Related Job Lock,” Journal of Policy Analysis and
Management, 20(3): 525-44.
Yelowitz, Aaron. 1995. “The Medicaid Notch, Labor Supply and Welfare
Participation: Evidence from Eligibility Expansions,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 110(4): 909-40.

37

Medicaid Age Threshold

0

1

5

1.5

2

10

15

2.5

3

20

Medicaid Income Threshold (X 100):Percent of Poverty Line

1995

2000

Year

Average
90th Percentile

2005

2010

1995

Median
10th Percentile

2000

Year

Average
90th Percentile

2005

2010

Median
10th Percentile

Figure 2: Age Thresholds

Contrasts of APE of Medicaid Income Threshold with 95% CI

Contrasts of APE of Medicaid Income Threshold with 95% CI

1 vs 5

-.01

-.005

Contrasts of Pr(Ind Change)
0
.01
.02

Contrasts of Pr(Occ Change)
0
.005
.01

.03

.015

Figure 1: Income Thresholds

2 vs 5
3 vs 5
5 quantiles of ftotval_99

Figure 3: Occupation Transitions

4 vs 5

1 vs 5

2 vs 5
3 vs 5
5 quantiles of ftotval_99

Figure 4: Industry Transitions

4 vs 5

Table 1 - Descriptive statistics
All Sample
Diff in avg taxes at 75th and 25th pct

0.496
(0.0524)

Sample of Above Mean Medicaid
Income Threshold
0.509
(0.0586)

Sample of Below Mean Medicaid
Income Threshold
0.484
(0.0418)

Real TANF benefits

1.725
(4.303)

2.396
(4.162)

1.062
(4.338)

Med inc threshold

1.910
(0.360)

2.129
(0.338)

1.693
(0.225)

Age limit for medicaid threshold1

4.691
(7.378)

5.215
(7.962)

4.173
(6.709)

Average Median Tax

0.110
(0.0195)

0.105
(0.0167)

0.115
(0.0210)

Average Tax at the 25th Percentile

-0.260
(0.0510)

-0.273
(0.0563)

-0.248
(0.0416)

Average Tax at the 75th Percentile

0.236
(0.0247)

0.236
(0.0232)

0.236
(0.0262)

Occupation Change

0.476
(0.499)

0.477
(0.499)

0.475
(0.499)

Transition to Risky Occ-Wage

0.217
(0.412)

0.219
(0.414)

0.215
(0.411)

Transition to Risky Occ-Sep Rates

0.230
(0.421)

0.231
(0.422)

0.229
(0.420)

Transition to Better Occ-Median Wage

0.215
(0.411)

0.218
(0.413)

0.213
(0.409)

Industry Change

0.334
(0.472)

0.343
(0.475)

0.326
(0.469)

Transition to Risky Ind-Wage

0.160
(0.367)

0.163
(0.369)

0.157
(0.364)

Transition to Risky Ind-Sep Rates

0.163
(0.369)

0.167
(0.373)

0.158
(0.365)

Transition to Better Ind- Median Wage

0.160
(0.367)

0.165
(0.371)

0.156
(0.363)

Transition to Better Match-Education

0.331
(0.471)

0.330
(0.470)

0.333
(0.471)

Highest Grade Completed

13.81
(2.768)

13.89
(2.859)

13.73
(2.673)

Age

43.50
(10.68)

43.79
(10.66)

43.22
(10.69)

Number of Children

0.810
(1.088)

0.884
(1.111)

0.737
(1.060)

Male

0.524
(0.499)

0.524
(0.499)

0.524
(0.499)

Foreign Born

0.149
(0.356)

0.197
(0.398)

0.102
(0.303)

Married

0.795
(0.404)

0.797
(0.402)

0.793
(0.405)

Union Members

0.131
(0.337)

0.146
(0.353)

0.115
(0.320)

White

0.844
(0.363)

0.829
(0.377)

0.860
(0.347)

Black

0.0978
(0.297)

0.0949
(0.293)

0.101
(0.301)

Hispanic

0.0866
0.0980
0.0752
(0.281)
(0.297)
(0.264)
Observations
65209
30508
34701
Notes: This table reports means and standard deviation in parentheses.
Medicaid income threshold is the most generous income threshold for receiving Medicaid benefits in each state (units: % of poverty line).
Medicaid age threshold is the age at which the most generous income threshold expires for each state. TANF benefits are calculated for a
family of 3 using the following formula. TANF Benefit = Maximum Benefit-t(Earnings-D)-Unearned Income. Average tax rates at
different income percentiles are calculated using data from the March CPS ASEC supplement and using NBER’s taxsim software.
We construct two measures of transitions to risky occupations, transitions to occupations with higher separation rates (Transition to
Risky Occ-Wage) and transitions to occupations with higher wage variance (Transition to Risky Occ-Wage). We construct similar
measures for transitions across industries. We construct two measures of quality of matches. The first is based on median wages paid in the
occupation or industry and we construct at transitions to higher paying occupations and industries (Transition to Better Occ-Median Wage and
Transition to Better Ind-Median Wage). The second measure is only at the occupation level and looks at the education requirements of each
occupation using the Labor Department’s ONET database. A transition to a better match in terms of education requirement occurs if a worker
moves to an occupation with a similar or higher education requirement as his/her previous occupation. This variable is labelled as Transition
to Better Match-Education.

Table 2- Effects of State Demographic Characteristics and Economic Conditions on Medicaid Income Threshold
(1)
-0.00402
(-0.95)

Medicaid Income Threshold
(2)
(3)
(4)
-0.00547
-0.00462
-0.00485
(-0.76)
(-0.56)
(-1.04)

-7.17e-09
(-0.30)

-7.20e-09
(-0.30)

-8.01e-09
(-0.31)

Pct of White in Population

0.0381
(0.58)

0.0385
(0.58)

Pct of Male in Population

-0.314
(-0.86)

Medicaid Age Threshold
(7)
(8)
(9)
-0.00547
-0.00462
-0.00485
(-0.76)
(-0.56)
(-1.04)

(5)
-0.0000729
(-0.02)

(6)
0.0383
(0.56)

-0.000000315
(-0.44)

-0.000000494
(-0.73)

-0.000000525
(-1.36)

-7.20e-09
(-0.30)

-8.01e-09
(-0.31)

-0.000000315
(-0.44)

-0.000000494
(-0.73)

0.0399
(0.56)

0.0373
(0.52)

-0.0402
(-0.65)

-1.497
(-1.41)

0.0385
(0.58)

0.0399
(0.56)

0.0373
(0.52)

-0.0402
(-0.65)

-0.312
(-0.85)

-0.327
(-0.82)

-0.326
(-0.82)

-0.0245
(-0.07)

3.117
(0.53)

-0.312
(-0.85)

-0.327
(-0.82)

-0.326
(-0.82)

-0.0245
(-0.07)

-0.00569
(-0.91)

-0.00551
(-0.88)

-0.00505
(-0.74)

-0.00543
(-0.80)

0.00125
(0.21)

-0.224
(-2.24)

-0.00551
(-0.88)

-0.00505
(-0.74)

-0.00543
(-0.80)

0.00125
(0.21)

Pct of Married in the Population

-0.133
(-0.89)

-0.131
(-0.87)

-0.142
(-0.86)

-0.156
(-0.95)

-0.108
(-0.75)

3.257
(1.36)

-0.131
(-0.87)

-0.142
(-0.86)

-0.156
(-0.95)

-0.108
(-0.75)

Average Education level

0.0296
(1.52)

0.0303
(1.54)

0.0331
(1.55)

0.0304
(1.45)

0.0362
(1.93)

-0.0556
(-0.18)

0.0303
(1.54)

0.0331
(1.55)

0.0304
(1.45)

0.0362
(1.93)

Pct of Workforce in Goods Producing Ind

0.00107
(0.47)

0.00107
(0.47)

0.00122
(0.49)

0.00126
(0.50)

-0.00102
(-0.46)

0.00178
(0.05)

0.00107
(0.47)

0.00122
(0.49)

0.00126
(0.50)

-0.00102
(-0.46)

0.00212
(0.25)

-0.000791
(-0.06)

0.00212
(0.25)

-0.000791
(-0.06)

0.000000315
(0.43)

0.000000641
(0.54)

Unemployment Rate

Real GDP (Millions of 2009 dollars)

Average Age of Population

First lag: Unemployment Rate

Second Lag Unemployment Rate

First Lag: Real GDP

Second lag: Real GDP

0.00377
(0.34)

(10)
-0.0000729
(-0.02)

0.00377
(0.34)
0.000000315
(0.43)

0.000000641
(0.54)
-0.000000137
(-0.18)

-0.000000137
(-0.18)

N
714
714
663
663
612
714
714
663
663
612
Notes: The table reports results from a OLS model with standard errors in parentheses. State level unemployment rate was taken from the Bureau of Labor Statistics’ Local Area Unemployment Statistics
program. State level GDP was taken from the Bureau of Economic Analysis’ Regional Economic Accounts. The rest of the variables were constructed from within the sample.

Table 3- Occupational Change as dependent variable
Medicaid income threshold

Medicaid age threshold

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.0349
(0.0131)

0.0292
(0.00939)

0.0297
(0.00921)

0.0306
(0.00959)

0.0309
(0.0101)

0.0323
(0.0109)

0.000865
(0.000676)

0.000524
(0.000604)

0.000366
(0.000610)

0.000354
(0.000619)

0.000435
(0.000604)

0.000275
(0.000504)

-0.0816
(0.206)

-0.0507
(0.223)

-0.0503
(0.223)

-0.000548
(0.00108)

-0.000439
(0.00112)

-0.000438
(0.00111)

0.894
(0.923)

0.893
(0.922)

Tax Progressivity 75th & 25th Pct

TANF Benefits at the 25th Percentile

Average Median Tax

Medicaid income threshold X Female

-0.00289
(0.00999)

Medicaid age threshold X Female

0.000328
(0.000658)

State Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Time Effects

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No
65,209

Yes
65,209

Yes
65,209

Yes
65,209

Yes
65,209

Yes
65,209

Regional Trends
N

Notes: The table reports marginal effects from a probit model with standard errors in parentheses. All specifications include the following controls:
Years of education, age ,number of children, and dummies for sex, race, ethnicity and country of birth. TANF benefits are calculated for a family
of 3 using the following formula. TANF Benefit = Maximum Benefit-t(Earnings-D)-Unearned Income. Standard Errors are clustered at the state level.

Table 4- Industrial Change as dependent variable
Medicaid income threshold

Medicaid age threshold

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.0334
(0.0113)

0.0321
(0.00821)

0.0308
(0.00856)

0.0313
(0.00922)

0.0315
(0.00947)

0.0215
(0.00997)

-0.000729
(0.000646)

-0.00101
(0.000630)

-0.00108
(0.000652)

-0.00120
(0.000683)

-0.00114
(0.000699)

-0.00114
(0.000765)

0.0283
(0.261)

0.0496
(0.269)

0.0489
(0.269)

-0.00145
(0.000523)

-0.00137
(0.000583)

-0.00137
(0.000588)

0.611
(0.711)

0.611
(0.710)

Tax Progressivity 75th & 25th Pct

TANF Benefits at the 25th Percentile

Average Median Tax

Medicaid income threshold X Female

0.0197
(0.00601)

Medicaid age threshold X Female

-1.44e-08
(0.000509)

State Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Time Effects

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No
65,209

Yes
65,209

Yes
65,209

Yes
65,209

Yes
65,209

Yes
65,209

Regional Trends
N

Notes: The table reports marginal effects from a probit model with standard errors in parentheses. All specifications include the following controls:
Years of education, age ,number of children, and dummies for sex, race, ethnicity and country of birth. TANF benefits are calculated for a family
of 3 using the following formula. TANF Benefit = Maximum Benefit-t(Earnings-D)-Unearned Income. Standard Errors are clustered at the state level.

Table 5: Transitions Across Jobs
(1)
Transition
to Risky
OccHigher
S.D of
Wages

(2)
Transition
to Risky
OccHigher
Separation
Rates

(3)
Transition
to Risky
IndHigher
S.D of
Wages

(4)
Transition
to Risky
IndHigher
Separation
Rates

(5)
Transition
to Better
OccHigher
Median
Wage

(6)
Transition
to Better
IndHigher
Median
Wage

(7)
Transition to
a job with
higher or
similar
education
Requirements

0.0231

(8)
Transition to a
job with
higher or
similar
education
RequirementsNon-College
Workers
0.0240

(9)
Transition to a
job with
higher or
similar
education
RequirementsCollege
Workers
0.0202

0.0263

0.00853

0.0143

0.0319

0.0214

0.0110

(0.00949)

(0.00596)

(0.00762)

(0.00957)

(0.00530)

(0.00573)

(0.00946)

(0.0116)

(0.0107)

Medicaid age threshold

0.00100
(0.000545)

0.000124
(0.000477)

-0.000937
(0.000472)

-0.000364
(0.000466)

0.0000945
(0.000305)

-0.00119
(0.000420)

0.00112
(0.000603)

0.000909
(0.000764)

0.00168
(0.000929)

Tax Progressivity 75th
& 25th Pct

-0.0696

-0.0674

-0.00646

0.0460

-0.0486

-0.177

0.0888

0.0879

-0.0166

(0.183)

(0.127)

(0.253)

(0.160)

(0.155)

(0.181)

(0.275)

(0.302)

(0.350)

0.000131

-0.000263

0.000310

0.0000773

0.000113

-0.000699

0.00103

0.00177

-0.000245

(0.000671)

(0.00114)

(0.000538)

(0.000760)

(0.000695)

(0.000728)

(0.000897)

(0.000700)

(0.00181)

0.284
(1.097)

0.708
(0.529)

-0.117
(0.538)

0.613
(0.630)

-0.480
(0.899)

-0.0997
(0.746)

1.119
(0.964)

0.522
(1.349)

1.729
(1.137)

State Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Time Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes
64,248

Yes
65,209

Yes
64,930

Yes
65,209

Yes
64,248

Yes
64,930

Yes
61,246

Yes
41,359

Yes
19,887

Medicaid income
threshold

TANF Benefits at the
25th Percentile

Average Median Tax

Regional Trends
N

Notes: The table reports marginal effects from a probit model with standard errors in parentheses. All specifications include the following controls: Years of education, age, number of children, and
dummies for sex, race, ethnicity and country of birth. TANF benefits are calculated for a family of 3 using the following formula. TANF Benefit = Maximum Benefit-t(Earnings-D)-Unearned Income.
Separation rates and wages for each occupation and industry are calculated from our sample. Education requirements for each occupation are calculated from the Labor Department’s ONET database.
Standard Errors are clustered at the state level.

Table 6: Tennessee Experiment
(1)
Occupation
Change

(2)
Industry
Change

-0.103
(0.0110)

(3)
Transition to
Risky OccHigher S.D of
Wages
-0.0855
(0.0144)

(4)
Transition to
Risky OccHigher
Separation Rates
-0.0392
(0.0248)

(5)
Transition to
Risky IndHigher S.D of
Wages
-0.0786
(0.0158)

(6)
Transition to
Risky IndHigher
Separation Rates
-0.0561
(0.0161)

(7)
Transition to
Better OccHigher Median
Wage
-0.0382
(0.0116)

(8)
Transition to
Better IndHigher Median
Wage
-0.0510
(0.0125)

(9)
Transition to a job
with higher or similar
education
Requirements
-0.0930
(0.0101)

Treat X After

-0.0691
(0.0129)

After 2000

0.190
(0.0490)

0.120
(0.0541)

0.0887
(0.0559)

-0.0274
(0.0207)

-0.0102
(0.0156)

0.00922
(0.0338)

0.0136
(0.0288)

-0.0153
(0.0179)

0.0175
(0.0396)

Treat
(Tennessee)

-0.968

0.994

-0.506

0.986

-0.928

-0.243

-0.602

-0.730

-1.000

(0.0625)

(0.0204)

(0.450)

(0.0689)

(0.231)

(0.478)

(0.351)

(0.361)

(0.00115)

-0.512

-0.654

-0.786

-0.719

-0.142

-0.392

-0.389

0.0183

0.278

(0.306)

(0.427)

(0.343)

(0.232)

(0.167)

(0.256)

(0.298)

(0.377)

(0.272)

-0.00253

-0.00139

0.000225

-0.00128

0.000473

0.00213

-0.00230

-0.00119

-0.00220

(0.000849)

(0.00126)

(0.000833)

(0.000625)

(0.000408)

(0.000637)

(0.000954)

(0.000379)

(0.000734)

4.917

-2.213

0.985

4.097

-0.398

-3.411

2.219

2.359

3.258

(1.499)

(1.620)

(1.686)

(2.322)

(1.299)

(1.894)

(2.421)

(1.574)

(2.061)

State Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Time Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes
20,426

Yes
20,426

Yes
20,113

Yes
20,426

Yes
20,318

Yes
20,426

Yes
20,086

Yes
20,318

Yes
19,174

Tax Progressivity
75th & 25th Pct

TANF Benefits
at the 25th
Percentile

Average Median
Tax

Regional Trends
N

Notes: The table reports marginal effects from a probit model with standard errors in parentheses. All specifications include the following controls: Years of education, age and
dummies for sex, race, ethnicity and country of birth. TANF benefits are calculated for a family of 3 using the following formula. TANF Benefit = Maximum Benefit-t(EarningsD)-Unearned Income. Separation rates and wages for each occupation and industry are calculated from our sample. Education requirements for each occupation are calculated from
the Labor Department’s ONET database. Standard Errors are clustered at the state level.

Appendix Tables- Not for Publication
Table A1: Occupation Change for Subgroups
(1)
Females
0.0381
(0.0174)

(2)
Males
0.0230
(0.00746)

(3)
Married
0.0298
(0.0114)

(4)
Non-Married
0.0310
(0.0204)

(5)
No Children
0.0322
(0.0112)

(6)
1 or More Children
0.0465
(0.0131)

0.000675
(0.00127)

0.000214
(0.000445)

0.000877
(0.000609)

-0.000490
(0.00153)

0.00188
(0.00129)

0.000164
(0.00109)

-0.210
(0.314)

0.0962
(0.188)

-0.303
(0.244)

0.994
(0.458)

-0.237
(0.273)

-0.277
(0.306)

-0.000114
(0.00149)

-0.00102
(0.000901)

0.000269
(0.00139)

-0.00264
(0.00133)

0.0000580
(0.00231)

0.000827
(0.00201)

0.928
(1.532)

0.721
(0.907)

1.091
(1.028)

1.405
(1.405)

1.296
(1.253)

0.678
(1.361)

State Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Time Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes
31,789

Yes
33,420

Yes
52,438

Yes
12,771

Yes
26,832

Yes
27,918

Medicaid income threshold

Medicaid age threshold

Tax Progressivity 75th & 25th Pct

TANF Benefits at the 25th Percentile

Average Median Tax

Regional Trends
N

Notes: The table reports marginal effects from a probit model with standard errors in parenthesis. All specifications include the following controls:
Years of education, age number of children, and dummies for sex, race, ethnicity and country of birth. TANF benefits are calculated for a family of 3
using the following formula. TANF Benefit = Maximum Benefit-t(Earnings-D)-Unearned Income.
Standard Errors are clustered at the state level.

Table A2: Industry Change for Subgroups
(1)
Females
0.0476
(0.00932)

(2)
Males
0.0151
(0.0113)

(3)
Married
0.0136
(0.0111)

(4)
Non-Married
0.0740
(0.0145)

(5)
No Children
0.0436
(0.0178)

(6)
1 or More Children
0.0192
(0.0160)

-0.000929
(0.000794)

-0.00132
(0.00107)

-0.000859
(0.000703)

-0.00176
(0.00131)

0.000454
(0.00132)

-0.00230
(0.00109)

0.221
(0.294)

-0.120
(0.288)

-0.146
(0.260)

0.899
(0.401)

-0.528
(0.479)

-0.0214
(0.204)

-0.00171
(0.000504)

-0.00133
(0.00104)

-0.00141
(0.000820)

-0.00299
(0.000813)

0.000489
(0.00137)

-0.00394
(0.00225)

-0.238
(1.065)

1.297
(0.959)

-0.321
(0.775)

3.244
(1.155)

1.485
(0.827)

-0.809
(1.272)

State Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Time Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes
31789

Yes
33420

Yes
52438

Yes
12771

Yes
26832

Yes
27918

Medicaid income threshold

Medicaid age threshold

Tax Progressivity 75th & 25th Pct

TANF Benefits at the 25th Percentile

Average Median Tax

Regional Trends
N

Notes: The table reports marginal effects from a probit model with standard errors in parentheses. All specifications include the following controls:
Years of education, age ,number of children, and dummies for sex, race, ethnicity and country of birth. TANF benefits are calculated for a family of 3 using
the following formula. TANF Benefit = Maximum Benefit-t(Earnings-D)-Unearned Income.
Standard Errors are clustered at the state level.

Appendix: Construction of Tax and Transfer Variables
Since tax systems were changing during the time period of analysis, we construct
measures of tax progressivity and median taxes. To construct a measure of tax
progressivity, we start by constructing state income tax liabilities using the
TAXSIM software from the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER)
jointly with the information from the March Supplement of the Current Population
Survey (CPS) to calculate the earned income, assets, pensions, disability, etc. for
those at the 75th and 25th percentile of the total income distribution. The average tax
rate is then obtained by dividing the tax liabilities by the average income at the 75th
and 25th percentile. We construct tax liabilities for those at the 75th and 25th
percentile of the national income distribution to hold constant the characteristics of
the population for all states and capture solely on the differences in tax rates, credits
and exemptions across states. To construct the tax liabilities, we assume that the
person is married and with one child and we use the averages for those at the 75th
and 25th percentiles of the national income distribution of the following variables:
wage and salary income of taxpayer, wage and salary income of spouse, dividend
income, interest income, rent income, alimony income, fellowships, taxable IRA
distributions, taxable pensions, gross social security benefits, other taxable transfer
income, child care expenses, and unemployment compensation. Similarly, we
measure the average tax rate for those at the median of the national income
distribution, assuming the person is married with one child and using the various
income variables to construct the tax rate for those at the 50th percentile of the
income distribution.
We also construct measures of cash transfers since these were also changing
importantly during the period of study. We construct a measure of Temporary
Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) benefits. TANF provides cash assistance to
low-income families with children. When TANF was introduced in 1996 to replace
the Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC) program, the system was
reformed by the legislation but also through state waivers introducing work
requirements, lifetime time limits, financial sanctions and enhanced-earnings
disregards. The benefits under TANF are constructed using information on
maximum benefits, benefit-reduction rates and flat earnings disregards which vary
over time and across states, as well as using earned and unearned income for the
25th percentile by year from the March CPS. In particular, we estimate TANF
benefits using the following formula from Hoynes and Luttmer (2011):
TANF Benefitst = Max. Benefitst – τst × (Earningst25th – Dst) – Unearned
Incomet25th,

where Max. Benefitst is the maximum benefit in state s at time t, τst is the benefitreduction rate in state s at time t and Dst is the flat earnings disregard in state s at
time t. We construct these Benefits for the average individual at the lowest 25th
percentile of the income distribution, so the earnings and unearned income are for
the average individual in the 25th percentile of the national income distribution.

