                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   INDUSTRY FAMILIARITY AND TRADING:
       EVIDENCE FROM THE PERSONAL PORTFOLIOS OF INDUSTRY INSIDERS

                                        Itzhak Ben-David
                                           Justin Birru
                                           Andrea Rossi

                                      Working Paper 22115
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22115


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2016




Previously circulated as "Trading Skill: Evidence from Trades of Corporate Insiders in Their
Personal Portfolios." We benefited from the comments of René Stulz and Michael Weisbach. We
thank Terrance Odean for providing the data. The authors appreciate comments received from
participants in seminars at Case Western Reserve University, Drexel University, Georgetown
University, Ohio University, The Ohio State University, the University of Cincinnati, the
University of Illinois, and the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. Ben-David and Birru’s
research was supported by the Dice Center at the Fisher College of Business. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Itzhak Ben-David, Justin Birru, and Andrea Rossi. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Industry Familiarity and Trading: Evidence from the Personal Portfolios of Industry Insiders
Itzhak Ben-David, Justin Birru, and Andrea Rossi
NBER Working Paper No. 22115
March 2016, Revised December 2016
JEL No. G11,G14

                                          ABSTRACT

We study whether industry familiarity is an advantage in stock trading by exploring the trading
patterns of industry insiders in their own personal portfolios. To do so, we identify accounts of
industry insiders in a large dataset provided by a retail discount broker. We find that insiders
trade firms from their own industry more frequently. Furthermore, they earn abnormal returns
exclusively when trading own-industry stocks, especially obscure stocks (small, low analyst
coverage, high volatility). In a battery of tests, we find no evidence of the use of private
information. The results are most consistent with the interpretation that industry familiarity is an
advantage in stock trading.

Itzhak Ben-David                                 Andrea Rossi
Department of Finance                            Department of Finance
Fisher College of Business                       Fisher College of Business
The Ohio State University                        The Ohio State University
2100 Neil Avenue                                 2100 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210                               Columbus, OH 43210
and NBER                                         andrearossi832@msn.com
bendavid@fisher.osu.edu

Justin Birru
Department of Finance
Fisher College of Business
The Ohio State University
2100 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210
birru.2@fisher.osu.edu




A online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w22115
1          Introduction

           A vast literature examines the ability of individuals to trade profitably.1 Although most
analyses find that individuals lose on average from trading (e.g., Barber and Odean, 2000), a few
studies show that some individuals consistently outperform the benchmarks (e.g., Seru, Shumway,
and Stoffman, 2010). One potential source of trading advantage for some individuals is familiarity
with the stocks and industries they trade, i.e., having better tools to decipher public information.
Several studies attempt to examine this source, yet the results are mixed. In the context of retail
traders, Døskeland and Hvide (2011) document that individuals overweight stocks of companies
in the industry in which they are employed, but they find that they earn negative returns. The
authors attribute this result to overconfidence. In the context of mutual fund managers, Pool,
Stoffman, and Yonker (2012) find that managers overweight stocks from their home states but do
not exhibit superior performance. Kacperczyk, Sialm, and Zheng (2005) show that mutual fund
managers who have concentrated positions in a few industries achieve positive abnormal returns.
Kempf, Manconi, and Spalt (2014) report that mutual fund managers outperform in industries in
which they have more investing experience. Finally, Cici, Gehde-Trapp, Göricke, and Kempf
(2014) find that mutual fund managers do not overweight industries in which they previously
worked. However, stocks that they pick from these industries outperform stocks in the rest of their
portfolio. Given the mixed results, it is important to understand whether familiarity with an
industry is related to skill.

           In this paper, we provide evidence on the ability of investors to capitalize on industry
familiarity from a novel source. Specifically, we examine trades made by industry insiders in their
own personal portfolios. In this setting, top corporate executives serve as retail traders. Compared
with average employees who engage in stock trading (such as those studied in Døskeland and
Hvide, 2011), the executives in our study are likely to have a better understanding of their industry.
Our tests contrast executives’ trading patterns and performance in stocks of firms within their
industry with those outside the industry. After documenting that insiders outperform when trading
stocks in their own industry, we attempt to identify the type of information on which insiders are
trading. To do so, we focus on the specific sources of trading profits that have been documented
in prior research, such as trading ahead of earnings announcements or merger and acquisition


1
    See Barber and Odean (2011) for a comprehensive review of the findings of the literature on individual investors.

                                                                1
(M&A) announcements, or trading in conjunction with the trades of firm insiders. Our findings,
however, do not reveal any evidence that insider profits in industry stocks originate from any of
the commonly identified sources. Instead, our analysis suggests that industry familiarity is the
trading advantage that best explains our results.

       Our study also contributes to the understanding of trading and portfolio holdings of
corporate executives. Past research has shown that insiders can profitably trade their own firm
stocks: Seyhun (1998), Lakonishok and Lee (2001), Cohen, Malloy, and Pomorski (2012), and
Ben-David and Roulstone (2012) report that prices drift for up to a year following insider
purchases. This performance is often ascribed to private information that insiders hold (e.g.,
Seyhun, 1998). However, little is known about the composition of insiders’ full portfolios or the
trades they make outside their own firm. Because our data cover all stocks that insiders trade with
the retail broker, we can provide the first insight into the portfolio composition and diversification
choices of insiders.

       Our data come from matching a transaction-level retail trading database (used in Barber
and Odean, 2000) with insider transactions reported in U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission
(SEC) records. Matching these databases allows us to identify insiders in the retail database and
track their other, non-own-firm, trades.

       We start by examining the trade composition of insiders. We first look at whether insiders
hedge their human capital by avoiding stocks in their industry of profession. In contrast, our results
show that insiders actually trade disproportionally more in own-industry stocks relative to non-
own-industry stocks. We estimate that 8.4% of their trades are in own-industry stocks, even though
own-industry firms comprise only 4.1% of the total market capitalization, on average.

       Next, we test whether insiders exhibit skill with respect to their stock buy-and-sell
decisions. Also, we explore whether this outperformance is reflected in all stock picks or confined
to trades in which insiders have professional expertise. We find evidence that insiders exhibit skill
only in their own-industry trades. Given that own-industry stock returns are likely to be correlated
with returns on insider human capital, insiders should avoid own-industry stocks unless they
possess some advantage in trading these stocks. Indeed, we find evidence that insiders make large
abnormal returns on their own-industry trades, both purchases and sales, but exhibit no
outperformance in non-own-industry trades. These results are robust to various methods of

                                                      2
measurement: holdings-based calendar-time portfolios, transactions-based calendar-time
portfolios, and buy-and-hold abnormal returns.

       The difference in the performance between own-industry and non-own-industry trades of
insiders is stark. A portfolio of own-industry purchases minus own-industry sales earns a Carhart
alpha of 16% per year. In contrast, a portfolio of non-own-industry purchases minus non-own-
industry sales earns a statistically insignificant alpha of 3% per year.

       We also find that insider outperformance in own-industry stocks does not merely stem from
an ability to time industry returns. Rather, insiders exhibit within-industry stock-picking ability:
stock purchases within industry outperform other stocks in the same industry, and stock sales
within industry underperform other stocks in the same industry. In other words, insiders are able
to identify winners and losers in the cross-section of industry stocks.

       We next examine the source of superior performance of industry insiders in expertise
stocks. One possibility is that insiders are better at deciphering public industry information. An
industry insider, for example, might be better than other investors or analysts at understanding the
implications of a new product announcement on future earnings. As an alternative to this
hypothesis, we test whether the same mechanisms that the past literature finds to be responsible
for insider profits can also explain insider outperformance in expertise stocks: for example, trading
ahead of merger announcements (e.g., Keown and Pinkerton, 1981) or based on future earnings
information (e.g., Beneish, Vargus, 2002, Aboody, Hughes, and Liu, 2005). The hypotheses are,
of course, not mutually exclusive.

       Our first test suggests that the industry insiders outperform due to an information
advantage. In particular, we document that the superior performance of the insiders in expertise
stocks is concentrated in obscure stocks: small stocks, stocks with low analyst coverage, and those
with high idiosyncratic risk. This result is consistent with insiders having the skill to better process
information than other market participants.

       Next, we conduct several tests that are motivated by information-based sources of insider
profits documented in the literature. To directly test whether expertise profits emanate from the
same source as insider trading profits we examine the correlation between a company’s insiders
and industry insiders in our sample. In fact, we find no evidence for this effect. We further sharpen



                                                       3
the test using the Cohen, Malloy, and Pomorski (2012) method of flagging insider trades that are
likely to convey information, but again fail to find any significant correlation.

        Our second empirical strategy is based on tracking the trades of industry insiders around
major news releases. It is possible that industry insiders are privy to certain industry information
before it is released to the public, making them likely to trade ahead of the release of that
information as news. Thus, we run several tests that are designed to test whether industry insiders
trade ahead of specific news events. First, we test whether they trade ahead of earnings
announcements by the traded firm, and whether those trades outperform. We find no evidence of
that correlation, and trading performance around traded firms’ earnings announcements is not of
higher quality than other trades.

        Third, we hypothesize that industry insiders use news information from their own firm to
trade other firms in the industry. We test for a correlation between trading activity of industry
insiders and their own earnings announcements. We find no association between the returns of
their earnings announcement (as a proxy for the surprise) and the propensity to trade another firm
in the industry.

        Fourth, we examine whether insiders trade ahead of M&A announcements. Many prior
studies focus on trading activity in the period leading up to an M&A announcement (e.g., Keown
and Pinkerton, 1981; Cao, Chen, and Griffin, 2005; Bodnaruk, Massa, and Siminov, 2009; Griffin,
Shu, and Topaloglu, 2012; Kedia and Zhou, 2014; Augustin, Brenner, and Subrahmanyam, 2015).
We find no evidence that insiders in our sample trade ahead of M&A activity in other firms. For
all of these tests, we show that our non-results are robust to defining expertise differently and that
our non-results are not driven by low power but rather that the correlation does not exist.

        Overall, despite having sufficient statistical power to detect expertise trading ahead of
major news events, we find no smoking gun for the alternative hypotheses. Our tests cannot
completely rule out informed trading in advance of news events as the source of industry insiders
profits. Yet, if trading ahead of news events is responsible for industry insiders’ profits, it needs to
be orthogonal to the sources investigated here, which are considered the major sources of news in
the academic literature: trades by corporate insiders of the traded firm, earnings announcements of
the traded firm, earnings announcements by their own firm, and merger announcements.



                                                       4
        Thus, the interpretation most consistent with our findings is that industry expertise drives
the superior returns of insider trading in peer firms. Specifically, insiders are better able to decipher
public information about firms in their own industry. Our results appear to provide little support
for other sources of profits.

        Our finding that industry experience increases an insider’s ability to decipher public
information within that industry is consistent with recent evidence that industry expertise matters.
Bradley, Gokkaya, and Liu (2015) determine that analyst forecasts are more accurate for firms in
industries in which the analyst has previous work experience. In the mutual fund setting, Cici,
Gehde-Trapp, Göricke, and Kempf (2014) find evidence that mutual fund managers’ trades in
industries in which they have previous work experience outperform other trades.

        Our analysis also sheds light on the role that expertise plays in the trades of insiders in
particular. Alldredge and Cicero (2015) show that insiders often rely on public information about
their principal customers to make profitable sales of own-firm stock. Their analysis highlights the
ability of insiders to profit on own-firm trades due to their expertise and increased attentiveness to
public information relative to outside investors. We document that the trading benefits of insider
expertise extend beyond an insider’s own firm, as expertise also benefits insiders’ retail trades in
non-own firm stock within their industry. Thus, our findings also contribute to the open question
of retail trader skill. Finding that insiders engage in profitable retail trading for at least a subset of
their trades is consistent with the evidence in Kelley and Tetlock (2013) that some retail trades
communicate novel cash flow information. The results add to the debate in the literature as to
whether retail trades convey new information to the market. Kelley and Tetlock (2013), Kaniel,
Saar, and Titman (2008), and Kaniel et al. (2012) provide evidence that retail trades convey
valuable information about returns and cash flows, while Dorn, Huberman, and Sengmueller
(2008), Odean (1999), Barber and Odean (2000, 2002), Hvidkjaer (2008), Barber, Odean, and Zhu
(2009), and Døskeland and Hvide (2011) find no evidence that retail trades move prices closer to
their fundamental value. Our analysis reveals that expertise is valuable and can help explain the
outperformance of some retail trades.




                                                        5
2       Data and Summary Statistics

2.1     Industry Insiders Sample

        Our data come from two matched datasets. The first contains the trading records of 78,000
individual investors at a large discount broker (henceforth, the LDB dataset) from January 1991 to
November 1996. These data were previously analyzed by Barber and Odean (2000). The second
dataset is the activity of all industry insiders, who are required by law to report their trading activity
in their own firm to the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC). We compile this
database from the insider trading files from the National Archives.

        Our main dataset is based on matching these two databases. As a way of illustration,
consider the following example. Suppose an insider reports several transactions during the sample
period of 1991–1996. The insider trading database reports the name of the firm, the transaction
dates, the direction of the trade, and the number of shares traded. We then look for similar
transactions in the retail trading database. The trades need to have the same number of shares and
dates. Our scoring system, which is detailed in Appendix A, calculates a quality score that allows
for small mismatches. For example, some of the trades of an executive may be taking place through
another broker’s account. Or, the trading dates may be shifted by a day or two relative to the trading
database. Additional mismatches may relate to the traded price or consolidating several trades into
a single transaction report.

        The matching procedure of the two databases is done in three main steps. First, we match
individual trades executed at the LDB with those filed with the SEC. Second, we consider all
potential LDB account–corporate insider pairs at the account level and assign each a matching-
likelihood score. Finally, we confirm the matches by manually inspecting the LDB trades and the
SEC filings. By matching individual trades in these two databases, we identify 105 LDB accounts
that belong to insiders of publicly traded firms. Appendix A includes an in-depth description of
the matching procedure.



2.2     Other Sources of Data

        Our analysis includes all trades of at least $100 in common shares (share code 10 or 11) of
AMEX, NASDAQ, and NYSE firms that have a valid four-digit SIC code, a 49 Fama-French


                                                        6
industry assignment, and a DGTW (Daniel, Grinblatt, Titman, and Wermers, 1997) assignment.
We aggregate trades daily; in other words, within each day we treat multiple trades in the same
stock by the same individual as a single net trade. We drop observations for which the net traded
quantity in a day is zero.

          We use a variety of data sources to study the performance of the industry insiders’ trades.
For purposes of comparison, in some tables and figures we display statistics regarding the trades
of the other retail investors in the LDB database. We obtain stock returns, market capitalization,
and Fama-French (1993) factor data from the daily and monthly files from the Center for Research
in Security Prices (CRSP), and accounting data from Compustat. We pull earnings announcement
data, including the number of analysts covering each stock, from the Institutional Brokers
Estimation System (I/B/E/S). We obtain returns and stock assignments to the DGTW
characteristics-based benchmarks from Russ Wermers’ website, and use these assignments to
calculate the daily version of the DGTW benchmark returns used in the analysis.2

          Throughout the paper, we use the 49 Fama-French industry portfolios as industry
benchmarks. Stock assignments to the 49 Fama-French industry benchmarks and their daily and
monthly returns are downloaded from Kenneth French’s website. 3 The Fama-French industry
classifications are sufficiently close to the three-digit SIC code industry definitions we employ to
define expertise trades (trades of firms within the insider’s same industry, see Section 2.4 for
further discussion) and at the same time they avoid classifying very small groups of stocks as
stand-alone industries; hence, the 49 Fama-French industry returns are less susceptible to extreme
idiosyncratic returns than the three-digit SIC code returns. Our results are, however, robust to the
choice of the industry benchmark.



2.3       Summary Statistics

          Table 1 presents summary statistics for the insiders in our sample. The 105 insiders are
affiliated with a total of 171 companies, and made 5,459 trades. On average, each insider is
affiliated with 1.63 companies, and the median insider is affiliated with only one firm. In our
sample, the maximum number of companies an insider is affiliated with is seven. The fifth row of

2
    The DGTW benchmarks are available at http://www.smith.umd.edu/faculty/rwermers/ftpsite/Dgtw/coverpage.htm
3
    http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/data_library.html

                                                           7
Panel A shows that insiders’ companies are similar in size to the average firm listed on NYSE and
AMEX, as the average insider firm is in the 48th percentile of the size distribution of NYSE-AMEX
companies. We also report details regarding the industry composition of insiders in our sample.
Financials are the most heavily represented industry in our sample, with 14.6% insiders associated
with firms in this industry, followed by computer hardware (7.6%) and business services (5.3%).
We verify in later analyses that our results are robust to excluding financial industry insiders.



2.4    Defining Expertise Stocks

       The majority of results in this study come from comparing the frequency and quality of
trades of insiders in stocks within their industry to those outside their industry. We define
“expertise trades” in reference to an insider’s firm. Stock trades made within the same three-digit
SIC industry as the insider’s firm are considered expertise trades, and all trades outside of the
insider’s industry are defined as “non-expertise trades.” In the appendix, we show that our results
remain qualitatively similar, but decline in magnitude and become noisier, when we use less
precise definitions of own-industry trades.

       Panel B of Table 1 displays the characteristics of insiders’ trades. In our sample, insiders
have nearly twice as many trades in own-firm stock as they do in the stocks of other firms in the
same industry, and they have about ten times as many non-expertise trades as they have expertise
trades. The average dollar value per trade is larger for expertise trades than for non-expertise trades
($27,656 vs. $20,979) and larger for expertise trades than for the average retail trade ($27,656 vs.
$13,174), but is smaller than the average value of own-firm open-market trades ($61,374). Finally,
Panel C shows that relative to non-expertise purchases and the purchases of all other retail traders,
the expertise stocks purchased are less likely to be low book-to-market (B/M) stocks, and are
slightly more likely to be stocks with high past returns. However, in general, expertise purchases
are quite similar to the non-expertise stocks and retail stocks purchased along the dimensions of
size, book to market, and past returns.




                                                      8
3       Trading Expertise Stocks Frequently

        We first examine the insiders’ trade composition. Because the value of insiders’ human
capital is correlated with the stock price performance of own-firm stock as well as own-industry
stocks, insiders should avoid holding stocks from their own industry unless they have an
informational advantage or suffer from a familiarity bias (false belief of having an informational
advantage due to familiarity) (Pool, Stoffman, and Yonker, 2012; Døskeland and Hvide, 2011).

        Table 2 examines the proportion of expertise trades of insiders relative to various
benchmarks. Panel A gives equal weight to all trades made by insiders, and compares the actual
percentage of expertise trades made by insiders to the percentage an insider would be expected to
make if she exhibited no trading tilt toward her own industry. The first two columns show that 8.4%
of all trades made by insiders are classified as expertise trades. This is a substantially greater tilt
toward expertise trades than one would expect unconditionally, as Column (1) shows that the
expected percentage of expertise trades should only be 4.1% based on the number of expertise
stocks relative to the universe of stocks in NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ. In other words, if
insiders traded all stocks in equal frequency, they would trade expertise stocks with only about
half the frequency with which they are traded in our sample.

        One concern with the results in Column (1) is the possibility that the insiders’ industries in
our sample are tilted toward industries in which retail traders particularly like to trade. If this is the
case, then insiders’ inclination toward expertise trades may not differ from the norm, defined as
the frequency with which retail traders in aggregate trade in this industry. Column (2) shows that
not only do insiders trade expertise stocks with a greater frequency than they should based on the
percentage of own-industry stocks in the market portfolio, but they also trade own-industry stocks
with a far greater frequency than other retail traders trade stocks in that given industry. In Column
(2), the benchmark is the observed percentage of trades in that industry for all other (non-insider)
retail traders in the LDB. The third row, showing actual minus benchmark, compares the actual
percentage of insider trades in expertise stocks with the frequency with which all traders in the
database trade stocks in that industry. Trades in expertise industries comprise only 4.2% percent
of the trades of other retail traders (in line with the benchmark of 4.1% in Column (1)), which is
again substantially lower than the frequency exhibited by insiders. The last row of Panel A shows
that by this definition, insiders trade expertise stocks 1.99 times more than expected.


                                                        9
       The analysis in the first two columns pools the trades of all insiders together and gives each
trade equal weight. By construction, this methodology gives more weight to the trades of insiders
who trade more frequently. We offer alternative weighting in the last two columns of Panel A,
where we instead calculate the trading tilt weighting each trader equally. The results also hold with
this weighting scheme.

       Panel B shows that the trading tilt toward own-industry stocks is even greater if we use a
dollar-weighted trade volume definition. In this case, the first two columns show that insiders trade
expertise stocks 2.72 times more than expected when using the benchmark of NYSE, AMEX, and
NASDAQ stocks, and 2.26 times more than expected when using the trades of other retail traders
as a benchmark. Columns (3) and (4) again demonstrate that the discrepancy between expected
(benchmark) and actual expertise trades is even larger when using a methodology that averages
over traders rather than trades.

       In summary, the results clearly show that industry insiders trade stocks in their own
industry more frequently. The higher frequency is not due to insiders’ industries being skewed
toward those in which retail traders trade disproportionately, as we also show that industry insiders
in these industries trade more frequently than other retail traders in these same industries. We next
examine whether the frequent trading of expertise industries reflects a familiarity bias or whether
insiders truly possess greater expertise in these stocks.



4      Trade Performance

4.1    Returns of Expertise Trades

       We next look at the profitability of insiders’ expertise and non-expertise trades. Two
potential hypotheses could explain the high frequency of trading own-industry stocks. First, the
familiarity bias hypothesis predicts that insiders tilt their trading toward own-industry stocks
because they are more familiar with or aware of these stocks. For example, Pool, Stoffman, and
Yonker (2012) find that mutual fund managers overweight stocks from their home states even
though own-state holdings do not perform better than other holdings. Similarly, Døskeland and
Hvide (2011) document that retail traders in Norway overweight industries in which they are
employed, with no superior performance.


                                                     10
        Second, the informational advantage hypothesis predicts that insiders tilt their trading
toward own-industry stocks because they possess an advantage in trading these stocks due to, for
instance, an increased ability to decipher public information. By exploring the returns to insiders’
trades we can discriminate between these two hypotheses. The familiarity bias motive for trading
predicts that own-industry trades should not exhibit outperformance, whereas the informational
advantage hypothesis predicts that own-industry trades should outperform.

        Figures 1 and 2 preview our main results. We begin by plotting the event-time buy-and-
hold DGTW-adjusted returns for portfolios, mimicking the purchases of industry insiders and other
retail traders in the LDB database for 63 trading days after portfolio formation. We follow
Seasholes and Zhu (2010) and skip a day between the transaction and the date at which we add the
stock to our portfolio.

        Figure 1 plots DGTW-adjusted cumulative returns for insiders’ expertise buys, for insiders’
non-expertise buys, and for buys of all other traders in the LDB database that we study. The figure
shows that insider expertise buys perform extremely well in the period following purchase, while
non-expertise buys and the buys of all other traders earn returns that are negative or near zero.

        Figure 2 shows returns for long buys and short sells; again, expertise trades perform
substantially better than non-expertise trades and the trades of all other traders. Although this
evidence indicates that expertise buys substantially outperform expertise sells, non-expertise buys
do not outperform non-expertise sells, nor do the buys of all other traders outperform the sells of
these traders.



4.1.1   Holdings-Based Calendar-Time Portfolios

        Our main analysis uses calendar-time portfolios to assess the profitability of insiders’
trades. Fama (1998) and Mitchell and Stafford (2000) strongly advocate the use of the calendar-
time portfolio methodology, and Seasholes and Zhu (2010) further argue that this methodology
addresses a number of pitfalls that can potentially affect studies of retail traders’ investments.

        We begin by using the calendar-time portfolio methodology to assess the holdings-based
returns of insiders. This analysis holds stocks for the period in which they are in an investors’
portfolio, and drops stocks from the portfolio at the end of the day on which they are sold. We also


                                                     11
use a transactions-based calendar-time portfolio methodology to assess whether the expertise
stocks that insiders buy outperform the expertise stocks that insiders sell. This methodology holds
purchased or sold stocks for a fixed period of time after the transaction. We also show that our
results are robust to using the buy-and-hold abnormal return methodology (BHAR) of Barber and
Lyon (1997).

       Table 3 presents the main results using the holdings-based methodology. To avoid mean-
reversion induced by the bid-ask spread, we follow Seasholes and Zhu (2010) and skip a day
between the actual purchase date and when we add the stock to our portfolio. Stocks are dropped
from the portfolio at the end of the day on which they are sold by the investor. Appendix B further
explains the holdings-based calendar-time methodology. Panel A of Table 3 shows raw portfolio
returns by sample year, reported in daily basis points, for all retail traders, all trades of insiders,
expertise trades of insiders, and non-expertise trades of insiders. Panel B presents Fama-French
alphas (Fama and French, 1993), Carhart alphas (Carhart, 1997), HXZ Q-factor alphas (Hou, Xue,
and Zhang, 2015), and Fama-French five-factor alphas (Fama and French, 2015). The results are
consistent across all models. Column (2) of Panel B shows that, in general, insiders do not exhibit
skill, as their trades earn an insignificantly positive alpha of around 1 basis point per day. However,
consistent with insiders possessing skill in trading in their own industry, Column (3) shows that
insiders do outperform on their expertise trades. Expertise trades make a statistically significant
alpha of between 4.9 and 5.8 basis points per day, depending on the model used. In contrast, the
non-expertise portfolio of insiders produces a small, statistically insignificant positive alpha. For
comparison purposes, Column (1) reports the alpha for the portfolio of all other retail traders.
Consistent with past research, retail traders do not exhibit skill on average.

       In the Internet Appendix, we show that the results are robust to a variety of sample choices.
One concern is that there are fewer stocks in the portfolio at the beginning of the sample. Table
IA3, Panel A shows that excluding 1991 from the analysis does not change the results. Table IA3
further addresses the concern that there are unequal numbers of stocks in the portfolio across
different days. Table IA3, Panel B weights each day by the aggregate dollar value invested in the
portfolio on a given day. Table IA3, Panel C weights each day by the number of stocks in the
portfolio. Both alternative weighting methodologies deliver the same results: the expertise
portfolio exhibits statistically significant outperformance, while the non-expertise portfolio
generally fails to exhibit skill. A final concern is that microcap stocks might be disproportionately

                                                      12
influencing the results. Table IA3, Panel D shows that excluding microcaps from the analysis
results in large, statistically significant alphas for the expertise portfolio but not for the non-
expertise portfolio.



4.1.2   Transactions-Based Calendar-Time Portfolios

        Next, we use a transactions-based calendar-time portfolio methodology to assess whether
insiders exhibit skill in their own-industry trades. If industry insiders have value-relevant
information regarding stocks in their industry of employment, then a portfolio of expertise stocks
purchased by insiders should outperform a portfolio composed of the expertise stocks sold by
insiders. The average holding period for insiders in our sample is roughly one year. We therefore
examine portfolios that hold stocks for 12 months following a buy or sell transaction. In Table IA5
of the Internet Appendix we show that all of the results are robust to a three-month or six-month
holding period. Appendix C gives further details about the transactions-based methodology.

        Table 4 separately reports the returns to buy and sell portfolios for expertise trades, non-
expertise trades, and the trades of all other retail traders. Columns (1) and (2) show that expertise
buys outperform expertise sells by more than six basis points per day. In contrast, the non-expertise
buys of insiders outperform non-expertise sells by less than one basis point per day, while buys
actually underperform sells for all other retail traders. The next four columns analyze the annual
differences in the buy and sell portfolios. Columns (3) and (4) present evidence that expertise buys
outperform expertise sells by a statistically significant 15.1% per year, and Columns (5) and (6)
show that the expertise buy-minus-sell portfolio has a statistically significant Carhart alpha of 16.0%
per year. Consistent with the earlier holdings-based results, non-expertise trades of insiders do not
exhibit any skill, as the buy-minus-sell portfolio earns only a statistically insignificant alpha of
3.0% per year.

        We perform some robustness tests. Internet Appendix Table IA4, Panel A, shows that the
results from equal-weighted portfolios are similar to the value-weighted results reported in Table
4. The rest of Table IA4 presents a number of robustness tests that confirm that the results are
robust to weighting days by aggregate dollar value invested, and that the results are robust to the
exclusion of microcap stocks and to the use of three- and six-month holding periods.



                                                     13
4.1.3   Buy-and-Hold Abnormal Returns

        We also confirm that our results are robust to alternative methods of computing returns.
We next report buy-and-hold abnormal returns and trade-size-weighted buy-and-hold abnormal
returns. The transactions-based calendar-time portfolio methodology does not facilitate the
examination of short-horizon windows, as, for instance, a three-month calendar-time portfolio will
at times have very few stocks in the expertise portfolio. Buy-and-hold portfolios do not have this
drawback. To gain further insight into the shorter-term performance of the stocks purchased and
sold by insiders, our buy-and-hold analysis focuses on three-month horizons. The Internet
Appendix reports results for 12-month horizons for all of our tests.

        Table IA1 examines the performance of expertise trades, non-expertise trades, and the
trades of all other retail traders using the buy-and-hold methodology. Columns (1) and (2) confirm
the calendar-time portfolio methodology results. Column (1) shows that expertise buys outperform
expertise sells by 6.0% in the three months after expertise trades. On the other hand, non-expertise
buys actually underperform non-expertise sells by a statistically significant 1.2%. The DGTW-
adjusted results reported in Column (2) lead to the same conclusion: expertise buys earn
significantly higher returns than expertise sells, but the same is not true of non-expertise trades.
The results again support the conclusion that insiders’ own-industry trades exhibit skill, while their
trades outside their industry of knowledge do not.

        The last three columns report trade-size weighted returns. Trade size appears to be
correlated with performance. The outperformance of expertise buys relative to sells is substantially
higher when trade-size weighting the returns. This result is consistent with evidence from the
mutual fund literature that stocks overweighted by a mutual fund or fund family tend to outperform
in the future, presumably because they reflect the “best idea” trades of a fund or family (Pomorski,
2009; Cohen, Polk, and Silli, 2010). The results we present in the rest of the paper are calculated
weighting each trade equally; however, the same results hold, and are often stronger, when we
weight each trade by its size. We choose to present the more conservative equal-weighted results
for one primary reason: because we only observe the insiders’ stock trades with the LBD trading
account, we cannot estimate each insider’s overall wealth and therefore cannot disentangle a
conviction effect from a wealth effect. In other words, we cannot completely rule out the possibility

                                                     14
that larger trades have high returns because, at least in part, wealthier insiders are more skilled
rather than because insiders trade using larger sums of money when they hold stronger conviction.

         In some cases, trades are closed out before the end of the three-month period, and these
sale decisions are not reflected in the returns reported in Table IA1. Table IA2 reports round-trip
buy-and-hold abnormal returns that take into account the timing of the investor’s sale decision.
The table separates trades into those held for less than three months and those held longer than
three months. If a stock is sold before the end of the three-month holding period, then the three-
month return is replaced with the holding period return.4 As Table IA2 shows, the results are robust
to an analysis that takes into account the holding period of the insider, and accounts for these
relatively shorter round-trip trades.5



4.2      Industry Timing versus Stock Picking

         The superior performance of expertise trades is potentially due to insiders’ ability to time
their own industries. We test this hypothesis by examining industry-adjusted excess returns. If the
outperformance of expertise trades results from industry timing ability, then we would not expect
to see outperformance when adjusting by industry returns.

         We repeat the main tests discussed in Section 4.1 for industry-adjusted returns, and present
the results in Columns (3) and (6) of Table IA1. Buy-minus-sell expertise returns are similar and
slightly smaller in magnitude than the DGTW-adjusted returns reported in the same table,
indicating that insiders may possess substantial stock-picking skill that is not attributable to
industry timing. The results suggest that insiders possess skill in identifying winners and losers in
the cross-section of industry stocks.



4.3      Is the Performance Driven by Local Expertise Stocks?


4
  In Table IA2, we assume that the first sale following a purchase of the same stock by the same individual closes the
individual’s position.
5
  Interestingly, when comparing the last row of the second and third set of results, we find that non-expertise and retail
trades appear to exhibit the disposition effect in that the positions sold off early exhibit larger gains than the positions
they continue holding. In contrast, expertise trades of insiders do not appear to exhibit the disposition effect, as the
positions closed early exhibit smaller gains than those that they continue holding. The evidence suggests that skill
may ameliorate the bias of the disposition effect.

                                                                 15
        Prior research indicates that investors outperform in their local stock picks (e.g., Coval and
Moskowitz, 2001; Ivkovic and Weisbenner, 2005). If firms in an industry tend to cluster
geographically, then expertise trades could be disproportionately tilted toward local stocks. We
next examine whether the outperformance that we observe in expertise trades can be attributed to
local firms.

        We follow Ivkovic and Weisbenner (2005) and consider stocks of firms located within 250
miles of the insider to be local. Because the LDB database only contains zip code information for
about 60% of the insiders in our sample, we use the zip code of the insider firm headquarters to
define local stocks.

        Table IA6 of the Internet Appendix presents the results of this analysis. Ivkovic and
Weisbenner (2005) report that 30% of retail investors’ holdings are in local stocks. Table IA6
shows that the corresponding number for insiders in our sample is about 25%, suggesting that, in
general, insiders are slightly less prone than common retail investors to hold geographically close
stocks. However, 43.4% of expertise trades are in local stocks, consistent with geographic
clustering of industries.

        We also investigate the returns of expertise trades in local firms. Table IA6, Panel A reports
equal-weighted abnormal returns separately for local and nonlocal firms. Panel B presents a similar
analysis on a trade size–weighted basis. Both panels indicate that when focusing only on nonlocal
stocks, expertise trades continue to exhibit substantial outperformance. The analysis clearly shows
that the subset of expertise trades that are local are not driving the results.

        Finally, we also assess the geographic distribution of insiders. Insiders in our sample are
relatively dispersed, representing 40 different states, with the greatest number of insiders from
California. In unreported analyses, we confirm that the results are robust to the exclusion of trades
in firms headquartered in California.



4.4     Alternative Industry Definition

        In Appendix D, we show that our performance results are robust to alternative definitions
of own-industry trades. In particular, we examine seven alternative, less precise, definitions of
industry. The looser industry classifications have the advantage of enlarging the sample of


                                                       16
expertise trades; however, the cost of the looser industry classifications is that industry is measured
with more noise, causing less precision in identifying trades that are likely to be true expertise
trades. Appendix Table A1 repeats the analysis of Tables 2 to 5 using the alternative industry
definitions. As discussed below, these results are robust to the alternative industry definitions.

       Panel A of Table A1 details the number of purchases and sales that are classified as
expertise under each of the alternative industry definitions. The sample size of purchases ranges
from 214 using the three-digit definition of industry to 688 using the Fama-French 12 industry
definition of expertise. As Panel B shows, the conclusion that insiders overweight own-industry
trades is robust to all alternative industry definitions. Similarly, Panel C shows that using the metric
of holdings-based alphas, insiders exhibit outperformance in their expertise trades under all
definitions of industry, although in some cases the outperformance is not statistically significant.
Panels D and E show that the outperformance results are also robust to the alternative industry
definitions when examining the transactions-based 12-month buy-minus-sell annualized Carhart
alphas, and DGTW-adjusted three-month buy-and-hold abnormal returns, respectively. Table A1
shows that the results of Tables 2 to 5 are qualitatively similar, though generally not as strong,
when using the alternative industry definitions.



4.5     Frequency of Expertise Trades

        The findings presented in Section 4 suggest that corporate insiders’ trades in stocks in their
own industry are on average profitable. Given this result, it is interesting to know whether some
insiders trade expertise stocks more than others and whether trading frequency is related to skill.
In Table IA8 of the Internet Appendix we provide concise answers to these questions. Columns
(1) to (3) report the 3-month abnormal return results which were discussed in Sections 4.1.3 and
4.3. In Columns (4) to (6) we repeat the same tests after excluding the top 10% of insiders ranked
by number of expertise trades executed. The first result in this table is that the number of expertise
trades in the latter tests is significantly smaller. In fact, the 10% of insiders that trade expertise
stocks the most execute between 40% and 50% of such trades, depending on the industry definition
used. Second, the profitability of expertise trades improves after the insiders that trade the most
are excluded. Moreover, in an unreported test, we find that there is no significant correlation
between the number of expertise trades an insider makes and the average profitability of his/her

                                                      17
trades. Therefore, the main findings presented in Section 4 are driven by the bulk of insiders who
trade less frequently – most of them trading expertise stocks one to four times over the sample.



5      What Types of Information Are Executives Trading On?

       The abnormal performance of within-industry trades of insiders documented in Section 4.1
is consistent with multiple potential explanations. The first is that insiders are simply better able
to decipher public information about their industry of expertise (“public information hypothesis”).
Recent evidence indicates that some individuals possess an advantage at interpreting public
information in certain settings. For example, Alldredge and Cicero (2015) attribute some profitable
insider trading to the ability of insiders to better interpret public information. Ivkovic, Sialm, and
Weisbenner (2008) show that individuals with more concentrated holdings outperform.
Kacperczyk, Sialm, and Zheng (2005), Kempf, Manconi, and Spalt (2014), and Cici, Gehde-Trapp,
Goricke, and Kempf (2014) all conclude that some traders possess expertise in certain industries.
Bradley, Gokkaya, and Liu (2015) also provide evidence that past industry experience is
advantageous in deciphering public information, finding that analyst forecasts are more accurate
for firms in industries in which the analyst has previous work experience. It is not surprising that
insiders possess an advantage in trading on public information within their industry of expertise.
The nature of insiders’ jobs encourages them to be attentive to industry news and day-to-day
developments.

       Alternative explanations for abnormal expertise trades rely on insiders trading ahead of
specific news events. If this is the case, expertise trades are profitable, not because insiders possess
skill or expertise in deciphering public information, but rather because they are privy to news
regarding firms in their industry.

       In this section, we conduct several tests that attempt to identify evidence of specific sources
of insider expertise profits. To do so, we focus on the most important specific sources of insider
profits that have been detected in the literature. Although no variable is likely to be correlated with
the entire set of profitable trades, our purpose is to provide several tests that can capture the main
sources of profitable insider trading documented in the literature.




                                                      18
5.1    Characteristics of Traded Stocks: Hard-to-Value Stocks

       Our first set of tests looks at the characteristics of stocks traded by industry insiders. In
particular, we want to determine whether the stocks traded by insiders provide an opportunity to
use an informational advantage. If insiders possess an advantage in processing information within
their industry of expertise, this advantage should be most valuable in the subset of stocks that is
most difficult to value. Importantly, we note that such an informational advantage could come
from public or private sources. Hard-to-value stocks simply have greater information asymmetry.
We use three separate measures to characterize hard-to-value stocks, and each suggests that trades
in hard-to-value stocks tend to be the most profitable.

       We use size, residual analyst coverage, and idiosyncratic volatility as proxies for being
hard to value. Hong, Lim, and Stein (2000) and Zhang (2006) argue that small stocks and stocks
with low analyst coverage have more valuation uncertainty, while Zhang (2006) and Kumar (2009)
maintain that stocks with higher idiosyncratic volatility also face greater valuation uncertainty. We
follow Hong, Lim, and Stein (2000) and obtain residual analyst coverage from a regression of
analyst coverage on size and a NASDAQ dummy. The regression is run each month in separate
NYSE-AMEX size quintiles. We follow Ang, Hodrick, Xing, and Zhang (2006) and calculate
idiosyncratic volatility using daily returns in month t – 1.

       Table 5 presents the results of this analysis. Panel A classifies stocks by size, Panel B
classifies stocks based on the residual analyst coverage measure of Hong, Lim, and Stein (2000),
and Panel C classifies stocks based on idiosyncratic volatility. Each panel displays future returns
for expertise buys and sells for stocks that are split into two groups based on whether they are
above or below the in-sample median for the given characteristic. In each of the three panels, the
expertise buy minus expertise sell portfolio exhibits statistically significant differences in future
returns for only the hard-to-value stocks.

       In Panel A, expertise buys of hard-to-value stocks (stocks with below-median size) earn
three-month future DGTW-adjusted returns that are 12.8% higher than for expertise sells of hard-
to-value stocks. The difference is statistically significant. In contrast, expertise buys actually
slightly underperform expertise sells (by a statistically insignificant -1.2%) for stocks of above-
median size. Panels B and C provide very similar results when classifying stocks based on residual
analyst coverage and idiosyncratic volatility. Regardless of the proxy for hard-to-value used,

                                                     19
statistically significant outperformance of expertise buys relative to expertise sells is confined to
only hard-to-value stocks. In Panel B, stocks with below-median residual analyst coverage exhibit
a three-month future return differential of 8.5% between expertise buys and sells, while for those
stocks with above-median analyst coverage, expertise buys earn a statistically insignificant 3.2%
higher return than expertise sells in the three months following the transaction. The results are
similar in Panel C, as the outperformance is again confined to only hard-to-value stocks. Within
transactions for stocks with above-median idiosyncratic volatility, expertise buys outperform
expertise sells by 10.7% over the following three months, while the difference is a statistically
insignificant 1.1% for those stocks with below-median idiosyncratic volatility.

       Overall, we find that insiders outperform when trading hard-to-value stocks. These results
bolster the previous results about outperformance and suggest that industry insiders exploit some
type of information asymmetry when trading stocks in their industry.



5.2    Tests for Trading Ahead of News Events

       We next turn to testing specific sources of insider profits that have been detected in the
literature. To do so, we isolate instances in which a specific source of insider profits is more likely
to be used or is more profitable, and then test whether the executives in our sample are more likely




                                                      20
to trade in these circumstances and whether their outperformance is stronger when they do. We
conduct several tests that attempt to answer the following questions:

        (1) Do some expertise trades coincide with the trades of the firm’s insiders?
        (2) Is there trading ahead of news?
                a. Trading ahead of earnings announcements of the traded firm
                b. Trading ahead of earnings announcements of own firms
                c. Trading ahead of merger announcements

        These tests encompass the settings in which the prior literature documents that profitable
insider trading is most likely to occur.



5.2.1   Expertise Trades that Coincide with Trades of the Firm’s Insiders

        The most general way to test whether expertise profits emanate from the same source as
insider trading profits is to test whether the expertise trades are correlated with the trades of insiders.
For instance, if an industry insider trades the stock of Firm A at the same time that insiders of Firm
A trade their own-firm’s stock, then this potentially signals that the expertise profits share a
common explanation with insider profits. Our tests use three sets of trades by insiders of the traded
firm: (1) all trades, (2) trades of top executives, and (3) trades identified as capturing valuable
information based on Cohen, Malloy, and Pomorski (2012).

        Table 6 tests the hypothesis that the timing of the trades of industry insiders is correlated
with the timing of the trades of insiders of the traded firms. Specifically, we investigate whether
expertise buys are disproportionately more likely to occur in conjunction with insider trading buys.
We conduct an analogous test for sells. For each expertise trade, we examine the fraction of insider
trading over our entire sample period that occurs in a window around the expertise trade. We then
average this value across all expertise trades. If expertise trade profits emanate from the same
source as the profits of insiders, we would expect to find that a disproportionate amount of insider
trading occurs in close proximity to expertise trades with the same sign.

        The timing of the trades in this test is important. Industry insiders might pay close attention
to the actions of other insiders, in particular to those in their own industry, and they might mimic
those trades once they become public. To avoid capturing mimicked trades based on public


                                                       21
information, in Table 6 we consider two different windows: the first spanning from one day before
to seven days after, and the second spanning from one day before to 15 days after each LDB trade.

        In Panel A, we examine whether the expertise and non-expertise trades analyzed in this
paper occur in conjunction with the trading of all insiders at the traded firm who filed trades with
the SEC. In Panels B and C of Table 6, we posit that some subsamples of insiders might be
particularly informative. The results in Panel A fail to provide support for expertise trades
occurring in conjunction with insider trades. In Columns (1) to (6), we analyze insider trading
purchase ratios. Comparing the first row of Panel A to the second and third rows, we find that
insider purchases are just as likely to occur in the window around expertise buys as they are to
occur in the window around non-expertise buys and the buys of all other retail traders. The results
hold for all window periods chosen. Moreover, comparing “buy” and “sell” columns in a given
time window across the first row of Panel A, we find that insiders of the traded firms are not more
likely to engage in insider trading purchases around expertise buys than they are around expertise
sells. Columns (7) to (12) repeat the same test, but for sale ratios instead of purchase ratios, and
they show similar results: expertise sales do not take place in conjunction with insider trading sales.

        The trades of high-ranking insiders that oversee the daily activities of a company are likely
to be particularly informative about the source of insider trading profits as these insiders have
access to more actionable information than the average insider reporting to the SEC. For this reason,
in Panel B we examine only the trades of top executives of traded firms.6 We find that insiders of
the traded firm are more likely to buy in conjunction with expertise buys than retail trader buys
(Columns (1) and (4)). However, the differences between expertise and retail trades are not
statistically significant in one-tailed tests (p-values are 0.17 and 0.20, respectively). Insiders are
more likely to engage in insider trading purchases around expertise purchases than expertise sales,
but again the difference is not statistically significant. The analysis of insider trading sale ratios in
Columns (7) to (12) of Panel B reveals no evidence in support of a common component to insider
and expertise profits. Insiders are much less likely to engage in insider selling around expertise
sales than around non-expertise sales and retail trader sales. Additionally, comparing “buy” and




6
 The results presented are robust to different definitions of top executives, all of which include CEOs, CFOs, and
COOs. Under the different definitions, 9.5% to 15% of the insider trades are defined as being made by top executives.

                                                             22
“sell” columns in a given time window, we find that insiders of the traded firms are not more likely
to engage in selling around expertise sales than they are around expertise purchases.

         To provide assurance that our test has power to identify trades that coincide the trades of
insiders, we also report results for non-executive insiders. We expect the trades of non-executive
insiders to coincide with those of executive insiders at the same firm. The last row of Panel B
shows that this is indeed the case. The purchases of non-executive insiders very strongly coincide
with the purchases of executive insiders. Similarly, the timing of sales of non-executive insiders
is very highly correlated with the timing of sales of executive insiders.

         Cohen, Malloy, and Pomorski (2012) propose a new way to identify the insiders whose
trades are likely to contain more valuable information. They analyze the past history of trading at
the individual insider level, and they suggest that insiders who have always traded in the same
month for the past few years are “routine” insiders and that their trades do not predict future returns.
Conversely, the remaining insiders can be defined as “opportunistic.” In Panel C, we repeat the
test using only the trades of opportunistic insiders7 to compute the trading ratios. The results in
Panel C are similar to those for the executives-only sample in Panel B. We find some weak
evidence that insiders are more likely to buy around expertise buys than non-expertise buys or
retail buys and that insiders are more likely to buy around expertise buys than expertise sells,
though none of the differences are statistically significant. Insider sells are again more likely to
occur around expertise buys than expertise sells, inconsistent with expertise sells sharing the same
sources of information as insider sells. In the last row, we perform a test to verify the power of the
test carried out in this table. In particular, we check whether the test can detect simultaneous trading
by opportunistic and non-opportunistic insiders at the same firm. This test is analogous to the one
for non-executives in Panel B, and the results again suggest that the average trading ratio test
presented in this table has the power to detect simultaneous trading with the same sign when it is
taking place.8


7
  Cohen, Malloy, and Pomorski (2012) suggest two definitions of “routine,” one at the trader level and one at the trade
level, and report that both are equally good. To maximize the power in our tests, we count as opportunistic the trades
made by opportunistic insiders as well as the non-routine trades made by routine insiders.
          8
            Comparing the last row of Panel B with the last row of Panel C in Table 6 reveals that non-executives seem
to trade in conjunction with top executives more than non-opportunistic insiders do with opportunistic insiders. This
is not surprising because, by virtue of how Cohen, Malloy and Pomorski (2012) define opportunistic and routine
insiders, a significant fraction of the trades of any given non-opportunistic insider takes place in the same calendar
month of different years, while no such patterns exists for the trades of opportunistic insiders.

                                                              23
       The weak evidence of increased insider trading of top executives and opportunistic insiders
around expertise buys relative to non-expertise buys and retail buys motivates us to conduct further
tests. In Panel D, we examine whether the expertise buys occurring in close proximity to insider
buys are contributing to the expertise outperformance results.

       The regressions in Panel D include all buy trades in the LDB. The regressions include a
dummy for expertise buys and a dummy for non-expertise buys, with retail buys as the omitted
group. The baseline results in Column (1) document the earlier results that expertise buys
outperform retail trader buys. In this panel, we identify expertise, non-expertise, and retail buys
that occur in conjunction with insider trading purchases based on two windows: from t – 1 to t + 7
and from t – 1 to t + 15 around the LDB trades. Specifically, for each LBD purchase, we compute
an indicator equal to 1 if there was an insider trading purchase in the same stock in the selected
window. Columns (2) and (3) focus on trades in conjunction with those of top executives. The first
row of coefficients documents that retail buys occurring in conjunction with insider buys
outperform; however, the same is not true for expertise buys occurring in conjunction with insider
buys. Instead, the coefficients in Columns (2) and (3) for the expertise buy variable interacted with
insider trading are negative, suggesting that expertise buys occurring in conjunction with insider
buys actually underperform the rest of the expertise buys, though only Column (3) is statistically
significant. Columns (4) and (5) use the Cohen, Malloy, and Pomorski (2012) definition of
opportunistic insider buys, and the results again show that expertise buys occurring in conjunction
with insider buys do not outperform the rest of the expertise buys.

       Panel E replicates the analysis in Panel D using sales rather than purchases. The results in
Panel E fail to provide evidence that expertise sales occurring in conjunction with insider sales
outperform the rest of the expertise sale trades. In conclusion, the analysis focusing on the trading
of insiders of other firms fails to turn up any evidence that the profits of expertise trades share a
common source with the profits of insider trades.

       One concern is that our regression non-result is driven by weak power rather than lack of
results. To assess whether this is the case, consider Panels D and E of Table 6. In particular, the
coefficient on the interaction between the insider trading dummy and the expertise buy (or sell)
has, in most specifications, the opposite sign than is predicted by the hypothesis that expertise
trades occur in conjunction with insider trades. Furthermore, the insider expertise buy and sell


                                                     24
variables continue to maintain their economic and statistical significance in the presence of the
interaction term, indicating that expertise trades that do not occur concurrently with insider trades
still deliver large significant outperformance.

       Although fully ruling out that expertise and insider trades share a common source is not
possible, our results thus far fail to uncover evidence that insiders exploit inside information in
their trades. Rather, our findings are most consistent with insiders being able to more efficiently
process public information than other traders.



5.2.2 Trading Ahead of Earnings Announcements of the Traded Firm?

       Next, we examine whether the profitability of expertise trades results from trading ahead
of news. We begin by focusing on trading that occurs immediately in advance of earnings
announcements of the traded firm.

       Table 7 assesses whether industry insiders outperform in their trades occurring in advance
of earnings announcements. Panel A of Table 7 reports the earnings announcement CAR for
expertise stocks that are traded in the period prior to an earnings announcement of the traded firm.
Three different methodologies are used to classify expertise buys and sells. “All” includes all
trades made by an insider. In this case, the same stock can potentially be classified as both a buy
and a sell. “Net” classifies a stock as an expertise buy or sell based on the net quantity traded
before an earnings announcement. “Last” classifies trades as buys or sells based only on the last
transaction occurring in the period leading up to the earnings announcement. Regardless of the
classification methodology used, expertise buys exhibit positive but statistically insignificant
returns, while expertise sells exhibit negative but statistically insignificant returns. The difference
in returns between expertise buys and sells is never significant at the 10% level for trades occurring
in the window from (-15, -2) before an earnings announcement. For the window that includes all
trades made in the period leading up to an earnings announcement, the difference in returns
between expertise buys and sells is significant at the 10% level under the “All” classification
methodology, but is not statistically significant using the alternative methodologies. Table 7, Panel
A, fails to uncover evidence that the observed outperformance of expertise trades is driven by
trading ahead of earnings announcements.



                                                      25
           To ensure that these non-results are not due to the tests having weak power, we conduct an
additional test. This time, we examine industry insiders’ performance after we remove all the trades
that take place immediately prior to the traded firms’ earnings announcements. If industry insiders’
outperformance is driven by trading ahead of the earnings releases of the firms that they trade,
removing these trades should reduce the observed outperformance. In fact, when we remove these
trades, the performance of industry insiders remains virtually unchanged. The returns that are
earned by industry insiders around earnings announcements in expertise trades (buy-minus-sell) is
0.93%, which is about 15% of the three-month adjusted buy-sell DGTW-adjusted returns reported
earlier.

           Also, in an unreported analysis, we examine the profitability of insider trades of
economically linked firms. Using Compustat’s historical customer segments file to identify
customers or suppliers of insider firms, we find that less than 1% of trades in our sample are trades
of customers or suppliers. These few trades do not substantially contribute to the ability of insiders
to outperform on expertise trades.

           We also examine the frequency of trades in same-industry firms around the earnings
announcements of the traded firms. The analysis is presented in Internet Appendix Figure IA1.
The top panel (Figure IA1a) shows the chronological distribution of buy transactions, and the
bottom panel (Figure IA1b) presents the chronological distribution of sell transactions. As a
benchmark, we include the distribution of trades by insiders in non-expertise stocks as well as the
distribution of trades by other retail traders. The charts show that the propensity of industry insiders
to trade expertise stocks around earnings announcements is largely in line with the propensity of
other traders to trade these stocks and with their own propensity to trade non-expertise stocks.



5.2.3      Trading Ahead of Earnings Announcements of Own Firm?

           Another possibility is that insiders trade on own-firm private information that is likely to
have implications for other firms in the industry. For example, information that own-firm earnings
will be abnormally high might indicate increased industry profitability that can be exploited by
trading in closely related firms.




                                                       26
        In Table 7, Panel B, we explore whether insiders’ expertise trades potentially reflect trading
on insider information regarding their own firm. To test this hypothesis, we examine the
profitability of expertise trades that occur in the period immediately preceding the own-firm
earnings announcement of the insider. If insiders have information regarding a shock to
profitability for their own company, they may seek to exploit this information by trading in the
stocks of closely related companies. For example, Tookes (2008) finds that information-based
trades (inferred from order flows) in the stocks of competitors of announcing firms predict the
announcing firms’ returns.

        The relationship between own-firm earnings surprises and the future performance of
closely related firms is potentially ambiguous. For instance, a positive shock to profitability for
one firm in an industry might reflect an industry-wide profitability shock, predicting a positive
relationship between own-firm earnings and the future performance of own-industry firms. On the
other hand, a positive shock to profitability for one firm could result from taking market share
from other industry firms, predicting a negative relationship between own-firm earnings and the
future performance of own-industry firms. Our analysis allows us to distinguish either of these
possibilities.

        Table 7, Panel B, analyzes the expertise trades of insiders in the 15 days prior to an insider’s
own-firm earnings announcement and in the entire period leading up to an insider’s own-firm
earnings announcement, and specifically examines the returns accruing to these expertise trades in
the days around the earnings announcement of the insider’s own firm. If insiders are using
information regarding their own firm’s earnings announcement to trade profitably in other stocks
in the industry, then we would expect to see that expertise buy (sell) transactions occurring in close
proximity to own-firm earnings announcements outperform (underperform) in the days around
those announcement. Table 7, Panel B, shows that when focusing on stocks purchased and sold
prior to an own-firm earnings announcement, the buys do outperform the sells in the three-day
period around the announcement, but the outperformance is not statistically significant. The
outperformance is insignificant when using either the all-days or 15-day window to define
transactions.

        As in Section 5.2.2., we are concerned that our test lacks power and therefore returns no
significant results. To check whether this is the case, we perform a similar analysis to that we


                                                      27
performed in the previous section. Specifically, we measure the performance of industry insiders
without the trades that appear just before their own company’s earnings announcements. The
updated performance results remain virtually the same as before. Another way to see this is to
focus on Column (2) of Table 7, Panel B. The expertise buy-minus-sell return of 0.95% is only
about 1/7 of the magnitude of the three-month adjusted buy-sell DGTW-adjusted returns that we
documented earlier.

        A final concern is that a positive own-firm earnings surprise sometimes reflects good news
for other industry firms and sometimes reflects bad news, resulting in no abnormal expertise buys
or sells on average. We explore this possibility in Internet Appendix Figure IA2 by testing for the
presence of abnormal trading in expertise stocks around own-firm earnings announcements. To
the extent that own-firm earnings have any implications (positive or negative) for other firms in
the industry, we should expect to see an increase in trading in expertise stocks in advance of own-
firm earnings announcements. Internet Appendix Figure IA2 reveals some patterns; however, these
do not seem to be consistent with the own-firm information story. Figure IA2a examines the
frequency of expertise purchases relative to non-expertise purchases in five-day increments in the
period leading up to and including the announcement, and Figure IA2b shows analogous statistics
for sales. In the five-day period leading up to an earnings announcement, non-expertise purchases
actually occur with a greater frequency than expertise purchases. The same is true for non-expertise
sales relative to expertise sales.

        Interestingly, industry insiders make more expertise trades on the day of the earnings
announcement (for purchases) and in the following days (for sales). This pattern is consistent with
the industry familiarity story. Once earnings are released, industry insiders feel able to process the
information and use it to trade other firms. These results show that outperformance in own-industry
trades does not appear to stem from industry insiders using information related to own-firm
earnings announcements.



5.2.4   Trading Ahead of Merger Announcements?

        M&As are major events in a firm’s life. These events typically require months of
negotiations, and the information about them could potentially leak and be known within the
industry. Several papers detect abnormal trading activity in the period leading up to an M&A

                                                     28
announcement and attribute it to private information (e.g., Keown and Pinkerton, 1981; Cao, Chen,
and Griffin, 2005; Bodnaruk, Massa, and Siminov, 2009; Griffin, Shu, and Topaloglu, 2012; Kedia
and Zhou, 2014; Augustin, Brenner, and Subrahmanyam, 2015). In contrast to other corporate
announcements, M&A announcements are typically completely unexpected events that lead to
substantial price increases for target firms. Thus, they are a prime setting for earning potentially
large returns. We, therefore, follow the prior literature by analyzing trading prior to M&A
announcements.

       In Table 8, we test whether insiders trade ahead of M&As within their industries. The table
compares trading in target firms prior to M&A announcements for insider expertise trades, insider
non-expertise trades, and all other retail traders. Panel A displays results for M&A announcements
with positive cumulative abnormal return reactions on the two days around the announcement (t
and t + 1) for the target firm, and Panel B displays results for large positive abnormal reactions
(defined as announcement returns greater than 5%). Panels A and B indicate that there is very little
trading in target firms prior to M&A announcements.

       Panel B shows that there is only one instance in which an insider purchased the stock of
another firm in her own industry in the 30 days before a meaningful M&A announcement was
made (Panel B, Column (2), first row). Six non-expertise purchases took place before an M&A
with a high abnormal reaction was announced (Panel B, Columns (1) to (3), second row). These
numbers account for only a tiny fraction of the expertise and non-expertise trades (0.39% and
0.20%, respectively). In comparison, the percentage of purchases made by other retail investors
that happened before an M&A (Panel B, Columns (1) to (3), third row) is 0.23%. Overall, industry
insiders do not appear to be more likely to place buy orders ahead of M&As than other retail traders,
regardless of whether the target is a firm in their industry.

       To be cautious, we further analyze the one expertise trade that was placed before M&A
activity. The purchase happened nine days before a friendly takeover, which was ultimately
completed and led to the delisting of the target firm’s shares about six months after the initial
announcement. The insider realized the position before the delisting occurred and earned a round-
trip return of 35%. However, the size of the trade was only about $20,000, which is less than the
size of the average expertise trade. Moreover, the insider seems to have sold the stock too soon
after the announcement, forfeiting a further potential gain of about 15%.


                                                      29
       Finally, we check the potential impact of this single trade by excluding it from the sample
and find that it does not have any material effect on the results. These findings are not consistent
with insiders actively trading on M&A information about other firms in their own industry.



5.2.5 Additional Analysis

       We provide an additional, albeit weaker, test of the hypothesis that expertise and insider
profits emanate from the same source. Of the 105 insiders in our sample, 23 are associated with
financial firms. This group is interesting to explore in isolation because these executives
potentially possess information about client firms outside their industry. In other words, we test
whether these insiders in financial firms profitably trade firms that we generally would call non-
expertise (firms outside the insiders’ industry). A growing body of literature provides evidence of
informed trading in non-own-company stock by financial insiders (e.g., Acharya and Johnson,
2007; Massa and Rehman, 2008; Bodnaruk, Massa, and Siminov, 2009; Acharya and Johnson,
2010; Ivashina and Sun, 2011; Massoud, Nandy, Saunders, and Song, 2011). Thus, if insiders in
financial firms used their inside information, we would expect to observe better performance on
not only their expertise trades but also on their non-expertise stocks (trading firms outside their
industry).

       Appendix Table IA9 shows little evidence to support this supposition. First, the subset of
insiders in financial firms are not driving the expertise results, as financial firm insiders actually
perform slightly worse on their expertise trades than nonfinancial insiders. Second, insiders in
financial firms exhibit no outperformance in their non-expertise trades. For instance, the buy-
minus-sell portfolio earns an insignificant 38 basis points in the three-month holding period.

       Overall, the results again support the notion that these insiders do not possess unconditional
trading skill, but instead are skilled in trading stocks in their specific areas of expertise. Financial
firm insiders are an obvious group in which to explore the presence of informed trading because
they are more likely than others to have direct access to other firms’ non-public material
information. The fact that their expertise trades do not earn abnormal returns provides further
evidence that the performance of insiders’ expertise trades is not likely to share a common source
with insider profits. The drawback of this test is the small sample size, and the results should be
considered with this fact in mind.

                                                      30
5.3     Alternative Industry Definition

       Next, we examine whether our conclusions regarding the source of expertise trade
profitability are robust to the seven alternative classifications of industry used in Appendix Table
A1. Appendix Table A2 repeats the analyses in Tables 6-10 using the alternative industry
definitions. As Panel A of Table A2 shows, defining industry according to the alternative
classifications enlarges the expertise sample considerably depending on the classification used.
For instance, using the Fama-French 12 industry classification enlarges the sample size of
expertise trades to 1,277 trades.

       Appendix Table A2 shows that the conclusions regarding the source of expertise profits
are unchanged when using the larger samples of expertise trades. Panel B of Table A2 shows that
when using the larger sample of expertise trades, expertise profitability is again confined to the
most hard-to-value stocks, though the differences are not always statistically significant with the
looser industry classifications. Panels C and D show that expertise trades still fail to occur in
conjunction with the trades of insiders when using the larger samples of expertise trades, and panel
E and F show that the expertise trades that happen in conjunction with insider trading at the traded
firms do not substantially contribute to the overall good performance of expertise trades. The final
three panels of Table A2 replicate the tests of Tables 8, 9, and 10, respectively, using the alternative
industry classifications. Panels G and H show that expertise trades ahead of earnings
announcements still fail to exhibit outperformance. Finally, Panel I shows that the larger sample
of expertise trades still fails to find any evidence of profitable trading in advance of M&A
announcements.



6      Which Insiders Trade Profitably?

       In this section, we briefly examine the characteristics of the insiders who trade most
profitably. The insider population that is required to report their trades to the SEC under US law
is composed of high-level executives and members of boards of directors, as well as individuals
who are more remote from the day-to-day operations, such as recently departed employees and
shareholders with a large stake in the company.


                                                      31
       In unreported analyses, we find that the outperformance of own-industry trades is present
for both executives and board members. Perhaps unsurprisingly, executives display slightly better
performance than board members, but this difference is not statistically significant. Former or
retired employees rarely trade stocks in the industry of their previous employer, and they do not
exhibit outperformance on these trades.



7      Conclusion

       We present the first analysis of insider trades in non-inside stocks. We show that insider
trades disproportionately consist of stocks within the insider’s industry of expertise. This trading
tilt toward same-industry stocks could represent a familiarity bias in which insiders invest in what
they know. Alternatively, it could be the case that insiders possess a comparative advantage in
trading stocks in their industry of expertise. We present evidence consistent with the latter, as
insider trades in own-industry stocks vastly outperform trades in non-own-industry stocks.

       Our analysis finds important differences between the trading ability of insiders outside and
within their industry. Outside their industry, insiders are not skilled traders. In contrast, insiders
do possess superior trading skill within their industry of expertise. This superior ability stems from
stock picking rather than industry timing and is concentrated in stocks that are the hardest to value.
The interpretation most consistent with our findings is that industry insiders have an advantage in
processing public information regarding firms in their industry of expertise.

       Our analysis is also relevant to the debate regarding familiarity and trading skill. Our results
suggest that familiarity of a high level, for instance, the level of industry familiarity exhibited by
insiders, is a source of trading skill. Furthermore, our findings can explain some of the heterogeity
in trading skill among retail traders (Kelley and Tetlock, 2013; Kaniel, Saar, and Titman, 2008;
and Kaniel et al., 2012).

       Finally, our results shed light on the role that expertise plays in the trades of insiders.
Alldredge and Cicero (2015) show that expertise and increased attentiveness to public information
relative to outside investors allows insiders to make profitable sales of own-firm stock. Our
evidence adds to the existing literature on insider trading by showing that industry insiders use
their expertise to engage in profitable trading outside their own firm.


                                                     32
       An interesting question is whether the documented effect is larger or smaller in recent years
than during our sample period of 1991–1996. On the one hand, due to increases in information
dissemination, insiders might be less able to profit from their superior ability to process
information. On the other hand, increased regulatory oversight of insider trading in recent years
might cause insiders to increasingly focus their trading in own-industry stocks rather than in the
stock of their own firm.




                                                    33
            Appendix A. Matching Procedure of LDB and Insider Trading Filings

       This appendix shows how we identify the trading accounts that belong to industry insiders.
To do so, we follow a three-step procedure to match the trades in the large discount broker (LDB)
database with the Security and Exchange Commission (SEC) insider trading filings.

       Step 1: Trade-level matches. We start by merging all the LDB common stock trades with
the daily file from the Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP). We have data on the quantity,
price, date, and commission paid for each buy and sell transaction. We obtain the daily trading
volume for each stock from CRSP. From the SEC filing, we obtain all the trades reported from
January 1991 to November 1996; the data include purchase and sale quantities, dates, prices, and
whether the transactions are related to the exercise of a stock option.

       During the matching procedure, we do not aggregate trades at the daily level, because we
need to consider three special cases. First, a purchase or a sale is occasionally split into two or
more separate orders placed with the broker on the same day. If the transaction is indeed an
insider’s transaction, the insider might report to the SEC the separate transactions or the total
amount. For this reason, we keep each single LDB trade and if in a given day an account has more
than one transaction of the same stock of the same sign, we also create an auxiliary trade with the
quantity equal to the total daily quantity.

       Second, there are positions opened and closed within the same day. In the case of a
corporate insider, this could indicate that a stock option has been exercised and the shares have
been added to the account and then sold the very same day.

       Third, a few orders that are initially written in the LDB books appear to go unexecuted and
are later cancelled. These cases are characterized by negative commissions (i.e., the brokerage firm
returns the commission fees to the clients whose orders have not been executed). Although it is
possible to use an algorithm to adjust for these cases, for the purpose of a general analysis of the
individuals’ trading patterns, it is not immediately clear how to deal with them when the purpose
is matching the trades with the SEC filing. For instance, suppose that on day t an insider places a
buy order for 200 shares of stock A and another buy order for 300 shares of stock A. If then we
learn that at day t + 1 the brokerage firm cancelled the purchase of 50 shares of stock A and gave
back part of the commission to the insider, what should we expect the insider to have reported to
the SEC? The strategy we adopt to deal with the three special cases presented above is designed

                                                     34
to maximize the chances of finding possible matches in the first and second step of the procedure,
allowing us to deal with the special cases when we manually double-check the matches one-by-
one in step three.

       The actual trade-level matching procedure begins with an approximate matching strategy.
For each trade reported in the SEC filing, we find all the possible corresponding trades in the LDB
database. A matched trade’s quantity must lie within a 1% tolerance interval of the quantity
reported to the SEC and must have been made no more than three days before or after the
transaction date reported. This allows for cases in which, for instance, an insider’s order is executed
the day after it was submitted, but the insider reported the order submission date as the transaction
date. To avoid double-counting, we keep only the best match for each SEC trade–LDB account
pair. At this stage, we also flag the matches for which the matched trade accounts for over 30% of
the daily trading volume of the stocks.

       Step 2: SEC insider–LDB account-level matches. At the end of the first step, there are
several thousand potential matches. We next calculate a matching-likelihood score to restrict the
search. The score calculated in this step is by no means the only criterion we use. Rather, its
purpose is simply to screen the potential matches and eliminate the most unlikely ones. The
formulas, parameters, and rules chosen should be understood accordingly.

       We begin this step by counting how many trades have been matched for each SEC insider–
LDB account pair. We call this variable      . We also calculate the average absolute date difference
and absolute percentage quantity difference between the trades reported in the SEC filing and the
corresponding trades in the potentially matching LDB account. These variables are called
          and             . We also count how many trades in the sample period each insider
reported to the SEC, including and excluding option-related transactions; the two variables are
called, respectively,        and           . Because it appears that option-related transactions are
less likely to have been executed using the discount brokerage firm, we compute a variable to try
to capture this fact when calculating the number of trades we expect to have been matched. This
variable is called        and is computed as 0.5                0.5     _          if           is less
than or equal to 3, and as 0.1               0.9     _          otherwise. We can now compute a
variable that indicates the quality of the SEC insider–LDB account match as follows:



                                                      35
                                   4                      1                  .               (1)



       The first term’s purpose is twofold. First, through the numerator, it increases the score of
potential matches for which the number of trades matched is higher. The numerator is quadratic
because the higher the number of trades in a given trading account that perfectly match (by day,
quantity, and sign) the trades of a given insider, the lower the probability that the insider and the
discount broker client are two different individuals and that some of their trades are coincidentally
identical. Second, through the denominator, we decrease the score of potential matches for which
the insider has made a large number of trades in his or her own firm during the sample period. This
accounts for the fact that, ceteris paribus, it is more likely that another person’s trades resemble
some trades of the insider if the latter has made a larger number of trades. We use the square root
of       because some insider trades reported to the SEC are not open-market transactions (e.g.,
the transaction price is missing or is very different from the prevailing market price), and so we
should not expect that all trades reported to the SEC have been executed via the discount broker.
The second and the third terms decrease the score if the SEC and LDB trades’ dates or quantities
do not match perfectly. We then keep only the SEC insiders–LDB account pairs that are more
likely to be matches. If the number of trades matched (       ) is equal to or larger than 2, we require
the score to be higher than 8. We also keep pairs that have a unique trade matched, as long as the
date and quantity match perfectly and the insider filing contains less than six trades. We also carry
to the next stage all the pairs that have a volume flag. At this point, we have about 800 pairs that
are potential matches.

       Then, for each LDB account, we count the number of transactions in firms for which the
potential matching corporate insider is indeed an insider, and we call this variable               . We
adjust this variable to account for unexecuted trades, which, as explained above, are characterized
by negative commission fees, and we do not count the auxiliary trades created in case a transaction
has been executed with multiple orders within the same day. We can then evaluate the goodness
of the potential matches from the LDB side. In theory, if the account really belongs to the corporate
insider, all the transactions in the securities of her firms should have been reported in the SEC
filing. However, this might not always be the case; for example, as explained above, it is possible
that an insider’s purchase or sale has been split into two or more orders, but she has reported a

                                                     36
single transaction in the filing. In this case, our matching algorithm will have matched the
transaction in the filing with the auxiliary total daily quantity expressly created for this purpose,
and so          will be larger than the actual number of trades matched       . Taking into account
these considerations, we modify the previously calculated score:

                                                           .
                                                               .                          (2)



         We then carry to the third step only the pairs that have been assigned a total score greater
than 0.5 or that have a volume flag.

         Step 3: Manual matching. At the beginning of this step, we have 225 SEC insider–LDB
account pairs. For each pair, we look at the trading patterns in the relevant stocks in the brokerage
account and compare them against the trades reported in the SEC filing. This procedure allows us
to make sure that our matching algorithm produced sensible results.

         One general requirement that we impose on the matches is that all trades made with the
brokerage account must have been reported in full in the SEC filing. We allow exceptions to this
rule if we believe there is a good reason why the trades and the filing do not match. Specifically,
we would classify as a good match a case in which all trades and the filing match except for the
reported date of one of the transactions. In such a case, the insider has usually reported the
transaction to have occurred one to five days after it has actually appeared in the LDB books. As
long as the price reported in the filing and the purchase or sale price are the same despite the
apparent date difference, we assume that either the shares were deposited in the account a few days
after the order was taken/executed or that the filing is not precise.

         Finally, we consider as good matches the cases in which the insiders reported the precise
dates and quantities for all their trades but the reported purchase prices are, sometimes or always,
slightly higher than those recorded in the trading database. In these cases, it appears that the
insiders reported the sum of the stock price plus the commissions paid as the purchase price.




                                                      37
             Appendix B. Holdings-Based Calendar-Time Portfolio Methodology

       Appendix A explains how we identify which trading accounts with stock transactions data
in the LDB database belong to industry insiders. To supplement our analysis of their trading
performance, we use daily buy and sell transactions from January 1991 to November 1996 to
construct daily aggregate stock holdings for those insiders and for the remaining retail investors in
the database.

       We start by netting out trades of the same stock made by a specific individual within the
same day. At the end of the first trading day of January 1991, we use positive net quantity trades
to back-out the positions. Starting from the second day of trading, we use both positive and
negative net quantity transactions to update the holding positions, excluding sales made by
individuals for whom we do not observe a previous corresponding purchase. At the beginning of
each day, we adjust the positions for stock splits using the CFACSHR item from CRSP. Given
that the average holding period in the database is one year, by the end of 1991 we have a fairly
complete picture of the aggregate stock holdings of the individuals in the database. We do not
know when the positions still held on November 1996 were closed, so in the holdings-based
analysis we assume that these positions were held for the average holding period. Therefore, the
time series we analyze goes from January 1991 to November 1997. Results are robust to the
terminal holding period assumption. More importantly, because the number of stocks and the
aggregate dollar amount in the holdings portfolios is smaller at the beginning of the sample, we
show in Panel A of Table IA3 that the results in Table 3 are robust to excluding 1991. As a further
robustness check, Panel B of Table IA3 repeats the regressions in Table 3, weighting each day in
the time series by the aggregate dollar amount held in the portfolio at the end of the previous day.
Panel C of that table repeats the same regressions, weighting each day by the number of different
stocks in the portfolio at the end of the previous day.




                                                     38
               Appendix C: Transaction-Based Calendar-Time Portfolio Methodology

       Motivated by prior evidence that the stocks individual investors sell earn higher returns
than those they buy (e.g., Odean, 1999), we test whether the same is true for the stocks traded by
industry insiders. In Table 4, we analyze the returns to calendar-time portfolios that mimic the buy
and sell decisions of the insiders and of the other retail traders in the database. Following Seasholes
and Zhu (2010), stocks purchased (sold) on day t are added to the buy (sell) portfolio at the
beginning of day t + 2 and held for a period of 12 months, and positions are not rebalanced daily;
that is, the relative weight of each position in the portfolio changes as stock prices change. In
value-weighted (equal-weighted) portfolios, the initial value of each position in the portfolio is
equal to the dollar value of the transaction that generated it (is equal to $1). Because the total
number of trades made by insiders is considerably lower than the number of trades made by the
other retail traders in the database and because trades are distributed unevenly across the sample
period, in Table 4 we weight each daily return of the buy-and-sell portfolio by the number of trades
contributing to the portfolio on that specific day. The daily weight for the buy-minus-sell return is
calculated as 0.5 times the relative daily weight in the buy portfolio’s time series plus 0.5 times
the relative daily weight in the sell portfolio’s time series. Due to the weighting scheme, the
average buy-minus-sell return can vary slightly from the difference between the average buy and
the average sell return. Moreover, whenever the number of stocks N in a buy or a sell portfolio is
less than five, the portfolio return is determined as 20%*N times the average return of the N stocks
in the portfolio plus 20%*(5 – N) times the market return.




                                                      39
                                  Appendix D: Alternative Industry Definitions

         In this paper, corporate insiders’ trades outside their own firm are defined as expertise if
those trades are in other firms in the same three-digit SIC code industry. In Appendix Table A1
and A2, we replicate the core results in the paper using different industry definitions: two-digit
SIC code industries and Fama-French 49, 48, 38, 30, 17, and 12 industries. See Sections 4.4 and
5.3 for a discussion of these robustness tests.


               Appendix Table A1. Expertise Results with Alternative Industry Definitions

Panel A: Number of Expertise Trades According to Different Industry Definitions

                                              Number of Expertise Trades
Expertise definition:         3 Digit SIC   49 FF     48 FF 2 Digit SIC     38 FF    30 FF     17 FF      12 FF
Purchases                        214         285       290         333       453      498       474        688
Sales                            199         283       286         317       417      446       400        589

Panel B: Robustness for Table 2 with Alternative Industry Definitions
Expertise definition:         3 Digit SIC   49 FF     48 FF   2 Digit SIC   38 FF    30 FF     17 FF      12 FF
Across Trades, EW                2.05        1.47      1.41      1.65        1.02     1.10      1.00       1.20
Across Trades, VW                2.72        2.14      2.15      2.76        1.70     1.65      1.20       1.75
Across Insiders, EW              3.31        2.24      2.07      2.38        1.53     1.63      1.24       1.56
Across Insiders, VW              3.28        2.40      2.29      2.65        1.93     2.01      1.50       1.93

Panel C: Robustness for Table 3 with Alternative Industry Definitions
                                  Holdings-Based Alphas (Basis Points per Day)
Expertise definition:      3 Digit SIC 49 FF       48 FF 2 Digit SIC 38 FF           30 FF      17 FF     12 FF
Fama-French 3 Factor Model   5.40**       2.47      2.46       3.46        2.75       1.70     5.05**      3.52
                              (2.13)     (1.05)    (1.06)     (1.52)      (1.48)     (0.72)     (1.97)    (1.49)
Carhart 4 Factor Model       5.81**       3.07      3.05      4.18*       3.28*       1.98     5.31**      3.66
                              (2.24)     (1.27)    (1.28)     (1.80)      (1.68)     (0.81)     (1.99)    (1.50)
HXZ Q-Factor Model            4.90*       3.39      3.35      4.16*       3.26*       1.73      4.60*      3.08
                              (1.92)     (1.43)    (1.43)     (1.82)      (1.71)     (0.72)     (1.78)    (1.27)
Fama-French 5 Factor Model   5.19**       2.60      2.60       3.67        2.26       1.60      4.89*      3.77
                              (2.00)     (1.10)    (1.11)     (1.61)      (1.23)     (0.68)     (1.89)    (1.55)

Panel D: Robustness for Table 4 with Alternative Industry Definitions
                        Transactions-Based 12-Month Buy-Minus-Sell Annualized Carhart Alphas
Expertise definition:         3 Digit SIC 49 FF      48 FF 2 Digit SIC 38 FF          30 FF    17 FF       12 FF
Value-Weighted                 15.97***     9.93*    10.07*     4.27       4.25       9.08*     9.04     16.13***
                                  (2.67)    (1.69)   (1.82)    (0.83)     (0.94)      (1.77)   (1.53)      (2.81)
Equal-Weighted                  11.02**     7.57*    7.43*     6.87*      6.24*       7.07*    6.63*       6.57*
                                  (2.26)    (1.86)   (1.87)    (1.78)     (1.88)      (1.75)   (1.67)      (1.96)




                                                              40
           Appendix Table A1. Expertise Results with Alternative Industry Definitions (Cont.)


Panel E: Robustness for Table IA1 with Alternative Industry Definitions
                          DGTW-Adjusted 3-Month Buy-And-Hold Abnormal Returns
Expertise definition:     3 Digit SIC 49 FF    48 FF 2 Digit SIC 38 FF       30 FF                17 FF       12 FF
Buy, EW                      2.76*    2.84**  2.66**    2.44**     1.39       1.03                1.76*       1.49*
                             (1.66)   (2.12)   (2.01)    (1.99)   (1.39)     (1.07)               (1.85)     (1.83)
Sell, EW                    -3.11*     -0.30   -0.47    -2.03*     -1.65     -0.49                 0.81       -0.54
                            (-1.90)   (-0.22) (-0.36)   (-1.69)  (-1.64)    (-0.44)               (0.71)     (-0.57)
Buy - Sell, EW              5.87**     3.14*   3.13*   4.47***   3.04**       1.52                 0.95        2.03
                             (2.52)   (1.67)   (1.68)    (2.60)   (2.14)     (1.03)               (0.64)     (1.62)

Buy, VW                     5.52***    3.57***    3.43***         1.86     2.29**     1.85**     3.40***    3.22***
                             (3.10)      (2.78)     (2.73)       (1.61)     (2.54)      (2.05)     (3.51)     (3.98)
Sell, VW                   -5.99***    -3.62***   -3.53***    -4.26***    -3.71***   -3.24***     -1.93*    -2.59***
                             (-3.54)    (-2.75)    (-2.76)      (-3.95)    (-4.12)     (-3.23)    (-1.82)    (-3.07)
Buy - Sell, VW             11.51***    7.18***    6.96***      6.11***    6.00***    5.09***     5.33***    5.81***
                             (4.69)      (3.91)     (3.88)       (3.88)     (4.71)      (3.77)     (3.72)     (4.97)




                                                             41
           Appendix Table A2. Tables 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10 with Alternative Industry Definitions

Panel A: Number of Expertise Trades According to Different Industry Definitions
                                                    Number of Expertise Trades
Expertise definition:                 3 Digit SIC   49 FF     48 FF 2 Digit SIC         38 FF      30 FF       17 FF     12 FF
Purchases                                214         285       290         333           453        498         474       688
Sales                                    199         283       286         317           417        446         400       589


Panel B: Robustness for Table 5 with Alternative Industry Definitions

                   Expertise Buy-Minus-Sell in Hard-toValue Stocks, DGTW-Adjusted 3 Month Returns
Expertise definition:            3 Digit SIC 49 FF        48 FF 2 Digit SIC 38 FF      30 FF                   17 FF     12 FF
Small Firm Size                   12.82***     7.70**     7.77**     9.81*** 6.10**     3.09                    1.26      3.14
                                    (3.17)      (2.37)    (2.42)      (3.37) (2.45)    (1.22)                  (0.48)    (1.47)
Small-Minus-Big Firm Size         13.97***     9.10**     9.24**    10.73*** 6.16**     3.09                    0.43      2.22
                                    (3.05)      (2.43)    (2.49)      (3.14) (2.15)    (1.05)                  (0.14)    (0.88)

                                         8.51**      4.40       4.29        6.25**       3.20       3.33       3.50*      2.64
Low Residual Analyst Coverage
                                         (2.39)     (1.55)     (1.53)        (2.41)     (1.52)     (1.61)      (1.69)    (1.53)
Low-Minus-High Residual                   5.31       2.49       2.28          3.60       0.36       3.57       4.91*      1.22
Analyst Coverage                         (1.14)     (0.66)     (0.61)        (1.04)     (0.13)     (1.22)      (1.65)    (0.49)

High Idiosyncratic Volatility          10.74***      5.28      5.50*        7.68**      5.09**      2.84         0.87     2.32
                                         (2.58)     (1.57)     (1.66)        (2.51)     (1.97)     (1.10)      (0.32)    (1.05)
High-Minus-Low Idiosyncratic            9.69**       4.22       4.72         6.42*       4.13       2.58        -0.36     0.59
Volatility                               (2.07)     (1.12)     (1.27)        (1.87)     (1.44)     (0.88)      (-0.12)   (0.24)


Panel C: Robustness for Table 6, Panel B, with Alternative Industry Definitions
                       p -values for Differences    in Average Insider Trading Ratios   for Top Executives
Expertise definition:              3 Digit SIC       49 FF      48 FF 2 Digit SIC        38 FF     30 FF       17 FF     12 FF
Exp Buy > Exp Sell APR (-1,+7)         0.23           0.24       0.24       0.27          0.25      0.34        0.03      0.38
Exp Buy > Exp Sell APR (-1,+15)        0.13           0.13       0.13       0.20          0.16      0.10        0.04      0.49
Exp Buy > Retail Buy APR (-1,+7)       0.17           0.32       0.33       0.55          0.61      0.80        0.07      0.45
Exp Buy > Retail Buy APR (-1,+15)      0.20           0.27       0.30       0.44          0.27      0.37        0.05      0.32

Exp Sell > Exp Buy ASR (-1,+7)            0.97       0.88       0.88         0.86        0.58       0.85        0.71     0.71
Exp Sell > Exp Buy ASR (-1,+15)           0.69       0.47       0.46         0.59        0.47       0.54        0.58     0.54
Exp Sell > Retail Sell ASR (-1,+7)        1.00       0.89       0.90         0.94        0.69       0.88        0.66     0.83
Exp Sell > Retail Sell ASR (-1,+15)       0.73       0.49       0.51         0.73        0.70       0.52        0.81     0.69


Panel D: Robustness for Table 6, Panel C with Alternative Industry Definitions
                      p -values for Differences in Average Insider Trading Ratios for Opportunistic Insiders
Expertise definition:                 3 Digit SIC 49 FF        48 FF 2 Digit SIC 38 FF           30 FF         17 FF     12 FF
Exp Buy > Exp Sell APR (-1,+7)            0.15       0.14       0.14       0.18        0.41       0.15          0.39      0.21
Exp Buy > Exp Sell APR (-1,+15)           0.33       0.38       0.37       0.50        0.60       0.14          0.63      0.32
Exp Buy > Retail Buy APR (-1,+7)          0.28       0.33       0.34       0.44        0.49       0.28          0.24      0.27
Exp Buy > Retail Buy APR (-1,+15)         0.32       0.51       0.53       0.46        0.43       0.22          0.40      0.35

Exp Sell > Exp Buy ASR (-1,+7)            0.75       0.76       0.75         0.57        0.42       0.78        0.38     0.37
Exp Sell > Exp Buy ASR (-1,+15)           0.81       0.82       0.82         0.64        0.48       0.89        0.80     0.50
Exp Sell > Retail Sell ASR (-1,+7)        0.18       0.26       0.27         0.11        0.15       0.37        0.25     0.29
Exp Sell > Retail Sell ASR (-1,+15)       0.24       0.48       0.49         0.20        0.36       0.72        0.58     0.46


                                                                       42
 Appendix Table A2. Tables 6, 7, 8, 9 and 10 with Alternative Industry Definitions (Cont.)

Panel E: Robustness for Table 6, Panel D with Alternative Industry Definitions
                      Coefficient for I(there was insider trading buying in window)*Insiders' Expertise Buy
Expertise definition:                 3 Digit SIC 49 FF           48 FF 2 Digit SIC 38 FF        30 FF          17 FF     12 FF
Top Executives (-1,+7)                    -2.48       -2.67       -2.48      -2.13     -2.52      0.65           -2.41     1.30
                                         (-0.86)     (-0.99)     (-0.92)   (-0.80)   (-0.95)     (0.17)        (-0.69)    (0.49)
Top Executives (-1,+15)                  -4.98*     -5.54**     -5.34**      0.69      1.12       1.56           1.30      2.21
                                         (-1.68)     (-2.06)     (-2.00)    (0.15)    (0.30)     (0.36)         (0.39)    (0.70)
Opportunistic (-1,+7)                     0.60        0.55        0.74       -0.30     -0.43      0.42           -0.90     -0.64
                                         (0.21)      (0.23)      (0.31)    (-0.12)   (-0.19)     (0.12)        (-0.29)   (-0.22)
Opportunistic (-1,+15)                    -1.07       -0.63       -0.44      -1.44     -0.79      0.12           -0.07     0.35
                                         (-0.36)     (-0.26)     (-0.18)   (-0.62)   (-0.37)     (0.04)        (-0.03)    (0.14)


Panel F: Robustness for Table 6, Panel E, with Alternative Industry Definitions

                      Coefficient for I(there was insider trading buying in window)*Insiders' Expertise Sell
Expertise definition:                3 Digit SIC 49 FF          48 FF 2 Digit SIC 38 FF           30 FF         17 FF    12 FF
Top Executives (-1,+7)                    1.05       0.80        0.97        2.42     2.85         0.25           0.07    2.90
                                         (0.12)     (0.16)      (0.19)      (0.40)   (0.72)       (0.07)        (0.02)   (0.77)
Top Executives (-1,+15)                  10.87       5.61        5.78        8.08     6.45         1.51          2.33     3.92
                                         (1.54)     (1.15)      (1.19)      (1.46)   (1.54)       (0.36)        (0.55)   (1.04)
Opportunistic (-1,+7)                     2.85       0.32        0.51        1.68     2.81        -0.72          -0.08    3.24
                                         (0.61)     (0.08)      (0.13)      (0.42)   (0.90)      (-0.23)       (-0.02)   (0.95)
Opportunistic (-1,+15)                    6.09       2.14        2.33        4.06     4.06        -0.67          -0.44    2.37
                                         (1.56)     (0.66)      (0.72)      (1.25)   (1.57)      (-0.24)       (-0.15)   (0.90)


Panel G: Robustness for Table 7, Panel A, with Alternative Industry Definitions

                         Buy-Minus-Sell CAR(-1,+1) around Traded Stocks Earnings Announcements
Expertise definition:             3 Digit SIC 49 FF        48 FF 2 Digit SIC 38 FF        30 FF                 17 FF     12 FF
All, Up to t-2                      1.51**      1.36*     1.30*     1.49**     1.13**       0.33                 0.19      0.06
                                     (1.97)     (1.82)     (1.78)    (2.38)      (2.07)   (0.55)                (0.34)    (0.12)
All, (-15,-2)                         0.93       0.79        0.29     1.55         0.97     0.00                 -0.34      0.21
                                     (0.47)     (0.42)     (0.16)    (1.00)      (0.71)  (-0.00)               (-0.23)    (0.15)
Net, Up to t-2                        1.47       1.20        1.11     1.29         0.81     0.74                  0.42      0.27
                                     (1.45)     (1.21)     (1.16)    (1.57)      (1.18)   (0.99)                (0.58)    (0.43)
Net, (-15,-2)                         0.34       0.24       -0.15     0.70        -0.30    -1.09                 -0.66     -0.86
                                     (0.13)     (0.10)    (-0.06)    (0.39)     (-0.20)  (-0.60)               (-0.37)   (-0.55)
Last, Up to t-2                       1.07       0.91        0.81     1.13         0.83     0.72                  0.30      0.21
                                     (1.11)     (0.97)     (0.89)    (1.44)      (1.25)   (1.01)                (0.42)    (0.36)
Last, (-15,-2)                        1.01       0.88        0.37     1.17         0.66     0.00                 -0.43     -0.07
                                     (0.49)     (0.45)     (0.20)    (0.75)      (0.48)  (-0.00)               (-0.29)   (-0.05)




                                                                    43
 Appendix Table A2. Tables 6, 7, 8, 9 and 10 with Alternative Industry Definitions (Cont.)

Panel H: Robustness for Table 7, Panel B, with Alternative Industry Definitions

                 Buy-Minus-Sell CAR(-1,+1) around Own-Firm Earnings Announcements After Expertise Trades
Expertise definition:             3 Digit SIC 49 FF        48 FF 2 Digit SIC 38 FF        30 FF       17 FF     12 FF
All, Up to t-2                        0.69         0.11     0.19      0.56     0.35         0.01      -0.43     -0.04
                                     (1.31)      (0.23)    (0.39)    (1.28)   (0.89)      (0.03)     (-1.23)   (-0.13)
All, (-15,-2)                         0.95        -0.47     -0.15     0.95      0.15       -1.35      -1.03      0.14
                                     (0.73)     (-0.25)   (-0.08)    (0.58)   (0.10)     (-0.92)     (-0.83)   (0.14)
Net, Up to t-2                        0.86        -0.05     0.06      0.57      0.14       -0.41    -1.04**     -0.45
                                     (1.02)     (-0.06)   (0.09)     (0.93)   (0.27)     (-0.77)     (-2.10)   (-1.03)
Net, (-15,-2)                         1.77        -0.79     -0.46     0.44     -0.61       -1.54      -1.37      0.19
                                     (1.21)     (-0.35)   (-0.20)    (0.23)  (-0.35)     (-0.91)     (-0.98)   (0.17)
Last, Up to t-2                       0.95        -0.22     -0.13     0.31     -0.07       -0.47     -0.77*     -0.24
                                     (1.23)     (-0.33)   (-0.20)    (0.53)  (-0.15)     (-0.95)     (-1.70)   (-0.60)
Last, (-15,-2)                        1.57        -0.72     -0.39     0.48     -0.56       -1.48      -1.33      0.22
                                     (1.08)     (-0.32)   (-0.17)    (0.25)  (-0.33)     (-0.88)     (-0.96)   (0.20)


Panel I: Robustness for Table 8 with Alternative Industry Definitions

                          # Insiders' Expertise Trades in Window Before M&A Announcements
Expertise definition:            3 Digit SIC 49 FF         48 FF 2 Digit SIC 38 FF    30 FF          17 FF     12 FF
(-30,-16)                              0           0         0          0      0         0             0         0
(-15,-6)                               1           1         1          1      1         1             1         1
(-5,-1)                                0           0         0          0      0         1             0         1




                                                               44
References

Aboody, David, John Hughes, and Jing Liu, 2005, Earnings Quality, Insider Trading, and Cost of
   Capital, Journal of Accounting Research 43, 651–673.

Acharya, Viral, and Timothy C. Johnson, 2007, Insider Trading in Credit Derivatives, Journal of
   Financial Economics 84, 110–141.

Acharya, Viral, and Timothy C. Johnson, 2010, More Insiders, More Insider Trading: Evidence
   from Private Equity Buyouts, Journal of Financial Economics 98, 500–523.

Alldredge, Dallin M., and David C. Cicero, 2015, Attentive Insider Trading, Journal of Financial
   Economics 115, 84–101.

Ang, Andrew, Robert J. Hodrick, Yuhang Xing, and Xiaoyan Zhang, 2006, The Cross-Section of
   Volatility and Expected Returns, Journal of Finance 61, 259–299.

Augustin, Patrick, Menachem Brenner, and Marti G. Subrahmanyam, 2015, Informed Options
   Trading Prior to M&A Announcements: Insider Trading? Working Paper.

Barber, Brad M., and John D. Lyon, 1997, Detecting Long-Run Abnormal Stock Returns: The
   Empirical Power and Specification of Test Statistics, Journal of Financial Economics 43, 341–
   372.

Barber, Brad M., and Terrance Odean, 2000, Trading Is Hazardous to Your Wealth: The Common
   Stock Investment Performance of Individual Investors, Journal of Finance 55, 773–806.

Barber, Brad M., and Terrance Odean, 2002, Online Investors: Do the Slow Die First?, Review of
   Financial Studies 15, 455-487.

Barber, Brad M., and Terrance Odean, 2011, The Behavior of Individual Investors. In G.
   Constantinides, M. Harris, and R. Stulz (eds.), Handbook of the Economics of Finance.
   Amsterdam: Elsevier.

Barber, Brad M., Terrance Odean, and Ning Zhu, 2009, Do Retail Traders Move Markets?, Review
   of Financial Studies 22, 151-186.

Ben-David, Itzhak, and Darren Roulstone, 2012, Corporate Transactions and Limits-to-Arbitrage,
   The Ohio State University, Working Paper.


                                                  45
Beneish, Messod D., and Mark E. Vargus, 2002, Insider Trading, Earnings Quality, and Accrual
   Mispricing, Accounting Review 77(4), 755–791.

Bodnaruk, Andriy, Massimo Massa, and Andrei Simonov, 2009, Investment Banks as Insiders and
   the Market for Corporate Control, Review of Financial Studies 22, 4989–5026.

Bradley, Daniel, Sinan Gokkaya, and Xi Liu, 2015, Before an Analyst Becomes an Analyst: Does
   Industry Expertise Matter? Journal of Finance, Forthcoming.

Cao, Charles, Zhiwu Chen, and John M. Griffin, 2005, Informational Content of Option Volume
   Prior to Takeovers, Journal of Business 78, 1073–1109.

Carhart, Mark, 1997, On Persistence in Mutual Fund Performance, Journal of Finance 52, 57-82.

Cici, Gjergji, Monika Gehde-Trapp, Marc-André Göricke, and Alexander Kempf, 2014, What
   They Did in Their Previous Lives: The Investment Value of Mutual Fund Managers’
   Experience Outside the Financial Sector, Working Paper.

Cohen, Lauren, Christopher Malloy, and Lukasz Pomorski, 2012, Decoding Inside Information,
   Journal of Finance 67(3), 1009–1043.

Cohen, Randolph B., Christopher Polk, and Bernhard Silli, 2010, Best Ideas, Working Paper.

Coval, Joshua D., and Tobias J. Moskowitz, 2001, The Geography of Investment: Informed
   Trading and Asset Prices, Journal of Political Economy 109, 811–841.

Daniel, Kent, Mark Grinblatt, Sheridan Titman, and Russ Wermers, 1997, Measuring Mutual Fund
   Performance with Characteristic-Based Benchmarks, Journal of Finance 52, 1035–1058.

Dorn, Daniel, Gur Huberman, and Paul Sengmueller, 2013, Correlated Trading and Returns,
   Journal of Finance 63, 885-920.

Døskeland, Trond M., and Hans K. Hvide, 2011, Do Individual Investors Have Asymmetric
   Information Based on Work Experience? Journal of Finance 66(3), 1011–1041.

Fama, Eugene F., 1998, Market Efficiency, Long-Term Returns, and Behavioral Finance, Journal
   of Financial Economics 49, 283-306.

Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1993, Common Risk Factors in the Returns on Stocks
   and Bonds, Journal of Financial Economics 33(1), 3–56.


                                                 46
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 2015, A Five-Factor Asset Pricing Model, Journal of
   Financial Economics 116, 1-22.

Griffin, John M., Tao Shu, and Selim Topaloglu, 2012, Examining the Dark Side of Financial
   Markets: Do Institutions Trade on Information from Investment Bank Connections? Review of
   Financial Studies 25, 2155–2188.

Hong, Harrison, Terry Lim, and Jeremy C. Stein, 2000, Bad News Travels Slowly: Size, Analyst
   Coverage, and the Profitability of Momentum Strategies, Journal of Finance 55(1), 265–295.

Hou, Kewei, Chen Xue, and Lu Zhang, 2015, Digesting Anomalies: An Investment Approach,
   Review of Financial Studies 28, 650–705.

Hvidkjaer, Søren, 2008, Small Trades and the Cross-Section of Stock Returns, Review of Financial
   Studies 21, 1125-1151.

Ivashina, Victoria, and Zheng Sun, 2011, Institutional Stock Trading on Loan Market Information,
   Journal of Financial Economics 100, 284–303.

Ivkovic, Zoran, Clemens Sialm, and Scott Weisbenner, 2008, Portfolio Concentration and the
   Performance of Individual Investors, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 43(3),
   613–656.

Ivkovic, Zoran, and Scott Weisbenner, 2005, Local Does as Local Is: Information Content of the
   Geography of Individual Investors’ Common Stock Investments, Journal of Finance 60, 267-
   306.

Kacperczyk, Marcin, Clemens Sialm, and Lu Zheng, 2005, On the Industry Concentration of
   Actively Managed Equity Mutual Funds, Journal of Finance 60(4), 1983–2011.

Kaniel, Ron, Shuming Liu, Gideon Saar, and Sheridan Titman, 2012, Individual Investor Trading
   and Return Patterns around Earnings Announcements, Journal of Finance 67, 639-680.

Kaniel, Ron, Gideon Saar, and Sheridan Titman, 2008, Individual Investor Trading and Stock
   Returns, Journal of Finance 63, 273-310.

Kedia, Simi, and Xing Zhou, 2014, Informed Trading around Acquisitions: Evidence from
   Corporate Bonds, Journal of Financial Markets 18, 182–205.



                                                  47
Kelley, Eric K., and Paul C. Tetlock, 2013, How Wise Are Crowds? Insights from Retail Orders
   and Stock Returns, Journal of Finance 68, 1229-1265.

Kempf, Elisabeth, Alberto Manconi, and Oliver Spalt, 2014, Learning by Doing: The Value of
   Experience and the Origins of Skill for Mutual Fund Managers, Working Paper.

Keown, Arthur J., and John M. Pinkerton, 1981, Merger Announcements and Insider Trading
   Activity: An Empirical Investigation, Journal of Finance 36(4), 855–869.

Kumar, Alok, 2009, Hard-to-Value Stocks, Behavioral Biases, and Informed Trading, Journal of
   Financial and Quantitative Analysis 44(6), 1375–1401.

Lakonishok, Josef, and Inmoo Lee, 2001, Are Insiders’ Trades More Informative? Review of
   Financial Studies 14(1), 79–111.

Massa, Massimo, and Zahid Rehman, 2008, Information Flows within Financial Conglomerates:
   Evidence from the Banks-Mutual Funds Relation, Journal of Financial Economics 89, 288–
   306.

Massoud, Nadia, Debarshi Nandy, Anthony Saunders, and Keke Song, 2011, Do Hedge Funds
   Trade on Private Information? Evidence from Syndicated Lending and Short-Selling, Journal
   of Financial Economics 99, 477–499.

Mitchell, Mark L., and Erik Stafford, 2000, Managerial Decisions and Long-Term Stock Price
   Performance, Journal of Business 73, 287–329.

Newey, Whitney K., and Kenneth D. West, 1987, A Simple, Positive Semi-Definite,
   Heteroskedasticity and Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix, Econometrica 55(3)
   703–708.

Odean, Terrance, 1999, Do Investors Trade Too Much? American Economic Review 89, 1279–

       1298.

Pomorski, Lukasz, 2009, Acting on the Most Valuable Information: “Best Idea” Trades of Mutual
   Fund Managers, Working Paper.

Pool, Veronika K., Noah Stoffman, and Scott E. Yonker, 2012, No Place Like Home: Familiarity
   in Mutual Fund Manager Portfolio Choice, Review of Financial Studies 25(8), 2563–2599.


                                                   48
Seasholes, Mark S., and Ning Zhu, 2010, Individual Investors and Local Bias, Journal of Finance
   65(5), 1987–2010.

Seru, Amit, Tyler Shumway, and Noah Stoffman, 2010, Learning by Trading, Review of Financial
   Studies 23, 705–839.

Seyhun, H. Nejat, 1998, Investment Intelligence from Insider Trading (MIT Press: Cambridge,
       MA).

Tookes, Heather, 2008, Information, Trading, and Product Market Interactions: Cross-Sectional
       Implications of Informed Trading, Journal of Finance 63(1), 379–413.

White, Halbert, 1980, A Heteroskedasticity-Consistent Covariance Matrix Estimator and a Direct
   Test for Heteroskedasticity, Econometrica 48(4), 817–838.

Zhang, X. Frank, 2006, Information Uncertainty and Stock Returns, Journal of Finance 61(1),
   105–136.




                                                  49
                          Figure 1. Characteristics-Adjusted Returns – Buys

This figure shows event-time buy-and-hold DGTW-adjusted returns (Daniel, Grinblatt, Titman, and Wermers, 1997)
for portfolios mimicking the purchases of industry insiders and other retail traders in the large discount broker (LDB)
dataset for 63 trading days after portfolio formation. Portfolio positions are trade size–weighted and not rebalanced
over time. Trade categories are defined in Table 3.




                                                              50
                                    Figure 2. Buy-Minus-Sell Portfolios

This figure shows event-time DGTW-adjusted (Daniel, Grinblatt, Titman, and Wermers, 1997) return differences
between buy and sell portfolios mimicking purchases and sales of industry insiders and other retail traders in the large
discount broker (LDB) dataset for 63 trading days after portfolio formation. Portfolio positions are trade size–weighted
and not rebalanced over time. Trade categories are defined in Table 3.




                                                               51
                                              Table 1. Summary Statistics

This table presents summary statistics for the individuals in our sample of 105 industry insiders and for all other retail
traders in the large discount broker (LDB) dataset from January 1991 to November 1996. Total Number of Firms is
the number of companies for which those individuals are insiders. Insiders’ Expertise Trades are trades made by
industry insiders in firms in their own industry other than their own firm. We use the three-digit SIC code industry
definition. Insiders’ Non-Expertise Trades are trades made by industry insiders outside of their industry. All Other
Retail Traders are all the trades made by all other individual traders in the LDB database. In Panel A, Firms’ Market
Cap is the average end-of-June market capitalization of the insiders’ firms, and Firms’ NYSE-AMEX Percentile is the
average end-of-June NYSE-AMEX percentile of the insiders’ firms. If an individual is an insider for more than one
firm, we only use the largest when calculating the two statistics described immediately above. In Panel C, stocks are
assigned to size and book-to-market quintiles based on the Daniel, Grinblatt, Titman, and Wermers (1997) (DGTW)
breakpoints and to previous-month return quintiles based on AMEX, NASDAQ, and NYSE breakpoints. We include
all trades of at least $100 in common shares (share code 10 or 11) of AMEX, NASDAQ, and NYSE firms that have a
valid five-digit SIC code and a DGTW assignment. Please refer to the text for further details.

Panel A: Summary Statistics for Insiders and Their Firms

                                           N            Mean      Std. Dev.     Min       25%          50%        75%        Max
Number of Individuals                     105
Total Number of Firms                     171
Number of Firms by Individual             105             1.63      1.27          1          1          1        2          7
Firms' Market Cap ($1,000)                105          1,803,781 4,895,634      5,114     51,088     208,301 1,198,165 33,612,047
Firms' NYSE-AMEX Percentile               105            47.70     27.90          0         24         46       67         99

                                      Insiders in Each Industry
                                           N            %
Financials                                 25          14.6
Computer Hardware                          13           7.6
Business Services                          9            5.3
Oil & Gas                                  8            4.7
Retail                                     7            4.1

Panel B: Trade Size by Trade Type ($)

                                               N       Mean Std. Dev.     Min      5%     25%       50%      75%    95%       Max
Size of Insiders' Trades in Own Firm ($)      785      61,374 197,594     109     1,563   5,625    11,500   35,000 228,373 2,498,438
Size of Insiders' Expertise Trades ($)        416      27,656 76,535      156     1,475   4,528     9,550   24,225 91,000 823,975
Size of Insiders' Non-Expertise Trades ($)   4,258     20,979 65,384      100     1,625   4,250     7,684   17,000 61,500 1,499,595
Size of All Other Retail Traders ($)       1,418,559   13,174 36,871      100      963    2,850     5,650   12,344 46,101 6,094,704


Panel C: Buy Trade Characteristics

                                                               % of Trades in Low and High Quintiles
                                                               Size                 B/M                t-1 Return
                                                N         Low       High       Low      High         Low       High
        Insiders' Expertise Trades             214        22.9      42.5       31.3     10.3         16.8      22.9
        Insiders' Non-Expertise Trades        2,302       18.6      40.0       40.9     13.0         18.3      19.3
        All Other Retail Traders             764,325      17.7      41.1       37.7     13.9         19.7      19.9



                                                                     52
                                 Table 2. Trading Tilt Toward Expertise Stocks

In this table, we analyze whether industry insiders tend to trade stocks of other firms in their own industry. A stock
purchase or sale by a corporate insider is classified as Expertise if the stock is in the insider’s industry based on the
three-digit SIC code definition. Trades in an insider’s own firm are excluded. For each corporate insider, the
benchmark is the fraction of trades that we would expect to be expertise trades if the individual had no trading tilt
toward stocks in his/her own industry. In Panel A (Panel B), the NYSE, AMEX, NASDAQ–benchmarked expected
percentage is calculated as the fraction of (the market capitalization of) NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ stocks that are
in an insider’s industry. Further, in Panel A (Panel B), the Other Retail Traders–benchmarked expected percentage is
calculated as the (dollar-weighted) fraction of trades that all the non-insider individual investors in the large discount
broker (LDB) database make in an insider’s industry. If an individual is an insider in more than one industry, we sum
those industries’ fractions to calculate the expected percentage. In Panel A (Panel B), the actual percentage is simply
the observed (dollar-weighted) percentage of an insider’s expertise trades. The tilt is the difference between the actual
and the expected percentages. *** indicates statistical significance at the 1% level.

Panel A: Trading Tilt Toward Expertise Stocks (Trades Are Equal-Weighted)

                                          Averaged across Trades                     Averaged across Industry Insiders
Benchmark:                       NYSE, AMEX, NASDAQ      Other Retail Traders   NYSE, AMEX, NASDAQ       Other Retail Traders
                                         (1)                        (2)                 (3)                       (4)
Percentage of Expertise Trades
Benchmark (%)                           4.09                       4.23                 3.33                     3.83
Actual (%)                              8.39                       8.39                11.01                     11.01
Tilt = Actual - Benchmark (%)          4.31***                 4.17***                7.69***                  7.18***
Tilt t -stat                           (12.14)                 (11.67)                 (3.57)                   (3.29)
Tilt Ratio = Actual / Expected          2.05                       1.99                 3.31                     2.87


Panel B: Trading Tilt Toward Expertise Stocks (Trades Are Dollar-Weighted)

                                          Averaged across Trades                     Averaged across Industry Insiders
Benchmark:                       NYSE, AMEX, NASDAQ      Other Retail Traders   NYSE, AMEX, NASDAQ       Other Retail Traders
                                         (1)                        (2)                 (3)                       (4)
Percentage of Expertise Trades
Benchmark (%)                           3.82                       4.58                 3.21                     4.24
Actual (%)                              10.38                      10.38               10.53                     10.53
Tilt = Actual - Benchmark (%)          6.56***                 5.80***                7.32***                  6.29***
Tilt t -stat                           (16.81)                 (14.74)                 (3.40)                   (2.86)
Tilt Ratio = Actual / Expected          2.72                       2.26                 3.28                     2.48




                                                                    53
                Table 3. Expertise Trades: Holdings-Based Calendar-Time Portfolios

A stock purchase or sale by a corporate insider is classified as Expertise if the stock’s industry is the same as the
insider’s based on the three-digit SIC code definition. Trades in an insider’s own firm are excluded, and the insider’s
remaining trades are defined as Non-Expertise. Retail Traders indicates trades made by the other individuals in the
large discount broker (LDB) dataset. In this table, we analyze the performance of holdings-based portfolios. We
construct aggregate daily holding positions from the daily buy and sell transaction data. Portfolio returns are value-
weighted. Please see Appendix B for details. In Panel A, we present average raw returns by calendar year. The market
return is the market return in the Fama-French (1993) model. In Panel B, we report alphas from calendar-time
regressions of the holdings-based returns in excess of the risk-free rate on the Fama-French (1993), Carhart (1997),
Hou, Xue, and Zhang (HXZ) (2014), and Fama-French (2015) factors. t-statistics based on Newey-West (1987)
standard errors with five lags and robust to heteroskedasticity and serial correlation are in parentheses. Statistical
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level is indicated with ***, **, and *, respectively.

Panel A: Raw Returns (Basis Points per Day)

                                                                               Insiders' Trades
                     Market Return       Retail Traders            All            Expertise        Non-Expertise
                           (1)                (2)                  (3)                (4)                (5)
      1991                 12.6               14.8                 18.9              31.1                17.1
      1992                 3.8                3.1                  0.5                9.8                -0.7
      1993                 4.3                3.6                  5.5                4.4                5.7
      1994                 0.1                1.2                  4.4                3.8                4.6
      1995                 12.5               12.4                 11.3              12.7                11.6
      1996                 7.8                8.3                  11.1              15.5                10.5
      1997                 11.5               11.6                 12.4              16.5                12.2
    All Years              7.5                7.8                  9.1               13.2                8.7


Panel B: Factor Regression Alphas (Basis Points per Day)

                                                                              Insiders' Trades
                                        Retail Traders             All            Expertise        Non-Expertise
                                              (1)                  (2)               (3)                 (4)
   Fama-French 3 Factor Model                0.14                  1.20            5.40**               0.74
                                            (0.26)              (0.89)              (2.13)             (0.52)
  Carhart 4 Factor Model                     0.24                  1.15            5.81**               0.68
                                            (0.46)              (0.87)              (2.24)             (0.48)
  HXZ Q-Factor Model                         -0.01                 0.95             4.90*               0.54
                                            (-0.02)             (0.71)              (1.92)             (0.38)
  Fama-French 5 Factor Model                 0.56                  1.74            5.19**               1.36
                                            (1.12)              (1.22)              (2.00)             (0.90)




                                                              54
 Table 4. Expertise Trades: Transactions-Based Buy-Minus-Sell Calendar-Time Portfolios

A stock purchase or sale by a corporate insider is classified as Expertise if the stock’s industry is the same as the
insider’s based on the three-digit SIC code definition. Trades in an insider’s own firm are excluded, and the insider’s
remaining trades are defined as Non-Expertise. All Retail Traders indicates trades made by the other individuals in
the large discount broker (LDB) dataset. In this table, we analyze the performance of transaction-based buy-and-sell
calendar-time portfolios with a 12-month holding period. Each day in the time series of each portfolio return is
weighted by the number of trades contributing to the portfolio on that specific day. Within day, trades are value-
weighted. Annualized Difference is the annualized average buy-minus-sell portfolio return. Annualized Alpha is the
annualized alpha from a calendar-time regression of the buy-minus-sell portfolio return on the Carhart (1997) factors.
t-statistics based on Newey-West (1987) standard errors with five lags and robust to heteroskedasticity and serial
correlation are in parentheses. Statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level is indicated with ***, **, and *,
respectively.




                        Average Returns (bp/Day)            Annualized Difference             Annualized Alpha
                           Buy           Sell                 Mean         t -stat          Mean          t -stat
                            (1)           (2)                  (3)           (4)              (5)           (6)
Insiders' Expertise       10.33          4.19                15.07**        2.48           15.97***        2.67
Insiders' Non-Expertise    6.83          6.02                 2.57          0.76             3.01          0.88
All Retail Traders         6.93          7.76               -2.11***       -2.88             -0.36        -0.59




                                                              55
                               Table 5. Expertise Trades in Hard-to-Value Stocks

A stock purchase or sale by a corporate insider is classified as Expertise if the stock’s industry is the same as the
insider’s based on the three-digit SIC code definition. Trades in an insider’s own firm are excluded, and the insider’s
remaining trades are defined as Non-Expertise. Retail Traders indicates trades made by the other individuals in the
large discount broker (LDB) dataset. We sort buy and sell trades into two equally sized portfolios using the in-sample
median value of stock size, residual analyst coverage calculated as in Hong, Lim, and Stein (2000), and idiosyncratic
volatility calculated in month t – 1, following Ang, Hodrick, Xing, and Zhang (2006). The median expertise stock is
in the 72nd NYSE-AMEX size percentile. Three-month equal-weighted DGTW-adjusted excess returns (Daniel,
Grinblatt, Titman, and Wermers, 1997) are reported. Stock returns and trade size are winsorized at the 1% level within
each trade category. t-statistics are reported in parentheses. Statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level is
indicated with ***, **, and *, respectively.

Panel A: Expertise Trades and Hard-to-Value Stocks: Size

                                    Insiders' Trades       Retail Traders
                          Exp Buy     Exp Sell Non-Exp Buy  Retail Buy                        Differences
                            (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)              (1) - (2)      (1) - (3) (1) - (4)
       Firm Size
          Small             4.02     -8.79***         -0.65         -1.34***     12.82***         4.68      5.36*
                           (1.35)     (-3.21)        (-0.89)         (-33.35)      (3.17)        (1.52)     (1.80)
          Big               1.49       2.64*          0.27          -0.36***        -1.15         1.22       1.85
                           (1.03)      (1.67)        (0.58)          (-14.85)      (-0.53)       (0.80)     (1.27)
          Small - Big       2.54     -11.43***        -0.92         -0.97***     13.97***         3.46       3.51
                           (0.77)      (-3.61)       (-1.06)         (-20.77)      (3.05)        (1.01)     (1.06)


Panel B: Expertise Trades and Hard-to-Value Stocks: Residual Analyst Coverage

                                    Insiders' Trades       Retail Traders
                          Exp Buy     Exp Sell Non-Exp Buy  Retail Buy                        Differences
                            (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)              (1) - (2)      (1) - (3) (1) - (4)
       Resid. Analyst Coverage
          Low               3.21      -5.30**         -0.75         -1.47***       8.51**         3.95      4.68*
                           (1.26)     (-2.14)        (-1.23)         (-44.61)       (2.39)       (1.51)     (1.83)
          High              2.31       -0.89          0.36          -0.23***        3.20          1.96       2.54
                           (1.09)     (-0.42)        (0.58)          (-6.85)       (1.07)        (0.88)     (1.19)
          Low - High        0.89       -4.41          -1.10         -1.24***        5.31          1.99       2.13
                           (0.27)     (-1.35)        (-1.27)         (-26.48)      (1.14)        (0.58)     (0.64)




                                                               56
                        Table 5. Expertise Trades in Hard-to-Value Stocks (Cont.)

Panel C: Expertise Trades and Hard-to-Value Stocks: Idiosyncratic Volatility

                                 Insiders' Trades       Retail Traders
                       Exp Buy     Exp Sell Non-Exp Buy  Retail Buy                Differences
                         (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)         (1) - (2) (1) - (3) (1) - (4)
   Idiosyncratic Volatility
      High               3.07    -7.68***     -1.49**         -1.78***    10.74***    4.56       4.85
                        (1.00)    (-2.73)      (-1.98)         (-43.27)    (2.58)    (1.44)     (1.58)
      Low               2.47*       1.42      1.10***         0.08***       1.06      1.37      2.39*
                        (1.76)     (0.90)      (2.58)          (3.56)      (0.50)    (0.93)     (1.70)
      High - Low         0.59    -9.10***     -2.60***        -1.86***     9.69**     3.19       2.45
                        (0.18)    (-2.82)      (-3.00)         (-39.67)    (2.07)    (0.91)     (0.73)




                                                         57
                       Table 6. Trading in Conjunction with Other Firms’ Insiders?

A stock purchase or sale by a corporate insider is classified as Expertise if the stock’s industry is the same as the
insider’s based on the three-digit SIC code definition. Trades in an insider’s own firm are excluded, and the remaining
trades are classified as Non-Expertise. Other Retail Traders indicates trades made by other individuals in the large
discount broker (LDB) dataset. The Insider Trading Purchase (Sale) Ratio is calculated with the SEC insider trading
filings using the following procedure. Each day t, for each stock in CRSP, we calculate the number of that firm’s
insiders purchasing (selling) their own firm’s stock. We divide this number by the total number of insider purchases
(sales) in that stock over our sample period (January 1991 to November 1996). Finally, we sum this fraction over a
window. We consider windows from 1 day before to 7 days after, and from 1 day before to 15 days after the date of
each Expertise trade, Non-Expertise trade, or Other Retail Traders trade. To calculate the trading ratios, in Panel A
we use the trades of all insiders in the SEC filings, in Panel B we use only the trades of top executives, and in Panel
C we use only the trades of opportunistic insiders defined as in Cohen, Malloy, and Pomorski (2012). We also present
p-values for one-sided tests for differences in means. To verify that the test can identify simultaneous trading when it
is likely to be taking place, in Panel B (Panel C) we also report the trading ratios for lower-level, non-executive insiders
(for non-opportunistic insiders). In Panel D (Panel E), we regress three-month DGTW-adjusted returns (Daniel,
Grinblatt, Titman, and Wermers, 1997) to buy (sell) trades made by retail traders and industry insiders in the LDB
dataset on indicators for the Expertise and Non-Expertise trades and on their interaction with an indicator of whether
there was an insider trade with the same sign in the underlying stock. In Panels D and E, returns are winsorized at the
1% level. t-statistics based on White (1980) heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors are in parentheses. Statistical
significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level is indicated with ***, **, and *, respectively. See the text for further details.

Panel A: Average Insider Trading Ratio (%) for All Insiders

                                      Average Purchase Ratio (APR) (%)                        Average Sale Ratio (ASR) (%)
Window around trades:                   (-1,+7)                 (-1,+15)                     (-1,+7)                    (-1,+15)
                                              p -value                  p -value                   p -value                      p -value
                               Buy     Sell   Buy>Sell   Buy    Sell    Buy>Sell    Buy     Sell   Sell>Buy     Buy     Sell     Sell>Buy
                                (1)    (2)        (3)    (4)    (5)         (6)      (7)     (8)       (9)      (10)    (11)       (12)
Insiders' Expertise            0.38    0.35       0.40   0.86   0.77        0.35    0.69    0.42       0.94     0.99    0.75       0.86
Insiders' Non-Expertise        0.51    0.45       0.16   0.96   0.80        0.05    0.63    0.52       0.91     1.11    0.95       0.91
Other Retail Traders           0.46    0.42       0.00   0.83   0.77        0.00    0.49    0.52       0.00     0.87    0.91       0.00
p -value Exp Buy APR > Retail Buy APR (-1,+7): 0.75                     p -value Exp Sell ASR > Retail Sell ASR (-1,+7): 0.81
p -value Exp Buy APR > Retail Buy APR (-1,+15): 0.44                    p -value Exp Sell ASR > Retail Sell ASR (-1,+15): 0.85



Panel B: Average Insider Trading Ratio (%) for Top Executives

                                      Average Purchase Ratio (APR) (%)                        Average Sale Ratio (ASR) (%)
Window around trades:                   (-1,+7)                 (-1,+15)                     (-1,+7)                    (-1,+15)
                                              p -value                  p -value                   p -value                      p -value
                               Buy     Sell   Buy>Sell   Buy    Sell    Buy>Sell    Buy     Sell   Sell>Buy     Buy     Sell     Sell>Buy
                                (1)    (2)        (3)    (4)    (5)         (6)      (7)     (8)       (9)      (10)    (11)       (12)
Insiders' Expertise            0.45    0.27       0.23   0.72   0.41        0.13    0.58    0.07       0.97     0.68    0.51       0.69
Insiders' Non-Expertise        0.30    0.23       0.15   0.60   0.59        0.47    0.27    0.30       0.33     0.62    0.59       0.59
Other Retail Traders           0.30    0.28       0.00   0.55   0.52        0.00    0.32    0.36       0.00     0.59    0.63       0.00
Same Firm Non-Executives       1.58    0.13       0.00   1.74   0.22        0.00    0.11    0.79       0.00     0.18    1.08       0.00
p -value Exp Buy APR > Retail Buy APR (-1,+7): 0.17                     p -value Exp Sell ASR > Retail Sell ASR (-1,+7): 1.00
p -value Exp Buy APR > Retail Buy APR (-1,+15): 0.20                    p -value Exp Sell ASR > Retail Sell ASR (-1,+15): 0.73




                                                                       58
                 Table 6. Trading in Conjunction with Other Firms’ Insiders? (Cont.)

Panel C: Average Insider Trading Ratio (%) for Opportunistic Trades (Cohen, Malloy,
and Pomorski, 2012)

                                       Average Purchase Ratio (APR) (%)                                Average Sale Ratio (ASR) (%)
Window around trades:                   (-1,+7)                     (-1,+15)                       (-1,+7)                      (-1,+15)
                                              p -value                      p -value                       p -value                      p -value
                                Buy    Sell   Buy>Sell       Buy    Sell    Buy>Sell    Buy       Sell     Sell>Buy     Buy     Sell     Sell>Buy
                                (1)    (2)        (3)        (4)    (5)          (6)     (7)       (8)        (9)        (10)   (11)        (12)
Insiders' Expertise             0.51   0.26       0.15       0.83   0.69         0.33   0.88      0.67       0.75        1.35   1.00       0.81
Insiders' Non-Expertise         0.38   0.38       0.48       0.72   0.69         0.41   0.51      0.44       0.83        0.90   0.88       0.57
Other Retail Traders            0.39   0.34       0.00       0.71   0.63         0.00   0.42      0.47       0.00        0.73   0.82       0.00
Same Firm Non-Opportunitic      1.15   0.09       0.00       1.31   0.15         0.00   0.17      0.65       0.00        0.30   0.93       0.00
p -value Exp Buy APR > Retail Buy APR (-1,+7): 0.28                         p -value Exp Sell ASR > Retail Sell ASR (-1,+7): 0.18
p -value Exp Buy APR > Retail Buy APR (-1,+15): 0.32                        p -value Exp Sell ASR > Retail Sell ASR (-1,+15): 0.24




Panel D: Returns to Buying in Conjunction with Insider Trading

Dependent variable:                                                  3 Month DGTW-Adj. Returns to Buy Trades
Trading in conjunction with:                               n.a.                  Top Executives                     Opportunistic Insiders
                                                           (1)                  (2)              (3)                   (4)               (5)
I(there was insider trading buying in window)
    × Buy                                                                  1.65***          1.93***                 1.08***            0.90***
                                                                            (13.30)            (20.40)               (12.12)           (12.98)
    × Insiders' Expertise Buy                                                  -2.48           -4.98*                 0.60              -1.07
                                                                            (-0.86)            (-1.68)                (0.21)           (-0.36)
    × Insiders' Non-Expertise Buy                                              -0.36            1.82                  -1.49             -0.97
                                                                            (-0.14)             (0.93)               (-0.81)           (-0.72)


Insiders' Expertise Buy                                   3.49**            3.57**             3.79**                 3.43*            3.57**
                                                          (2.10)             (2.06)             (2.14)                (1.95)            (1.99)
Insiders' Non-Expertise Buy                                0.53                 0.54            0.44                  0.59              0.60
                                                          (1.21)             (1.23)             (1.00)                (1.32)            (1.31)
Intercept                                                -0.72***          -0.76***        -0.81***                 -0.77***       -0.79***
                                                         (-30.13)           (-31.32)           (-32.70)             (-31.08)           (-31.11)


Window Around Trades                                       n.a.             (-1,+7)            (-1,+15)              (-1,+7)           (-1,+15)


Obs                                                      755016             755016             755016               755016             755016
       2
Adj. R                                                     0.00                 0.00            0.00                  0.00              0.00




                                                                           59
               Table 6. Trading in Conjunction with Other Firms’ Insiders? (Cont.)

Panel E: Returns to Selling in Conjunction with Insider Trading

Dependent variable:                                         3 Month DGTW-Adj. Returns to Sell Trades
Trading in conjunction with:                       n.a.             Top Executives        Opportunistic Insiders
                                                   (1)             (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)
I(there was insider trading selling in window)
   × Sell                                                          0.01       0.26**       -0.15*        -0.12
                                                                (0.09)         (2.27)      (-1.72)      (-1.63)
   × Insiders' Expertise Sell                                    1.05          10.87         2.85         6.09
                                                                (0.12)         (1.54)       (0.61)       (1.56)
   × Insiders' Non-Expertise Sell                                  0.64        -0.70        -0.72        -0.50
                                                                (0.28)        (-0.37)      (-0.41)      (-0.37)


Insiders' Expertise Sell                          -2.99*        -3.01*        -3.54**      -3.23*       -3.81**
                                                  (-1.83)       (-1.82)       (-2.12)      (-1.86)      (-2.12)
Insiders' Non-Expertise Sell                       0.58            0.56        0.61         0.63          0.63
                                                  (1.23)        (1.17)         (1.26)       (1.29)       (1.26)
Intercept                                        -0.12***      -0.12***      -0.13***     -0.11***     -0.10***
                                                  (-4.68)       (-4.62)       (-5.00)      (-4.02)      (-3.85)


Window Around Trades                               n.a.         (-1,+7)       (-1,+15)     (-1,+7)      (-1,+15)


Obs                                              646933         646933        646933       646933       646933
      2
Adj. R                                             0.00            0.00        0.00         0.00         0.00




                                                              60
                     Table 7. Returns to Trading Ahead of Earnings Announcements

A stock purchase or sale by a corporate insider is classified as Expertise if the stock’s industry is the same as the
insider’s based on the three-digit SIC code definition. Trades in an insider’s own firm are excluded. In Panel A, we
test whether the returns to expertise trades are disproportionally earned around the traded firms’ earnings
announcements. For each expertise trade, we identify the closest subsequent earnings announcement and calculate the
cumulative abnormal return (CAR) over the market from one day before to one day after the announcement. In
Columns (1), (3), and (5) we include all trades that took place up to two days before the next earnings announcement
(essentially the whole sample of trades), and in Columns (2), (4), and (6) we include only trades that took place from
15 days to two days before the next earnings announcement. In Columns (1) and (2) we include all expertise trades
meeting the above requirements. In Columns (3) to (6) we adjust for the cases in which an insider makes more than
one trade (of any sign) in the same stock before a given earnings announcement. In Columns (3) and (4) the trades are
considered as a single purchase (sale) if the net quantity traded before a given earnings announcement is positive
(negative). In Columns (5) and (6) the trades are considered as a single purchase (sale) if the last trade preceding the
earnings announcement is a purchase (sale). In Panel B, we test whether industry insiders attempt to profit from their
knowledge of their own-firm earnings by trading stocks of other firms in the same industry ahead of their own firm’s
earnings announcements. For each expertise trade made by an insider in the sample, we identify the closest subsequent
earnings announcement of that insider’s firm (in the same industry) and calculate the cumulative abnormal return
(CAR) over the market earned by the traded stock from one day before to one day after the announcement of the
insider’s firm. Columns organization in Panel B is the same as in Panel A. t-statistics are reported in parentheses.
Statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level is indicated with ***, **, and *, respectively.


Panel A: Earnings Announcements of Traded Stocks
                            CAR(-1,+1) around Earnings Announcements of Traded Stocks
Consolidation rule                                  All                               Net                         Last
Window before announcement              Up to t-2         (-15,-2)        Up to t-2         (-15,-2)   Up to t-2         (-15,-2)
                                           (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)         (5)              (6)
CAR of Traded Stock
    Expertise Buy                         0.88*            -1.15            0.57             -0.78       0.67             -0.81
                                          (1.66)          (-1.04)          (0.79)           (-0.67)     (0.98)           (-0.71)
    Expertise Sell                        -0.63            -2.08            -0.90            -1.12       -0.39            -1.81
                                         (-1.13)          (-1.26)          (-1.25)          (-0.49)     (-0.59)          (-1.06)
    Expertise Buy-Sell                   1.51**            0.93             1.47             0.34        1.07             1.01
                                          (1.97)          (0.47)           (1.45)           (0.13)      (1.11)           (0.49)


Panel B: Earnings Announcements of Own Firm
                 CAR(-1,+1) Around Own-Firm Earnings Announcement After Expertise Trades
Consolidation rule                         All                     Net                       Last
Window before announcement       Up to t-2     (-15,-2)  Up to t-2     (-15,-2)    Up to t-2      (-15,-2)
                                     (1)           (2)       (3)           (4)         (5)            (6)
CAR of Traded Stocks
  Expertise Buy                     0.54          0.64      0.60          1.72        0.65           1.38
                                  (1.33)        (0.60)    (0.85)        (1.37)      (0.97)         (1.11)
  Expertise Sell                   -0.15         -0.30     -0.26         -0.05       -0.30          -0.18
                                 (-0.44)       (-0.41)   (-0.56)       (-0.07)     (-0.78)        (-0.25)
  Expertise Buy-Sell                0.69          0.95      0.86          1.77        0.95           1.57
                                  (1.31)        (0.73)    (1.02)        (1.21)      (1.23)         (1.08)

                                                                     61
                       Table 8. Insiders’ Trades around M&A Announcements

A stock purchase or sale by a corporate insider is classified as Expertise if the stock’s industry is the same as the
insider’s based on the three-digit SIC code definition. Trades in an insider’s own firm are excluded, and the remaining
trades are classified as Non-Expertise. Retail Traders’ Trades indicates trades made by other individuals in the large
discount broker (LDB) dataset. In this table, we analyze whether industry insiders tend to trade ahead of mergers and
acquisitions (M&As) in firms in their own industry (Expertise trades) or in other industries (Non-Expertise trades)
based on the three-digit SIC code definition. We also report the same statistics for the other retail traders in the LDB
database. We display the number of purchases made one to five, six to 15, and 16 to 30 calendar days before and after
the initial announcement, for stocks that are the target of M&A activity. Data for M&A announcements from 1991 to
1996 are from the Securities Data Company (SDC). We include announcements of deals that have been completed as
well as of those that have not. In Panel A (Panel B), we only include M&A announcements in which the target’s
abnormal stock return the day of the announcement and the following trading days was higher than 0% (5%).

Panel A: Number of Buy Trades around M&A News with Abnormal Returns > 0%

                                                              Days around M&A Announcements
                                       -30 to -16    -15 to -6        -5 to - 1   1 to 5       6 to 15     16 to 30
                                           (1)          (2)             (3)         (4)          (5)          (6)
  # Insiders' Expertise Trades              0            1               1          3            0             1
  % of Total Expertise Trades             0.00         0.39            0.39        1.16         0.00         0.39
  # Insiders' Non-Expertise Trades          5            3               1          8            5             6
  % of Total Non-Expertise Trades         0.16         0.10            0.03        0.26         0.16         0.20
  # Retail Traders' Trades                1371         985              423        1262         876          1053
  % of Total Retail Traders Trades        0.14         0.10            0.04        0.13         0.09         0.11


Panel B: Number of Buy Trades around M&A News with Abnormal Returns > 5%

                                                              Days around M&A Announcements
                                        -30 to -16   -15 to -6        -5 to - 1   1 to 5       6 to 15     16 to 30
                                           (1)          (2)              (3)        (4)          (5)          (6)
   # Insiders' Expertise Trades             0            1                0          2            0            0
   % of Total Expertise Trades            0.00         0.39             0.00       0.77         0.00         0.00
   # Insiders' Non-Expertise Trades         2            3                1          7            3            2
   % of Total Non-Expertise Trades        0.07         0.10             0.03       0.23         0.10         0.07
   # Retail Traders' Trades               1096          787             329        1049          641          708
   % of Total Retail Traders Trades       0.11         0.08             0.03       0.11         0.07         0.07




                                                                 62
                        Internet Appendix
                                    for

           Industry Familiarity and Trading:
Evidence from the Personal Portfolios of Industry Insiders

                             Itzhak Ben-David
       Fisher College of Business, The Ohio State University, and NBER

                                Justin Birru
            Fisher College of Business, The Ohio State University

                                Andrea Rossi
            Fisher College of Business, The Ohio State University




                                          63
                     Table IA1. Buy-and-Hold Abnormal Returns, Three Months

A stock purchase or sale by a corporate insider is classified as Expertise if the stock’s industry is the same as the
insider’s based on the three-digit SIC code definition. Trades in an insider’s own firm are excluded, and the insider’s
remaining trades are defined as Non-Expertise. All Retail Traders’ Trades indicates trades made by the other
individuals in the large discount broker (LDB) dataset. We report three-month (63 days) buy-and-hold returns as well
as returns in excess of the DGTW benchmark return (Daniel, Grinblatt, Titman, and Wermers, 1997) and the value-
weighted industry benchmark returns. Stock returns and trade size are winsorized at the 1% level within each trade
category. t-statistics are reported in parentheses. Statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level is indicated with
***, **, and *, respectively.

                                              Equal Weighted                         Trade-Size Weighted
                                                 DGTW- Industry-                           DGTW- Industry-
                                          Raw   Adjusted Adjusted                 Raw     Adjusted Adjusted
                                           (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)
                       Buy               7.39***      2.76*         2.29        12.96***     5.52***     5.12***
                                          (4.23)      (1.66)       (1.41)         (7.14)      (3.10)      (3.17)
        Insiders'
                       Sell                1.43       -3.11*        -2.08         -2.30     -5.99***     -5.48***
        Expertise
                                          (0.76)      (-1.90)      (-1.24)       (-1.19)     (-3.54)      (-3.52)
         Trades
                       Buy - Sell        5.96**       5.87**       4.38*        15.26***    11.51***     10.60***
                                         (2.33)        (2.52)      (1.87)         (5.76)     (4.69)        (4.73)
                       Buy               3.80***       -0.19      -0.91**       5.94***      1.66***     1.28***
        Insiders'                         (8.06)      (-0.45)      (-2.10)      (12.77)       (3.99)      (3.11)
          Non-         Sell              5.00***       0.46         0.46        4.91***        0.21         0.47
        Expertise                         (9.63)      (0.99)       (0.98)       (11.28)       (0.55)       (1.23)
         Trades        Buy - Sell        -1.20*        -0.66      -1.36**         1.02       1.45**         0.81
                                         (-1.71)      (-1.03)      (-2.14)       (1.61)      (2.53)        (1.44)
                       Buy               3.30***     -0.85***    -0.85***       3.26***     -0.90***     -0.87***
                                         (125.37)     (-36.20)    (-36.01)      (128.25)     (-39.80)     (-38.59)
        All Retail
                       Sell              3.88***     -0.31***    -0.26***       3.90***     -0.33***     -0.36***
        Traders'
                                         (142.65)     (-12.68)    (-10.79)      (147.60)     (-14.11)     (-15.75)
         Trades
                       Buy - Sell       -0.59***     -0.54***    -0.59***       -0.63***    -0.57***     -0.50***
                                         (-15.50)     (-16.04)    (-17.29)       (-17.32)    (-17.56)     (-15.55)




                                                                 64
                    Table IA2. Round-trip Returns and Monthly Based Returns

In this table, we present the equal-weighted round-trip returns earned by industry insiders and other retail traders on
their purchases. We separate purchases into two groups depending on whether they were closed within 63 trading days
of their opening. The average number of trading days in a month during our sample period is 21.08, so we use 63
trading days as an approximation for a three-month period. For positions closed within 63 trading days, we calculate
the realized return as the cumulated return earned starting the day after the purchase until the day of the sale. For
positions held for more than 63 trading days, we report the 63 trading days’ cumulated return, calculated starting the
day after the purchase. The Average 63 Trading Days Return (Realized or Trailing) is computed using the round-trip
returns for the positions that are closed within 63 days, and the 63 trading day returns for the remaining positions.
Equivalent 3-Month Average Return is the Average 63 Trading Days (Realized or Trailing) adjusted for the average
difference between the Average Holding Period and the actual number of trading days in a three-month period. We
exclude purchases made in the last 63 trading days of our five-year and 11-month sample because it is not possible to
determine when some of the resulting positions were closed. The number of observations used in this table is therefore
about 4% smaller than in Table 1. See the text for further details.

                                                                   Insiders'       Insiders' Non-
                                                                   Expertise         Expertise          All Other
                                                                    Trades             Trades         Retail Traders
                                                                      (1)                (2)               (3)
All Positions
Observations                                                         209                2,176             729,284
Average Holding Period (Capped at 64 Trading Days)                   46.1               54.9               52.6
Average 63 Trading Days Return (Realized or Trailing)                 5.8                3.7                3.0
Equivalent 3-Month Average Return                                    7.91               4.29               3.63
Average 3-Month Returns Calculated as in Table 5                     7.39               3.80               3.30

Positions Closed Within 63 Trading Days of Purchase
Observations                                                          95                 547              215,932
Percent of Total Purchases (%)                                       45.5                25.1              29.6
Average Holding Period (Trading Days)                                24.7                27.9              25.6
Average Round-trip Return (Realized)                                 5.04                5.01              5.65

Positions Held For More Than 63 Trading Days
Observations                                                         114                1,629             513,352
Percent of Total Purchases (%)                                       54.5               74.9               70.4
Average Return After 63 Trading Days (Trailing)                      6.38               3.30               1.92




                                                              65
                         Table IA3. Holdings-Based Calendar-Time Portfolios

This table presents robustness tests for Table 3, Panel B under different specifications. Panel A replicates the analysis
excluding the year 1991 from the time series of portfolio returns. In Panel B, each observation in the regression, i.e.,
each day in the time series of portfolio returns, is weighted by the aggregate dollar amount held in the portfolio at the
end of the previous day (). In Panel C, each observation in the regression, i.e., each day in the time series of portfolio
returns, is weighted by the number of different stocks in the portfolio at the end of the previous day. Panel D replicates
the analysis in Table 3, Panel C excluding microcap stocks, defined as stocks in the lowest DGTW (Daniel, Grinblatt,
Titman, and Wermers, 1997) size quintile.

Panel A: Excluding 1991

                                                                                Insiders' Expertise     Insiders' Non-
                                      All Retail Traders   All Insider Trades        Trades            Expertise Trades
                                             (1)                   (2)                  (3)                   (4)
 Fama-French 3 Factor Model                  0.58                  1.56               5.14**                 1.33
                                            (1.03)               (1.51)                (2.08)               (1.24)
 Carhart 4 Factor Model                      0.65                 1.54                5.00**                 1.32
                                            (1.16)               (1.49)                (2.02)               (1.23)
 HXZ Q-Factor Model                          0.18                 0.84                 4.07*                 0.59
                                            (0.30)               (0.77)                (1.67)               (0.52)
 Fama-French 5 Factor Model                1.04**                2.18**               5.31**                2.06*
                                            (1.97)               (2.04)                (2.10)               (1.86)


Panel B: Days Weighted by Aggregate Dollar Amount

                                                                                Insiders' Expertise     Insiders' Non-
                                      All Retail Traders   All Insider Trades        Trades            Expertise Trades
                                             (1)                     (2)                (3)                   (4)
 Fama-French 3 Factor Model                  0.50                1.91*                5.58**                1.78*
                                            (0.83)               (1.85)                (2.23)               (1.66)
 Carhart 4 Factor Model                      0.57                1.90*                5.28**                1.79*
                                            (0.94)               (1.85)                (2.13)               (1.67)
 HXZ Q-Factor Model                         -0.15                 1.40                 4.65*                 1.25
                                           (-0.24)               (1.36)                (1.81)               (1.17)
 Fama-French 5 Factor Model                  0.91                2.40**               5.68**                2.41**
                                            (1.65)               (2.29)               (2.23)                (2.22)




                                                                66
                 Table IA3. Holdings-Based Calendar-Time Portfolios (Cont.)

Panel C: Days Weighted by Number of Stocks in Portfolio

                                                                       Insiders' Expertise    Insiders' Non-
                             All Retail Traders   All Insider Trades        Trades           Expertise Trades
                                    (1)                    (2)                 (3)                 (4)
Fama-French 3 Factor Model          0.26                1.63*                4.76**                1.44
                                   (0.49)               (1.67)               (2.09)               (1.42)
Carhart 4 Factor Model              0.35                 1.61                4.55**                1.43
                                   (0.65)               (1.64)               (2.01)               (1.41)
HXZ Q-Factor Model                  0.00                 1.24                 3.54                 1.05
                                  (-0.01)               (1.23)               (1.56)               (0.99)
Fama-French 5 Factor Model          0.70               2.17**                4.66**              2.09**
                                   (1.38)               (2.14)               (2.04)               (1.98)


Panel D: Excluding Microcaps

                                                                       Insiders' Expertise    Insiders' Non-
                             All Retail Traders   All Insider Trades        Trades           Expertise Trades
                                    (1)                    (2)                 (3)                 (4)
Fama-French 3 Factor Model          0.36                 1.56                5.87**                0.99
                                   (0.64)               (1.12)               (2.40)               (0.67)
Carhart 4 Factor Model              0.47                 1.49                5.66**                0.95
                                   (0.85)               (1.08)               (2.32)               (0.65)
HXZ Q-Factor Model                  0.07                 1.12                4.83*                 0.64
                                   (0.12)               (0.81)               (2.00)               (0.43)
Fama-French 5 Factor Model          0.69                 1.99                6.27**                1.45
                                   (1.30)               (1.35)               (2.51)               (0.93)




                                                      67
                      Table IA4. Transactions-Based Calendar-Time Portfolios

This table presents robustness tests for Table 4 under different specifications. Panel A repeats the analysis of Table,
where portfolios are equally-weighted within days. Panels B and C report figures computed analogously to Table 4
and Table IA4, Panel A, respectively, with the only exception being that each observation, i.e., each day in the time
series of portfolio returns, is weighted by the aggregate dollar amount held in the portfolio at the end of the previous
day. Panels D and E replicate the analysis presented in Table 4, and Table IA4, Panel A, respectively, excluding
microcap stocks, defined as stocks in the lowest DGTW (Daniel, Grinblatt, Titman, and Wermers, 1997) size quintile.
Panels F and G replicate the analysis presented in Table 4, and Table IA4, Panel A, respectively, using a six-month
holding period. Panels H and I replicate the analysis presented in Table 4, and Table IA4, Panel A, respectively, using
a three-month holding period.

Panel A: Equal-Weighted Portfolios, Days Weighted by Number of Trades

                        Average Returns (bp/Day)             Annualized Difference             Annualized Alpha
                           Buy           Sell                  Mean         t -stat           Mean         t -stat
                            (1)           (2)                   (3)           (4)              (5)           (6)
Insiders' Expertise       10.21          6.46                  8.57*         1.77            11.02**        2.26
Insiders' Non-Expertise    6.33          6.82                  -0.79        -0.44             0.90          0.52
All Retail Traders         6.26          7.18                -2.33***       -2.72             -0.44        -0.66


Panel B: Value-Weighted Portfolios, Days Weighted by Aggregate Dollar Amount

                        Average Returns (bp/Day)             Annualized Difference             Annualized Alpha
                           Buy           Sell                  Mean         t -stat          Mean          t -stat
                            (1)           (2)                   (3)           (4)              (5)           (6)
Insiders' Expertise       12.06          2.51                19.75***        2.73           19.39***        2.71
Insiders' Non-Expertise    6.57          5.50                  2.76          0.78             3.11          0.89
All Retail Traders         6.83          7.74                -2.07***       -2.63             -0.34        -0.51

Panel C: Equal-Weighted Portfolios, Days Weighted by Aggregate Dollar Amount

                        Average Returns (bp/Day)             Annualized Difference             Annualized Alpha
                           Buy           Sell                 Mean          t -stat           Mean         t -stat
                            (1)           (2)                  (3)            (4)              (5)           (6)
Insiders' Expertise       10.32          5.40                11.20*          1.86            12.61**        2.11
Insiders' Non-Expertise    5.92          6.20                 -0.74         -0.40             0.86          0.49
All Retail Traders         6.27          7.22                -2.23**        -2.40             -0.40        -0.56




                                                               68
              Table IA4. Transactions-Based Calendar-Time Portfolios (Cont.)

Panel D: Value-Weighted Portfolios, Excluding Microcaps

                        Average Returns (bp/Day)   Annualized Difference       Annualized Alpha
                           Buy           Sell        Mean         t -stat    Mean          t -stat
                            (1)           (2)         (3)           (4)        (5)           (6)
Insiders' Expertise       10.79          4.09      20.00***        3.30     20.92***        3.53
Insiders' Non-Expertise    7.37          6.30        3.53          1.04       3.46          1.01
All Retail Traders         7.18          7.96      -2.00***       -2.60       -0.20        -0.31

Panel E: Equal-Weighted Portfolios, Excluding Microcaps

                        Average Returns (bp/Day)   Annualized Difference      Annualized Alpha
                           Buy           Sell       Mean          t -stat    Mean         t -stat
                            (1)           (2)         (3)           (4)       (5)           (6)
Insiders' Expertise        8.90          7.31        5.94          1.40      8.16*         1.86
Insiders' Non-Expertise    7.04          7.06        0.63          0.37      1.97          1.21
All Retail Traders         6.61          7.40      -2.09**        -2.17      0.14          0.19

Panel F: Value-Weighted Portfolios, Six-Month Holding Period

                        Average Returns (bp/Day)     Annual Difference        Annualized Alpha
                           Buy           Sell       Mean          t -stat    Mean         t -stat
                            (1)           (2)         (3)           (4)       (5)           (6)
Insiders' Expertise       11.35          3.48      19.31**         2.37     21.06**        2.55
Insiders' Non-Expertise    7.45          4.41        7.25          1.36      8.64          1.63
All Retail Traders         5.89          6.69      -2.22**        -2.17      -0.05        -0.06

Panel G: Equal-Weighted Portfolios, Six-Month Holding Period

                        Average Returns (bp/Day)   Annualized Difference      Annualized Alpha
                           Buy           Sell       Mean          t -stat    Mean         t -stat
                            (1)           (2)         (3)           (4)       (5)           (6)
Insiders' Expertise        8.42          4.77        8.45          1.21      10.64         1.54
Insiders' Non-Expertise    6.43          6.07        0.48          0.18      2.29          0.87
All Retail Traders         5.24          6.12      -2.55**        -2.35      -0.46        -0.52




                                                    69
              Table IA4. Transactions-Based Calendar-Time Portfolios (Cont.)

Panel H: Value-Weighted Portfolios, Three-Month Holding Period

                        Average Returns (bp/Day)   Annualized Difference       Annualized Alpha
                           Buy           Sell       Mean          t -stat    Mean          t -stat
                            (1)           (2)         (3)           (4)        (5)           (6)
Insiders' Expertise       13.33         -0.48      30.45***        2.71     33.04***        2.94
Insiders' Non-Expertise   10.03          7.01        8.33          1.13       10.95         1.50
All Retail Traders         5.70          6.71       -2.64*        -1.87       0.04          0.03

Panel I: Equal-Weighted Portfolios, Three-Month Holding Period

                        Average Returns (bp/Day)   Annualized Difference      Annualized Alpha
                           Buy           Sell       Mean          t -stat    Mean         t -stat
                            (1)           (2)        (3)            (4)       (5)           (6)
Insiders' Expertise       11.08          1.76      21.89**         2.23     24.50**        2.57
Insiders' Non-Expertise    6.54          7.97       -1.71         -0.46      0.76          0.20
All Retail Traders         5.44          6.45      -2.71**        -2.10      -0.43        -0.39




                                                    70
                      Table IA5. Buy-and-Hold Abnormal Returns, 12 Months

This table shows results analogous to those reported in Table IA1, but using a 12-month holding period. A stock
purchase or sale by a corporate insider is classified as Expertise if the stock’s industry is the same as the insider’s
based on the three-digit SIC code definition. Trades in an insider’s own firm are excluded, and the insider’s remaining
trades are defined as Non-Expertise. All Retail Traders’ Trades indicates trades made by the other individuals in the
large discount broker (LDB) dataset. We report three-month (63 days) buy-and-hold returns as well as returns in
excess of the DGTW benchmark returns (Daniel, Grinblatt, Titman, and Wermers, 1997) and the value-weighted
industry benchmark returns. Stock returns and trade size are winsorized at the 1% level within each trade category. t-
statistics are reported in parentheses. Statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level is indicated with ***, **,
and *, respectively.


                                              Equal Weighted                       Trade-Size Weighted
                                                 DGTW- Industry-                         DGTW- Industry-
                                          Raw   Adjusted Adjusted               Raw     Adjusted Adjusted
                                           (1)         (2)            (3)        (4)         (5)          (6)
                      Buy              27.92***       7.78            6.55    25.96***       4.46        4.18
                                         (5.45)      (1.56)          (1.37)     (5.22)      (0.89)      (0.88)
        Insiders'
                      Sell             16.14***       -1.83       -2.73       13.49***      -4.46        -3.60
        Expertise
                                         (3.94)      (-0.50)     (-0.77)        (2.90)     (-1.06)      (-0.91)
         Trades
                      Buy - Sell         11.78*       9.61            9.27     12.47*        8.92        7.78
                                         (1.80)      (1.55)          (1.55)    (1.83)       (1.36)      (1.26)
                      Buy              15.53***       -0.97     -4.35***      16.63***      -0.45     -2.05***
        Insiders'                       (16.14)      (-1.12)     (-4.89)       (18.62)     (-0.56)     (-2.60)
          Non-        Sell             16.81***       -0.89      -2.19**      15.97***     -1.80**     -2.09**
        Expertise                       (14.86)      (-0.87)      (-2.05)      (16.91)      (-2.14)     (-2.44)
         Trades       Buy - Sell          -1.28       -0.08       -2.16         0.66         1.35        0.04
                                         (-0.86)     (-0.06)     (-1.56)       (0.51)       (1.17)      (0.03)
                      Buy              15.21***     -1.37***    -2.72***      16.56***    -0.64***    -1.96***
                                        (265.02)     (-26.98)    (-51.04)      (295.50)    (-12.95)    (-38.23)
        All Retail
                      Sell             17.52***     0.19***     -0.81***      18.77***     0.77***    -0.40***
        Traders'
                                        (288.16)     (3.57)      (-14.30)      (315.07)     (14.69)    (-7.39)
         Trades
                      Buy - Sell       -2.31***     -1.57***    -1.91***      -2.21***    -1.41***    -1.56***
                                        (-27.59)     (-21.06)    (-24.67)      (-27.02)    (-19.57)    (-20.89)




                                                                71
                                Table IA6. Insider Trades and Local Stocks

A stock purchase or sale by a corporate insider is classified as Expertise if the stock's industry is the same as the
insider's based on the three-digit SIC code definition. Trades in an insider's own firm are excluded, and the insider’s
remaining trades are defined as Non-Expertise. A stock purchase or sale by a corporate insider is classified as Local
if the headquarters of the traded firm is within 250 miles of the headquarters of the insider’s firm(s). In Panel A (Panel
B), we report equal-weighted (trade size–weighted) three-month buy-and-hold DGTW-adjusted returns (Daniel,
Grinblatt, Titman, and Wermers, 1997). Stock returns and trade size are winsorized at the 1% level within each trade
category. t-statistics are reported in parentheses. Statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level is indicated with
***, **, and *, respectively.

Panel A: Equal-Weighted Three-Month DGTW-Adjusted Returns

                                    Local Stocks                                     Non-Local Stocks
                        All           Expertise     Non-Expertise          All           Expertise      Non-Expertise
                        (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)               (6)
    N                  1205              179             1026             3619              233              3386
    Buy                0.48             -2.03             0.92            -0.09           6.69***            -0.52
                      (0.55)           (-0.92)           (0.98)          (-0.19)           (2.83)           (-1.07)
    Sell               -1.46           -6.06**           -0.67             0.69            -1.00             0.82
                      (-1.58)          (-2.19)          (-0.69)           (1.34)          (-0.50)           (1.52)
    Buy - Sell         1.93             4.03              1.59            -0.78           7.69**            -1.34*
                      (1.53)           (1.14)            (1.18)          (-1.11)           (2.49)           (-1.85)


Panel B: Trade-Size-Weighted Three-Month DGTW-Adjusted Returns

                                    Local Stocks                                     Non-Local Stocks
                        All           Expertise     Non-Expertise          All           Expertise      Non-Expertise
                        (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)               (6)
    N                  1205              179             1026             3619              233              3386
    Buy              3.90***            0.25           4.68***           1.04**          13.04***            0.13
                      (4.66)           (0.11)            (5.26)           (2.20)           (5.01)           (0.28)
    Sell               0.12           -7.89***           1.47*            -0.68            -4.04*            -0.40
                      (0.15)           (-2.85)           (1.93)          (-1.50)          (-1.94)           (-0.88)
    Buy - Sell       3.78***           8.14**          3.20***          1.71***          17.09***            0.54
                      (3.31)           (2.25)            (2.73)           (2.62)           (5.12)           (0.82)




                                                                  72
Table IA7. Expertise Trades in Hard-to-Value Stocks, 12-Month DGTW-Adjusted Returns

This table shows results analogous to those reported in Table 5, but using a 12-month holding period. A stock purchase
or sale by a corporate insider is classified as Expertise if the stock’s industry is the same as the insider’s based on the
three-digit SIC code definition. Trades in an insider’s own firm are excluded, and the insider’s remaining trades are
defined as Non-Expertise. Retail Traders indicates trades made by the other individuals in the large discount broker
(LDB) dataset. We sort buy and sell trades into two equally sized portfolios using the in-sample median value of stock
size, residual analyst coverage calculated as in Hong, Lim, and Stein (2000), and idiosyncratic volatility calculated in
month t – 1, following Ang, Hodrick, Xing, and Zhang (2006). The median expertise stock is in the 72nd NYSE-
AMEX size percentile. Three-month equal-weighted DGTW-adjusted excess returns (Daniel, Grinblatt, Titman, and
Wermers, 1997) are reported. Stock returns and trade size are winsorized at the 1% level within each trade category.
t-statistics are reported in parentheses. Statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level is indicated with ***, **,
and *, respectively.

Panel A: Expertise Trades and Hard-to-Value Stocks: Size

                                   Insiders' Trades       Retail Traders
                           Exp Buy   Exp Sell Non-Exp Buy  Retail Buy                         Differences
                             (1)       (2)          (3)         (4)                  (1) - (2) (1) - (3) (1) - (4)

       Firm Size

           Small             12.50      -9.97*        -3.06**         -3.01***       22.47**        15.57*     15.51*
                            (1.37)      (-1.81)        (-2.09)         (-35.03)       (2.10)        (1.68)     (1.70)
           Big               3.02        6.39           1.13          0.26***          -3.37         1.89       2.75
                            (0.78)      (1.35)         (1.26)          (4.85)         (-0.55)       (0.47)     (0.71)
           Small - Big       9.49      -16.36**       -4.19**         -3.28***       25.85**         13.68      12.76
                            (0.95)      (-2.25)        (-2.44)         (-32.19)       (2.10)        (1.36)     (1.28)


Panel B: Expertise Trades and Hard-to-Value Stocks: Residual Analyst Coverage

                                      Insiders' Trades       Retail Traders
                           Exp Buy      Exp Sell Non-Exp Buy  Retail Buy                         Differences
                             (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)               (1) - (2)      (1) - (3) (1) - (4)

       Resid. Analyst Coverage

           Low             17.08**       -2.71        -2.17*          -3.94***        19.79*       19.25**    21.02**
                            (2.00)      (-0.49)       (-1.82)          (-58.14)       (1.95)        (2.23)     (2.46)
           High              -1.60       -0.95          0.24          1.19***          -0.66         -1.84      -2.79
                            (-0.32)     (-0.19)        (0.19)         (15.71)         (-0.09)       (-0.36)    (-0.56)
           Low - High       18.68*       -1.76         -2.41          -5.13***        20.45*       21.09**    23.81**
                            (1.89)      (-0.24)       (-1.40)          (-50.45)       (1.66)        (2.10)     (2.41)




                                                                 73
Table IA7. Expertise Trades in Hard-to-Value Stocks, 12-Month DGTW-Adjusted Returns
(Cont.)

Panel C: Expertise Trades and Hard-to-Value Stocks: Idiosyncratic Volatility

                                   Insiders' Trades       Retail Traders
                         Exp Buy     Exp Sell Non-Exp Buy  Retail Buy                Differences
                           (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)         (1) - (2) (1) - (3) (1) - (4)

     Idiosyncratic Volatility

        High               11.30    -10.47*     -4.11***        -2.95***    21.77*      15.40      14.25
                          (1.16)    (-1.66)      (-2.79)         (-33.32)   (1.88)     (1.57)     (1.46)
        Low                4.43      6.72*       2.17**         0.20***      -2.29      2.25       4.23
                          (1.47)     (1.83)      (2.46)          (3.94)     (-0.48)    (0.72)     (1.41)
        High - Low         6.87     -17.19**    -6.28***        -3.15***    24.06*      13.15      10.02
                          (0.68)     (-2.36)     (-3.66)         (-30.91)   (1.92)     (1.27)     (0.98)




                                                           74
                          Table IA8. Trading Frequency and Expertise Trades
This table presents a robustness test for the results presented in Panel E of Table A1. Column 1 to 3 present results
obtained using all the corporate insiders in the sample. Columns 4-6 present results obtained after excluding the top
10% of insiders ranked by number of expertise trades. We repeat the test for the eight industry definitions considered
in Appendix D, but report results for only three of them in order to save space. Stock returns are winsorized at the 1%
level. t-statistics are reported in parentheses. Statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level is indicated with
***, **, and *, respectively.

                       Equal-Weighted DGTW-Adjusted 3-Month Buy-And-Hold Abnormal Returns
                                                                           Excluding Top 10% of Insiders by Number of
                                        All Insiders                                    Expertise Trades
Expertise Definition      3 Digit SIC   2 Digit SIC       12FF              3 Digit SIC    2 Digit SIC       12FF
                              (1)           (2)            (3)                   (4)            (5)            (6)
Purchases (n)                214            333            688                  109            173            377
Sales (n)                    199            317            589                  101            199            337
Buy                         2.76*         2.44**          1.49*               6.46***        4.95***         2.02*
                            (1.66)         (1.99)         (1.83)               (2.67)         (2.74)         (1.73)
Sell                        -3.11*         -2.03*         -0.543              -4.84**         -1.783         -0.504
                            (-1.90)       (-1.69)        (-0.57)               (-2.18)        (-1.21)        (-0.40)
Buy-Sell                    5.87**        4.47***         2.033              11.30***        6.74***         2.521
                            (2.52)         (2.60)         (1.62)               (3.44)         (2.89)         (1.47)




                                                                 75
                                    Table IA9. Financial Firm Insiders

A stock purchase or sale by a corporate insider is classified as Expertise if the stock’s industry is the same as the
insider’s based on the three-digit SIC code definition. Trades in an insider’s own firm are excluded, and the insider’s
remaining trades are defined as Non-Expertise. Financial Firm Insiders are individuals who are insiders of at least one
financial firm or bank, according to the 49 Fama-French industry definition. Twenty-three out of 105 industry insiders
in our sample are classified as Financial Firm Insiders, and they are responsible for roughly 30% of insiders’ trades.
The remaining insiders are classified as Non-Financial Firm Insiders. Three-month (12-month) equal-weighted
DGTW-adjusted excess returns (Daniel, Grinblatt, Titman, and Wermers, 1997) are reported in Panel A (Panel B).
Stock returns and trade size are winsorized at the 1% level within each trade category. t-statistics are reported in
parentheses. Statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level is indicated with ***, **, and *, respectively.

Panel A: Three-Month DGTW-Adjusted Returns

                                                                                          Non-Financial Firm
                                          All Insiders        Financial Firm Insiders         Insiders
                                               (1)                       (2)                      (3)
       N (#insiders)                          105                        23                        82
       Expertise Buy                          2.76*                     1.17                      4.15
                                             (1.66)                    (0.87)                    (1.44)
       Expertise Sell                        -3.11*                     0.30                    -5.70**
                                             (-1.90)                   (0.15)                    (-2.34)
       Expertise Buy - Sell                  5.87**                     0.87                    9.85***
                                             (2.52)                    (0.36)                    (2.61)
       Non-Expertise Buy                      -0.19                    1.21*                    -1.30**
                                             (-0.45)                   (1.85)                    (-2.25)
       Non-Expertise Sell                     0.46                      0.83                      0.23
                                             (0.99)                    (1.14)                    (0.38)
       Non-Expertise Buy - Sell               -0.66                     0.38                     -1.54*
                                             (-1.03)                   (0.39)                    (-1.82)




                                                              76
Table IA9. Financial Firm Insiders (Cont.)


Panel B: 12-Month DGTW-Adjusted Returns

                                                                         Non-Financial Firm
                                All Insiders   Financial Firm Insiders       Insiders
                                    (1)                  (2)                    (3)
     N (#insiders)                  105                  23                     82
     Expertise Buy                  7.78               8.48**                   7.17
                                   (1.56)              (2.56)                  (0.81)
     Expertise Sell                -1.83              11.25***               -11.79**
                                  (-0.50)              (2.82)                 (-2.12)
     Expertise Buy - Sell           9.61                -2.77                 18.96*
                                   (1.55)              (-0.53)                 (1.81)
     Non-Expertise Buy             -0.97                -0.21                  -1.56
                                  (-1.12)              (-0.17)                (-1.33)
     Non-Expertise Sell            -0.89                0.42                   -1.71
                                  (-0.87)              (0.27)                 (-1.27)
     Non-Expertise Buy - Sell      -0.08                -0.63                   0.15
                                  (-0.06)              (-0.31)                 (0.08)




                                               77
 Figure IA1. Do Insiders Trade More Before the Traded Firm Earnings Announcements?

Figure IA1a shows the average daily percentage of buy trades for expertise and non-expertise trades of insiders around
the traded-firm’s earnings announcements, as well the fraction of trades by other traders in the retail trading database.
Trades are shown for intervals of five trading days around the traded firm’s earnings announcement. Analogously,
Figure IA1b presents the share of sell trades around the traded-firm’s earnings announcements.


       Figure IA1a. Distribution of Buy Trades Relative to the Traded Firm’s Earnings
                                      Announcements




       Figure IA1b. Distribution of Sell Trades Relative to the Traded Firm’s Earnings
                                       Announcements




                                                               78
     Figure IA2. Do Insiders Trade More Before Own-Firm Earnings Announcements?

Figure IA2a shows the average daily percentage of buy trades for expertise and non-expertise trades of insiders around
their own-firm earnings announcements. Trades are shown for intervals of five trading days around the own-firm
earnings announcement. Analogously, Figure IA2b presents the share of sell trades around own-firm earnings
announcements.


 Figure IA2a. Distribution of Buy Trades Relative to Own-Firm Earnings Announcements




 Figure IA2b. Distribution of Sell Trades Relative to Own-Firm Earnings Announcements




                                                              79
