                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      THE MARCH OF THE TECHIES:
       TECHNOLOGY, TRADE, AND JOB POLARIZATION IN FRANCE, 1994-2007

                                         James Harrigan
                                          Ariell Reshef
                                          Farid Toubal

                                      Working Paper 22110
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22110


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2016




This paper was begun while James Harrigan was a visiting professor in the Department of
Economics at Sciences Po in 2012-2013. We thank the Bankard Fund for Political Economy at
the University of Virginia, the Research in Paris fund of the Mairie de Paris, Sciences Po, and the
iCODE Institute (Idex Paris-Saclay) for support. This research is also supported by a public grant
overseen by the French National Research Agency (ANR) as part of the Investissements d'avenir"
program (ANR-10-EQPX-17 – Centre d'accès sécurisé aux données – CASD). We thank Francis
Kramarz for guidance with the data, David Autor for an insightful conference discussion, and
seminar audiences in Amsterdam, Barcelona, Bloomington, Cambridge MA, Lausanne, New
York, Oslo, Palo Alto, Paris, San Francisco, Stockholm, Utrecht, and West Lafayette for helpful
comments. Abiy Teshome provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by James Harrigan, Ariell Reshef, and Farid Toubal. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The March of the Techies: Technology, Trade, and Job Polarization in France, 1994-2007
James Harrigan, Ariell Reshef, and Farid Toubal
NBER Working Paper No. 22110
March 2016
JEL No. D3,F1,F16,F66,J2,O3

                                         ABSTRACT

Using administrative employee-firm-level data on the entire private sector from 1994 to 2007, we
show that the labor market in France has polarized: employment shares of high and low wage
occupations have grown, while middle wage occupations have shrunk. During the same period,
the share of hours worked in technology-related occupations ("techies") grew substantially, as did
imports and exports, and we explore the causal links between these trends. Our paper is among
the first to analyze polarization in any country using firm-level data, and we show how
polarization occured within firms, but mostly due to changes in the composition of firms
(between firms). Motivated by the fact that technology adoption is mediated by technically
qualified managers and technicians, we use a new measure of the propensity of a firm to adopt
new technology: its employment share of techies. Using the subsample of firms that are active
over the whole period, we show that firms with more techies in 2002 saw greater polarization,
and grew faster, from 2002 to 2007. Offshoring reduced employment growth. Among blue-collar
workers in manufacturing, importing caused skill upgrading while exporting caused skill
downgrading. To control for the endogeneity of firm-level techies and trade in 2002, we use
values of techies and trade from 1994 to 1998 as instruments. We conclude that technological
change, mediated through techies, is an important cause of polarization in France. Firm-level
trade had important effects in manufacturing.

James Harrigan                                  Farid Toubal
Department of Economics                         Ecole Normale Supérieure de Cachan,
University of Virginia                          Bureau 503, Bat Cournot
P.O. Box 400182                                 61, avenue du Président Wilson
Charlottesville, VA 22904-4182                  94235 Cachan Cedex, FRANCE
and NBER                                        and Paris School of Economics, and CEPII
harrigan@nber.org                               ftoubal@ens-cachan.fr

Ariell Reshef
Université Paris 1 - Panthéon Sorbonne
Maison des Sciences Economiques
Bureau 310
106-112 Boulevard de l'Hopital
75647 Paris Cedex 13
France
and Paris School of Economics
ariell.reshef@psemail.eu


A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w22110
1    Introduction

Job polarization— growth in the shares of high-wage and low-wage jobs at the expense of middle
wage jobs— is one of the most striking phenomena in many advanced economies’ labor markets
in the last several decades.1 In this paper we study the extent, characteristics, and causes of job
polarization in France from 1994 to 2007.

    Job polarization occurs between and within …rms over time, and we are among the …rst to
study polarization using …rm-level data. Studying …rm-level data is important because technologi-
cal change and globalization a¤ect demand for labor through …rm-level decisions. We use adminis-
trative worker-…rm linked data for the entire French private sector to document how employment
shares have changed across 22 major occupations, which we rank by average wage. The compre-
hensive nature and high quality of the French administrative data allow us to describe changes in
employment shares in an unusually accurate way, compared to other research that typically relies
on survey data. We use an instrumental variables strategy to make causal inferences about the
importance of technology and trade in driving polarization.

    We match workers with imports, exports and technology, through the …rms at which they work.
We construct a novel indicator for technology at the …rm level: the employment share of workers
who facilitate the adoption and use of new technology— the techies. We match customs data to
…rms to create import and export intensities. The matched …rm-worker nature of the data allow us
to study polarization along two complementary dimensions: within-…rm adjustment, and changes
in the employment share composition across …rms that have di¤erent occupational shares. In
addition, we exploit the …rm-worker match to construct measures of exposure to imports, exports
and technology, across occupations.

    We show that, like many other countries, France has experienced job polarization: employment
shares of high-wage managers and professionals, among them technical managers and engineers,
increased; employment shares of middle income o¢ ce workers and industrial workers fell; and
employment shares of low-wage retail, personal service and unskilled manual workers increased.
However, the picture that emerges is more complex than this simple relationship between wage ranks
   1
     The United States (Autor, Katz, and Kearney (2006), Autor, Katz, and Kearney (2008), Firpo, Fortin, and
Lemieux (2011)), the United Kingdom (Goos and Manning (2007)), Germany (Spitz-Oener (2006), Dustmann, Lud-
steck, and Schönberg (2007)), and more generally in Europe (Goos, Manning, and Salomons (2009) and Oesch (2013)).
Polarization contrasts with earlier labor market developments, where changes in employment shares of middle-wage
jobs were more modest, and the growth of high-wage jobs was at the expense of low-wage jobs. For example, in 1980s
in the U.S., changes in employment shares are positively related to wages in the 1980s Autor, Katz, and Kearney
(2008)).


                                                        2
and changes in employment shares. For example, employment in middle management declined, but
technicians increased their employment shares, while both occupations earn very similar middle-
income wages.

       The magnitudes of changes are large and they occurred relatively rapidly. Despite very di¤erent
labor market institutions, polarization in France from 1994 to 2007 is comparable both in shape and
in magnitude to polarization in the United States from 1980 to 2005 (Autor and Dorn (2013)).2 This
suggests that similar forces are at play. We …nd that polarization in France is a strong force that
increases inequality through reallocation of employment shares from middle-paying occupations to
both high and low-paying occupations.3

       We decompose changes in employment shares into two components: within-…rm changes and
changes due to changes in …rm sizes (including entry and exit). We …nd that these two dimensions
explain varying shares of changes in employment across occupations. For example, within-…rm
changes explain nearly all of the overall drop in employment in skilled industrial workers, but
hardly any of the drop in employment in o¢ ce workers, where changes in …rm size composition
dominate. For the latter, this implies that employment growth in …rms that are intensive in o¢ ce
workers lags behind other …rms. Changes in composition also explain virtually all of the change in
employment shares of managers (both top and mid-level) and of unskilled industrial workers. We
are the …rst to document wide dispersion across occupations in the exposure of workers to imports,
exports and technology (techies).

       We then ask what factors explain employment share changes in the 12 largest occupations
within …rms: importing, exporting or technology? Our identi…cation strategy allows us to make
causal inferences about these forces. We …nd that the main driving force is technology. While
the e¤ect of technology is pervasive, trade plays an important role only in manufacturing. Within
nonmanufacturing …rms, technology strongly increases employment shares of top managers, while
having the opposite (albeit smaller) e¤ect on o¢ ce and retail workers. Within manufacturing …rms,
technology causes an increase in employment shares of mid-level professionals (who are relatively
high in the wage distribution), while lowering shares of foremen and supervisors (who are closer
to the middle of the wage distribution) and of o¢ ce workers. At the same time, technology causes
signi…cant skill downgrading among blue collar workers.
   2
    See Goos, Manning, and Salomons (2014) for a comparison across European countries, including France.
   3
    This is consistent with overall decreasing inequality in France, because changes in occupational wages tend to
compress the overall wage distribution, as we discuss in more detail below. For example, Verdugo (2014) shows that
changes in the composition of French employment across education and experience groups increase inequality in the
face of overall reductions in inequality. See also Charnoz, Coudin, and Gaini (2013) for a broad view of trends in
inequality in France.


                                                        3
    Trade a¤ects the occupational mix, but mainly in manufacturing. Importing causes strong skill
upgrading: employment shares of skilled industrial and manual laborers increase, while the share of
unskilled industrial workers falls. This is consistent with a simple o¤shoring story, where imported
intermediates substitute for low-skill workers within manufacturing …rms, but are complementary to
skilled workers. We …nd that exporting increases employment shares of top managers, lowers shares
of (mid-wage) skilled industrial and manual workers, and increases shares of (low-wage) unskilled
industrial workers— causing strong polarization within manufacturing. As with technology, these
…ndings imply skill downgrading among blue collar workers in response to exporting.

    Our results on skill downgrading within blue-collar occupations in response to technological
change and exporting are new and intriguing, and we discuss them at length below.

    Turning to between-…rm changes, we …nd that technology has substantial e¤ects on …rms’overall
employment shares: techie-intensive …rms grow much faster than other …rms. Importing has large
e¤ects on employment growth in manufacturing: …rms that import from low and middle income
countries see substantially slower employment growth. This is mostly due to imports of intermediate
inputs, which suggests that o¤shoring contributes to slower …rm-level employment growth.

    As the second largest economy in Europe, France is a good laboratory for studying changes
in the structure of employment, where, due to its relatively rigid wage structure, shocks are more
likely to a¤ect employment rather than wages. Card, Kramarz, and Lemieux (1999) estimate similar
employment responses to demand shocks across demographic groups in France, Canada and the
U.S. In contrast, while wages in France are overall insensitive to demand shocks, wages do respond
to demand shocks in the U.S. and, to a lesser extent, in Canada.4 These …ndings contribute to
the external validity of our work.5 Our …ndings indicate the pervasiveness of job polarization: we
observe a similar pattern of changes in employment shares in France as in the U.S. and the U.K.,
despite large di¤erences in the way the wage distribution has evolved.
   4
     In recent work Bozio, Breda, and Guillot (2016) document a similar increase in relative labor costs (including
employer contributions, as opposed to net or gross wages) in France as in the U.K. and other similar economies
(although still less than in the U.S.). They also estimate similar responses of relative labor costs to demand shifts as
in the U.S.
   5
     Jaimovich and Siu (2012) show that the disappearance of routine-intensive jobs in the U.S. from the 1980s co-
incides with “jobless recoveries". Our sample, 1994–2007, however, coincides with a relatively stable period in the
French economy. Cortes, Jaimovich, Nekarda, and Siu (2014) estimate that the drop in employment in routine occu-
pations in the U.S. is driven by changes in employment transition rates (between jobs, and between employment and
non-employment), mainly among men, the young, and low skilled individuals— but not due to changes in demographic
composition.




                                                           4
1.1    Relationship to existing literature

Our work contributes to the literature that documents the pervasiveness of job polarization, and
studies its causes. It is distinguished by the quality of the administrative data, its comprehen-
siveness (the entire French private sector), our focus on within and between …rm changes, and by
causal inference. The features of the French occupational classi…cation make it particularly useful
for understanding polarization, for example, by distinguishing between di¤erent skill levels within
similar functions (e.g., industrial and manual labor workers). These skills are determined by em-
ployers’assessment, which makes them closer to the economic notion of “skill", rather than being
determined by educational credentials (which are typically based on individual employee reporting).
The within-function skill dimension is absent in previous work on polarization.

    This is the …rst paper to describe that both analyzes polarization across and within …rms and
makes causal inference at this disaggregate level. Since employment decisions are made at the …rm
level, …rm-level data is ideal for studying polarization. In contrast, Beaudry, Doms, and Lewis
(2010) and Autor and Dorn (2013) exploit geographical variation across local labor markets within
the U.S., and Michaels, Natraj, and Van Reenen (2014) exploit variation across industries within
countries.6 Goos, Manning, and Salomons (2014) address the roles of both within-industry changes
and changes in industrial composition. While they are successful in explaining the contribution of
changes in industrial composition to polarization, they are less successful in explaining the within-
industry contribution. Our work shows that for many occupations, changes in the composition
of …rms matter the most for understanding changes in aggregate employment shares. We discuss
these …ndings in detail below.

    Industry level analysis masks substantial variation across …rms. The importance of …rms in
explaining relative demand shifts can be illustrated by juxtaposing Berman, Bound, and Griliches
(1994) with Bernard and Jensen (1997). While Berman, Bound, and Griliches (1994) show that
most (70%) of the increase in relative demand for nonproduction workers in U.S. manufacturing in
the 1980s is driven by within-industry changes (versus changes in industry composition), Bernard
and Jensen (1997)— using the diasaggregate data underlying the industry analysis of Berman,
Bound, and Griliches (1994)— show that variation in plant size composition explains most (60%)
of the increase in their wage bill share in this period. This led to opposing conclusions about the
relative roles of trade versus technology in driving the same relative demand shift.
   6
     Beaudry, Doms, and Lewis (2010) exploit variation across U.S. cities, but do not study polarization; they study
changes in demand for skill (college-equivalent workers). Autor, Dorn, and Hanson (2013) exploit variation in
industrial composition across local labor markets and estimate signi…cant e¤ects of imports from China on employment
and wages in U.S. manufacturing.


                                                         5
       We are aware of only a few other papers that study polarization using comprehensive matched
worker-…rm data.7 The closest paper to ours is Kerr, Maczuskij, and Maliranta (2015), who study
polarization in Finland in 2000–2009. As we do, they decompose changes in occupational em-
ployment shares into within and between-…rm changes. For a subset of their sample they match
both trade and technology indicators at the …rm level. When analyzing the e¤ects of trade and
technology on polarization, Kerr et al instrument for …rm level trade (as we do), but are not able
to address the endogeneity of their technology measures. Böckerman, Laaksonen, and Vainiomäki
(2013) also analyzes Fnnish …rm-level data, and …nd eveidence of within-frm polarization, but due
to the absence of strong instruments are not able to make causal statements.

       Keller and Utar (2015) analyze polarization within the Danish textile and apparel sector. Al-
though they use …rm level data, they do not exploit the …rm level dimension in their analysis. Using
a sample of workers employed in the sector in 1999, they show that the end of quota protection
caused trade-exposed workers in middle-wage occupations within the textile and apparel sector to
move disproportionately into higher and lower paid occupations. While not directly comparable to
our economy-wide analysis, which focuses on longer term trends rather than outcomes of individual
workers, the analysis of Keller and Utar (2015) is consistent with our …ndings. In addition— and
similar to our aggregate analysis— they show that polarization in Denmark in 1991–2009 progressed
much faster than in the United States in 1980–2005.

       The main explanation for job polarization in the literature is the “routinization hypothesis"
(Goos and Manning (2007)). As argued in Autor, Levy, and Murnane (2003), technological progress
in information and communications technology (ICT) allows machines to replace codi…able cognitive
routine tasks that were once performed by humans. These tasks happen to be more prevalent— or
“bundled"— in occupations that are, on average, in the middle of the wage distribution. Thus, the
di¤usion of ICT lowers demand for these occupations. At the same time, ICT complements non-
routine cognitive tasks, and demand for occupations that are characterized by these tasks— which
are higher up in the wage distribution— rises. Occupations at the bottom of the wage distribution
are less a¤ected by ICT, and they absorb the residual supply of labor.8 Our results broadly support
the importance of the ‘routinization hypothesis".
   7
     Cortes and Salvatori (2015) document a large increase in the proportion of workplaces that specialize in non-
routine tasks in the United Kingdom. Changes in industry composition plays a minor role in this. But because
Cortes and Salvatori (2015) cannot track establishments over time, they cannot make statements about the role
establishment composition versus within-establishment changes.
   8
     Acemoglu and Autor (2011) provide an analytical framework that suggests how tasks are bundled across types
of workers (di¤erentiated by education level or skill), and how changes in demand for these tasks a¤ect employment
shares of these types.



                                                        6
       A second force that could help explain job polarization is o¤shoring, where domestic labor is
replaced by labor abroad (see among many others Feenstra and Hanson (1996), Grossman and
Rossi-Hansberg (2008), Rodriguez-Clare (2010), Blinder and Krueger (2013)). Our results suggest
a modest role for o¤shoring in explaining polarization, for the simple reason that polarization is
concentrated in the non-manufacturing sector where o¤shoring is rare. Similarly, Feenstra and
Hanson (1999) estimate that imports of intermediate inputs have a small e¤ect on relative demand
for skilled labor in U.S. manufacturing from 1979 to 1990, while computers have a large e¤ect.
Michaels, Natraj, and Van Reenen (2014) come to a similar conclusion, as does Oesch (2013).9

       Moreno-Galbis and Sopraseuth (2014) …nd that population aging is an additional factor that
can help explain the increase employment at the bottom of the wage distribution. Older people
have relatively high demand for personal services— largely provided by low-wage workers— thus,
population aging can help explain the rise of employment in low-paid positions. Another force
which may operate at the bottom of the wage distribution is immigration, since this is where
most immigrants …nd employment, at least initially; however, Oesch (2013) dismisses this as an
important factor.

       An important force that may be part of the explanation of changes in aggregate occupational
employment shares is labor market regulation. Indeed, France experienced changes in labor market
regulation during the period we study, most notably changes in regulations of the 35-hour working
week. However, as Askenazy (2013) points out, the 35-hour regulations were designed to not a¤ect
aggregate labor demand measured in hours — which is our unit of analysis— and in fact, they
probably didn’t. The 35-hour regulations were designed to share the existing demand across more
workers, in an attempt to reduce unemployment. Even if changes in the 35-hour regulations did
a¤ect industries and occupations di¤erently, this does not a¤ect our identi…cation of causal forces,
as we explain below.

       Our work is closely related to Maurin and Thesmar (2004), who investigate changes in em-
ployment composition within French manufacturing from 1984 to 1995. Using survey data, they
…nd that employment in product design and marketing increases, while employment in production
drops— both for high and low-skilled workers within these categories (quali…é and non-quali…é,
respectively). Concurrently, employment in high-skill administrative jobs declines. Maurin and
   9
    Becker and Muendler (2014) show that overall German employment in 1979–2006 shifted towards “non-
o¤shorable" activities, while imports of intermediate inputs increase, suggesting a role for o¤shoring in explaining
changes in labor demand. However, they do not address polarization, they do not investigate the role of technology,
nor do they identify causal relationships.



                                                         7
Thesmar (2004) associate these changes to technological change. Using …rm level data from 1988
to 1992, Maurin, Thoenig, and Thesmar (2002) …nd evidence that increases in employment in
product design and marketing within French manufacturing …rms may be related to exporting.10

       A key objective of our is paper is to identify causal relationships of technology and trade on
…rm’s occupational composition and size. Our identi…cation strategy relies on initial conditions
across …rms to explain changes in occupational composition and size. We use lagged values as
instruments and discuss their validity in detail. This strategy is similar to that of Beaudry, Doms,
and Lewis (2010) and Autor and Dorn (2013), who exploit variation across space and use lagged
initial conditions as instruments that help identify the propensitiy of local labor markets to respond
to technological change. Michaels, Natraj, and Van Reenen (2014) estimate “long di¤erences" spec-
i…cations and exploit variation across industries (within countries), and instrument for di¤erences
in ICT intensity by using intial conditions in the United States. Goos, Manning, and Salomons
(2014) do not address causality.

       There are also important di¤erences between our econometric approach and those in Beaudry,
Doms, and Lewis (2010) and Autor and Dorn (2013). Beaudry, Doms, and Lewis (2010) …nd
that higher supply of college-educated workers (and commensurate low returns to college) in 1980
predicts higher rates of computer adoption and higher increases in the returns to college across
U.S. cities. In contrast, Autor and Dorn (2013) …nd that higher levels of routine-task labor input
(which is not particularly high skilled) across local labor markets in 1980 predicts higher rates of
information technology adoption, job polarization and in‡ows of skilled labor.11 Our approach
di¤ers from both of these. The …rm level lends itself more naturally to studying and identifying
the mechanisms of adjustment. Firms that are initially more technologically-intensive in 2002 are
more sensitive to reductions in the cost of computing power. Our innovative approach is to proxy
technology-intensity with the share of techies in …rm employment; the techie share captures the
propensity to adopt technology at the …rm level. Firms with a higher techie share exhibit larger
changes in occupational composition and higher overall employment growth. Our approach is
appropriate for our sample, which starts after information technology becomes all but ubiquitous,
and while polarization is evident.
  10
     Related to this, Thesmar and Thoenig (2000) use data from France from 1984 to 1995 to show that increases
in product market volatility and creative destruction can lead to …rm organizational change, namely substitution of
product design and marketing workers for production workers.
  11
     Beaudry, Doms, and Lewis (2010) use initial supply of “college equivalents”, de…ned as workers who have a least
a 4-year college degree plus one-half of those with at least some college education. If the "some college" group are
predominantly employed in routine-intensive occupations in 1980, then this can help reconclie the seemingly di¤erent
predictions of Autor and Dorn (2013).



                                                         8
       Biscourp and Kramarz (2007) study the role of trade in explaining employment declines in
French manufacturing from 1986 to 1992. They …nd that imports of …nal goods are associated
with declines in production workers’ employment, and in particular low-skill production workers’
employment. In contrast, Goux and Maurin (2000) investigate the causes of the decline in low-
skill employment in France form 1970 to 1993. Using survey data, they estimate that changes
in industrial composition— not technological change or globalization— drive this decline.12 These
results contrast with Katz and Murphy (1992) (for the U.S., 1963–1987) and Berman, Bound, and
Griliches (1994) (for U.S. manufacturing, 1979–1989), who argue that intra-industry changes are
most important. Our empirical strategy identi…es causal e¤ects from within-industry variation, so
we are silent on this issue.

       By studying job polarization, we also contribute to the literature on wage inequality in France.
In contrast to other comparable industrial economies— e.g., the U.S., U.K., Canada and Germany—
France has had relative stability in wage inequality since 1980. As Charnoz, Coudin, and Gaini
(2013) and Verdugo (2014) show, the 90/10 percentile ratio falls all through our sample, and this is
mostly driven by a compression in the 50/10 percentile ratio. In contrast, top wage income shares
(top 1% and 0.1%) in France have increased markedly, contributing to an increase in inequality,
albeit less than in other countries; see Landais (2008), Amar (2010), Godechot (2012), and Piketty
(2014). We estimate that polarization is a strong force that increases inequality, and that within-
occupation wage compression counterbalances this.

       Kramarz (2008) studies the e¤ect of o¤shoring on …rm-level employment in French manufac-
turing from 1986 to 1992. He estimates that French …rms that faced strong labor unions lowered
employment and o¤shored more than …rms facing weaker wage bargaining by workers. Our em-
pirical strategy uses …rm level importing activity directly. Carluccio, Fougere, and Gautier (2014)
investigate the separate e¤ects of exporting and importing on wage bargaining and the resulting
wages of workers in French manufacturing from 2005 to 2009.

1.2      Roadmap to the paper

Our paper has two types of empirical …ndings, descriptive and econometric. After describing the
data in Section 2, we document the polarization of the French labor market, and how polarization
has evolved both within and between …rms, in Section 3. This section also introduces new measures
of how workers in a given occupation are exposed to trade and to workers in di¤erent occupations.
  12
    Exports and imports have o¤setting e¤ects on net, but are estimated to have some e¤ects on gross reallocations
within industries. This echoes the analysis in Harrigan and Reshef (forthcoming).



                                                        9
In Section 4 we present a simple model of …rm-level technology which is used to motivate the
econometric analysis in Section 6. The econometric analysis shows how …rm characteristics in 2002
a¤ect both within-…rm polarization and between-…rm employment growth from 2002 to 2007.


2        Data source description

To study job polarization in France we use …rm-level data on trade and employment from 1994
to 2007. This 14 year period saw big changes in technology, globalization, and economic policy:
the tech boom of the late 1990s, Chinese accession to the World Trade Organization in 2001,
the introduction of the euro in 1999, and steady progress in integrating goods, …nancial, and labor
markets within the European Union. During most of our sample France was governed by the center-
right.13 It was also a period of macroeconomic stability in France, with no recessions (annual growth
slowed to just under 1 percent in 2002 and 2003, and averaged 2.4 percent during the rest of the
period). During this period, the French government implemented a set of labor market reforms
intended to lower labor costs and increase employment, especially of low-skilled workers (Askenazy
(2013)). This section gives an overview of our data sources and details about data de…nitions and
matching of …rms. For compactness of the exposition, we relegate additional important details to
the appendix.

2.1      Workers and …rms: DADS Poste

Our source for information on workers is the DADS Poste, which is based on mandatory annual
reports …led by all …rms with employees, so that our data includes all private sector French workers
except the self-employed.14 Our unit of analysis is annual hours paid in a …rm, by occupation.15
For each worker, the DADS reports gross and net wages, hours paid, occupation, tenure, gender and
age. There is no information about workers’education or overall labor market experience. The data
do not include worker identi…ers, so we can not track workers over time, but this is of no concern
to us given our focus on long-run trends rather than individual outcomes.16 Throughout the paper,
    13
     The Socialist President Francois Mitterand left o¢ ce in Spring 1995 with a National Assembly controlled by the
center-right government of prime minister Édouard Balladur until 1997. During 1997–2002 prime minister Lionel
Jospin’s left-wing government cohabitated with right-wing president Jacques Chirac. During 2002–2007, both the
presidency and government in France were of the center-right.
  14
     The DADS Poste is an INSEE database compiled from the mandatory …rm-level DADS (“Déclaration Annuelle
de Données Sociales") reports. See the appendix for details.
  15
     The data is reported at the level of establishments, which are identi…ed by their SIRET. The …rst nine digits of
each SIRET is the …rm-level SIREN, which makes it easy to aggregate across establishments for each …rm.
  16
     The DADS Panel is a related dataset which has been used by researchers interested in following individuals over
time (for example, Abowd, Kramarz, and Margolis (1999) and Postel-Vinay and Robin (2006)). The DADS Panel is
a 1/25 sample of individuals in the DADS Poste.



                                                         10
our measure of labor input is annual …rm-level hours paid rather than head count. The DADS
Poste has no information about the …rm beyond the …rm identi…er and industry and, implicitly,
…rm-level aggregates related to employment such as total hours by occupation, average wages, etc.
       From 1994 to 2007, 2.9 million private sector …rms appear in our DADS Poste data.17 These
…rms range in size from tiny cafes and tabacs to giant industrial enterprises and retailers. Our
descriptive analysis includes all 2.9 million …rms, but in our econometric analysis we focus on the
subset of …rms that were in operation continuously from 1994 to 2007. There are 310,713 of these
“permanent" …rms, with 85% of hours paid in nonmanufacturing. Though these …rms represent
about 11 percent of …rms in our sample, they are much larger than the average …rm, and account
for about half of aggregate hours in each year. The share of nonmanufacturing hours within the
"permanent" …rms is only one percent point smaller than in the larger sample.18 Changes in
occupational shares within "permanent" …rms are also very similar to the larger sample (we discuss
this in more detail below in Section 5.2).

2.2      Occupations: the PCS

Every job in the DADS is categorized by a two digit PCS occupation code.19 Excluding agricultural
and public sector categories, the PCS has 22 occupational categories, listed in Table 1.20 These 22
categories are consistently de…ned over our period of analysis.21 In much of our analysis we focus
on the 14 larger PCS categories indicated in bold in Table 1, each of which comprises between 2
percent and 13 percent of private sector hours, and which together comprise 95 percent of hours.

       Each two digit PCS category is an aggregate of as many as 40 four digit subcategories. Although
hours data is not available by four digit category, the descriptions of the four digit categories in Table
2 are helpful in understanding the kinds of tasks performed within two-digit categories, and make
it clear that the two-digit categories are economically meaningful. The subcategories also suggest
di¤erences in the susceptibility of jobs to automation and/or o¤shoring. For example, Personal
Service workers (PCS 56) such as restaurant servers, hair stylists, and child care providers do the sort
of “non-routine manual" tasks (c.f. Autor, Levy, and Murnane (2003)) that require both proximity
and human interaction. The same can be said for Retail Workers (PCS 55) and both skilled and
  17
     SIRENs in the DADS Poste are classi…ed by “categorie juridique”. We de…ne private …rms as those with SIRENs
other than categorie juridique 4, 7, or 9. There are 457,958 other SIRENs in the DADS Poste, including public
sector enterprises and nonpro…ts.
  18
     See detailed information in the appendix.
  19
     PCS stands for Professions et Catégories Socioprofessionnelles.
  20
     We also exclude a very small category …rst introduced in 2002, PCS 31, and allocate these workers to PCS 34.
  21
     There are some small discontinuities in how workers are assigned to occupations between 2001 and 2002, due to
improvements in data processing in 2002. See the appendix for more details and for a description of how we cope
with this issue.


                                                       11
unskilled manual laborers (PCS 63 and 68), whose jobs include gardening, cooking, repair, building
trades, and cleaning. In contrast, mid-level professionals and managers (PCS 46) often do routine
cognitive tasks that can be done more cheaply by computers or overseas workers. Industrial workers
(PCS 62 and 67) doing routine manual work are unquestionably directly in competition with both
robots and imported intermediate goods. Drivers (PCS 64) do a job which can be neither o¤shored
nor automated (at least for now), while the work of skilled transport/wholesale/logistics workers
(PCS 65) is likely subject to automation.

       Two occupations are of particular interest: PCS 38 “Technical managers and engineers" and
PCS 47 “Technicians".22 As is clear from the detailed descriptions in Table 2, many workers in
these categories are closely connected with the installation, management, maintenance, and support
of information and communications technology (ICT) and other new technologies. These are jobs
that require technical training, skill, and experience, so we refer to workers in these two occupations
as “techies". Our hypothesis is that techies mediate the adoption of new technology within …rms:
they are the ones who plan, purchase, and install new technology, and who train and support other
workers in the use of new technology. In short, if a …rm invests in new technology, it needs techies,
and …rms with more techies are probably more technologically sophisticated …rms.

       One potential problem with our hypothesis that …rm-level techies are an indicator of …rm-
level technological sophistication is that …rms can purchase ICT consulting services. By hiring
a consultant, …rms can obtain and service new ICT without increasing their permanent sta¤ of
techies. However, only 0.7% of techie hours are in the IT consulting sector, which implies that
almost all of the hourly services supplied by techies are obtained in-house rather than purchased
from consultants.23

2.3      Matched …rm-trade

Our source for …rm-level trade data is the French Customs.24 For each trade observation, we know
the importing or exporting …rm, trading partner country, the product traded, and the value of
trade. We use the …rm-level SIREN identi…er to match the trade data to the DADS Poste data on
employment. This match is not perfect: we fail to match about 11 percent of imports and exports
to …rms. The reason for the imperfect match is that there are SIRENs in the trade data for which
  22
     A precise de…nition of these categories of workers is given in the appendix.
  23
     We refer to the IT consulting sector as industry code 72 in the NAF classi…cation, which includes the following sub-
categories: Hardware consultancy, Publishing of software, Other software consultancy and supply, Data processing,
Database activities, Maintenance and repair of o¢ ce, Accounting and computing machinery, and Other computer
related activities.
  24
     The appendix gives the details about the match between the French Customs and the DADS Poste datasets.


                                                           12
there is no corresponding SIREN in the DADS Poste. This is likely to lead to a particular type of
measurement error: for some …rms, we will observe zero trade even when true trade is positive.


3     Descriptive results

In this section we do …ve things:

    1. Show how the French job market polarized between 1994 and 2007, both within and between
      …rms.

    2. Illustrate the March of the Techies: the growing importance of occupations that specialize in
      new technology.

    3. Calculate the extent to which polarization has been a force that increases wage inequality.

    4. Introduce a new measure of an occupation’s exposure to trade.

    5. Characterize the extent to which employees in di¤erent occupations work together in the same
      …rm, with particular attention to employees working in …rms with techies.

    Our basic unit of observation is hours paid in a …rm, classi…ed by occupation. We report various
aggregates of this data, using the following notation:

               hf ot                           hours in …rm f by occupation o in year t.
                          P
               hf t =         o hf ot          hours in …rm f in year t, across all occupations o.
                          hf ot
               sf ot =    hf t                 share of occupation o in …rm f hours, year t.
                          P
               Hot =          f   hf ot        aggregate hours in occupation o in year t.

                 ft   =   Phf t                …rm f share of aggregate hours in year t.
                           f hf t
                          P
               Sot =        f      f t sf ot   occupation o share of aggregate hours in year t.

3.1    Occupational polarization and the March of the Techies

In this section we present the …rst major results of our paper: the French occupational structure
polarized between 1994 and 2007, with high-wage and low-wage occupations growing at the expense
of middle-wage occupations. To show this, we begin with Figure 2, which plots economy-wide occu-
pational hours shares Sot from 1994 to 2007, separately for manufacturing and nonmanufacturing
(for readability, the scales are di¤erent for each occupation). The share of hours by upper and
technical managers, along with technicians, saw steady growth, while the share worked by middle


                                                             13
managers and foremen-supervisors fell. The largest occupation in 1994, o¢ ce workers, fell steadily,
while retail and personal service jobs grew. Among industrial workers in manufacturing, there was
substantial skill upgrading, with the share of hours accounted for by high skilled workers rising as
the share of low skilled workers declined.

       Particularly striking in Figure 2 is the rapid growth in the techie occupations, Technical Man-
agers and Engineers (PCS 38) and Technicians (PCS 47). While techies have a larger hours share
in manufacturing, they also have a large and growing presence in nonmanufacturing, especially
Technical Managers. We call this growth in the importance of these two occupations The March
of the Techies.

       We next connect changes in occupational shares to average occupational wages. Polarization is
illustrated vividly in Figure 3, which plots the change in an occupation’s share of aggregate hours
from 1994 to 2007 against the occupation’s rank in the wage distribution in 2002.25 The circles are
proportional to the average size of occupations, and the curve is a weighted quadratic regression
line. The pattern is clear: the two large, highly-paid occupations on the right, PCS 37 (Managers)
and PCS 38 (Technical Managers) grew, as did three large low-wage occupations on the left: PCS
68 (Low-skilled manual laborers), PCS 56 (Personal service workers), and PCS 55 (Retail workers).
The middle-wage occupations that shrank over the period include skilled industrial workers and
manual laborers (PCS 62 and 63), unskilled industrial workers (PCS 67), and clerical and middle-
management workers (PCS 54 and 46). Exceptions to this pattern in the middle of the wage
distribution include drivers (PCS 64), an occupation that can be neither o¤shored nor automated,
and Technicians (PCS 47). To summarize, polarization and the march of the techies proceeded
together from 1994 to 2007.

       Theses changes are large and occurred relatively rapidly. Polarization in France in from 1994
to 2007 is comparable both in shape and in magnitude to polarization in the United States from
1980 to 2005 (Autor and Dorn (2013)), a period almost twice as long.26

       Figures 4 for nonmanufacturing and 5 for manufacturing …rms o¤er a useful re…nement of
the economy-wide story seen in Figure 3. Figure 4 shows the di¤erent fortunes of o¢ ce workers
(PCS 54), whose hours share plummeted, and of the lower-paid service sector occupations, retail
  25
    This ranking is stable over time, and insensitive to de…ning wages as gross or net of payroll taxes.
  26
    To see this, notice that the scale of Panel A of Figure 1 in Autor and Dorn (2013) is “100 change in employment
share", and each observation is for one percentile. In contrast, we have 22 occupations. This means that each 0.1
unit in their …gure translates to 0:45 = 0:1=100 (100=22) 100 percent points, on average, in our …gures. See Goos,
Manning, and Salomons (2014) for a comparison across European countries.


                                                        14
and personal service workers (PCS 55 and 56), whose ranks swelled considerably. There was skill
downgrading within manual workers (PCS 63 fell while 68 grew).

      As seen in Figure 5, a simple polarization story does not describe what happened within man-
ufacturing. Instead, the key fact is skill upgrading among blue-collar industrial workers: the hours
share of the skilled (PCS 62) grew at the same time that the share for unskilled workers (PCS 67)
plunged. As in nonmanufacturing, the managerial categories (PCS 37 and 38) grew strongly while
o¢ ce workers and middle managers (PCS 54 and 46) shrank.

3.1.1     Polarization within and between …rms

We turn next to a more detailed analysis of the changes in hours shares just described: did they
occur due to within-…rm adjustment, changes in …rm size, or both? The change in Sot , the share of
hours in occupation o in the economy, can be decomposed into changes within and between …rms
as follows:
                                              X                      X
                                      Sot =                 f t sf o +         f   sf ot             (1)
                                                  f                      f
                                              |        {z         } |         {z      }
                                                      between                within

where     ft   is …rm f ’s share of economywide hours, sf ot is the share of occupation o in …rm f , and
overbars indicate simple time averages. Entry and exit of …rms is accounted for by changes in the
 ft   from zero to positive or from positive to zero. The results of this decomposition are reported
in Table 3 for the whole period and the entire private sector. The fourteen largest occupations are
boxed in Table 3 and illustrated in Figure 6.

      Begin by looking at the full period for all …rms, which is illustrated in Figure 6 and reported
in the …rst four columns of Table 3. The top managerial categories both grew a lot, but technical
managers (PCS 38, +2.0pp) grew much faster than upper managers (PCS 37, +1.4pp). Middle
manager (PCS 46, -1.5pp) and supervisor (PCS 48, -0.4pp) jobs shrank, but similarly-paid tech-
nician jobs (PCS 47, +1.0pp) grew substantially. Turning to the lower paid occupations, we see
substantial polarization and evidence consistent with the decline of jobs vulnerable to automation
and o¤shoring. Among the white collar occupations, o¢ ce jobs (PCS 54, -2.0pp) plunged while
lower paid retail (PCS 55, +1.5pp) and personal service (PCS 56, +1.2) jobs grew. Among blue
collar occupations, the picture is more nuanced: high skill industrial (PCS 62, -1.0pp) and manual
labor (PCS 63, -0.3pp) jobs fell, but similarly skilled and paid jobs in driving (PCS 64, +0.7pp)
and distribution (PCS 65, +0.2pp) grew. At the bottom of the skill ladder, relatively well-paid
industrial jobs (PCS 67, -3.0pp) plunged while the lowest paid occupation in the economy (low
skilled manual labor, PCS 68, +0.4) grew.

                                                             15
   The between-within decompositions help us understand these changes in greater depth. Focus
…rst on the fortunes of high and low skill industrial workers, PCS 62 and PCS 67, both of whom saw
big overall declines. For the high-skill industrial workers in PCS 62, the overall decline of -1.0pp
was more than entirely due to within-…rm changes: …rms that had above average amounts of these
workers actually contributed +0.2pp to hours growth, but within …rm shedding of these workers
contributed a -1.2pp drop. The story is exactly the opposite for the low skill industrial workers in
PCS 67: the overall collapse of -3.0pp was driven by a -3.4 drop due to between-…rm changes, with
hours actually being added within …rms, +0.4pp. Putting these two facts together implies that
…rms intensive in skilled industrial workers grew, but within these …rms there was substitution of
unskilled for skilled industrial workers. Firms intensive in low skill industrial workers in PCS 67
exhibit disproportionately low employment growth.

   Next, consider the skilled and unskilled manual labor occupations, PCS 63 and PCS 68. As
discussed above, these jobs are probably less subject to both automation and o¤shoring than the
similarly skilled, but better paid, industrial jobs. Firms that were intensive in these occupations
shrank, contributing -1.3pp and -0.4pp to the overall declines in PCS 63 and PCS 68 respectively.
But within …rms the importance of these jobs actually increased substantially, by 1.0pp and 0.8pp
respectively. In other words, even as these manual-labor-intensive …rms shrank, they did so by
shedding other workers faster than their manual laborers.

   Drivers, PCS 64, are the archetypal low-skill job that can not be automated (at least for now)
or o¤shored. Thus, it is not surprising that their hours share grew +0.7pp, even as other blue-collar
jobs were shrinking. This was driven by within-…rm changes, +1.1pp, that were partly o¤set by a
between-…rm decline in …rms that use a lot of drivers, -0.4pp.

   Turning to clerical workers, PCS 54, the -2.0pp collapse in o¢ ce jobs was more than accounted
for by the between-…rm component: …rms that had a lot of o¢ ce workers shrank substantially,
contributing -2.4pp to the overall decline, even as the within-…rm component was +0.4. This
within-between split is not consistent with a simple story of replacing clerical workers with com-
puters; rather, it is suggestive of a heavy reliance on o¢ ce workers being associated with slower …rm
employment growth. This …nding suggests that models that rely on substitution— either within
local labor markets or industries— are missing an important dimension of the mechanics of polar-
ization.

   The accompanying boom in lower-paid retail (PCS 55, +1.5pp) and personal service (PCS 56,
+1.2pp) jobs was fairly evenly split across the within and between components. Thus, …rms heavy

                                                 16
in retail and/or personal service jobs expanded, and increased the share of these jobs within their
…rms as they did so.

      The march of the techies was broad based. Both technical managers (PCS 38, +2.0pp) and
technicians (PCS 47, +1pp) grew rapidly. This growth was mainly accounted for by between-…rm
changes (techie-intensive …rms grew faster, accounting for more than 75% of total techie hours
growth), but in addition …rms on average shifted hours toward techies.

3.1.2      Polarization and …rm entry/exit

As noted above, entry and exit of …rms is accounted for by changes in the …rm employment shares
 ft   from zero to positive or from positive to zero in equation (1). The subset of …rms that have
positive hours in every year from 1994 to 2007, which we call “permanent" …rms, account for about
half of total hours in each year. The other half of hours are accounted for by …rms that enter
and/or exit between 1994 and 2007. Here we focus on the contribution of net entry by these other
…rms to the overall changes in occupational hours shares. Letting the set of permanent …rms be
denoted by P and the set of other …rms as O, the decomposition in (1) can be re-written as
                               X                    X                      X                      X
                       Sot =               f t sf o +       f    sf ot +          f t sf o   +           f   sf ot :   (2)
                               f 2P                  f 2P                  f 2O                   f 2O
                               |      {z        } |         {z      }      |                 {z                  }
                                   between P            within P                      net entry

Table 4 reports the results of the decomposition in (2), separately for nonmanufacturing and man-
ufacturing …rms.27 Column 6 of the Table shows that in most cases the contribution of net entry is
the same sign as the overall change. In a few occupations (Personal Service Workers in nonmanu-
facturing and Supervisors in manufacturing) net entry accounts for the bulk of the overall change.
The overall skill upgrading of industrial workers in manufacturing, as seen by growth in the share
of skilled industrial workers (+3.8pp, PCS 62) and a drop in the share of the unskilled (-5.9pp, PCS
67), is driven by a combination of an increase in skill intensity both within and between permanent
…rms combined with substantial net exit of …rms intensive in unskilled industrial workers (-4.3pp,
PCS 67). The expansion of the techie occupations is similar in permanent and other …rms.

3.2      Contribution of polarization to inequality

How much does job polarization contribute to wage inequality? Reallocation of labor from middle-
paying occupations to both high and low-paying occupations mechanically increases inequality,
and here we calculate that this is a strong force towards higher inequality in France. While wage
 27
      Table 4 omits occupations that amounted to less than 3 percent of sectoral hours in 2002


                                                                 17
inequality in our sample is relatively stable, this is the result of opposing forces. While changes
in occupational employment shares increase inequality, changes in wages across occupations tend
to compress the wage distribution. In other words, if it wasn’t for job polarization, France would
have experienced a signi…cant compression in the wage distribution.

       We measure wage inequality across occupations in year t by the weighted standard deviation of
average relative occupational wages:
                                              v
                                              u
                                              uX           wot         2
                                              t  Sot               1                                              (3)
                                                  o
                                                           wt

where Sot is the hours share of occupation o, wot is the average wage of occupation o, and wt is the
overall average wage.28 Occupational inequality as measured by (3) rose a modest 6 percent from
0.485 in 1994 to 0.514 in 2007.

       Changes in (3) embody two forces: changes in average occupational wages and in the shares
of occupations in the economy. To isolate the impact of polarization (compositional changes in
occupational employment shares) on this measure of inequality, we proceed in two ways. The …rst
is to …x wages in 1994 and let employment shares evolve as in the data. We …nd that polarization
contributed 153% of the actual increase in occupational inequality from 1994 to 2007. In the
second calculation we …x employment shares in 1994 and let relative wages evolve as in the data.
We …nd that changes in occupational wages contribute                14% of the actual increase in         from 1994
to 2007, and implies that polarization contributed 124% of the change. The di¤erence between
these two calculation arises from the interaction of changes in relative wages and in occupational
employment shares. Both calculations imply that polarization has strongly increased inequality,
whereas compression of the distribution of wages across broad occupations has worked to reduce
inequality. This result— between-occupation wage compression with reallocation of hours across
occupations that increases overall wage inequality— is consistent with …ndings in Charnoz, Coudin,
and Gaini (2013) and Verdugo (2014), as discussed above in Section 1.1.

3.3      Trade exposure of occupations

A key question in understanding job polarization is: how exposed are workers to the forces that
are potentially driving polarization? Because we have data that matches …rms and trade, we can
construct measures of …rm-level exposure of di¤erent occupations to imports and exports— measures
  28
    This measure is equivalent to the weighted coe¢ cient of variation, and has the virtue of being scale independent,
and thus invariant to general trends in nominal wages (see Cowell (2008)). We splice the wot =wt series between 2001
and 2002, as described in the appendix.


                                                         18
which have not been calculated before in the literature. To construct these measures, we allocate
…rm-level exports xf t to workers within the …rm, by occupation, and then sum across …rms to get
economy-wide measures of occupational export exposure,

                                                          X
                                                  Xot =         xf t sf ot ;                                          (4)
                                                           f

where sf ot is the share of occupation o hours in …rm f hours. We then divide Xot by aggregate
exports Xt to give the share of aggregate exports allocated to occupation o. We de…ne Mot ; imports
allocated to occupation o, similarly. The scale of the occupational trade shares are not particularly
meaningful, so we report occupational trade shares relative to the occupation’s share of aggregate
hours Sot , with the ratios averaged over time.29 Thus, in Figure 7, workers in occupations with
exposure greater than one are more exposed than the average worker to trade.

       Figure 7 shows great variation in exposure to trade by occupation. Import and export exposure
are correlated, which re‡ects the well-known fact that …rms that trade tend to both import and
export; e.g., see Bernard, Jensen, Redding, and Schott (2007). The most trade-exposed occupations
are Upper Managers (PCS 37) and Techies (PCS 38 and 47). Highly skilled industrial workers (PCS
62) are very exposed to trade, particularly to exports, and the same is true for Supervisors (PCS
48). What this means is that these workers are concentrated in …rms which export and, to a lesser
extent, import. Interestingly, the less-skilled industrial workers (PCS 67) are only slightly more
exposed to exports, and no more exposed to imports, than the average worker.

       In contrast, manual laborers (PCS 63 and 68), retail workers (PCS 55), drivers (PCS 64), and
especially personal service workers (PCS 56) are comparatively unexposed to trade. To a lesser
extent, the same is true for o¢ ce workers (PCS 54), the largest occupation in the economy in 1994.

       There are two important caveats in interpreting these numbers. First, the trade exposure
indices treat all workers in a …rm as equally exposed to the …rm’s trade. Second, the indices re‡ect
only direct …rm-level exposure to trade, and do not account for any exposure to trade that comes
through competition in product markets. We address the causal e¤ects of …rm-level trade exposure
in our econometric analysis below.
  29
     There is very little time series variation in relative occupational exposure to trade, so we report the time-averages
for simplicity.




                                                           19
3.4   Techie exposure of occupations

Our working hypothesis is that techies are a key channel that translate falling ICT prices into
changes in the …rm level occupation mix. An implication is that …rms with more techies may see
greater ICT-enabled changes in occupational mix. As a step toward measuring this e¤ect, in this
section we introduce measures of occupational exposure: what share of workers overall, and by
occupation, work in …rms with techies? The short answer is that more than half of all workers are
exposed to techies, and that exposure to techies varies a lot across occupations. We also report
exposure of workers to other occupations.

   To begin, we compute the share of hours that occur in …rms that employ occupation o. This
measure of overall exposure to occupation o is given by
                                           P
                                              dof t hf t
                                           f
                                             P           ;
                                                hf t
                                                  f

where dof t is an indicator equal to 1 if …rm f has at least one hour paid by occupation o and hf t
is total hours in …rm f . This share includes exposure of occupation o workers to themselves, so we
also compute a measure that excludes this own-exposure,
                                     P
                                        dof t (hf t hof t )
                                      f
                                             P              :
                                                hf t
                                                  f

To get a clearer picture of how occupations interact at the …rm level, we also compute occupation-
by-occupation exposure,                     P
                                                 dof t ho0 f t
                                             f
                                                 P             :
                                                   ho0 f t
                                                 f

The result of computing occupation-by-occupation exposure is a non-symmetric square matrix,
where each row gives the exposure of occupation o0 to all other occupations o. The diagonal
elements are 1 by de…nition, while the o¤-diagonal elements answer the question: what share of
hours in occupation o0 (rows) are worked in …rms that also employ occupation o (columns)?

   The occupational exposure measures do not change much over time, so we report results for a
single year, 2002, in Table 5. The …rst two rows report overall exposure, excluding and including
an occupations’ exposure to itself. Focusing on the column for PCS 38, technical managers and
engineers, Table 5 shows that 55 percent of hours paid in the economy were in …rms that also had


                                                      20
hours in this techie occupation (the number rises to 60 percent including PCS 38 exposure to itself).
The corresponding number for PCS 47, technicians, is 56 percent. Moving down the column labeled
38, we see great heterogeneity in exposure to technical managers: 77 percent for top managers (PCS
37), and only 21 percent for personal service workers (PCS 56). The highest exposure is for skilled
industrial workers (PCS 62, 83 percent), with very high exposure for low-skilled industrial workers
as well (PCS 67, 77 percent). The biggest occupation in the economy, o¢ ce workers (PCS 54), is
less exposed than average to technical managers, with just over half of o¢ ce workers sharing a …rm
with a technical manager. Not surprisingly, the two techie occupations are very highly exposed to
each other, at 86 percent for both. Other occupations’exposure to the two techie occupations is
quite similar (to see this, compare the columns labeled 38 and 47).


4     Techies and polarization: an illustration

The heterogeneity across occupations of exposure to techies shown in Table 5 is further motivation
for our hypothesis that techies are a channel through which falling ICT prices cause polarization.
In this section we show this channel theoretically, with a simple model of …rm-level outcomes. The
model shows how a drop in the price of ICT can lead to polarization of employment within a …rm,
and shows how polarization depends on parameters of the …rm’s technology. The model also shows
how a drop in the price of ICT can lead to greater employment growth in ICT-intensive …rms.
These results help to motivate our within and between-…rm econometric analyses in the following
sections. Proofs of all statements are in the appendix.

4.1   Technology

We begin with a constant returns to scale production function which combines three types of
non-techie labor services, along with ICT, into output Q:
                                                                   !               !
                                             L        1        f
                                                               M               e
                                                                               H
                            Q=                                                             :
                                   1

In this function, L is simply hours worked by low-skill workers. The other components of the
production function combine hours worked by medium and high-skill workers, M and H; with ICT
         e
services C,
                                     h   1       1             1       1   i
                              f=
                              M              e
                                             C       + (1      ) M
                                                                                   1


                                     h   1       1             1       1
                                                                           i
                               e =
                               H             e
                                             C       + (1      ) H
                                                                                   1
                                                                                       :



                                                          21
f is an aggregate of the tasks performed by medium-skill workers together with ICT services, and
M
e is similarly an aggregate of tasks produced by high-skill workers together with ICT services.
H
Our assumption that ICT is a substitute for M and a complement to H is given by                 > 1 and
0<    < 1: A key parameter is , which indexes the intensity of ICT in production.

   ICT technology does not a¤ect production unless it is installed, maintained, and managed by
technicians and managers with the appropriate education, training, and experience. To express
                                                                e as a Leontief function of techies’
this idea in the simplest way possible, we specify ICT services C
labor hours T and ICT capital K,
                                                e = min[T; K] :
                                                C

The three types of workers are paid wL , wM , and wH . Techies are paid wT , and ICT capital is
paid a rental rate of r. The unit cost function corresponding to this technology is

                                     b = (wL )1         (e
                                                         pM ) (e
                                                               pH )                 ;

where the price indices of medium and high-skill tasks are
                                           h                            i       1

                                               p1C                  1       1
                                   peM =             + (1        ) wM
                                                                                1
                                   peH =       p1C   + (1           1
                                                                 ) wH       1
                                                                                        ;

and the price of ICT services is
                                                 p C = wT + r :

Using Shepard’s Lemma, the relative employment levels of workers are
                                                                    !
                         H                    (1     ) pC 1 wL
                            =
                         L     1           wH + (1       ) p C 1 wH
                                                                                            !
                            M                               (1     ) pC 1 wL
                              =
                            L   1                     wM + (1         ) p C 1 wM
                                                                               !
                             H                       wM + (1        ) p C 1 wM
                               =       pC
                             M                       wH + (1        ) p C 1 wH

4.2   Cross-sectional variation in relative employment

A key parameter in the technology just described is , the distributional parameter associated
                                   e and M
with ICT services in the functions H     f that create high and medium-skill tasks (the share
of ICT services in total cost is increasing in ). How does cross-sectional variation in         a¤ect the

                                                       22
composition of employment within …rms? We answer this question by di¤erentiating the relative
employment equations with respect to , which gives

                                              @    H
                                                         <0
                                              @    L

                                              @    M
                                                         <0
                                              @    L
For both H and M , higher       is associated with lower employment relative to L. The reason is that
as the importance of ICT in producing high and medium-skill tasks rises, the labor that is required
to work with ICT capital falls. Since there is no direct e¤ect of       on the productivity of L, the
ratios H=L and M=L decline with . The e¤ect of           on H=M cannot be signed.

4.3     Polarization with falling ICT prices

We next turn to the e¤ect of falling ICT prices on relative employment within …rms. A drop in r
leads to a polarization in employment, with H rising relative to M and L; and M falling relative
to H and L,

                                              @    H
                                                         <0
                                              @r   L
                                              @    M
                                                         >0
                                              @r   L

                                              @    H
                                                         <0
                                              @r   M
The intuition is straightforward: since ICT is a complement to H but a substitute for M , a drop
in r leads to greater employment of H and less of M .

      We now turn to a key question which helps motivate our empirical speci…cation below: is the
polarizing e¤ect of falling r stronger within …rms where ICT is more important? Mathematically,
                           @2   H
is the cross derivative   @r@   M   negative? Intuition suggests yes, and we show in the appendix that
 @2     H
@r@     M   is negative for most of the relevant regions of the parameter space.

      We illustrate the forces at work with a numerical example. In the example we normalize the
wage of the least skilled workers to 1, and set wM = 2 and wH = 3: The elasticities of substitution
are    = 2 and    = 1=2, and the upper-level cost shares ;     are equalized at 1=3. We drop the cost
of ICT r from 11 to 1, and analyze how the resulting ratio H=M varies as a function of        2 [0; 1].
The …gure below, a contour plot of the level of H=M , illustrates what we …nd. The vertical axis


                                                    23
           Figure 1: H=M as a function of r (vertical axis) and        (horizontal axis)

measures the cost of computer capital r, while the horizontal axis measures the parameter . Lower
levels of H=M are at the upper right of the …gure, shaded blue, with higher levels of H=M shading
toward orange. Moving from the top to the bottom of the …gure illustrates our analytical result
that a drop in r leads to an increase in H=M , as ICT services complement H and substitute for
M . This increase is steeper for higher levels of : the more important ICT is in the production
function, the greater the polarizing e¤ect of a drop in r (to see this, note that when more contour
lines are crossed for the same vertical drop, then the level of the function is changing faster). The
…gure also shows that the e¤ect of higher      on H=M is ambiguous: for low levels of r (at the
bottom of the …gure), higher    is associated with higher H=M , but for higher values of r the e¤ect
is reversed.



                                                 24
4.4      Techies and competitiveness

We now turn to the between-…rm e¤ect of falling computer prices. While a drop in the price of
computers r bene…ts all …rms that employ ICT services by lowering their unit costs b (@b=@r > 0
when       > 0), …rms that are more ICT-intensive (higher ) bene…t more:

                                                 @2b
                                                     >0:
                                                @r@
This means that, following a drop in r, ICT-intensive …rms become relatively more cost competitive,
and under any plausible demand system this will lead to market-share gains for ICT-intensive …rms.

       There are three e¤ects of falling r on the total demand for labor in high- …rms relative to
low- …rms. The …rst is the just-mentioned competitiveness e¤ect, which will raise the relative
output of high- …rms. The second e¤ect is the substitution e¤ect of ICT for medium-skilled labor
M , and the third is the complementary e¤ect of ICT on high-skilled labor H. The net e¤ect on
total employment of the substitution and complementarity e¤ects is ambiguous, so the e¤ect of
ICT-intensity on employment growth is an empirical matter, which we investigate in Section 5
below.

       To summarize, a fall in r will lead to an increase in aggregate demand for H relative to M
through a within-…rm channel, and possibly through a between-…rm channel. The within-…rm
e¤ect is due to substitution of H for M within …rms, and the between-…rm e¤ect is due to the
increasing competitiveness of high- …rms.

4.5      Imports and exports

The model above is silent on globalization as an in‡uence on the level and composition of em-
ployment. Rather than incorprate imports and exports formally into the model, we discuss this
much-studied issue informally here.

       Feenstra and Hanson (1996) seem to have been the …rst to show how purchases of imported
intermediates (o¤shoring) can a¤ect the skill composition of employment. More recently, Acemoglu
and Autor (2011) showed how o¤shoring can contribute to …rm-level polarization. These and related
analyses make the point that o¤shoring has competing e¤ects on total …rm-level employment:
a direct substitution e¤ect of imported intermediates for workers within the …rm, and a cost-
reducing e¤ect that can raise demand for workers whose jobs are not o¤shored.30 We estimate
  30
    Grossman and Rossi-Hansberg (2008) show how this second e¤ect may or may not dominate in general equilib-
rium.


                                                     25
these polarization and net employment e¤ects in our econometric analysis below.

    A large empirical literature— reviewed by Bernard, Jensen, Redding, and Schott (2007)— …nds
that exporting is associated with higher skill intensity in cross-sections of …rms. We know of no
theoretical or empirical analysis of the link between exporting and …rm-level employment, perhaps
because the …rst-order e¤ect is too obvious: …rms that also sell abroad will tend to have greater
labor demand than those who sell only at home. In our econometric analysis below we look for
such …rm-level employment e¤ects both within and between French …rms.


5     Econometric analysis of between-…rm di¤erences in employment
      growth

In this section we ask: what accounts for di¤erences across …rms in employment growth? The
discussion in the previous section suggests that both globalization and technological change are im-
portant causal factors, and the purpose of our econometric analysis is to quantify their importance.

5.1    Estimating equations

Optimal …rm-level employment depends on both demand and cost conditions. We specify optimal
employment in logs for …rm f in year t as
                                                               X
                                  ln hf t =   f   + Df t +          k xkf t   + "f t :                  (5)
                                                               k

The …rm intercept and trend are given by f + Df t, while the e¤ect of time-varying …rm-speci…c
                            P
characteristics is given by  k k xkf t . The list of …rm characteristics xkf t includes techies and
trade indicators, as well as other …rm characteristics which we can not measure, such as capital,
intermediate inputs, and demand shocks. First di¤erencing (5) from t                     1 to t gives
                                                  X
                               ln hf t = Df +         k   xkf t +    "f t = Df + uf t :
                                                  k
              P
Here uf t =    k   k    xkf t + "f t is a composite term that includes changes in the …rm characteristics
xkf t ’s and changes in the error term "f t .

    We model the …rm-speci…c time trend Df as a function of the level of the techie share and
trade in time t        1. Firms that do not trade at all, and/or that have no techies at all, are likely
to be distinctly di¤erent from …rms that do trade and/or have techies, so to accommodate this we
allow techies and trade to enter Df non-linearly. To control for the well-established fact that …rm


                                                          26
growth rates decline with size, we also include hf t                         1   as a regressor. Finally, we allow Df to depend
on an industry i …xed e¤ect                     31
                                           i.        Let techiest       1   be the share of techies in period t            1 hours and
techpost       1   be an indicator equal to one if techiest                      1   > 0, and similarly for imports and exports
(both divided by the total gross wage bill of the …rm). The equation to be estimated is then

                               ln hf t =        i   +   1 techies f t 1     +    2 techpos f t 1

                                     +          3 exports f t 1     +   4 exppos f t 1

                                     +          5 imports f t 1     +    6 imppos f t 1       +      7 hf t 1   + uf t ;

or, more compactly,
                                                        ln hf t =   i   + Xf t        1   + uf t :                                    (6)

Here      i   + Xf t    1   summarizes the Df function. The rationale for this speci…cation is that there
are industry and/or economy-wide trends in ICT prices and globalization that will a¤ect …rms’
employment growth di¤erentially through …rms’ initial levels of techies and trade. For example,
a …rm with a large techie share will be more responsive to falling IT prices than a …rm that has
few techies, as in the model of Section 4 above. Similarly, a …rm that exports …nal goods or
purchases imported inputs will be more a¤ected by the increased integration of Eastern Europe,
China, and India into the world economy than will a …rm that does not trade. Thus, equation
(6) allows us to estimate the heterogeneous e¤ect of aggregate trends on …rm outcomes, where the
heterogeneity is captured by …rm characteristics in the initial period. With industry …xed e¤ects                                       i,

the six parameters of interest f 1 ; :::;                  6g   are identi…ed by variation across …rms within industries
in the levels of techies, trade, and employment. Industry-speci…c factors that may a¤ect growth in
…rm-level labor demand are controlled for by the industry …xed e¤ects                                            i.


       The speci…cation in (6) has the feature that the marginal e¤ects of techies and trade are constant.
This is potentially restrictive, since (for example) the e¤ect of techies might depend on whether
or not a …rm trades (and vice versa). To allow for this possibility, we also estimate a speci…cation
  31
    To be precise, we de…ne an indicator function equal to 1 if …rm f is in industry i. The parameter                           i   is the
coe¢ cient that multiplies this indicator.




                                                                        27
where the e¤ects of techies are interacted with the trade variables,

     ln hf t =   i   +   1 techies f t 1     +   2 techpos f t 1                                                                        (7)
            +    3 exports f t 1     +     4 exppos f t 1   +     5 imports f t 1   +       6 imppos f t 1

            +        7 exports f t 1   +     8 exppos f t 1   +       9 imports f t 1   +    10 imppos f t 1      techies f t   1

            +        11 exports f t 1    +    12 exppos f t 1     +     13 imports f t 1    +   14 imppos f t 1      techpos f t    1

            +    15 hf t 1   + uf t :

Firm-level imports are likely to have di¤erent e¤ects on employment growth depending on what
goods are imported. For example, imports of capital goods or …nal goods that are complementary
in demand to the goods produced by a …rm (Bernard, Blanchard, Van Beveren, and Vandenbussche
(2012)) may boost employment, while o¤shoring (imports of parts and other intermediates) may
reduce employment growth. To allow for these di¤erences, we also report estimates that break
down imports by intermediate/…nal and by source country.

   When we estimate (6) and (7) we use growth rates instead of log di¤erences on the left hand
side. This has virtually no e¤ect on the results, but it has the advantage of making statements
about aggregate employment growth more straightforward. In unreported results, we estimated
other non-linear speci…cations for the Df function, for example by using indicators for terciles
or quartiles of exports f t      1     and imports f t        1   instead of their values. These deliver very similar
magnitudes of the economic e¤ect on …rm employment growth. In other words, the main source of
non-linearity is the extensive zero/positive margin; once we control for this, further non-linearity
is much less important.

   Our estimating equations are similar to models estimated by Autor and Dorn (2013) and
Beaudry, Doms, and Lewis (2010). In Beaudry et al., the authors show that city-level variation in
the adoption of PC technology is caused by predetermined city-level di¤erences in the abundance
of highly educated labor. Similarly, Autor and Dorn (2013) show that labor markets with higher
levels of “routineness" see larger increases in low-wage service employment. Both of these papers
use lagged levels as instruments for levels in the 1980s. A contribution of our approach is that
we locate the e¤ects of technology adoption in …rms, which is where choices about technology are
made, rather than in industries or regions.




                                                                      28
5.2     Estimation methodology

Estimation of equations (6) and (7) by least squares is unlikely to be consistent for two reasons:
endogeneity of the included right hand side variables, and correlation of the included right hand
side variables with relevant omitted variables. Here we describe our instrumental variables strategy
that delivers a consistent estimator of (6) and (7) in the face of these issues, and we discuss potential
threats to the internal validity of our IV approach.

   Our data cover the 14 years 1994 to 2007. As noted above, there are some small discontinuities
in the hours shares between 2001 and 2002 due to a change in data processing of the DADS.
Consequently, we estimate equations (6) and (7) on the 5 year period 2002 to 2007. The left hand
side variable is the growth rate of …rm hours between 2002 and 2007, and the initial levels of techies,
trade and employment on the right hand side are measured in 2002. Because our data goes back to
1994, we use lagged levels of techies, trade and employment from 1994 to 1998 as instruments for
the levels in 2002 (our choice of which years to use as instruments is discussed below). We estimate
(6) and (7) separately for manufacturing and nonmanufacturing …rms.

   Our estimation sample consists of a balanced panel of the 310,713 French private sector …rms
that have positive hours in each year from 1994 to 2007. We refer to these as “permanent …rms".
Thus, …rm entry and exit is not relevant to our estimation strategy. These 310,713 …rms, 85%
of whose hours are in nonmanufacturing, account for about half of private sector hours in each
year, and they are somewhat larger than the average …rm, both in terms of total hours and in the
average number of occupations per …rm. Figure 8 illustrates the di¤erences between the French
private sector as a whole and our estimation sample of permanent …rms. For most occupations, the
di¤erences are small and stable over time, and the exceptions are small occupations. In particular,
the trends are virtually the same. Figure 9 shows that overall changes in hours shares and the
within-between split are similar for permanent …rms and those that are active for a subset of the
sample ("temporary …rms").

5.2.1    Instrument validity

As with any IV strategy, consistency requires that the lagged independent variables satisfy two
requirements: they must be strong (correlated with the included endogenous variables) and exoge-
nous (uncorrelated with the composite error term uf t ). We address these requirements here, but in
summary: our instruments are undoubtedly strong, but there are some concerns about exogeneity.




                                                   29
Choice of instruments.           Since our estimation period begins in 2002, while the sample begins in
1994, we potentially have eight lags, 1994 to 2001, of the dependent variables to use as instruments.
This raises two distinct questions. The …rst is, how many lags are exogenous? The second question
is, if all the lags are exogenous, how many should be used as instruments? This second question
is motivated by the fact that even if all eight lags are valid instruments, there is the potential for
…nite sample bias due to the “many instruments" problem (see Bound, Jaeger, and Baker (1995)
for an illustration).

       To answer the question about how many instruments are valid, we implement a sequence of
“di¤erence-in-Sargan" tests, also known as C tests.32 We assume that the 1994 lag is a valid
instrument, and we then sequentially add more recent lags (1995, 1996, etc.). The incremental
increase in the usual overidenti…cation Sargan test statistic is distributed as a             2 ,   where m is the
                                                                                              m
number of added instruments, which is 7 in our case. The null hypothesis is that the additional
instruments are valid, conditional on the previous ones being valid. Failure to reject the null at each
increment is taken as evidence for the validity of the added instruments. The results indicate that
in nonmanufacturing no more than six lags, including 1994–1999, should be used; in manufacturing
the procedure indicates no more than four lags, including 1994–1997, should be used.33

       Importantly, the lag for which the C stat exeeds conventional critical values is also the lag
that is the …rst to have a Hansen J statistic that exeeds conventional critical values. This is not
generally true, but in our case it is. This implies that the overidenti…cation test is not rejected at
standard levels of signi…cance for six lags in nonmanufacturing and for four lags in manufacturing.
In manufacturing, using …ve lags from 1994 to 1998 gives a p-value for the J test of 0:03.34 This is
particularly reassuring, because it implies that as a set, lags 1994–1998 can be considered exogenous
a priori. We chose …ve lags in both sectors for symmetry.35

       To answer the question about how many valid instruments to use, we use the procedure proposed
by Donald and Newey (2001). The purpose of the Donald-Newey procedure is to select the most
e¢ cient set of instruments, and the procedure involves minimizing the mean squared error (MSE) of
a weighted average of the estimates of interest, relative to a benchmark estimate.36 Our benchmark
  32
     Convenient references for the “di¤erence-in-Sargan" test include Hayashi (2000), pages 218–221 and 232–234,
and Ruud (2000), Chapter 22.
  33
     These results are available upon request.
  34
     Adding 1999 and 2000 lags increases the p-value somewhat to 0.06.
  35
     These results are available upon request.
  36
     Of the two minimum MSE crieria proposed by Donald and Newey (2001), we use the Mallows criteria, which
proves to be more robust in practice. We consider the simple average of the MSE criterion across the six elements of
interest in .


                                                        30
uses only the 1994 lags of X. When we add lags of X sequentially and compare the MSE to that
of using only 1994, we …nd that the minimum MSE is attained with six lags in nonmanufacturing
and seven lags in manufacturing, which includes 1999 or 2000, respectively.

   To summarize, our two procedures give slightly di¤erent answers, with the di¤erence-in-Sargan
procedure suggesting using 1994–1998 lags and the Donald-Newey procedure suggesting an addi-
tional year or two. We choose to be conservative, and thus proceed by using the 1994–1998 lags as
our set of instruments in both the manufacturing and nonmanufacturing sectors.


Are the instruments strong?         The most common test statistic of the null of weak instruments
is the …rst stage F -statistic, where the critical values are somewhat larger than the standard
tabulation of the F distribution would indicate (Staiger and Stock (1997)). As discussed by Stock
and Yogo (2005), the econometric theory of testing for weak instruments when there is more than
one endogenous regressor is challenging, and results only exist for the case of up to three endogenous
regressors (see Table 1 in Stock and Yogo (2005)). Since our application includes seven endogenous
regressors, there is no econometric theory available to guide the choice of critical values for a …rst
stage F statistic. As an alternative, we report Shea (1997)’s partial R2 . Shea’s statistic, along
with other measures of …rst stage goodness-of-…t, has been criticized because it lacks a foundation
in distribution theory, but it has two key virtues: it is easy to interpret, and it is well de…ned for
an arbitrary number of endogenous variables. The Shea partial R2 s for equation (6) are reported
in Table 6, and the results leave no question that the …rst stage is strong.


Are the instruments excludable? An implication of exogeneity is that the instruments must
be excludeable, i.e. not relevant except through their in‡uence on the endogenous regressors. We
conduct a speci…cation test that addresses this implication. Our procedure is to add the 1998 lag
of techies, trade, and employment to (6), using lags from 1994 to 1997 as instruments. We then
test the null hypothesis that the coe¢ cients on the 1998 levels are jointly zero. The question being
asked by this procedure is: once we have controlled for 2002 levels of techies and trade, is there
any extra explanatory power from the 1998 levels? This null cannot be rejected, which leads us to
proceed in assuming that the exclusion restrictions for lags from 1994 to 1998 are valid.


Are the instruments exogenous? For the instruments to be exogenous, they must be uncor-
related with the composite error term uit in (6). Recall that uit includes both changes in …rm
characteristics xkf t and changes in the error term "f t in (5). Thus our identifying assumption is



                                                 31
that …ve year changes in the xkf t ’s and the error term "f t are uncorrelated with four to eight year
lags of the levels of techies and trade.

   We can directly test part of our exogeneity assumptions, because 2002–2007 changes in techies
and trade are among the changes in …rm characteristics included in uit , and we have data on these
changes. As a test of the null hypothesis that these observable changes are uncorrelated with the
instruments, we regress 2002–2007 changes in techies and trade on the full set of instruments. The
explanatory power of these regressions is near zero: the regressions’R2 ’s are tiny, and F tests fail
to reject the null of no linear relationship.

   While reassuring, these regression tests of instrument exogeneity fail to address potential cor-
relation between the instruments and changes in unobservable …rm characteristics such as revenue
or capital and intermediates intensity. However, given the very low correlation between changes
and lagged levels in the variables we do observe, it seems reasonable to expect that the correlation
between changes in di¤erent variables and our instruments would also be small.

   An additional concern is endogeneity in the instruments due to serial correlation in the error
term "f t in (5). It is likely that the errors are contemporaneously correlated with the xkf t ’s, so
serial correlation in "f t implies possible correlation between "f t and the lagged xkf t ’s that we use
as instruments. However, since it is       "f t rather than "f t that enters our estimating equation (6),
what matters for the exogeneity of our instruments is possible correlation between            "f t and the
lagged xkf t ’s. In the appendix we show that although serial correlation in "f t does give rise to bias,
this bias is likely to be small.

   We have just argued that the above issues are likely to be minor threats to the exogeneity of
our instruments. A more serious concern is omitted variables in initial period levels in equation
(6), i.e. misspeci…cation of Df . Potentially important omitted variables include other …rm inputs
such as capital, materials, and domestic outsourcing. If the omitted variables in levels are both
contemporaneously correlated with our regressors and correlated over time, then they may be
correlated with our instruments. We regard this possibility as the most serious threat to the
exogeneity of our instruments, and we can not test this or rule it out a priori.

   Table 7 reports p-values for two standard diagnostic tests for 2SLS estimation of equation (6).
The rows labeled “Endogeneity,      2 (7)"   test the null hypothesis that OLS is a consistent estimator
using a Hausman test, while the rows labeled "Overid,          2 (28)"   test the null hypothesis that the



                                                     32
instruments are valid using Hansen’s J test.37 We reject the consistency of OLS at any conventional
level of statistical signi…cance. As mentioned above, in nonmanufacturing the Hansen J test is not
rejected, while in manufacturing it is, but only once we add the lag 1998 and at the 3% level of
signi…cance.

    The purpose of the discussion above is to argue that while our instruments are imperfect, 2SLS
is likely to have smaller bias than OLS, so we proceed accordingly.

5.2.2    Weighting

The unit of observation in our data is a …rm, but our research question concerns aggregate employ-
ment. Since the distribution of employment across …rms is highly skewed, unweighted regression
analysis of (6) would weight tiny …rms the same as huge …rms, which would give a distorted picture
of the e¤ect of techies and trade on employment polarization. To avoid this, our estimator weights
…rm observations by total …rm hours in 2002. The resulting estimates have the usual interpretation
as estimated conditional means, where the conditional expectation is taken over the distribution of
hours rather than the distribution of …rms. Our practice of weighting by employment is standard
in the literature on inequality and polarization, see for example Michaels, Natraj, and Van Reenen
(2014) and Autor and Dorn (2013).

5.2.3    Summary of estimation strategy

Here we summarize our estimation strategy for equations (6) and (7). We estimate two regressions,
one for nonmanufacturing …rms and the other for manufacturing …rms. The dependent variable
is growth in hours in 2002–2007. The explanatory variables are levels of techies (share of hours),
trade (imports and exports, scaled by total …rm wage bill), and log hours in 2002. The estimator is
weighted two stage least squares, where the instruments are lagged techies, trade, and log hours in
1994–1998. We weight observations by …rm hours in 2002. Finally, we compute heteroskedasticity
robust covariance matrices.

5.3     Estimation results

The estimated parameters of equations (6) and (7) do not directly address our research questions.38
Here we focus on two questions:
  37
     There are seven degrees of freedom for the Hausman test because there are seven endogenous variables in (6).
With …ve lags of the seven dependent variables, we have 35 instruments, which is why there are 28 degrees of freedom
for the J test.
  38
     The estimate parameters are reported in the Appendix.




                                                        33
   1. What is the e¤ect of an increase from zero to the median of the explanatory variable on the
         growth in hours? We call this the extensive margin e¤ ect.

   2. What is the e¤ect of an increase from the 25th to the 75th percentile of the explanatory
         variable on the growth in hours? We call this the intensive margin e¤ ect.

       We scale both estimated e¤ects by the 75th -25th percentile range (also called the interquartile
range or IQR) of the growth in hours.39 Computing these e¤ects involves calculating the estimated
conditional mean at two di¤erent points, and then looking at the di¤erence. For equation (6), the
formulas for the extensive and intensive margin e¤ects of techies are, respectively,

                                                         b2 + b1    p50 (techies)
                              extensive_techies =                                                               (8)
                                                        p75 ( hf t ) p25 ( hf t )

                                                  b1    [p75 (techies) p25 (techies)]
                        intensive_techies =                                                                     (9)
                                                        p75 ( hf t ) p25 ( hf t )
where pN (x) is the N th percentile of variable x. Analogous de…nitions apply to the intensive
and extensive margin e¤ects of imports and exports. To understand the scale of these unit-free
measures, suppose that the estimated extensive margin e¤ect of techies is 0.6. This means that an
increase from zero to the median value of techies increases expected employment growth by 60%
of its interquartile range (IQR). Similarly, an intensive margin e¤ect of techies of -0.4 means that
a one IQR change in techies causes an expected reduction of employment growth equal to 40% of
its IQR. In short, the e¤ects we report are similar to elasticities.

       The interaction e¤ects estimated in equation (7) permit us to re…ne the above questions. In
particular, we can ask: what are the intensive and extensive margin e¤ects of techies for …rms that
trade and those who do not trade? Similarly, what are the intensive and extensive margin e¤ects
of imports and exports for …rms with and without techies? As with the simpler formulas given by
(8) and (9), the formulas for the di¤erences in conditional means involve both parameter estimates
and percentiles of the data. The somewhat involved expressions for these e¤ects are relegated to
the appendix. Brie‡y, techie interaction e¤ects are evaluated at the median value of exports and
imports over their strictly positive range. This means that the e¤ect of techies among trading …rms
is evaluated for a …rm with the median level of trade. Similarly, exports and imports interaction
e¤ects are evaluated at the median value of techies over it strictly positive range. This means that
the e¤ect of trade among techie-intensive …rms is evaluated for a …rm with the median level of
  39
    When we compute the intensive and extensive margin e¤ects we use the percentiles of the distribution of strictly
positive values for the explanatory variables.



                                                        34
techies. Tables 8 and 9 report the size of relevant subsamples of …rms by techie and trade status.40

5.3.1      Techies cause faster employment growth, especially in manufacturing

The e¤ect of techies are reported in Panel A of Table 10, …rst for all …rms (columns 1 and 2) and
then for …rms divided into those who do and do not trade (columns 3 through 6). Statistically
signi…cantly e¤ects are shaded, and standard errors are reported in italics.41

         The …rst number in Table 10, 0.344, means that nonmanufacturing …rms with the median
         techie share saw signi…cantly faster employment growth than …rms without techies. At one
         third of the interquartile range (IQR) of employment growth, this is an economically large
         e¤ect. The extensive techie e¤ect for nonmanufacturing …rms is the same for …rms that do
         not trade (column 3, almost 60% of employment within nonmanufacturing), and there is also
         a smaller 0.15 intensive margin e¤ect for these …rms (column 4). For nonmanufacturing …rms
         that trade (column 5) the extensive margin e¤ect is not signi…cant, and there is a negative
         intensive margin e¤ect (column 6).

         Techies have a strong e¤ect on manufacturing employment growth, with an extensive margin
         e¤ect of 0.94 and a smaller, but still important, intensive margin e¤ect of 0.22 (columns 1
         and 2). The extensive margin e¤ect is particularly strong for …rms that do not trade (column
         3), and is positive but not signi…cant for …rms that do trade (column 5). The fact that
         the extensive margin e¤ect of techies is imprecisely estimated for …rms that trade is due to
         the fact that almost all trading …rms employ techies (see Table 8). But variation in techie
         intensity within manufacturing …rms that trade has an intensive margin e¤ect of 0.26.

       Overall, Panel A of Table 10 shows that …rms that employed more techies in 2002— both at the
extensive and the intesive margins— saw much faster employment growth from 2002 to 2007. This
result is consistent with our theoretical prediction in Section 4, where we illustrated that falling
ICT prices raise the competitiveness of …rms that employ techies.

5.3.2      Trade a¤ects employment growth

The overall e¤ects of importing and exporting on employment growth are reported in Panel B of
Table 10, …rst for all …rms (columns 1, 2, 5 and 6) and then for …rms divided into those who do and
  40
     Because …rms that only import or only export comprise such a small share of hours worked (16 percent of hours in
nonmanufacturing, 9 percent in manufacturing) and of trade (10 percent of trade in nonmanufacturing, 1 percent in
manufacturing), we do not report the estimated e¤ects for these …rms. Complete results are available upon request.
  41
     That is, estimates with 90% con…dence intervals that exclude zero are shaded.



                                                         35
do not employ techies (columns 3, 4, 7, and 8). All but one of the estimated e¤ects are statistically
insigni…cant, and the one signi…cant e¤ect is trivially small.

   The empirical literature on o¤shoring suggests (e.g., Biscourp and Kramarz (2007)) that it
is important to distinguish between intermediate inputs and other imports, and among country
sources of imports. To do this we estimate versions of equation (6) that disaggregate trade, …rst by
including an indicator for imports of intermediate goods and second by disaggregating imports by
source country (high income countries according to World Bank classi…cation in 2002, China, and
all other countries). These import measures enter the regression as in all our other speci…cations,
as intensity (value divided by total gross wage bill) and as an indicator for positive values.

   The results from these speci…cations are reported in Table 11. The …rst two columns repeat
the “overall" estimates from Panel B of Table 10. Columns 3 and 4 report estimates when we add
regressors that capture intermediate inputs. In this speci…cation the e¤ect of importing intermediate
inputs is incremental, over and above importing per se. Columns 5 and 6 disaggregate by sources
of imports. Our …ndings are:

     Column 3 shows that for manufacturing …rms, importing per se has a statistically insigni…cant
     positive extensive margin e¤ect, but the extensive margin of imports of intermediates is large
     and negative, at -0.8. The negative employment growth e¤ects of importing intermediate
     inputs (that is, o¤shoring) is suggestive of a simple substitution e¤ect of foreign for domestic
     low-skilled labor, which is also what we …nd in Table 17 below. We thus …nd no evidence of a
     …rm-level productivity e¤ect of o¤shoring that o¤sets the labor substitution e¤ect, as seen in
     the models of Grossman and Rossi-Hansberg (2008) and Rodriguez-Clare (2010). The e¤ects
     of importing in nonmanufacturing are always virtually nil.

     When distinguishing imports by source country (columns 5 and 6), we still …nd that the
     e¤ects are insigni…cant for nonmanufacturing …rms. But the story for manufacturing …rms is
     strikingly di¤erent: the overall insigni…cant e¤ect found in column 1 is evidently hiding large
     negative e¤ects from lower income countries (-0.1 but insigni…cant from China and -0.43 from
     other), combined with a zero e¤ect for imports from rich countries. This is consistent with
     the idea that o¤shoring to lower income countries reduces employment growth by substituting
     imported intermediate inputs for labor.

     Exporting has no detectable e¤ect on employment growth in any speci…cation, except in
     nonmanufacturing in column 3, but this is not stable across speci…cations.


                                                 36
         Overall, our results in Tables 17 and 11 support a conclusion that o¤shoring reduces …rm
employment growth, and leads to skill upgrading within blue collar workers. In addition, it is
striking how stable the techie e¤ects are, especially in manufacturing, across all import speci…cation.


6          Econometric analysis of within-…rm changes in occupational
          structure

In this section we ask: what explains changes in the occupational structure within French …rms,
and how did this contribute to job polarization? Our hypothesis is that both globalization and
technological change are important causal factors, and the purpose of our econometric analysis is
to quantify their importance. We measure changes in a …rm’s occupational structure by changes
in the share of hours in one of twelve major PCS occupations, excluding the share of techies (PCS
38 and 47). Changes in this “ex-techie" share are explained by …rm-level measures of exposure to
globalization (imports and exports as a share of the …rm’s wage bill) and technology (the share of
techies in total …rm hours).

6.1        Estimating equations and estimation methodology

Our estimation approach here is very similar to the approach in section 5, so we move quickly.
The …rm-occupation outcome measure of interest is the ex-techie share of hours of the twelve large
non-techie occupations listed in Table 2. For each occupation o, our estimating equation is

                                                     o        o
                                           sf ot =   i   +        Xf t   1   + uof t :                            (10)

where X includes the same regressors as in equations (6) and (7) with the exception of log total
hours.42 The estimator is again weighted 2SLS, where the weights are 2002 hours. The issues of
instrument strength and validity are the same as before. The same instrument selection procedure
used above still leads us to use lags from 1994–1998 as instruments. Table 13 reports p-values for
the Hausman endogeneity tests and Hansen’s J tests of the overidentifying restrictions. Table 12
shows that the …rst stage is strong. We estimate (10) for each occupation o that comprised at least
three percent of hours in 2002, separately for manufacturing and nonmanufacturing.

         One additional econometric issue is censoring. Firms choose their mix of occupations optimally,
and corner solutions are common: few if any …rms employ workers in all occupations in every
    42
     Overall, the estimates of regressions when we include log total hours as a regressor (and instrument for it
accordingly) tell a similar story as the results reported in the paper. This is because in almost all speci…cations …rm
size has no e¤ect on the outcome variable. These results are available upon request.



                                                             37
year, and the (weighted) median number of occupations per …rm-year is 10.43 This means that
the sample size when estimating (10) varies by PCS code.44 If corner solutions in occupational
hours are nonrandom and correlated with observables, which is likely, then OLS is inconsistent.
Rather than trying to model sample selection, which is neither feasible nor relevant to our research
question, we rely on our instruments to correct for the inconsistency due to sample selection.

6.2     Estimation results

As in Section 5, we report scaled e¤ects rather than regression coe¢ cients45 . Since the sample
changes for each occupation, percentiles that are needed for deriving these scaled e¤ects are com-
puted separately for each occupation in the corresponding sample. Tables 14 through 17 report
our results.46 Rows are occupation-speci…c regression results. The Overall e¤ects in columns (1)
and (2) of Tables 14 through 17 are functions of the data and the estimated parameters of our
baseline speci…cation, equation (10). The remaining columns are functions of the data and the
estimated parameters of the interaction speci…cation, which is similar to equation (7). Statistically
signi…cantly e¤ects are shaded, and standard errors are reported in italics.47

6.2.1     Techies cause within-…rm skill upgrading in nonmanufacturing

Turning …rst to the estimates for nonmanufacturing …rms (over 85% of private sector employment),
the Overall results in Table 14 show that techies have a large positive e¤ect on within-…rm skill
upgrading:

        Firms with more techies increase the share of top managers (PCS 37), and the e¤ect is
        large and statistically signi…cantly. The extensive margin e¤ect, which compares a …rm with
        no techies to one with a median techie share, is that the latter di¤erentially increases the
        managerial share of hours by 34% of the interquartile range (IQR). Turning to the intensive
        margin e¤ect among …rms with techies, the e¤ect of a one IQR higher techie share is to raise
        the managerial share by a …fth of its IQR.

        Among other white collar workers, the intensive margin e¤ect of techies is to cause modest
        skill upgrading: middle-management jobs increase their shares (PCS 46, e¤ect is +0.048)
  43
     More precisely, 10 is the weighted median, with weights equal to total …rm hours in the permanent-private
subsample of …rms used in our regression analysis. The weighted median is 12 for manufacturing …rms, and 9 for
nonmanufacturing …rms.
  44
     When sf ot = sf ot 1 = 0, we treat the change sf ot as unde…ned, and …rm f is not included in the estimation
sample for occupation o.
  45
     Regression coe¢ cients are reported in the appendix.
  46
     For each sector, we include estimates only for occupations that amounted to at least 3 percent of hours in 2002.
  47
     That is, estimates with 90% con…dence intervals that exclude zero are shaded.


                                                         38
         while low-paid o¢ ce and retail occupations shrink (the e¤ect for O¢ ce Workers PCS 54 is
         -0.055, and for Retail Workers PCS 55 it is -0.15).

         The share of the lowest-paid occupation, low-skill manual workers (PCS 68), grew much more
         slowly in …rms with techies, with an extensive margin e¤ect of -0.67. The intensive margin
         e¤ect of -0.20, while smaller, is also economically important.

         By contrast, the extensive margin e¤ect of 1.46 for highly paid skilled industrial workers (PCS
         62) is large and positive: …rms with the median number of techies saw their share of PCS 62
         increase much faster than …rms with no techies.48

       The …nal 4 columns of Table 14 shows how the e¤ects of techies varies with …rm’s trading status:

         For …rms that do not trade (58 percent of hours in nonmanufacturing), the extensive margin
         e¤ect of techies on top manager growth (PCS 37) is half of the IQR for this occupation’s
         share growth for these …rms. There are no statistically signi…cant e¤ects for other white
         collar occupations (PCs 46 to 56), but there is a strong skill upgrading e¤ect within blue
         collar workers, particularly along the extensive margin: techies cause faster growth for skilled
         industrial workers (PCS 62, +1.4) and slower growth for low-skill manual laborers (PCS 68,
         -0.7).

         For …rms that both import and export (26 percent of hours), the extensive margin e¤ects
         of techies in column 5 are largely unidenti…ed, which is a consequence of the fact that over
         90 percent of hours among this group of …rms are in …rms with techies (see Table 8). The
         intensive margin e¤ects in column 6 generally line up with the overall intensive margin e¤ects
         reported in column 2.

6.2.2      Techies cause within-…rm skill polarization in manufacturing

Table 15 shows that rather than causing skill upgrading as they do in nonmanufacturing, techies in
manufacturing cause skill polarization within manufacturing …rms. The channels are mainly along
the extensive margin, and are somewhat di¤erent among …rms that trade and those that do not:

         Among …rms that trade (78 percent of hours in manufacturing) polarization occurs along
         the extensive margin, with middle managers growing faster (PCS 46, +0.6) and both clerical
         o¢ ce workers (PCS 54, -0.9) and similarly paid middle-wage skilled manual workers (PCS 63,
         -2.9) reducing their shares within …rms.
  48
    Despite our short-hand description of PCS 62 as “skilled industrial workers", this occupation comprised more
than 4 percent of hours worked in nonmanufacturing in 2002 (see Table 3), mainly in construction.


                                                      39
        Within non-trading …rms (14 percent), the extensive margin polarization e¤ect of techies was
        even sharper. In …rms with techies, top and middle managers grew faster (PCS 37, +0.8 and
        PCS 46, +0.5) while within blue collar industrial workers techies caused skill downgrading,
        with skilled industrial workers growing much more slowly (PCS 62, -1.3) and low-skill blue
        collar workers growing faster (PCS 67, +1.5). The e¤ect for clerical workers is also negative
        (PCS 54, -0.5) though not statistically signi…cant.

6.2.3     Trade a¤ects within-…rm skill mix, mostly in manufacturing

Tables 16 and 17 show that trade also a¤ects the within-…rm occupational mix, but mainly in manu-
facturing. Overall, trade has small and mainly statistically insigni…cant e¤ects on the occupational
mix within nonmanufacturing …rms. However,

        Importing causes …rms to increase their share of drivers and the e¤ect is large (columns 1
        and 3 of Table 16). This is true both overall (+0.9) and for …rms with techies (+1.24), and
        is consistent with nonmanufacturing …rms that import and have distribution networks.

        Compared to …rms that do not export, nonmanufacturing exporters have sharply falling shares
        of o¢ ce workers (PCS 54, -0.6), and rising shares of low skill manual workers (PCS 68, +2.4);
        comparing column 5 to 7 in Table 16, these e¤ects are even larger among …rms that have
        techies (-0.8 and +3.4, respectively).

   Given that nonmanufacturing …rms do not engage in much direct international trade, the paucity
of strong results just described is not surprising. In Table 17 we …nd much larger e¤ects of trade
on manufacturing …rms, almost entirely along the extensive margin:

        The extensive margin of exporting has a large and positive e¤ect on growth in the share of
        managers (PCS 37, +0.4). The e¤ect among …rms with techies is similar in size to the overall
        e¤ect, though imprecisely estimated. By contrast, importing has no extensive margin e¤ect
        on the PCS 37 share.

        There is a strong blue collar skill upgrading e¤ect of importing (column 1): the growth
        of skilled industrial and manual laborers (PCS 62 and 63) is much faster (+1.3 and +6.2,
        respectively), while growth of unskilled industrial workers is much slower (PCS 67, -3.3).

        There is a strong blue collar skill downgrading e¤ect of exporting (column 5): the growth
        of skilled industrial and manual laborers (PCS 62 and 63) is much slower (-1.0 and -3.4
        respectively) while the share of unskilled industrial workers grows much faster (PCS 67,
        +2.1).

                                                   40
         The e¤ects are similar among manufacturing importers with techies (columns 3 and 7), which
is to be expected, since almost all trading manufacturing …rms employ techies (see Table 8). The
intensive margin e¤ects of trade in manufacturing industries are mostly small and/or statistically
insigni…cant— all the action comes from comparing …rms that do not trade with …rms that do.

         For manufacturing …rms, imports are primarily of intermediate inputs, so we have identi…ed the
e¤ects of o¤shoring. The skill upgrading e¤ect of importing is consistent with a simple o¤shoring
story where imported intermediate goods substitute for low-skill workers within manufacturing
…rms, thus raising the skill intensity of the remaining labor force. This is consistent with Biscourp
and Kramarz (2007), who …nd that imports of …nal goods are associated with declines in produc-
tion workers’ employment, and in particular low-skill production workers’ employment in French
Manufacturing in 1986–1992. It is also what is found by Verhoogen (2008) in Mexican data.49

         Our …nding that exporting is associated with faster growth of managers (PCS 37) is not sur-
prising, given the extensive literature that documents a positive correlation between the share of
non-production/white-collar jobs and exporting. What is new and surprising is our …nding that ex-
porting causes skill downgrading within production/blue-collar occupations. Together these results
imply a within-…rm polarizing e¤ect of exporting. Earlier researchers using plant or …rm level data
could not uncover this e¤ect because they did not have information on skill composition within
production/blue-collar workers.

         Overall, our results in Tables 17 and 11 support a conclusion that o¤shoring reduces …rm
employment growth, and leads to skill upgrading within blue collar workers.


7         Econometric Results: Goodness of …t

Our …nal quantitative question is: how much of the within-…rm and between-…rm variation in
occupational change do our econometric models explain? To answer this, we compute two measures.
The …rst is the usual regression R2 , weighted by …rm hours. The second is directly related to the
within-between decomposition of occupational hours share changes given by equation (1). We …rst
compute the “explained within” component from 2002 to 2007 using the …tted values csf ot from
estimation of equation (10), and then divide this by the actual within component for permanent
    49
    Verhoogen (2008), studies the e¤ects on plant-level quality upgrading in manufacturing in Mexico, following
the large 1994/1995 devaluation of the peso. He proxies worker quality by within-blue collar education levels in
manufacturing.




                                                      41
…rms from 2002 to 2007,
                                                                   P          csf ot
                                                                      f   f
                                  Explained within o = 100         P                   ;
                                                                      f   f    sf ot

where      f   is the average hours share of …rm f from 2002 to 2007.50 Explained within is an answer
to the question, "what percentage of the within-…rm change in the hours share of occupation o
from 2002 to 2007 is explained by the estimates?". Similarly, we compute the “explained between"
component from 2002 to 2007 using the …tted values gbf t from estimation of equation (6), and then
divide this by the actual between component for permanent …rms from 2002 to 2007,
                                                                    P c
                                                                        f t sf o
                                 Explained between o = 100          Pf           ;
                                                                     f  f t sf o


where c f t is approximated by using gbf t .51

       Table 13 reports the weighted R2 and Explained within goodness of …t statistics for the estimates
of our baseline speci…cation, equation (10). Similarly, Table 7 reports the weighted R2 and Explained
between goodness of …t statistics for the estimates of equation (6). The R2 s are generally very low,
which is to be expected in cross sectional micro data.

       The Explained within results are generally weak, with 9 of the 24 being negative, which means
that the regression model predicts an aggregate change opposite in sign to what actually occurred.
Of the 15 positive results, only 5 are greater than 1 percent. The Explained between results in
Table 7 are even weaker, with 10 of the 24 being negative. The inability of the regression model to
explain much of the within-…rm and between-…rm variation is probably a sign of the importance
of both …rm-speci…c random shocks and unmeasured systematic in‡uences on …rms’occupational
choices.

       Tables 13 and 7 also report p-values for the null hypothesis that the trade and techie e¤ects are
jointly equal to zero. This null is rejected for equation (10) at conventional signi…cance levels for
all the PCS codes in manufacturing, and for nine of twelve in nonmanufacturing. For equation (6)
this null is rejected for both nonmanufacturing and manufacturing.
  50
     Since the regression model explains the ex-techie share of occupation o in …rm f , which is weakly greater than
the overall share of o in f , we adjust the …tted values by multiplying them by the average ratio of ex-techie to total
hours for f in the two years.
  51
     We explain how we approximate c f t by using gbf t in the appendix.




                                                          42
8    Conclusions

In this paper we use administrative employee-…rm-level data from 1994 to 2007 to show that the
labor market in France has become polarized: employment shares of high and low wage occupations
have grown, while middle wage occupations have shrunk. During the same period, the share of
hours in technology-related occupations (“techies") grew substantially, as did imports and exports,
and we explore the causal links between these trends.

    We show that polarization is pervasive: it has occurred within the nonmanufacturing and manu-
facturing sectors, and both within and between …rms. The importance of between-…rm reallocations
for polarization implies that simple theories of substitution across workers within economic units
miss an important margin of adjustment. The importance of changes in the composition of …rms
for explaining job polarization suggests di¤erential e¤ects of technological change and trade on
relative competitiveness across …rms.

    Motivated by the fact that technology adoption is mediated by technically quali…ed managers
and technicians, we develop a novel measure of the propensity to adopt new technology: the …rm-
level employment share of techies. Using the subsample of …rms that are active over the whole
period, we develop an empirical framework that allows us to study the …rm-level e¤ects of falling
ICT prices and the growth of o¤shoring and exporting. To control for the endogeneity of …rm-level
techies and trade in 2002, we use values of techies and trade from 1994 to 1998 as instruments.

    Our econometric results show that nonmanufacturing …rms with more techies in 2002 saw
substantial skill upgrading from 2002 to 2007, with the share of hours worked by managers growing
faster and the share worked by o¢ ce and retail workers growing slower. The e¤ect of techies in
manufacturing was polarizing, but di¤ered between …rms that traded and those that did not: …rms
that did not trade saw their share of managers rising faster and blue-collar skill downgrading, while
…rms that traded saw faster growth in middle managers as o¢ ce workers grew more slowly.

    Our results also show that …rms with more techies in 2002 saw substantially faster employment
growth in 2002–2007. This is consistent with technological change improving the competitiveness
of these …rms relative to other …rms with no techies in 2002.

    Importing by manufacturing …rms caused blue-collar skill upgrading, suggesting that low-skill
blue collar workers saw their tasks replaced by imports. Exporting is found to cause within-…rm
polarization: faster growth in the share of managers and skill downgrading within production


                                                 43
workers. O¤shoring also caused slower employment growth in manufacturing, while exporting had
no e¤ect on employment growth.

   While our estimated e¤ects of techies and trade are economically large, most of the variation
in within-…rm and between-…rm occupational change is unexplained by these variables. We thus
make no claim that the mechanisms we study in our econometric exercises are the only, or even
dominant, in‡uences on changes in the aggregate occupational mix.

   Changes in the occupational structure of employment are an important feature of the world
economy in recent decades, with profound implications for inequality and for the distribution of
gains from technological progress and globalization. Our paper is the …rst to analyze these economy-
wide changes using …rm-level data and causal econometric analysis, which has made it possible to
paint a rich and nuanced portrait of how and why polarization evolved in France between 1994 and
2007.



References
Abowd, J. M., F. Kramarz, and D. N. Margolis (1999): “High wage workers and high wage
 …rms,” Econometrica, 67(2), 251–333.
Acemoglu, D., and D. Autor (2011): “Skills, tasks and technologies: Implications for employ-
 ment and earnings,”in Hanbook of Labor Economics, ed. by O. Ashenfelter, and D. Card, vol. 4b.
 North Holland.
Amar, M. (2010): “Les très hauts salaires du secteur privé,” insee première, 1288, 4.
Askenazy, P. (2013): “Working time regulation in France from 1996 to 2012,”Cambridge Journal
  of Economics, 37, 323–347.
Autor, D. H., and D. Dorn (2013): “The growth of low-skill service jobs and the polarization
 of the US labor market,” The American Economic Review, 103(5), 1553–1597.
Autor, D. H., D. Dorn, and G. H. Hanson (2013): “The China Syndrome: Local Labor
 Market E¤ects of Import Competition in the United States,” The American Economic Review,
 103(6), 2121–2168.
Autor, D. H., L. F. Katz, and M. S. Kearney (2006): “The Polarization of the U.S. Labor
 Market,” The American Economic Review, AEA Papers and Proceedings, 96(2), 189–194.
        (2008): “Trends in U.S. Wage Inequality: Revising the Revisionists,” The Review of
  Economics and Statistics, 90(2), 300–323.
Autor, D. H., F. Levy, and R. J. Murnane (2003): “The Skill Content of Recent Technological
 Change: An Empirical Exploration,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(4), 1279–1333.



                                                44
Beaudry, P., M. Doms, and E. Lewis (2010): “Should the Personal Computer be Consid-
  ered a Technological Revolution? Evidence from U.S. Metropolitan Areas,” Journal of Political
  Economy, 118(5), 988–1036.
Becker, S. O., and M.-A. Muendler (2014): “Trade and Tasks: An Exploration over Three
  Decades in Germany,” NBER Working Paper No. 20739.
Berman, E., J. Bound, and Z. Griliches (1994): “Changes in the Demand for Skilled Labor
  Within U.S. Manufacturing: Evidence from the Annual Survey of Manufactures,”The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 109(2), 367–397.
Bernard, A., B. Jensen, S. Redding, and P. Schott (2007): “Firms in International Trade,”
  Journal of Economic Perspectives, 21(3), 105–130.
Bernard, A. B., E. J. Blanchard, I. Van Beveren, and H. Y. Vandenbussche (2012):
  “Carry-along trade,” Discussion paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Bernard, A. B., and J. B. Jensen (1997): “Exporters, Skill Upgrading, and the Wage Gap,”
  Journal of International Economics, 42(1), 3–31.
Biscourp, P., and F. Kramarz (2007): “Employment, skill structure and international trade:
  Firm-level evidence for France,” Journal of International Economics, 72(1), 22–51.
Blinder, A. S., and A. B. Krueger (2013): “Alternative Measures of O¤shorability: A Survey
  Approach,” Journal of Labor Economics, 31(2), S97–S128.
Böckerman, P., S. Laaksonen, and J. Vainiomäki (2013): “Is there job polarization at the
 …rm level?,” .
Bound, J., D. A. Jaeger, and R. M. Baker (1995): “Problems with Instrumental Variables
 Estimation when the Correlation Between the Instruments and the Endogenous Explanatory
 Variable is Weak,” Journal of the American statistical association, 90(430), 443–450.
Bozio, A., T. Breda, and M. Guillot (2016): “Taxes and Technological Determinants of Wage
 Inequalities: France 1976-2010,” Working Paper, Paris School of Economics (PSE) and Institut
 des politiques publiques (IPP).
Card, D., F. Kramarz, and T. Lemieux (1999): “Changes in the Relative Structure of Wages
 and Employment: A Comparison of the United States, Canada, and France,”Canadian Journal
 of Economics, 32, 843–877.
Carluccio, J., D. Fougere, and E. Gautier (2014): “Trade, Wages, and Collective Bargain-
 ing: Evidence from France,” Banque de France Working Paper No. 498.
Charnoz, P., E. Coudin, and M. Gaini (2013): “Decreasing Wage Inequality in France 1967-
 2009: The roles of supply, demand and institutions,” Working Paper, CREST-INSEE, February
 2013.
Cortes, G. M., N. Jaimovich, C. J. Nekarda, and H. E. Siu (2014): “The Micro and Macro
 of Disappearing Routine Jobs: A Flows Approach,” NBER Working Paper No. 20307.
Cortes, G. M., and A. Salvatori (2015): “Task Specialization within Establishments and the
 Decline of Routine Employment,” working paper, University of Manchester.
Cowell, F. A. (2008): Measuring Inequality. Oxford University Press.


                                              45
Donald, S. G., and W. K. Newey (2001): “Choosing the Number of Instruments,” Economet-
 rica, 69(5), 1161–1191.
Dustmann, C., J. Ludsteck, and U. Schönberg (2007): “Revisiting the German wage struc-
 ture,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(2), 843–881.
Feenstra, R. C., and G. H. Hanson (1996): “Foreign Investment, Outsourcing, and Relative
  Wages,” in The Political Economy of Trade Policy, ed. by G. M. Grossman, R. C. Feenstra, and
  D. R. Irwin, pp. 89–127. MIT Press, Oxford.
         (1999): “The Impact of Outsourcing and High-Technology Capital on Wages: Estimates
  for the United States, 1979-1990,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114(3), 907–940.
Firpo, S., N. M. Fortin, and T. Lemieux (2011): “Occupational Tasks and Changes in the
  Wage Structure,” Working Paper, University of British Columbia.
Godechot, O. (2012): “Is Finance Responsible for the Rise in Wage Inequality in France?,”
 Socio-Economic Review, 10, 447–470.
Goos, M., and A. Manning (2007): “Lousy and Lovely Jobs: The Rising Polarization of Work
 in Britain,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 89(1), 118–133.
Goos, M., A. Manning, and A. Salomons (2009): “Job Polarization in Europe,”The American
 Economic Review, AEA Papers and Proceedings, 99(2), 58–63.
         (2014): “Explaining Job Polarization: Routine-Biased Technological Change and O¤-
  shoring,” The American Economic Review, 104(8), 2509–2526.
Goux, D., and E. Maurin (2000): “The decline in demand for unskilled labor: an empirical
 analysis method and its application to France,”Review of Economics and Statistics, 82(4), 596–
 607.
Grossman, G. M., and E. Rossi-Hansberg (2008): “Trading Tasks: A Simple Theory of
 O¤shoring,” The American Economic Review, 98(5), 1978–97.
Harrigan, J., and A. Reshef (forthcoming): “Skill Biased Heterogeneous Firms, Trade Liber-
 alization and the Skill Premium,” Canadian Journal of Economics.
Hayashi, F. (2000): Econometrics. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
Jaimovich, N., and H. E. Siu (2012): “The Trend is the Cycle: Job Polarization and Jobless
  Recoveries,” NBER Working Paper No. 18334.
Katz, L. F., and K. M. Murphy (1992): “Changes in Relative Wages, 1963-1987: Supply and
 Demand Factors,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107(1), 35–78.
Keller, W., and H. Utar (2015): “International Trade and Job Polarization: Evidence at the
 Worker Level,” Preliminary and Incomplete Draft (December).
Kerr, S. P., T. Maczuskij, and M. Maliranta (2015): “Within and Between Firm Trends in
 Job Polarization: Role of Globalization and Technology,” draft (October), Wellesley College.
Kramarz, F. (2008): “O¤shoring, Wages, and Employment: Evidence from Data Matching Im-
 ports, Firms, and Workers,” CREST-INSEE mimeo.



                                              46
Landais, C. (2008): “Top Incomes in France: booming inequalities?,”Paris School of Economics,
  Mimeo.
Maurin, E., and D. Thesmar (2004): “Changes in the Functional Structure of Firms and the
 Demand for Skill,” Journal of labor economics, 22(3), 639–664.
Maurin, E., M. Thoenig, and D. Thesmar (2002): “Globalization and the Demand for Skill:
 An Export-Based Channel,” CEPR Discussion Paper No. 3406.
Michaels, G., A. Natraj, and J. Van Reenen (2014): “Has ICT Polarized Skill Demand?
 Evidence from Eleven Countries over Twenty-Five Years,” Review of Economics and Statistics,
 96(1), 60–77.
Moreno-Galbis, E., and T. Sopraseuth (2014): “Job polarization in aging economies,”Labour
 Economics, 27, 44–55.
Oesch, D. (2013): Occupational Change in Europe. Oxford University Press, United Kingdom.
Piketty, T. (2014): Capital in the Twenty-…rst Century. Harvard University Press.
Postel-Vinay, F., and J.-M. Robin (2006): Microeconometric search-matching models and
 matched employer-employee data. Cambridge University Press.
Rodriguez-Clare, A. (2010): “O¤shoring in a Ricardian World,” American Economic Journal:
 Macroeconomics, 2(2), 227–58.
Ruud, P. A. (2000): An Introduction to Classical Econometric Theory. Oxford University Press,
 Oxford.
Shea, J. (1997): “Instrument Relevance in Multivariate Linear Models: A Simple Measure,”
  Review of Economics and Statistics, 79(2), 348–352.
Spitz-Oener, A. (2006): “Technical Change, Job Tasks and Rising Educational Demands: Look-
  ing Outside the Wage Structure,” Journal of Labor Economics, 24(2), 235–270.
Staiger, D., and J. H. Stock (1997): “Instrumental Variables Regression with Weak Instru-
  ments,” Econometrica, 65(3), 557–586.
Stock, J. H., and M. Yogo (2005): “Testing for weak instruments in linear IV regression,” in
  Identi…cation and Inference for Econometric Models: Essays in Honor of Thomas Rothenberg,
  ed. by D. W. Andrews, J. H. Stock, and T. J. Rothenberg. Cambridge University Press.
Thesmar, D., and M. Thoenig (2000): “Creative destruction and …rm organization choice,”
 Quarterly Journal of Economics, pp. 1201–1237.
Verdugo, G. (2014): “The great compression of the French wage structure, 1969–2008,” Labour
 Economics, 28, 131–144.
Verhoogen, E. A. (2008): “Trade, Quality Upgrading, and Wage Inequality in the Mexican
 Manufacturing Sector,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123, 489–530.




                                             47
9    Figures and Tables

                                  Table 1: PCS Occupations

          PCS code     description of occupation                         rank   share
          21           Small business owners and workers                    7     0.1
          22           Shopkeepers                                          3     0.2
          23           Heads of businesses                                  1     0.7
          34           Scienti…c and educational professionals              5     0.5
          35           Creative professionals                               6     0.6
          37           Top managers and professionals                       2     7.3
          38           Technical managers and engineers                     4     6.2
          42           Teachers                                             9     0.3
          43           Mid-level health professionals                      12     1.2
          46           Mid-level managers & professionals                  11    12.2
          47           Technicians                                         10     5.0
          48           Supervisors and foremen                              8     2.9
          53           Security workers                                    18     1.0
          54           O¢ ce workers                                       16    11.6
          55           Retail workers                                      20     7.0
          56           Personal service workers                            21     4.1
          62           Skilled industrial workers                          13    11.0
          63           Skilled manual laborers                             17     8.5
          64           Drivers                                             14     5.1
          65           Skilled transport and wholesale workers             15     2.7
          67           Unskilled industrial workers                        19     8.2
          68           Unskilled manual laborers                           22     3.7


Note to Table 1: “rank" is the occupation’s wage rank in 2002, “share" is occupation’s share of
hours paid in 2002. Occupations in bold are account for at least 2.5 percent of hours.




                                               48
                          Table 2: PCS 2-digit occupations and representative 4-digit suboccupations

     37   Top managers and professionals                                   56   Personal service workers
          Managers of large businesses                                          Restaurant servers, food prep workers
          Finance, accounting, sales, and advertising managers                  Hotel employees: front desk, cleaning, other
          Other administrative managers                                         Barbers, hair stylists, and beauty shop employees
     38   Technical managers and engineers (techies)                            Child care providers, home health aids
          Technical managers for large companies                                Residential building janitors, caretakers
          Engineers and R&D managers                                       62   Skilled industrial workers
          Eletrical, mechanical, materials and chemical engineers               Skilled construction workers
          Purchasing, planning, quality control, and production managers        Skilled metalworkers, pipe…tters, welders
          Information technology R&D engineers and managers                     Skilled heavy and electrical machinery operators
          Information technology support engineers and managers                 Skilled operators of electrical and electronic equipment
          Telecommunications engineers and specialists                          Skilled workers in various industries
     46   Mid-level professionals                                          63   Skilled manual laborers
          Mid-level professionals, various industries                           Gardeners
          Supervisors in …nancial, legal, and other services                    Master electricians, bricklayers, carpenters, etc
          Store, hotel, and food service managers                               Skilled electrical and electronice service technicians
          Sales and PR representatives                                          Skilled autobody and autorepair workers
     47   Technicians (techies)                                                 Master cooks, bakers, butchers
          Designers of electrical, electronic, and mechanical equipment         Skilled artisans (jewelers, potters, etc)




49
          R&D technicians, general and IT                                  64   Drivers
          Installation and maintenance of non-IT equipment                      Truck, taxi, and delivery drivers
          Installation and maintenance of IT equipment                     65   Skilled transport workers
          Telecommunications and computer network technicians                   Heavy crane and vehicle operators
          Computer operation, installation and maintenance technicians          Warehouse truck and forklift drivers
     48   Foremen, Supervisors                                                  Other skilled warehouse workers
          Foremen: construction and other                                  67   Low skill industrial workers
          Supervisors: various manufacturing sectors                            Low skill construction workers
          Supervisors: maintenance and installation of machinery                low skill electrical, metalworking, and mechanical workers
          Warehouse and shipping managers                                       low skill shipping, moving, and warehouse workers
          Food service supervisors                                              Other low skill transport industry workers
     54   O¢ ce workers                                                         Low skill production workers in various industries
          Receptionists, secretaries                                       68   Low skill manual laborers
          Administrative/clerical workers, various sectors                      Low skill mechanics, locksmiths, etc
          Computer operators                                                    Apprentice bakers, butchers
          Bus/train conductors, etc                                             Building cleaners, street cleaners, sanitation workers
     55   Retail workers                                                        Various low skill manual laborers
          Retail employees, various establishments
          Cashiers
          Service station attendants
                  Figure 2: Occupational hours shares 1994-2007

           Upper Managers                             Technical Managers                              Middle Managers




                                   10




                                                                                10 12 14 16
8
7




                                   8
6




                                   6
5
4




                                   4




                                                                                8
        1994 1997 2000 2003 2006                     1994 1997 2000 2003 2006                      1994 1997 2000 2003 2006


              Technicians                                  Supervisors                                 Office Workers

                                   2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5




                                                                                8 10 12 14 16
10
8
6
4




                                                                                6
2




        1994 1997 2000 2003 2006                     1994 1997 2000 2003 2006                      1994 1997 2000 2003 2006


            Retail Workers                              Personal Service                               Skilled Industrial
10




                                                                                5 10 15 20 25 30
                                   6
8




                                   4
6




                                   2
4
2




                                   0




        1994 1997 2000 2003 2006                     1994 1997 2000 2003 2006                      1994 1997 2000 2003 2006


            Skilled Manual                                   Drivers                                 Skilled Distribution
10 12




                                                                                3
                                   6




                                                                                2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8
                                   4
8




                                   2
6
4




                                   0




        1994 1997 2000 2003 2006                     1994 1997 2000 2003 2006                      1994 1997 2000 2003 2006


          Unskilled Industrial                          Unskilled Manual
20




                                   5
                                   4
15




                                   3
10




                                   2
5




                                   1




        1994 1997 2000 2003 2006                     1994 1997 2000 2003 2006


             Manufacturing (red circle), Nonmanufacturing (green square)



                                                               50
            Figure 3: Change in employment shares 1994–2007, whole economy




             2
                                                                                                          38

                            55
                                                                                                                    37
                       56
                                                                              47
             1



                                                          64
                  68                  53
                                                     65             43
                                                                                   42                                    23
             0




                                                                                                     34
                                           63                                                21 35             22
                                                                                        48


                                                               62
             -1




                                                                         46

                                                54
             -2




                                 67
             -3




                  22        20                    15                10                               5                   1
                                                 occupational wage rank




Notes to Figures 3, 4, and 5: Vertical axis is change in occupation’s share of aggregate hours paid
from 1994 to 2007. Horizontal axis is rank of occupation’s average wage in 2002. Circles are
labelled by PCS occupation and are proportional in size to occupation’s share of hours in 2002.
Curve is …tted values from a weighted regression of hours share change on rank and rank2 . For
key to occupations, see Tables 1 and 2.




                                                                    51
Figure 4: Change in employment shares 1994–2007, Nonmanufacturing



  2               55                                                                              38
             56
                                                                                                            37
  1


                                                64                  47
                            53
        68
                                           65             43
                                                                         42                                      23
  0




                                                                                        35   34
                                                                              48   21                  22
                                 63
                       67
                                                     62
  -1




                                                               46
  -2




                                      54
  -3




        22        20                    15                10                                 5                   1
                                       occupational wage rank



 Figure 5: Change in employment shares 1994-2007, Manufacturing
  5




                                                                                                  38
                                                     62
                                                                    47

                                                                                                            37

                  55                       65
                                                          43
        68 56               53                                           42                  34        22        23
  0




                                                64                            48   21 35
                                 63

                                      54
                                                               46
  -5




                       67
  -10




        22        20                    15                10                                 5                   1
                                       occupational wage rank




                                                          52
                         Table 3: Changes in occupational hours share: Between-Within decomposition (1994-2007)
                                                                  All …rms                                  Nonmanufacturing                                 Manufacturing
     Rank    PCS2                                  Share      Share Between         Within        Share      Share Between Within                Share      Share Between           Within
       7     21 Small business head                 0.22      -0.320    -0.278      -0.042         0.23      -0.330  -0.257  -0.072               0.21      -0.296   -0.329          0.033
       3     22 Shopkeeper                          0.23      -0.262    -0.118      -0.144         0.30      -0.402  -0.160  -0.242               0.05      -0.011   -0.033          0.022
       1     23 Large business heads                0.67       0.038     0.127      -0.089         0.67       0.045   0.212  -0.166               0.68      -0.026   -0.122          0.096
       5     34 Scienti…c professional              0.50      -0.122    -0.102      -0.020         0.64      -0.194  -0.132  -0.063               0.13      -0.022   -0.033          0.011
       6     35 Creative professional               0.68      -0.283    -0.153      -0.129         0.64      -0.241  -0.123  -0.118               0.81      -0.333   -0.217         -0.116
       2     37 Upper manager                       6.91       1.384     1.791      -0.407         7.65       1.122   1.982  -0.860               4.95       1.480    1.265          0.215
       4     38 Technical manager                   5.75       1.954     1.511       0.443         5.07       1.394   0.687   0.707               7.59       4.211    3.704          0.507
       9     42 Teacher                             0.31       0.073    -0.013       0.086         0.39       0.080  -0.015   0.095               0.08      -0.020   -0.015         -0.005
      12     43 Health worker                       1.20       0.242     0.092       0.150         1.58       0.166   0.105   0.061               0.20       0.156    0.050          0.107
      11     46 Middle manager                     12.55      -1.510    -1.520       0.009        13.86      -1.396  -1.051  -0.346               9.04      -2.805   -2.714         -0.091




53
      10     47 Technician                          4.85       1.017     0.859       0.158         3.44       0.756   0.294   0.463               8.67       2.839    2.350          0.489
       8     48 Foreman                             2.95      -0.448    -0.265      -0.183         2.46      -0.370  -0.197  -0.173               4.25      -0.316   -0.459          0.143
      18     53 Security worker                     0.86       0.380     0.033       0.347         1.12       0.462   0.049   0.413               0.16      -0.043   -0.020         -0.024
      16     54 O¢ ce worker                       12.01      -1.954    -2.336       0.382        14.12      -2.555  -2.459  -0.096               6.43      -1.990   -2.042          0.052
      20     55 Retail worker                       6.85       1.499     0.477       1.022         8.68       1.408   0.668   0.740               1.96       0.285   -0.101          0.386
      21     56 Personal service worker             3.98       1.240     0.635       0.605         5.41       1.272   0.863   0.409               0.18       0.013   -0.013          0.026
      13     62 High Skill industrial worker       10.97      -1.002     0.245      -1.246         4.57      -0.926  -0.547  -0.379              28.05       3.748    2.255          1.493
      17     63 High Skill manual laborer           8.57      -0.329    -1.310       0.981        10.27      -0.726  -1.184   0.458               4.08      -0.716   -1.700          0.985
      14     64 Driver                              4.94       0.692    -0.382       1.075         6.31       0.744  -0.344   1.088               1.28      -0.523   -0.494         -0.029
      15     65 Skill distribution worker           2.65       0.208     0.077       0.131         2.61       0.118   0.023   0.095               2.76       0.474    0.199          0.275
      19     67 Low Skill industrial worker         8.58      -2.951    -3.359       0.407         5.34      -0.841  -2.197   1.356              17.03      -5.916   -6.367          0.451
      22     68 Low Skill manual laborer            3.73       0.401    -0.352       0.753         4.60       0.353  -0.320   0.672               1.43      -0.202   -0.479          0.277
     Notes to Table 3: Rank orders PCS codes according to occupational mean wage in 2002. Share is time average revised levels of hours shares. 14 largest occupations are boxed.
                                          Figure 6: Within-between decomposition, all …rms 1994-2007

                                           38
                  2

                                     37                                       55
                                                                                     56
                                                         47
  percent point change 1994-2007




                                                                                                         64
                                                                                                                              68
                                                                                                                65
                        0




                                                                48                                63

                                                                                           62
                                                  46
          -2




                                                                      54


                                     managerial & professional             white collar          blue collar
                                                                                                                      67
                  -4




                                      37     38     46    47     48    54      55     56    62      63     64    65      67    68
                                                                        PCS occupation
                                                              total                 between                     within
                                   note: for each PCS, total = between + within




Notes to Table 3 and Figure 6: Changes in share of occupational hours paid from 1994 to 2007
are decomposed into within-…rm and between-…rm changes using equation (1). For key to
occupations, see Tables 1 and 2.




                                                                               54
                        Table 4: Between-Within decomposition 1994-2007, permanent …rms and net entry


                                                         All …rms            Permanent …rms          All other …rms
                                                 2002 share Change 94-07   Between-p Within-p   Net entry Share of total
          PCS2                                       (1)           (2)         (3)        (4)      (5)           (6)
                                                         Non-manufacturing
     37   Top managers and professionals             8.1          1.12        1.25      -0.25      0.11         0.10
     38   Technical managers and engineers           5.4          1.39        0.39       0.20      0.80         0.57
     46   Mid-level managers and professionals      13.6         -1.40        0.00      -0.33     -1.07          0.76
     47   Technicians                                3.4          0.76        0.22       0.22      0.32          0.42
     54   O¢ ce workers                             13.7         -2.56       -1.54       0.04     -1.05          0.41
     55   Retail workers                             8.9          1.41        0.31       0.43      0.67         0.48
     56   Personal service workers                  5.6           1.27        0.14      -0.03      1.16         0.91
     62   Skill industrial workers                   4.1         -0.93       -0.18       0.05     -0.79          0.86
     63   Skill manual laborers                     10.1         -0.73       -0.13      -0.06     -0.54         0.75




55
     64   Drivers                                    6.5          0.74        0.20       0.73     -0.18         -0.25
     67   Unskill industrial workers                5.4          -0.84       -0.73       0.54     -0.65          0.77
     68   Unskill manual laborers                   4.6           0.35       -0.04       0.25      0.14         0.40
                                                           Manufacturing
     37   Manager                                    5.3          1.48        0.84       0.36     0.28           0.19
     38   Technical mgr                              8.2          4.21        2.60       0.33      1.28          0.30
     46   Midddle manager                            8.3         -2.80       -1.05       0.48     -2.24          0.80
     47   Technician                                 9.1          2.84        1.70       0.42      0.73          0.26
     48   Supervisor                                 4.3         -0.32       -0.26       0.37     -0.42          1.34
     54   O¢ ce wrkr                                 6.0         -1.99       -1.10       0.42     -1.31          0.66
     62   Skill industrial wrkr                     29.5          3.75        2.10       2.06     -0.42         -0.11
     63   Skill manual labor                         4.2         -0.72       -0.99       0.77     -0.50          0.70
     67   Unskill industrial wrkr                   15.7         -5.92       -2.99       1.36     -4.29          0.72

     Notes to Table 4: Column (2) = Column (3) + Column (4) + Column (5), Column (6) = Column (5)/Column (2).
     PCS codes with 2002 hours shares less than 3 percent not reported.
Figure 7: Occupational share of trade relative to occupational share of hours



        Upper Mgr 37
     Technical Mgr 38
        Middle Mgr 46
        Technician 47
        Supervisor 48
        Office Wrkr 54
        Retail Wrkr 55
    Personal Srvce 56
   High Skill Indstrl 62
  High Skill Manual 63
              Driver 64
     Skilled Distrib 65
   Low Skill Indstrl 67
  Low Skill Manual 68

                           0             .5             1              1.5             2

                                                   Exports                   Imports


Notes to Figure 7: Occupational trade exposure de…ned by equation (4). Figure shows average
relative exposure from 1994 to 2007.




                                              56
                                                                Table 5: Economywide occupational exposure, 2002
                                                 21     22      23     34      35     37       38      42     43      46      47      48      53      54      55      56      62      63       64        65     67     68
     excluding own                              0.02   0.03    0.44   0.36    0.23   0.68     0.55    0.33   0.40    0.71    0.56    0.59    0.31    0.69    0.29    0.35    0.43    0.58     0.48      0.45   0.49   0.53
     including own                              0.02   0.03    0.45   0.38    0.24   0.75     0.60    0.34   0.45    0.82    0.61    0.61    0.32    0.88    0.35    0.39    0.52    0.65     0.52      0.47   0.55   0.57

     cross-occupational
     21 Small business head                     1.00   0.00    0.01   0.02    0.02   0.12     0.09    0.01   0.03    0.27    0.11    0.14    0.01    0.41    0.17    0.07    0.20    0.63     0.11      0.06   0.16   0.37
     22 Shopkeeper                              0.00   1.00    0.01   0.10    0.05   0.33     0.18    0.03   0.05    0.49    0.13    0.08    0.02    0.44    0.22    0.11    0.07    0.21     0.13      0.08   0.11   0.16
     23 Large business heads                    0.01   0.01    1.00   0.13    0.10   0.66     0.53    0.11   0.14    0.83    0.49    0.47    0.09    0.88    0.29    0.18    0.46    0.50     0.38      0.40   0.51   0.46
     34 Scienti…c professional                  0.12   0.19    0.42   1.00    0.38   0.84     0.60    0.61   0.84    0.86    0.59    0.65    0.41    0.91    0.34    0.57    0.40    0.74     0.53      0.36   0.40   0.57
     35 Creative professional                   0.01   0.07    0.37   0.36    1.00   0.76     0.53    0.56   0.49    0.88    0.55    0.56    0.34    0.81    0.26    0.57    0.39    0.60     0.47      0.29   0.38   0.45
     37 Upper manager                           0.02   0.04    0.56   0.45    0.27   1.00     0.77    0.39   0.46    0.92    0.72    0.58    0.36    0.92    0.38    0.41    0.50    0.54     0.53      0.49   0.54   0.54
     38 Technical manager                       0.00   0.02    0.61   0.36    0.17   0.89     1.00    0.34   0.37    0.90    0.86    0.62    0.27    0.93    0.28    0.29    0.63    0.53     0.47      0.54   0.60   0.49
     42 Teacher                                 0.05   0.04    0.27   0.57    0.44   0.72     0.39    1.00   0.67    0.78    0.47    0.42    0.35    0.89    0.12    0.49    0.25    0.50     0.38      0.18   0.27   0.45
     43 Health worker                           0.02   0.07    0.30   0.84    0.31   0.83     0.44    0.60   1.00    0.85    0.48    0.61    0.35    0.96    0.14    0.59    0.28    0.75     0.45      0.20   0.31   0.52
     46 Middle manager                          0.01   0.02    0.52   0.37    0.25   0.82     0.66    0.35   0.40    1.00    0.64    0.56    0.32    0.89    0.44    0.39    0.49    0.57     0.51      0.50   0.54   0.56




57
     47 Technician                              0.01   0.03    0.57   0.37    0.18   0.85     0.86    0.37   0.44    0.90    1.00    0.73    0.34    0.94    0.34    0.32    0.74    0.63     0.53      0.64   0.69   0.57
     48 Foreman                                 0.01   0.02    0.48   0.29    0.23   0.79     0.71    0.31   0.40    0.86    0.74    1.00    0.36    0.90    0.30    0.35    0.71    0.73     0.60      0.59   0.71   0.65
     53 Security worker                         0.01   0.01    0.43   0.31    0.35   0.84     0.55    0.41   0.50    0.87    0.64    0.65    1.00    0.92    0.22    0.42    0.52    0.53     0.57      0.41   0.55   0.62
     54 O¢ ce worker                            0.02   0.04    0.35   0.53    0.32   0.80     0.52    0.48   0.63    0.84    0.58    0.59    0.39    1.00    0.25    0.46    0.39    0.61     0.52      0.32   0.41   0.56
     55 Retail worker                           0.01   0.01    0.45   0.33    0.17   0.63     0.41    0.11   0.29    0.76    0.40    0.45    0.28    0.70    1.00    0.30    0.38    0.68     0.47      0.52   0.50   0.54
     56 Personal service worker                 0.01   0.02    0.19   0.14    0.27   0.40     0.21    0.22   0.29    0.56    0.22    0.38    0.18    0.54    0.18    1.00    0.15    0.57     0.20      0.14   0.20   0.30
     62 High Skill industrial worker            0.01   0.00    0.59   0.27    0.16   0.80     0.83    0.25   0.41    0.87    0.83    0.85    0.33    0.93    0.31    0.25    1.00    0.67     0.58      0.75   0.89   0.62
     63 High Skill manual laborer               0.04   0.02    0.29   0.16    0.12   0.41     0.33    0.15   0.19    0.54    0.36    0.46    0.14    0.65    0.29    0.25    0.35    1.00     0.33      0.30   0.37   0.60
     64 Driver                                  0.01   0.01    0.38   0.12    0.08   0.58     0.52    0.16   0.16    0.71    0.36    0.48    0.19    0.83    0.23    0.16    0.40    0.54     1.00      0.53   0.58   0.48
     65 Skill distribution worker               0.00   0.01    0.63   0.39    0.28   0.85     0.77    0.35   0.44    0.92    0.73    0.80    0.43    0.93    0.58    0.38    0.73    0.73     0.73      1.00   0.82   0.68
     67 Low Skill industrial worker             0.00   0.00    0.59   0.33    0.25   0.79     0.77    0.33   0.45    0.87    0.76    0.80    0.39    0.92    0.43    0.38    0.86    0.66     0.64      0.74   1.00   0.65
     68 Low Skill manual laborer                0.01   0.01    0.31   0.19    0.09   0.55     0.38    0.21   0.30    0.62    0.40    0.50    0.30    0.74    0.24    0.31    0.41    0.65     0.41      0.32   0.45   1.00
     Columns give share of hours worked exposed to each occupation. An hour of work in a …rm is de…ned as “exposed" to an occupation if the …rm employs workers in that occupation. The …rst two rows
     measure economywide exposure, remaining rows report cross-occupational exposure. For example, consider the column labelled 54, O¢ ce Workers. The …rst number in the column, 0.69, indicates that 69
     % of hours worked in the economy in occupations other than PCS 54 happen in …rms that employ PCS 54. The second number, 0.88, includes exposure of o¢ ce workers to themselves, indicating that 88
     % of all hours worked occur in …rms that employ PCS 54. Turning to the row labelled 38, the number 0.93 indicates that 93% of hours in PCS 38, Technical Managers and Engineers, are worked in …rms
     that employ PCS 54.
                                     Figure 8: Occupational hours shares for all …rms and permanent …rms


                                              Non−manufacturing                                                                                                                                             Manufacturing
                                PCS 37                                    PCS 38                                   PCS 46                     PCS 47                     PCS 37                                   PCS 38                                       PCS 46                                        PCS 47
   7 7.5 8 8.5 9 9.5




                                                                                        16




                                                                                                                                                                                       9 10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                11
                                               6




                                                                                                                                 4




                                                                                                                                                            6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             10
                                                                                                                                                            5.5
                                                                                                                                 3.5
                                                                                        15




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                10
                                               5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             9
                                                                                                                                                                                       8
                                                                                                                                                            5




                                                                                                                                                                                       7
                                                                                                                                 3
                                                                                        14
                                               4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                9




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             8
                                                                                                                                                            4.5




                                                                                                                                                                                       6
                                                                                                                                 2.5
                                                                                        13




                                                                                                                                                                                       5
                                               3




                                                                                                                                                            4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             7
                         1994     2002 2007                        1994     2002 2007                       1994     2002 2007         1994     2002 2007         1994     2002 2007                       1994     2002 2007                           1994     2002 2007                            1994     2002 2007


                                PCS 48                                    PCS 54        7 7.5 8 8.5 9 9.5          PCS 55                     PCS 56                     PCS 48                                   PCS 54                                       PCS 55                                        PCS 56




                                                                                                                                                            4.6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2 2.2
   2.4 2.5 2.6 2.7 2.8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .12 .14 .16 .18 .2 .22
                                                                                                                                                                                       5.5 6 6.5 7 7.5 8
                                               13 14 15 16 17 18




                                                                                                                                 6
                                                                                                                                 5.5




                                                                                                                                                            4.4
                                                                                                                                 5




                                                                                                                                                            4.2
                                                                                                                                 4.5
                                                                                                                                 4




                                                                                                                                                            4
                         1994     2002 2007                        1994     2002 2007                       1994     2002 2007         1994     2002 2007         1994     2002 2007                       1994     2002 2007                           1994     2002 2007                            1994     2002 2007


                                PCS 62                                    PCS 63                                   PCS 64                     PCS 65                     PCS 62                                   PCS 63                                       PCS 64                                        PCS 65
   5.5




                                                                                                                                                                                       4.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1.6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3.2
                                               10 10. 5 11




                                                                                                                                                            32
                                                                                        5.5 6 6.5 7 7.5 8




                                                                                                                                 3




                                                                                                                                                            30




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3
                                                                                                                                                                                       4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1.4
                                                                                                                                 2.8
   5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2.4 2.6 2.8
                                                                                                                                                                                       3.5
                                                                                                                                                            28
                                                                                                                                 2.6
   4.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1.2
                                               9.5




                                                                                                                                                            26




                                                                                                                                                                                       3
                                                                                                                                 2.4




                                                                                                                                                                                       2.5
                                                                                                                                                            24
                                               9
   4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1
                         1994     2002 2007                        1994     2002 2007                       1994     2002 2007         1994     2002 2007         1994     2002 2007                       1994     2002 2007                           1994     2002 2007                            1994     2002 2007


                                PCS 67                                    PCS 68                                                                                         PCS 67                                   PCS 68
                                               5.5




                                                                                                                                                            22




                                                                                                                                                                                       1.6
   6




                                                                                                                                                            20
   5.5




                                                                                                                                                                                       1.4
                                               5




                                                                                                                                                            18
   5




                                                                                                                                                                                       1.2
                                               4.5
   4.5




                                                                                                                                                            16




                                                                                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                                                                            14
                                               4
   4




                         1994     2002 2007                        1994     2002 2007                                                                             1994     2002 2007                       1994     2002 2007




                                                                                                                                  Blue box: All firms
                                                                                                                                  Red circle: Permanent firms

Notes to Figures 8 and 9:‘Permanent" …rms are those with positive hours for each year from 1994
to 2007, "All" includes permanent and all other …rms. In Figure 9, size of circles is proportional
to occupation’s hours share in 2002. For key to occupations, see Tables 1 and 2.




                                                                                                                                                  58
                                                   Figure 9: Changes in occupational hours shares



                                                                    permanent vs. temporary firms
                                              Overall change                                                                                       Between-firm change
                                                                               37                 38                                                       includes net entry
 -1.0 -0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0




                                                                    64             47        55                                                                                                 38 37




                                                                                                             -1.5-1.0-0.50.0 0.51.0
    permanent firms




                                                                                                               permanent firms
                                                                                                                                                                                           47
                                        62                           65                                                                                                       62
                                                                         4368
                                                                            53                         56
                                                                                                                                                                        64           65
                                                                                                                                                                                      23   55    56
                                                             48 63 223423
                                                                        42                                                                                                      22355343
                                                                                                                                                                                 213442
                                                                                                                                                                              6848
                                                                   2135                                                                               46
                                        46                                                                                                                    63


                           67                      54                                                                                 67                       54

                         -2.0               -1.0               0.0                                 1.0                                -2.0     -1.5        -1.0      -0.5          0.0          0.5
                                                temporary firms                                                                                             temporary firms
                          weighted correlation = 0.75                                                                                 weighted correlation = 0.83


                                         Within-firm change
                                               includes net entry
 -0.20.00.20.40.60.8




                                                                         64
  permanent firms




                                                                                   55
                                                             5467             68        63
                                                        65
                                                   48         47
                                                              43     53 38         56
                                              37          46 42
                                                         21
                                                          34
                                                         23
                                                         35
                                                         22
                          62

                         -1.0          -0.5           0.0                      0.5                     1.0
                                               temporary firms
                          weighted correlation = 0.74

Note: permanent firms active from 1994 to 2007, temporary firms all others.




                                                                                                  59
     Table 6: Shea …rst stage partial R2 for baseline employment growth regressions

                                            Nonmanufacturing           Manufacturing
                    Techies 2002                 0.584                    0.513
                    Techies 2002 > 0             0.209                    0.152
                    Imports 2002                 0.568                    0.561
                    Imports 2002 > 0             0.219                    0.142
                    Exports 2002                 0.542                    0.671
                    Exports 2002 > 0             0.222                    0.175
                    Notes to Table 6: Reports …rst stage goodness of …t
                    measure for 2SLS estimation of equation (6). Each
                    number in the table is the adjusted Shea (1997) partial
                    R2 of the …rst stage equation for the endogenous
                    variable listed in the row, corresponding to the second
                    stage equation listed in the column.




Table 7: Second stage goodness of …t and test statistics for baseline employment growth
regressions

                                                  Nonmanufacturing            Manufacturing
              Goodness of …t
              Weighted R2                                  0.006                  0.039
              Explained between by PCS:
              37                                            0.687                -0.410
              46                                           -1.733                 0.238
              48                                           -3.896                 0.216
              54                                           -0.957                 0.121
              55                                            1.232                 0.026
              56                                            0.448                -0.053
              62                                            9.074                 0.451
              63                                           -1.695                 0.016
              64                                           -3.075                -0.006
              65                                            1.805                -1.159
              67                                           -0.186                 0.117
              68                                            1.330                 0.013
              p-values
              Joint signi…cance, 2 (7)                     0.0086                 0.000
              Endogeneity, 2 (7)                            0.000                 0.000
              Overid, 2 (28)                                 0.38                  0.03
              Notes to Table 7: Statistics based on 2SLS estimates of equation (6).




                                                    60
                                    Table 8: Shares of hours
                                                     nonmanufacturing
                             techies?                 no  yes Total
                             no trade                26.7 31.1 57.8
                             import only             1.9  7.4    9.3
                             export only             1.5   5.0   6.5
                             import & export          1.7 24.7 26.4
                             Total                   31.8 68.2 100.0

                                                      manufacturing
                             techies?                no   yes Total
                             no trade                6.1  7.6    13.6
                             import only             0.8  4.0    4.7
                             export only             0.9  3.2    4.1
                             import & export         2.0 75.5 77.5
                             Total                   9.7 90.3 100.0



                                    Table 9: Shares of trade
                                                  nonmanufacturing
                                            imports              exports
                  techies?            no      yes total      no    yes total
                  import only         5.6     5.8   11.4     0.0   0.0   0.0
                  export only        0.0      0.0    0.0    4.3    4.7   8.9
                  import & export    14.3    74.3 88.6      11.4 79.7 91.1
                  Total              20.0    80.0 100.0     15.6 84.4 100.0

                                                    manufacturing
                                            imports               exports
                  techies?            no      yes total      no    yes total
                  import only         0.4     1.0   1.4      0.0    0.0   0.0
                  export only         0.0     0.0   0.0      0.2    0.5   0.7
                  import & export     1.8    96.8 98.6       0.9 98.4 99.4
                  Total               2.1    97.9 100.0      1.1 98.9 100.0




Notes to Tables 8 and 9: These tables report cross tabs of frequencies for the estimation sample.




                                                61
                  Table 10: E¤ects of techies (Panel A) and trade (Panel B) on employment growth rates

                                    overall                      no trade                    imports & exports
                             extensive intensive           extensive intensive              extensive intensive
     Panel A                    (1)         (2)               (3)         (4)                  (5)        (6)
     Nonmanufacturing          0.344       0.011             0.311      0.153                 0.244     -0.148
                                0.189        0.043           0.179         0.059             0.305       0.088

     Manufacturing              0.939        0.219           1.140         0.134             0.392       0.264
                                0.211        0.067           0.211         0.146             0.291       0.080




62
                                                 imports                                                        exports
                                    overall                    techies                             overall                    techies
                             extensive intensive       extensive intensive                  extensive intensive       extensive intensive
     Panel B                    (1)         (2)            (3)         (4)                     (5)         (6)            (7)         (8)
     Nonmanufacturing         -0.126       0.002         -0.090       0.008                  -0.339      -0.005         -0.279      -0.010
                                0.218        0.009           0.372         0.014             0.218       0.005         0.373      0.003

     Manufacturing             -0.148        0.036           -0.207        0.043             0.077       -0.038        0.025      0.003
                                0.268        0.039           0.339         0.044             0.212       0.051         0.280      0.050

     Standard errors italicized. Regression results reported in Appendix Tables 21 and 22
                 Table 11: E¤ects of techies, exports and di¤erent classes of imports on employment growth rates
     A. Nonmanufacturing
                                                 extensive     intensive       extensive    intensive   extensive   intensive
                                                    (1)           (2)             (3)          (4)         (5)         (6)
     techies                                       0.344         0.011           0.331        0.011       0.400       0.015
                                                   0.189         0.043           0.203       0.042       0.180       0.040
     exports                                       -0.339       -0.005           -0.390      -0.005      -0.179      -0.005
                                                   0.218         0.005           0.220       0.004       0.245       0.005
     imports                                       -0.126        0.002           -0.040      0.010
                                                   0.218         0.009           0.330       0.010
     imports of intermediate inputs                                              0.012       -0.012
                                                                                 0.308       0.006
     imports from China                                                                                  -0.146      0.005
                                                                                                         0.445       0.006
     imports from high income countries                                                                  0.031       0.008
                                                                                                         0.257       0.010
     imports from other countries                                                                        -0.373      0.001
                                                                                                         0.357       0.004




63
     B. Manufacturing
                                                 extensive     intensive       extensive    intensive   extensive   intensive
                                                    (1)           (2)             (3)          (4)         (5)         (6)
     techies                                       0.939         0.219           0.929        0.221       0.815       0.229
                                                   0.211         0.067           0.209       0.067       0.210       0.069
     exports                                       0.077        -0.038           0.055       -0.031      0.182       -0.020
                                                   0.212         0.051           0.213       0.051       0.200       0.050
     imports                                       -0.148        0.036           0.698       0.066
                                                   0.268         0.039           0.518       0.057
     imports of intermediate inputs                                              -0.815      -0.032
                                                                                 0.375       0.046
     imports from China                                                                                  -0.085      0.006
                                                                                                         0.188       0.005
     imports from high income countries                                                                  -0.010      0.098
                                                                                                         0.227       0.049
     imports from other countries                                                                        -0.431      -0.025
                                                                                                         0.211       0.011

     Standard errors italicized. Regression results reported in Appendix Tables 21 and 22
             Table 12: Shea …rst stage partial R2


Nonmanufacturing:

PCS                             37        46       54      55         56
Techies 2002                  0.669     0.657    0.657    0.640     0.744
Techies 2002 > 0              0.245     0.262    0.275    0.306     0.305
Imports 2002                  0.603     0.600    0.601    0.633     0.694
Imports 2002 > 0              0.204     0.210    0.211    0.228     0.171
Exports 2002                  0.550     0.560    0.556    0.573     0.587
Exports 2002 > 0              0.210     0.214    0.214    0.239     0.197

PCS                             62        63       64      67         68
Techies 2002                  0.708     0.665    0.681    0.697     0.664
Techies 2002 > 0              0.242     0.295    0.280    0.268     0.290
Imports 2002                  0.630     0.626    0.642    0.622     0.642
Imports 2002 > 0              0.189     0.217    0.211    0.209     0.209
Exports 2002                  0.590     0.538    0.566    0.578     0.543
Exports 2002 > 0              0.202     0.219    0.207    0.221     0.217

Manufacturing:

PCS                             37        46       48      54         62
Techies 2002                  0.561     0.550    0.563    0.551     0.542
Techies 2002 > 0              0.142     0.167    0.147    0.171     0.168
Imports 2002                  0.571     0.571    0.573    0.562     0.564
Imports 2002 > 0              0.131     0.136    0.126    0.140     0.138
Exports 2002                  0.681     0.679    0.681    0.677     0.674
Exports 2002 > 0              0.183     0.183    0.172    0.186     0.185

PCS                             63        64       67
Techies 2002                  0.556     0.550    0.551
Techies 2002 > 0              0.171     0.180    0.169
Imports 2002                  0.598     0.581    0.567
Imports 2002 > 0              0.113     0.135    0.137
Exports 2002                  0.701     0.720    0.675
Exports 2002 > 0              0.165     0.204    0.184
Notes to Table 12: Reports …rst stage goodness of …t measure for 2SLS
estimation of equation (10). Each number in the table is the adjusted
Shea (1997) partial R2 of the …rst stage equation for the endogenous
variable listed in the row, corresponding to the second stage equation
listed in the column. For key to occupations, see Tables 1 and 2.




                                   64
Table 13: Second stage goodness of …t and test statistics, baseline within regressions


          Nonmanufacturing:

          PCS                              37            46       54          55    56
          Goodness of …t
          Weighted R2                     0.052        0.017     0.034    0.017     0.020
          Explained within               -2.827        -0.714    2.410    0.346    -0.664
          p-values
          Joint signi…cance; 2 (6)       0.000         0.029     0.000    0.040    0.044
          Endogeneity; 2 (6)             0.000         0.000     0.000    0.000    0.000
          Overid; 2 (24)                 0.000         0.000     0.000    0.000    0.000

          PCS                              62            63       64          67    68
          Goodness of …t
          Weighted R2                    0.035         0.003      0.017   0.050    0.033
          Explained within               8.162         0.669     -0.136   1.834    0.158
          p-values
          Joint signi…cance; 2 (6)       0.244         0.005     0.111    0.061    0.015
          Endogeneity; 2 (6)             0.000         0.000     0.000    0.000    0.000
          Overid; 2 (24)                 0.000         0.000     0.000    0.000    0.000

          Manufacturing:

          PCS                              37            46       48          54    62
          Goodness of …t
          Weighted R2                    0.067         0.035     0.015    0.030    0.176
          Explained within              -17.185        0.249     0.100    -0.798   -0.096
          p-values
          Joint signi…cance; 2 (6)       0.000         0.000     0.017    0.000    0.000
          Endogeneity; 2 (6)             0.000         0.000     0.000    0.000    0.000
          Overid; 2 (24)                 0.000         0.000     0.038    0.000    0.000

          PCS                              63            64       67
          Goodness of …t
          Weighted R2                    0.064          0.013    0.376
          Explained within               1.277         -24.195   0.788
          p-values
          Joint signi…cance; 2 (6)       0.000         0.000     0.000
          Endogeneity; 2 (6)             0.000         0.001     0.000
          Overid; 2 (24)                 0.000         0.990     0.000
          Notes to Table 13: Statistics based on 2SLS estimates of equation
          (10).




                                                  65
Notes to Tables 14 through 17: The tables on the following four pages report estimated e¤ects
derived from 2SLS estimation of equations (10) (columns labeled overall) and interaction
speci…cations (other columns). Reported e¤ects are functions of the estimated parameters and
moments of the data. E¤ects highlighted in yellow are statistically signi…cantly di¤erent from zero
at the 90 percent level or more.




                                                66
                             Table 14: E¤ects of techies on employment shares in nonmanufacturing …rms
                                                         overall                      no trade        imports & exports > 0
                                                  extensive intensive           extensive intensive   extensive   intensive
                                                     (1)         (2)               (3)         (4)       (5)         (6)
     37   Top managers and professionals            0.340       0.215             0.516      0.051      0.179       0.295
                                                     0.182        0.082           0.160     0.038      0.436       0.108

     46   Mid-level professionals                   -0.106        0.048           -0.128    0.019      0.276       0.096
                                                     0.096        0.019           0.113     0.024      0.239       0.035

     54   O¢ ce workers                              0.006        -0.055          -0.003    -0.028     -0.399      -0.094
                                                     0.110        0.030           0.132     0.033      0.284       0.066

     55   Retail workers                             0.120        -0.153          0.066     0.002      -0.030      -0.251
                                                     0.319        0.076           0.372     0.060      0.714       0.145

     56   Personal service workers                  -0.616        0.130           -0.319    0.161      -3.570      0.014




67
                                                     0.875        0.078           0.984     0.153      2.294       0.157

     62   Skilled industrial workers                 1.458        -0.261          1.430     0.275      0.787       -0.401
                                                     0.596        0.213           0.433     0.162      1.621       0.169

     63   Skilled manual laborers                    0.214        -0.062          0.181     0.025      0.263       -0.095
                                                     0.177        0.051           0.166     0.102      0.756       0.063

     64   Drivers                                   -0.080        -0.132          -0.108    -0.288     0.254       -0.061
                                                     0.246        0.057           0.327     0.150      0.668       0.065

     67   Low skill industrial workers               0.220        0.154           0.525     0.100      -1.060      0.218
                                                     0.261        0.066           0.354     0.092      0.524       0.088

     68   Low skill manual laborers                 -0.673        -0.199          -0.712    -0.156     0.095       -0.230
                                                     0.241        0.079           0.293     0.086      0.115       0.121
     Standard errors italicized. Regression results reported in Appendix Tables 23 and 24
                               Table 15: E¤ects of techies on employment shares in manufacturing …rms
                                                         overall                      no trade        imports & exports > 0
                                                  extensive intensive           extensive intensive   extensive   intensive
                                                     (1)         (2)               (3)         (4)       (5)         (6)
     37   Top managers and professionals            0.211       0.073             0.832      -0.206    -0.123       0.204
                                                     0.219        0.058           0.304     0.225      0.382       0.135

     46   Mid-level professionals                    0.563        0.324           0.539     0.259      0.636       0.301
                                                     0.196        0.156           0.260     0.203      0.306       0.178

     48   Foremen, Supervisors                      -0.465        -0.134          -0.899    0.180      -0.011      -0.170
                                                     0.583        0.059           1.084     0.639      0.249       0.063

     54   O¢ ce workers                             -0.511        -0.163          -0.528    0.399      -0.874      -0.175




68
                                                     0.194        0.217           0.341     0.348      0.306       0.215

     62   Skilled industrial workers                -0.822        -0.163          -1.270    0.256      0.015       -0.216
                                                     0.347        0.080           0.432     0.266      0.215       0.075

     63   Skilled manual laborers                    0.601        -0.030          2.560     -2.670     -2.910      0.099
                                                     1.210        0.203           1.078     0.831      1.709       0.227

     64   Drivers                                    1.520        0.254           2.380     -1.390     0.670       0.266
                                                     0.556        0.087           0.864     0.739      0.863       0.092

     67   Low skill industrial workers               1.133        0.035           1.540     -0.623     0.086       0.126
                                                     0.753        0.105           0.924     0.495      0.340       0.074
     Standard errors italicized. Regression results reported in Appendix Tables 25 and 26
                                Table 16: E¤ects of trade on employment shares in nonmanufacturing …rms
                                                                           imports                                          exports
                                                         overall                     techies > 0              overall                 techies > 0
                                                  extensive intensive           extensive intensive    extensive intensive       extensive intensive
                                                     (1)         (2)               (3)         (4)        (5)         (6)           (7)         (8)
     37   Top managers and professionals            0.182       0.023            -0.026       0.018      0.054       0.018        -0.060       0.010
                                                     0.263        0.010              0.275    0.018     0.242      0.008              0.286    0.007

     46   Mid-level professionals                    0.161        -0.010             0.035    -0.010    0.077      -0.001             0.159    0.003
                                                     0.111        0.006              0.164    0.010     0.146      0.002              0.200    0.003

     54   O¢ ce workers                              0.062        0.010              0.331    -0.002    -0.604     0.006              -0.822   0.006
                                                     0.165        0.009              0.276    0.011     0.219      0.002              0.329    0.003

     55   Retail workers                            -0.385        0.036              -0.531   0.081     0.417      -0.003             0.664    -0.009
                                                     0.245        0.020              0.374    0.042     0.301      0.004              0.388    0.006




69
     56   Personal service workers                  -1.058        -0.002             -1.280   -0.001    -0.479     0.006              -0.244   0.001
                                                     0.747        0.011              0.909    0.016     1.130      0.006              1.129    0.006

     62   Skilled industrial workers                -0.957        0.010              -0.802   0.003     -0.201     -0.044             0.199    -0.022
                                                     0.660        0.029              0.625    0.030     0.521      0.022              0.580    0.016

     63   Skilled manual laborers                    0.055        -0.019             0.184    -0.009    -0.100     -0.002             -0.196   -0.005
                                                     0.224        0.011              0.269    0.012     0.201      0.003              0.276    0.003

     64   Drivers                                    0.902        -0.033             1.240    -0.040    -0.002     -0.002             -0.451   -0.003
                                                     0.490        0.012              0.729    0.015     0.447      0.003              0.628    0.005

     67   Low skill industrial workers               0.009        0.014              0.032    0.033     -0.335     -0.004             -0.480   -0.011
                                                     0.287        0.017              0.369    0.023     0.403      0.007              0.521    0.010

     68   Low skill manual laborers                 -1.220        -0.013             -2.100   -0.018    2.410      -0.018             3.387    -0.016
                                                     0.839        0.012              1.301    0.015     1.074      0.007              1.563    0.008
     Standard errors italicized. Regression results reported in Appendix Tables 23 and 24
                                   Table 17: E¤ects of trade on employment shares in manufacturing …rms
                                                                      imports                                            exports
                                                         overall                 techies > 0                overall                 techies > 0
                                                  extensive intensive       extensive intensive      extensive intensive       extensive intensive
                                                     (1)         (2)           (3)         (4)          (5)         (6)           (7)          (8)
     37   Top managers and professionals            0.112       0.000         0.031       0.036        0.413      -0.002         0.333       -0.035
                                                     0.223        0.011           0.307     0.044     0.185       0.002         0.238      0.055

     46   Mid-level professionals                    0.187        -0.012          0.028     0.000     -0.068      -0.002        0.085      -0.040
                                                     0.327        0.061           0.418     0.066     0.261       0.062         0.354      0.055

     48   Foremen, Supervisors                       0.485        0.021           0.650     0.030     -0.053      -0.010        -0.117     -0.008
                                                     0.286        0.025           0.417     0.026     0.272       0.034         0.272      0.038




70
     54   O¢ ce workers                             -0.162        0.062           -0.231    0.025     0.103       -0.039        0.180      -0.008
                                                     0.307        0.041           0.469     0.041     0.253       0.075         0.367      0.044

     62   Skilled industrial workers                 1.250        -0.016          1.530     -0.002    -1.013      0.139         -1.158     0.153
                                                     0.752        0.031           0.835     0.038     0.546       0.097         0.627      0.097

     63   Skilled manual laborers                    6.196        0.064           4.460     0.132     -3.435      0.208         -2.687     0.273
                                                     2.536        0.190           2.264     0.211     1.795       0.234         1.755      0.233

     64   Drivers                                    0.941        -0.054          0.606     -0.063    -0.317      0.145         -0.145     0.139
                                                     0.546        0.051           0.726     0.060     0.500       0.060         0.624      0.069

     67   Low skill industrial workers              -3.255        -0.015          -3.620    -0.048    2.106       -0.178        2.451      -0.230
                                                     1.668        0.053           1.852     0.068     1.186       0.170         1.369      0.174
     Standard errors italicized. Regression results reported in Appendix Tables 25 and 26
