                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      TAX BENEFITS FOR COLLEGE ATTENDANCE

                                       Susan Dynarski
                                     Judith Scott-Clayton

                                     Working Paper 22127
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w22127


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2016




This paper was prepared for the "Economics of Tax Policy" conference, held in Washington, DC
on December 3-4, 2015 and led by the Robert D. Burch Center at UC Berkeley, the Penn
Wharton Public Policy Initiative, and the Urban-Brookings Tax Policy Center. We are grateful to
organizers Alan Auerbach, Kent Smetters, and Len Burman, discussant David Figlio, and
conference participants for helpful feedback. Portions of this paper draw on Dynarski and Scott-
Clayton (2013) and Dynarski, Scott-Clayton, and Wiederspan (2013). CJ Libassi and Mahima
Mahadevan provided research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Susan Dynarski and Judith Scott-Clayton. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Tax Benefits for College Attendance
Susan Dynarski and Judith Scott-Clayton
NBER Working Paper No. 22127
March 2016
JEL No. H2,H52,I22,I28

                                          ABSTRACT

National efforts to promote college enrollment are increasingly delivered through tax-based
assistance, including tax credits and deductions for tuition and fees, tax-advantaged college
savings plans, and student loan interest deductions. This paper outlines the main tax-based
student aid programs and describes their history and growth over time. We then provide an
economic perspective on tax-based student aid, and an assessment of their impact on student
behavior. We conclude with a discussion of what the tax system does particularly well and what it
does particularly poorly in comparison to traditional Department of Education-based student aid
programs, and highlight opportunities for productive reform. At a minimum, a simpler system of
education tax benefits would decrease the administrative and time costs of transferring funds to
households with postsecondary expenses. At best, simplification would clarify incentives and
increase investments in human capital.


Susan Dynarski
University of Michigan
Weill Hall
735 South State Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-3091
and NBER
dynarski@umich.edu

Judith Scott-Clayton
Teachers College
Columbia University
525 W.120th Street, Box 174
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
scott-clayton@tc.columbia.edu
<1> 1. Introduction

           There are many ways a society can finance college, and over time the US has tried almost

all of them. Starting in the 19th Century, state taxpayers funded college education by establishing

public universities, which are now attended by 80 percent of undergraduates. Through the

Morrill Act, the federal government provided each state with a large parcel of land, which states

then sold to raise money for building their colleges. State tax revenues paid for the bulk of

operating expenses of these colleges, allowing them to charge artificially low prices.

           In the 1960s, portable grants and loans emerged as a new source of government funding

for college (Table 2 provides a brief description of key federal programs for postsecondary

education.). With the Higher Education Act of 1965, the federal government established new

loans and grants for college students. Unlike the state subsidies, which are delivered to

institutions, these funds travel with the students, as vouchers, and can be used at any accredited

college – including private colleges. The Pell Grant, introduced in the early 1970s further

expanded federal grants for students; still the largest source of grants for college, the Pell targets

funds on low-income students.

           In recent decades, federal grants and loans have grown even more important, as states

have scaled back on their subsidies to public colleges, which have, in turn, raised tuition prices. 1

Political pressure mounted on politicians to relieve the burden of rising costs, especially among

middle- and upper-income families who were not eligible for the Pell Grant.

           In this context, presidential candidate Bill Clinton proposed major new tax benefits for

college attendance during his 1996 campaign. Since then, the role of the federal tax code in

subsidizing college has expanded rapidly. In 2015, households received $19.7 billion in tax

credits for education (Joint Committee on Taxation [JCT] 2015a). The growth has been sharp
1
    Private colleges have also rapidly increased tuition prices, for reasons debated by economists.


                                                                                                         1
and rapid: in 1998, the figure was $4.9 billion (Bulman and Hoxby 2015a). 2 And the tax credits

are just one of more than a dozen different tax subsidies for education. Table 1 shows that these

tax subsidies together now provide nearly as much support for postsecondary education as does

the Pell Grant program.

                                                [TABLE 1 ABOUT HERE]

                                                [TABLE 2 ABOUT HERE]

           In this paper, we describe the federal tax subsidies for higher education, their history,

their incidence, and their behavioral effects. The federal tax system also includes benefits for

other levels of education, but more than three-quarters of all federal tax expenditures for

education are for college. The tax system subsidizes the families of future college students

through the Coverdell and 529 programs, tax-advantaged savings plans authorized by the federal

and state governments, respectively. The federal and state tax systems subsidize current college

students and their families through tax credits, a deduction for tuition costs and loan interest, an

exclusion of scholarships, grants and tuition reductions from taxable income, and a dependent

exemption for students aged 19 to 23. Finally, the tax code subsidizes former college students

with a deduction for interest paid on student loans.

           The tax subsidies for education are now extensive, complicated, and expensive.

Compelling evidence, using rigorous empirical methods, indicates that the tax credits and tuition

tax deduction (which account for the bulk of the tax expenditures for education) have precisely

zero effect on human capital accumulation. If their intent is to increase schooling, they are a

failure.

           An alternative goal of the tax benefits for education is a transfer to middle-income

families. If so, they are a very leaky bucket, since they impose extensive administrative burdens
2
    Dollars adjusted to 2015 real values unless otherwise noted.


                                                                                                       2
on households, colleges and government. Reducing the tax rates applied to these families would

be a more transparent and less expensive approach to achieving this goal.

         Streamlining the tax benefits for education could potentially enhance their efficiency. At

a minimum, a simpler system of education tax benefits would decrease the administrative and

time costs of transferring funds to households with postsecondary expenses. At best,

simplification would clarify incentives and increase investments in human capital.



<1> 2. Overview of Tax Benefits for Higher Education

<2> 2.1 Rationale and History

         The economic efficiency argument for subsidizing education rests upon the belief that

students, facing market prices for college, will purchase less than the socially optimal level of

college. These suboptimal decisions can result from several factors (see Page & Scott-Clayton

[forthcoming] for a review). First is the presence of social externalities: a college-educated

population may generate benefits to society above and beyond the benefits reaped by individuals,

including improved infant health, reduced reliance on social welfare programs, and increased

civic participation (Oreopoulos & Petronijevic, 2013; Dee, 2004). 3 Second, education may also

involve internalities, or private costs/benefits that are not fully realized at the time of the

decision. For example, individuals may make suboptimal investments because they

underestimate their own return to attending or overestimate the cost. Third, common foibles of

human behavior may result in procrastination, decision avoidance, and default bias in college

planning and decision-making (Lavecchia, Liu, & Oreopoulos 2014). Finally, if prospective


3
  Price subsidies may also be justified if families underestimate the value of college, or are unable to make optimal
investments due to borrowing constraints. Note that these latter two concerns, however, are more commonly cited as
justifications for need-based financial aid than as justifications for the tax benefits, which are not particularly
targeted by income.


                                                                                                                    3
students face credit constraints, they may not be able to borrow enough to make optimal

investments in college. Along with direct institutional subsidies and financial aid, tax benefits are

a policy tool that can lower the effective price of college, and thus encourage families to invest

more in college than they would have otherwise.

       Of course, in practice, tax expenditures may serve other motivations beyond economic

efficiency, including a desire to redistribute income. Beyond promoting college attendance,

policy discussions around the higher education tax benefits have also reflected a desire to

provide assistance to middle-class families (Crandall-Hollick, 2014; Lederman, 1997). While

targeted tax expenditures may be an economically inefficient means of transferring income to the

middle class (as opposed to altering the underlying tax brackets and tax rates directly), they have

proved more popular and easier to implement than fundamental tax reforms. Thus, even if these

tax benefits do little to promote college enrollment, they may nonetheless serve a transfer

purpose.

       Policymakers have a variety of tools at their disposal for subsidizing education: they can

directly subsidize educational institutions through expenditures, they can directly subsidize

students through student aid or voucher programs, and/or they can implement targeted tax credits

and deductions. At the state and local level, subsidies for both K-12 and postsecondary education

have predominantly taken the form of direct expenditures to public institutions, while at the

federal level, subsidies have predominantly taken the form of direct aid to students.

       The proper role of tax breaks for private spending on education has been a contentious

topic for decades (Moynihan 1978). Private school associations and parents of children in private

schools have long lobbied for tax deductions for private school tuition (see Samwick [2013] for

an analysis of one such proposal). Opponents have viewed such a deduction as a back door to




                                                                                                     4
government funding to religious schools. While a number of states eventually implemented tax

credits for tuition paid at private elementary and secondary schools, federal tuition deductions

and credits for private elementary and secondary schooling were repeatedly proposed and

repeatedly defeated over the years.

        Nonetheless, these early efforts to push for tax benefits for private schooling may have

sown the seeds for the recent expansion of these subsidies in federal postsecondary policy. At

least two major expansions of the federal role in postsecondary finance were conceived as

political responses to pressure to institute a private school tax break for middle-income

constituents: both the Guaranteed Student Loan (introduced in 1965, as part of the Higher

Education Act) and the Middle Income Student Assistance Act (1978), which extended federal

financial aid to middle and upper-income families, emerged as compromise policies during

battles over a tuition tax credit (Hearn 2001).

        From the mid-1960s through the mid-1990s, federal subsidies for higher education

continued to predominantly take the form of student grants and loans. That began to change with

the introduction of the Hope and Lifetime Learning tax credits for postsecondary education in

1997. Since then, the magnitude and scope of federal tax benefits has expanded dramatically,

driven largely by tax credits. As shown in Table 3, the federal government annually spends over

$30 billion dollars on an array of tax benefits for higher education, about two-thirds the amount

provided in federal grants to undergraduates, and more than half the magnitude of all types of

federal expenditures on elementary and secondary education. 4 For context, Table 3 also provides


4
  The Joint Committee on Taxation (JCT) estimates $32 billion in tax benefits for postsecondary education in 2015
(see Table 1). The College Board (2015) estimates $45 billion in federal grants for postsecondary education in 2013-
14. Note that the JCT estimate includes both undergraduate and graduate benefits. U.S. Department of Education
estimates total federal expenditures of $57 billion on elementary and secondary education in 2012-13 (NCES Digest
of Education Statistics, Table 235.10. "Revenues for public elementary and secondary schools, by source of funds:
Selected years, 1919-20 through 2012-13.”
https://nces.ed.gov/programs/digest/d15/tables/dt15_235.10.asp?current=yes).


                                                                                                                  5
information on federal tax benefits for other levels of education (the largest of these, the

deduction for charitable contributions to educational institutions, may apply to any level of

education).

                                          [INSERT TABLE 3 HERE]

         Below, we discuss each of the major existing federal tax benefits for college enrollment

in more detail, along with a brief summary of related benefits that we place outside the scope of

this discussion. [Note: the role of tax benefits for education has grown over time at the state level

as well, particularly in recent years in the form of tax-advantaged college savings programs. We

will not provide a survey of state programs, however, since they are dwarfed in magnitude by the

federal subsidies.]

<2> 2.2 Federal Tax Credits and Deductions for Currently Enrolled Students

         The most longstanding tax benefit for households with college students is the dependent

deduction. While children are generally considered independent for tax purposes after age

eighteen, the age limit is extended through twenty-three if the child is enrolled in school. This tax

break allows families to save up to several thousand dollars a year for each child enrolled in

college because parents can claim a dependent exemption for the student (thus reducing their

taxable income), or qualify for the Earned Income Tax Credit (a refundable credit for low-

income families). These provisions save households up to several thousand dollars a year for

each child enrolled in college and were estimated to cost $4.5 billion in 2015 (Crandall-Hollick

2016).

         In 1996 Bill Clinton, then a candidate for the presidency, proposed a tax credit for the first

two years of college costs. After Clinton’s election, this proposal took shape as the Hope and




                                                                                                      6
Lifetime Learning Credits, introduced in 1997. These allowed families of college students to

offset their educational costs with tax credits of up to $1,500 a year.

      The new credits remained largely unchanged for 10 years, with minor tweaks to their

maximum values and AGI phase-out ranges. But the number of households receiving the credits

rose by more than half, from about 4.5 million filers in 1998 to 7.5 million in 2008. The credits

totaled $7.6 billion in the 2008 tax year.

       Responding to critiques that the existing programs were of limited benefit to low-income

families, presidential candidate Barack Obama proposed a tax credit that would cover a broader

range of educational expenses than the Hope Credit, and would be partially refundable for

families with zero tax liability. This proposal took form in 2009 as the American Opportunity

Tax Credit (AOTC), a renamed and modified version of the Hope credit. AOTC was created as

part of the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 and temporarily replaced the

HOPE Credit for 2009 and 2010. AOTC was extended through 2017 by the American Taxpayer

Relief Act of 2012, and made permanent in late 2015 by the Protecting Americans from Tax

Hikes (PATH) Act of 2015.

       As of 2015, the maximum benefit for the AOTC is $2,500, with $1,000 refundable. All of

the first $2,000 in qualifying expenses is eligible for the credit, and 25% of an additional $2,000.

Eligible expenses include course-related books and supplies. This allows students attending low-

tuition public institutions to access more of the credit. Students are allowed to claim the credit

for four years of undergraduate education (unlike Hope, which was limited to 2 years). Like the

former Hope Credit, the AOTC is available for all eligible students in the household; by contrast,

only one Lifetime Learning Credit may be claimed per household (Department of the Treasury,

Internal Revenue Service 2011).




                                                                                                     7
        With the introduction of the AOTC, the cost of the tax credits rose sharply. In 2010,

spending on the AOTC was nearly $19 billion, comparable to annual spending on the Pell Grant

program just a few years earlier (Crandall-Hollick 2014b; College Board 2011). Combined

spending on the AOTC and the much smaller LLC was estimated at approximately $20 billion in

2015, compared with $30 billion for the Pell program (Crandall-Hollick 2016; College Board

2015).Since 2002, families not claiming one of the education tax credits have been able to deduct

up to $4,000 in tuition fees from income (even if they do not itemize).The benefit has been

repeatedly extended, most recently by the PATH Act of 2015, which extended the deduction

through 2016. 5 Additionally, up to $2,500 in interest on student loans is deductible from taxable

income, for households with incomes up to $80,000 (single) or $160,000 (married) (Crandall-

Hollick 2014a).

<2> 2.3 Federal Savings Incentives for Prospective College Students

        In parallel with the tax credits, a set of tax benefits intended to increase education saving

has emerged. In 1997, the same legislation that established the tax credits created the Education

IRA, now called the Coverdell Education Savings Account (ESA). The Coverdell is structured

much like the Roth IRA, with after-tax dollars growing tax-free. Earnings are never taxed if

Coverdell withdrawals are used for education expenses. The Coverdell can be used for

elementary or secondary education, as well as for higher education. The Coverdell currently

allows for annual, after-tax deposits of up to $2,000. The far more generous contribution limits

for the 529 vary by state: cumulative contribution limits for a beneficiary range from $250,000

to $400,000 (Crandall-Hollick, 2015).



5
 The benefit was originally set to expire in 2005, but in 2006 it was extended to cover 2006 and 2007; in 2008, it
was extended to cover 2008 and 2009; and in 2010, it was extended to cover 2010 and 2011. For 2011, the income
limit for this benefit was $80,000 for single filers or $160,000 for joint returns.


                                                                                                                     8
       While the Coverdell is a product of federal legislation, 529 savings plans are an invention

of the states. The 529 savings plans have their roots in prepaid tuition plans, the first of which

was introduced by Michigan in 1986. Those who purchased shares in Michigan’s plan were

guaranteed that their investment would cover the cost of a certain number of semesters at

Michigan schools. Michigan exempted investment returns in its prepaid plan from state taxes,

and argued to the Internal Revenue Service that returns should also be exempted from federal

taxes. The IRS disagreed, but Michigan went forward with the plan and sued the IRS for a refund

of taxes paid, winning its case in 1994.

       In 1997, Congress codified the federal tax treatment of the tuition plans in Internal

Revenue Code Section 529. IRC 529 also contains language that recognized a variant on the

prepaid plans that had been introduced by a handful of states: the tax-advantaged college savings

plan. Like the Coverdell, these new savings plans allowed after-tax investments to grow free of

federal and state taxes; however, withdrawals used for postsecondary costs were not exempt

from federal taxation. With the passage of tax reform in 2001, the federal tax on withdrawals

from 529 savings plans was eliminated.3 States that did not already have a savings plan quickly

established one. The growth of the 529 savings plans has far outstripped that of the prepaid

plans, likely because of their greater fungibility and potentially higher returns.

       While these benefits may appear small from the lens of federal tax expenditures, this lens

may understate the role of these programs, which are ultimately intended to use the tax benefit to

leverage much larger private investments in education. Whether or not they actually do so is not

straightforward to determine, as we will discuss below. What is clear is that the volume of assets

held in these accounts has grown substantially over time: 529 accounts include over $250 billion

in assets under management nationally, up from about $10 billion in 2000 and $80 billion in




                                                                                                     9
2005 (College Savings Plans Network 2015). In addition, Coverdell accounts held about $7

billion dollars in mutual funds in 2014 (Investment Company Institute 2016). As these accounts

are drawn down in the coming decades, their revenue consequences will increase.

<2> 2.4 Other Tax Benefits for Postsecondary Education

       Of the higher education tax benefits outlined in Table 1, it is clear that the tax credits are

by far the largest, representing more than two-thirds of the total. But additional benefits accrue to

students after graduation, in the form of student loan interest deductions and student loan

forgiveness. Up to $2,500 in interest on student loans is deductible from taxable income for

households with incomes up to $80,000 (single) or $160,000 (married). This deduction is for

interest on any student loans, not just federal loans. This deduction was estimated to cost $1.4

billion in tax revenue in 2014 (Crandall-Hollick 2014a). With rapid increases in the share of

middle- income families carrying student loan debt (Simon and Barry 2012), this amount is

projected to grow to $2.4 billion in 2019 (JCT 2015a).

       The exclusion of some discharged student loans, in contrast, is estimated to cost only

about $200 million each year and has remained flat over time. For those aware of the increasing

generosity of income-based student loan repayment programs, which forgive remaining debt

after 20 or 25 years depending on the program, this may come as a surprise. The reason for the

limited tax expenditure on these exclusions is that only loans forgiven for working for a certain

period of time in “certain professions” or “a broad class of employers” are excluded (IRS 2015).

Thus, while balances discharged under the Public Service Loan Forgiveness or Teacher Loan

Forgiveness programs are tax-exempt, those discharged under any of the income-driven

repayment plans are taxable as income. Moreover, the primary cost of any type of loan




                                                                                                    10
forgiveness program is the loan balance itself, not the potential income tax foregone, but only the

latter is a tax expenditure.

        The biggest tax benefit for education outside of the higher education tax credits is the

deduction for charitable contributions to educational institutions, estimated to cost $6.2 billion in

2015, rising to $7.1 billion in 2019. While it is not possible with the JCT data to separate how

much of this tax expenditure is due to postsecondary giving, experts estimate that 60-70 percent

of all charitable giving in education is for higher education (Tyson 2014). The Council for Aid to

Education, which conducts an annual institutional survey, estimates that postsecondary

institutions received $40.3 billion in charitable contributions in 2015, the highest level since the

survey began in 1957 (Council for Aid to Education, 2016).

        Allowing households to deduct their charitable donations provides an incentive for them

to give more than they would have otherwise. The policy rationale for such an incentive is that it

encourages support of institutions that provide broader social value (Randolph, 2015). Critics

have questioned, however, whether postsecondary charitable giving is always in the public

interest given the unequal distribution of contributions across institutions. Of the $40 billion

donated to postsecondary education, 17 elite institutions accounted for more than $10 billion in

donations received (Lederman, 2016). Many of these same institutions also receive

disproportionate benefits from the tax-exempt treatment of their endowment gains and land

holdings (Woodhouse, 2015).



<1> 3. The Incidence and Impact of Tax Benefits for Higher Education

<2> 3.1 Empirical Challenges




                                                                                                   11
           Understanding the economic incidence of these tax benefits is critical, whether the goal is

to change behavior, redistribute resources, or both. Assessing incidence can be tricky, however,

for at least three reasons. First, any individual tax benefit may interact with other provisions in

the tax code (or federal financial aid system) in complex ways. Most obviously, who benefits

most from a tax deduction depends not just on the parameters of the deduction itself, but also on

marginal tax rates. Claiming one tax credit also may affect eligibility for claiming another.

           Second, take-up is never perfect: not all who qualify for a tax benefit will claim it. In

some cases the decision not to claim may be a reasoned one; for example, a family may decide

that the value of current consumption is greater than the value of saving for college. In other

cases, confusion and bureaucratic hurdles may serve as barriers to take-up.

           Finally, the incidence of a tax benefit may be affected by the responses of other people or

firms. For example, schools could capture some of the benefits of the tax subsidies by increasing

tuition or reducing aid.

           A full assessment of incidence thus requires far more than a description of eligibility

criteria, phase-in and phase-out regions, and benefit calculations. At a minimum it requires

detailed data on actual tax records for taxpayers of varying characteristics; it may also require

information on possible institutional responses and an identification strategy for identify causal

effects.

           For those who do receive a benefit from these subsidies, is it a pure transfer, or do the tax

benefits increase college enrollment, or increase the quality/intensity of college enrollment? A

naïve comparison of college enrollments among those that received the tax benefit versus those

that did not would be contaminated by reverse causality, because those that do not enroll in

college cannot claim the associated tax benefits. In other words, college enrollment may




                                                                                                       12
determine whether or not a person is “treated” by the tax benefit rather than the other way

around.

        To estimate the causal impact of the tax benefits requires comparing similar groups, one

that is potentially eligible for the benefit and one that is not, for reasons that are unrelated to

potential college enrollment. Since income largely determines eligibility for the tax benefits, and

income has its own effects on college enrollment, it is difficult to isolate the effect of the tax

benefits themselves. The most credible estimates of the impact of the education tax credits utilize

quasi-experimental approaches. Several studies take advantage of changes over time in the

availability or generosity of benefits for observably similar tax filers, while two studies utilize

rich administrative data to compare families just above and just below discontinuities or kinks in

the eligibility formula. These quasi-experimental analyses are described in more detail below.

        Estimating the impact of the education savings incentives and student loan interest

deductions is yet more challenging, because decades can separate college enrollment and the

receipt of benefits. For example, families may benefit from education savings incentives for

nearly two decades before children reach the age of college enrollment. A difference-in-

difference analysis comparing families of, say, 10-year-olds, just before and after the

introduction or expansion of savings benefits is unlikely to yield clear findings, since the

“treated” group of families is eligible for the benefit for eight years prior to college-age while the

“control” group is eligible for only one year less. Attempting to identify a completely unaffected

group would require examining families at different points in time, during which other factors

may intervene to contaminate the comparison. These challenges may explain why there is far

more research on the impact of the tuition tax credits and deductions rather than on the college

savings and student loan benefits.




                                                                                                      13
<2> 3.2. Economic Incidence: Who Benefits?

<3> 3.2.1 Incidence of the Tax Credits

      From their inception, the LLC and former HOPE credit have primarily benefited middle-

and upper-income families. At very low AGIs (below $10,000), families did not qualify for the

credits because they had insufficient tax liability (and the credits were not refundable). Even for

those with higher AGIs, the value of the credits could be limited by the definition of allowable

expenses, which consisted only of tuition and fees. A typical, low-income student attending a

community college with average tuition and fees of $3,322 in 2012-13 (National Center for

Education Statistics, 2013) and receiving the average Pell Grant of $3,678 (College Board, 2014)

would have had no expenses eligible for Hope or LLC. For a middle-income student attending a

more expensive private college and not receiving any grant aid, allowable expenses would

generate the maximum tax credit.

       The AOTC reaches higher-income families than did the Hope credit. The AGI cap on the

AOTC is considerably higher than that on the Hope Credit: $180,000 for a joint return. Before

AOTC, 18% of the dollars devoted to the education tax credits and deductions went to families

with incomes over $100,000; the figure for 2012 was 24% (College Board, 2014). The AGI cap

on the AOTC is higher than that on any of the other credits or deductions. High-income

households that were once only eligible for the tuition tax deduction are now eligible for the

more-generous AOTC. As a result, the share of households claiming the deduction has dropped

while the share claiming the credits has risen. There is no guarantee that households always

choose the benefit of greatest value, however. Turner (2011a) finds that families often fail to

optimize, likely due to the complexity of understanding the different eligibility rules and benefit

calculations and how they interact with other elements in the tax calculation.




                                                                                                   14
       The AOTC also benefits low-income families more than the old HOPE credit, for two

reasons. First, because the AOTC is partially refundable, families can benefit from the credit

even if their income is too low to owe any income taxes. Second, unlike the original HOPE

credit, the AOTC covers not just tuition and fees but also course-related books, supplies, and

equipment. This allows low-income students to benefit even if their tuition and fees are already

fully covered by financial aid. As a result, expenditures for low-AGI families have increased:

pre-AOTC 5% of the credit and tuition deduction dollars went to filers with incomes under

$25,000; in 2012 the share was 24%.

       Another factor that affects incidence is how financial aid changes in response to the

receipt of these tax credits. In the federal financial aid formula, taxes paid are deducted from

income; thus in general anything that reduces taxes paid will increase ability to pay in the eyes of

the aid formula. To avoid having the education tax credits unintentionally reduce financial aid

eligibility, the FAFSA currently requires information on the amount of AOTC and LLC

received. In practice, however, these and other tweaks to the basic aid formula—which depends

most heavily on family income, family size, and number in college—have little effect on Pell

Grant or student loan eligibility (Dynarski, Scott-Clayton & Wiederspan 2013). Institutional aid

may be more sensitive: Nicholas Turner (2012) finds evidence that some colleges may reduce

grant assistance nearly dollar-for-dollar for students eligible for tax-based aid.

<3> 3.2.2 Incidence of Savings Incentives

       The benefits of education savings accounts rise sharply with income, since those with the

highest marginal tax rates benefit the most from sheltering capital income from taxation. These

additional deductions have little to no value for low-income families, who often take the standard

deduction rather than itemize and who face relatively low marginal tax rates. Further, the




                                                                                                   15
accounts are risky for families for whom the college attendance of children is uncertain, since

account holders are penalized if the accounts are not used for schooling (Dynarski 2004). Finally,

the financial aid system reduces aid disproportionately for those families that hold their assets in

the 529 or ESA rather than conventional saving vehicles. Since the highest-income families are

unaffected by the aid tax, this further intensifies the positive correlation between income and the

advantages of the tax-advantaged college savings accounts.

3.3 Behavioral Impacts of the Tuition Tax Credits and Deduction

       Long (2004) is the first to provide a quasi-experimental analysis of the impact of

education tax credits on college enrollment. Using annual data from the October Current

Population Survey (CPS) from 1990-2000, she identifies families potentially eligible for a

education tax credit based on income and tax filing status (single or joint return). She uses a

difference-in-difference approach to compare college enrollment rates for potentially eligible

versus ineligible households, before and after the introduction of the Hope and Lifetime Learning

Credits in 1998.

       Long finds no evidence that college enrollments increased faster among eligible groups,

and hypothesizes that this could be due to lack of awareness among families on the margin of

college enrollment. She notes, however, that the CPS data are not ideally suited to the analysis:

income is measured in ranges, making it difficult to precisely determine eligibility and

potentially attenuating the effect estimates; moreover, for young adults, the availability of family

income depends upon whether they are still part of their parents’ household, which is itself

potentially determined by college enrollment status.

       Two later studies using smaller samples with more accurate information on family

income and later years of data found some positive enrollment effects of the introduction of the




                                                                                                    16
tax credits. LaLumia (2010) uses an individual fixed-effects approach, comparing eligible

individuals’ enrollment status before and after the introduction of the tax credits and tuition

deduction in 1998, with data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979 (NLSY-79).

The advantage of this analysis is more detailed data on family income and a window of data

extending to 2006, giving the tax benefits more time to have an effect. The disadvantage is that,

due to the age of the sample, effects can only be estimated for older individuals (33 to 50), a

group for whom college enrollment is relatively rare. LaLumia finds no effect of the benefits on

enrollment for the sample overall, though positive effects are found for adults whose educational

attainment in 1998 fell below their expectations in 1979.

       Turner (2011b) applies a difference-in-difference using data from the Survey of Income

and Program Participation (SIPP) from 1996-2003. But unlike the prior papers, Turner (2011b)

focuses not on comparing eligible versus ineligible groups around the introduction of the tax

credits, but in changes in the generosity of tax-based aid (including the tuition deduction) for

eligible groups over time. In particular, changes to the tuition deduction in 2002 and increases in

the generosity of the LLC in 2003 created differential increases in potential aid among eligible

groups. Turner (2011) focuses on 18-19 year olds and finds that an extra $100 of tax-based aid

increases college enrollment by 0.4 percentage points – an estimate in line with the magnitudes

of enrollment effects found for grant aid (see Dynarski and Scott-Clayton, 2013 for a review of

the impacts of financial aid).

       The positive findings in Turner (2011b) are surprising in light of other work by the same

author (Turner 2011a, Turner 2012) finding that families often fail to optimize their choice of tax

benefit and that colleges reduce grant assistance nearly dollar-for-dollar for students eligible for

tax-based aid. Turner (2011b) notes that these seemingly contradictory findings may be due to




                                                                                                   17
differences in the sample examined (Turner 2012 focuses on four-year institutions, which have

the most grant aid to crowd out, while the enrollment effects in Turner 2011b may be driven by

two-year enrollees, although the SIPP do not allow him to differentiate). An alternative concern,

however, is that institutional aid may be increasing differentially for the same income groups

affected by the increasing generosity of tax benefits over this time period, generating possibly

spurious estimates of the impact of tax-based aid.

       Two recent papers by Bulman and Hoxby (2015) and Hoxby and Bulman (forthcoming)

provide the most definitive evidence on the enrollment effects of tax-based aid. Both papers

utilize rich, individual-level administrative data from the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) on the

population of potential tax return filers. These data include income and tax data from income tax

forms as well as W-2 data from non-filers; enrollment information is derived from Form 1098t

data, which institutions use to directly report to the IRS information on individuals’ enrollment

intensity and tuition and fee payments. The precise data on income and extremely large number

of observations enables them to utilize regression discontinuity and regression kink analyses

around eligibility cutoffs and phase-out regions, in addition to using a difference-in-difference to

examine the effect of the introduction of the AOTC in 2009.

       Bulman and Hoxby (2015) use a regression kink design to examine the effect of the HTC

and LLC for filers at the boundaries of the phase-out regions of each credit. The intuition behind

the design is that in the absence of the “kink” in tax credit eligibility, we should expect the

relationship between income and college enrollment to change smoothly. In many applications,

however, data limitations make it quite challenging to distinguish a true “kink” from an abrupt

but nonetheless smooth change in the outcome distribution. Given the vast data at their disposal,

this is not a concern in their analysis. They show clear kinks in actual usage of the tax credits in




                                                                                                    18
the expected directions over these phase-out regions, but no corresponding kink in enrollment

behavior.

         In a second analysis, Bulman and Hoxby examine the introduction of the AOTC in 2009,

using a difference-in-difference approach that makes use of the fact that the AOTC increased

tax-based aid differentially for filers at various points in the income distribution. They find very

precisely estimated zero effects on enrollment.

         Finally, Hoxby and Bulman (forthcoming) use a regression-discontinuity design to

estimate the effects of the tuition tax deduction for families around the maximum income cutoff

for eligibility. They find evidence that families manage income to fall just below the cutoff, but

using an “optimal doughnut-hole” design that determines which observations are in the

manipulable range around the cutoff and then discards these, they find no evidence that the

deduction impacts college enrollment decisions (or other margins such as enrollment intensity,

enrollment in a four-year college, tuition paid, or student loans taken). 6

<2> 3.4 Behavioral Effects of the Savings Incentives

         Descriptive research has found that family assets and savings are correlated with

children’s college enrollment and progress (see review by Elliott & Beverly, 2011). But

estimating the causal impact of the college savings plans on college enrollments is extremely

challenging for the reasons discussed above. Still, research on other related programs may be at

least somewhat informative regarding the likely effects of the program at least on more proximal

outcomes such as college savings behavior.




6
 It is worth noting that because families may be eligible for both the AOTC and the deduction for tuition and fees,
but can only take one or the other, the families who are most affected by the cutoff for the tuition and fees deduction
are those who are not eligible for AOTC (e.g., beyond four years of undergraduate education or enrolled less than
half time).


                                                                                                                    19
           For example, a recent randomized experiment examines the effect of additional

incentives for educational savings. Part of a broader national initiative to promote Savings for

Education, Entrepreneurship, and Downpayment (SEED) accounts, the SEED for Oklahoma

Kids (SEED OK) program in 2008 automatically opened a 529 account for infants in the

treatment group with an initial $1,000 deposit. The program additionally encouraged parents to

open a second “participant-owned” 529 account by offering a $100 account-opening incentive

and a savings match for low-income families. 7 Approximately a year and a half after treatment

assignment, 16 percent of families in the treatment group had an individually-owned 529

account, compared with only about 2 percent of families in the control group, though the treated

families did not save significantly more overall (Nam, Kim, Clancy, Zager, & Sherraden, 2012). 8

Though the children in the study families are very young, and impacts may grow over time, in

some ways these results highlight how difficult it is to promote these accounts.



<1> 4. Policy Discussion

<2> 4.1 Increasing Complexity

           With dozens of tax and aid programs available, two-thirds of students are now eligible for

some sort of discount on their college costs. The increasing scope and diversity of subsidies for

education implies increased complexity—both for students trying to estimate their college costs

and for policy makers trying to ensure coherence across programs. The proliferation of

programs, each well-intentioned, has created a system that makes it difficult for families—

especially “first-generation” families in which neither parent has attended college—to know just

how affordable college can be. Calculating the net price of college for a given family requires


7
    The match was 1:1 for families with AGI below $29K and 0.5:1 for families with AGI between $29K and $43K.
8
    Unsurprisingly, nearly 100 percent of the treatment group accepted the automatic account.


                                                                                                                20
understanding their finances as well as the rules of the Pell Grant, student loans, the tuition tax

credits, state grant programs, and aid offered by individual colleges. Evidence suggests that

students are quite poor at estimating net prices.

         A symptom of the general confusion is that some aid goes unclaimed: the Government

Accountability Office recently calculated that 14 percent of families eligible for an education tax

benefit failed to claim it. Forty percent of filers who used the tuition tax deduction would have

been better off claiming one of the tax credits instead.

         The Government Accountability Office has found that many families do not choose the

tax advantage that would most benefit them. Families can choose among the AOTC, LLC,

tuition tax deduction, or disbursement from a 529 or Coverdell to cover current expenses.

Different types of expenditures (tuition, books, living expenses) qualify for some of these but not

others. GAO found that about 15% percent of filers made a suboptimal choice, suggesting

substantial confusion among filers and tax preparers (U.S. Government Accountability Office,

2012).

<2> 4.2 Suitability of Tax System for Delivering Subsidies to Schooling Costs

         In 2011, the Treasury Inspector General for Tax Administration (TIGTA) released a

report highly critical of the administration of the AOTC (Treasury Inspector General for Tax

Administration, 2011). TIGTA inspected the income tax returns that claimed in AOTC in 2009,

the first year of the credit, and found ambiguities in two million returns qualifying for $3 billion

in credits. Most of these flagged returns lacked a Form 1098-T by the IRS that support students’

attendance at an eligible college. The same colleges that qualify for federal financial aid qualify

for the tax credits, so this reflects a failure of coordination between the U.S. Department of

Education (hereafter, ED), which has a constantly-updated list of eligible institutions, and the




                                                                                                      21
IRS which failed to obtain it. The report pointedly referred IRS to a publicly-available dataset of

institutions in the Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System.

        The report also noted that institutions inconsistently fill out the 1098-T, the information

return that is used to report eligible postsecondary expenses to IRS. The intent of this form is to

gather information about a student’s costs net of any scholarship aid. The TIGTA concluded that

some colleges fail to net out scholarships. TIGTA also identified 350,000 cases in which a

household received a credit even though the information on the 1098-T indicated they did not

fulfill at least one of the eligibility criteria (at least half-time, undergraduate). The report

emphasized that reducing fraud and error in the education credits will require better gathering of

information from taxpayers and postsecondary institutions.

        IRS defended its performance in its response in the TIGTA report, indicating that fraud

was not nearly as rampant as the report implied (Treasury Inspector General for Tax

Administration, 2011). In particular, IRS noted that while TIGTA report correctly noted that

millions of AOTC recipients had not had their postsecondary institutions confirmed, this was due

not to fraudulent filings but to weaknesses in the IRS’s databases of eligible institutions, which

they pledged to improve.

        In response to the TIGTA report, legislation was introduced to the House to tighten

administration of the AOTC. The proposed legislation would require that taxpayers list the

employer identification number of a student’s postsecondary institution. In theory, this should be

present on the 1098-T, but apparently some institutions listed incorrectly.

        None of these administrative challenges are insurmountable. The TIGTA is holding IRS

to a degree of oversight that ED has maintained over colleges for decades. However, while ED

has all of the necessary lists and procedures and lines of communication in place, IRS is




                                                                                                     22
relatively new to the student aid game. Until the agency gets its procedures into place, the

opportunities for error and fraud are widened. The TIGTA report warns, however, that improving

these procedures may create additional paperwork burdens for families and colleges.

       With the rapid growth of the tax credits, an increasing number of students now complete

paperwork for both the IRS and the US Department of Education in order to obtain college

funding. And there is more paperwork on the horizon for families and colleges, with the

Treasury Inspector General putting pressure on the IRS to obtain more documentation from

applicants and colleges regarding their eligibility for the tax credits. If carried through, these

steps will largely duplicate the work that ED already does in administering the traditional aid

programs and multiply paperwork burdens on households and colleges.

       ED and IRS bring complementary strengths to the administration of aid for college. ED

has long experience in delivering aid to students and communicating with colleges. IRS has a

well-developed capacity for gathering and verifying income data from households. Conversely,

IRS has little experience with verifying student enrollment and delivering aid when it is needed.

And while ED has long experience in gathering income data from applicants, it does so by

imposing substantial paperwork burdens upon households and colleges. Just one example:

colleges are statutorily required to “verify” a minimum of 30% of their aid applications each

year, an auditing process that requires applicants to submit extra supporting documentation,

including copies of tax returns. Some colleges audit 100% of their aid applications. Were tax

data alone used to calculate aid eligibility, the data underlying all applications would

automatically be verified, since it would come from the IRS rather than the applicant.

<2> 4.3 Prospects for Reform




                                                                                                     23
       When choosing a path forward, it is critical to keep this in mind: the tax credits and

tuition tax deduction apparently have no effect on human capital accumulation. Until this year,

economists strongly suspected that this was the case, but recent evidence based on the universe

of household tax records (Bulman and Hoxby 2015, Hoxby and Bulman forthcoming) is

dispositive. The tax credits and tax deduction, which account for most of the tax expenditures for

postsecondary education, do not affect schooling decisions. While part of the explanation may

be that institutions capture some of these tax benefits via reductions in financial aid (Turner

2012), Hoxby and Bulman (forthcoming) argue that the main explanation relates to how and

when these benefits are received. In particular, tax benefits may not be realized until nearly a

year after an enrollment decision is first made, and because the benefits are delivered as part of

the income tax filing process, the authors argue that they are more likely to be perceived simply

as a windfall rather than as an incentive for educational investment.

       To achieve the goal of increasing human capital investments, the tax incentives would

have to be restructured so that they are targeted at households whose investments are plausibly

sensitive to price, and delivered when schooling expenses are being paid. One proposal

suggested by Hoxby and Bulman (forthcoming) would be to compute eligibility for the credits

automatically using income tax information in the year an individual turns 17, rather than the

year of enrollment, and proactively notify prospective students of their eligibility. In addition,

they propose that institutions could file to receive the benefits directly from the IRS, so that a

student would only need to present evidence of eligibility in order to have the institution credit

their account immediately upon enrollment.

       An even more comprehensive approach would be to consolidate the credits with the Pell

Grant program, creating a single grant program that subsidizes, at the time that tuition is due, the




                                                                                                     24
postsecondary expenses of low- and middle-income families. Eligibility for this program could

automatically be determined using tax data, with funds delivered by the Department of

Education. As described in Dynarski and Scott-Clayton (2007), families could apply for a

consolidated grant by simply checking off a box on their income tax forms. While IRS has all

the data needed to determine grant eligibility, the Department of Education has the infrastructure

in place to deliver funds to schools. We therefore suggest that the role of the IRS be limited to

forwarding applicants’ adjusted gross income, dependency status, and number of dependents to

the Department of Education, which will calculate aid eligibility and send vouchers directly to

the institutions at which students are enrolled. This consolidation would eliminate the duplicative

administrative burdens now placed upon colleges and households by Treasury and ED. Treasury

has a comparative advantage in calculating ability to pay, given it already serves this function for

the income tax system. ED has a comparative advantage in delivering funds to schools and

colleges, given it already serves this function with the Pell and Stafford loan programs. Dynarski

and Scott-Clayton (2007) show that the existing combined distribution of Pell awards and tax

credits could be replicated using only information available from income tax records. While a

natural concern is that lots of wealthy families may suddenly qualify for aid if assets are not

considered (as they are in the current federal student aid application), Dynarski and Scott-

Clayton (2007) show that vanishingly few families with incomes low enough to qualify for Pell

Grants have assets that would disqualify them for an award. 9

         The goal of the education tax incentives could instead be redefined as explicitly

redistributive: the transfer of income to households with postsecondary expenses. In this case,

the transfer should be achieved at the lowest cost possible to households, government and


9
 This is due both to low levels of assets in general, as well as the fact that most assets are in the form of primary
housing or retirement accounts, both of which are excluded in the federal financial aid formula.


                                                                                                                        25
colleges. A relatively straightforward subsidy to postsecondary education is already embedded in

the dependent deduction, which applies to children up to age 24 if they are enrolled in college.

This provision also extends eligibility for the EITC. A single, refundable credit could be created

to make the subsidy more generous. Currently, the AOTC is calculated as 100 percent of the first

$2,000 in expenses and 25 percent of the next $2,000, but just 40 percent of this total is

refundable. A simplified credit could be equal to 100 percent of eligible expenses (up to a limit)

and fully refundable.

       The tax benefits for education are a costly way to reduce the tax burden on middle-

income families, imposing extensive administrative costs on households, colleges and

government. Reducing the tax rates applied to these families would be a more transparent and

less expensive approach to achieving this goal. At a minimum, a simpler system of education tax

benefits would decrease the administrative and time costs of transferring funds to households

with postsecondary expenses. At best, simplification would clarify incentives and increase

investments in human capital.




                                                                                                   26
                                               References



Avery, Christopher, and Thomas. J. Kane. 2004. “Student Perceptions of College Opportunities. The

     Boston COACH Program.” In College Choices: The Economics of Where to Go, When to Go,

     and How to Pay for It, edited by Caroline Hoxby, 355-384. Chicago: University of Chicago

     Press.



Baum, Sandy R., and Jennifer Ma. 2011. “Trends in College Pricing.” Trends in Higher Education

     Series. College Board.

     https://trends.collegeboard.org/sites/default/files/College_Pricing_2011.pdf (accessed March 3,

     2016).



Bulman, George, and Caroline Hoxby. 2015. “The Returns to the Federal Tax Credits for Higher

     Education.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 20833.



Camp, Dave. 2014. “H.R.5771 - 113th Congress (2013-2014): To Amend the Internal Revenue Code

     of 1986 to Extend Certain Expiring Provisions and Make Technical Corrections, to Amend the

     Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to Provide for the Tax Treatment of ABLE Accounts Established

     under State Programs for the Care of Family Members with Disabilities, and for Other Purposes.

     [legislation].” December 19.




                                                                                                   27
College Board. 2013. “Trends in Student Aid.” Trends in Higher Education Series.

     http://trends.collegeboard.org/sites/default/files/student-aid-2013-full-report.pdf (accessed March

     3, 2016).



College Savings Plan Network. 2015. “529 Plan Data (Reporting Date: December 31, 2015).”

     http://www.collegesavings.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/09/Dec-2015.pdf (accessed March 3,

     2016).



Council for Aid to Education. 2016. “Colleges and Universities Raise Record $40.30 Billion in

     2015.” Press release, January 27. http://cae.org/fundraising-in-education/survey-results-other-

     research/annual-press-release/ (accessed March 3, 2016).



Crandall-Hollick, Margot. 2014a. “Higher Education Tax Benefits: Brief Overview and Budgetary

     Effects.” Congressional Research Service Report 41967.



Crandall-Hollick, Margot. 2014b. “The American Opportunity Tax Credit: Overview, Analysis, and

     Policy Options.” Congressional Research Service Report 42561.



Crandall-Hollick, Margot. 2015. “Tax-Preferred College Savings Plans: An Introduction to 529

     Plans.” Congressional Research Service Report 42807.



Crandall-Hollick, Margot. 2016. “Higher Education Tax Benefits: Brief Overview and Budgetary

     Effects.” Congressional Research Service Report 41967.




                                                                                                       28
Dynarski, Susan. 2004. “Who Benefits from the Education Saving Incentives? Income, Educational

    Expectations and the Value of the 529 and Coverdell.” National Tax Journal 57 (2): 359-383.



Dynarski, Susan, and Judith Scott-Clayton. 2007. “College Grants on a Postcard: A Proposal for

    Simple and Predictable Federal Student Aid.” Hamilton Project Discussion Paper 2007-01.

    Washington, DC: The Brookings Institution.



Dynarski, Susan, and Judith Scott-Clayton. 2013. “Financial Aid Policy: Lessons from

    Research.” Future of Children 23 (1): 67–91.



Dynarski, Susan, Judith Scott-Clayton, and Mark Wiederspan. 2013. “Simplifying Tax Incentives and

    Aid for College: Progress and Prospects.” In Tax Policy and the Economy, edited by Jeffrey

    Brown, 27: 161-201. Cambridge: National Bureau of Economic Research.



Hearn, James C. 2001. “The Paradox of Growth in Federal Aid for College Students, 1960–1990.” In

    The Finance of Higher Education: Theory, Research, Policy, and Practice, edited by Michael B.

    Paulsen and John C. Smart, 267-320. New York: Agathon Press.



Hoxby, Caroline and George Bulman. 2015. “The Returns to the Federal Tax Credits for Higher

    Education.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 21554.




                                                                                                  29
Hoxby, Caroline, and George Bulman. 2016. “The Effects of the Tax Deduction for Postsecondary

     Tuition: Implications for Structuring Tax-Based Aid.” Economics of Education Review.

     Forthcoming.



Investment Company Institute. 2016. “Frequently Asked Questions about Coverdell Education

     Savings Accounts.” https://www.ici.org/pubs/faqs/faqs_coverdell (accessed March 3, 2016).



Joint Committee on Taxation. 2014. “Background and Present Law Related to Tax Benefits for

     Education.” JCX-70-14, June 24.



Joint Committee on Taxation. 2015a. “Estimates of Federal Tax Expenditures for Fiscal Years 2015-

     2019.” JCX-141R-15, December 7.



Joint Committee on Taxation. 2015b. “Estimated Budget Effects of Division Q of Amendment #2 to

     the Senate Amendment to H.R. 2029 (Rules committee print 114-40), the "Protecting Americans

     from Tax Hikes Act of 2015".” JCX-143-15, December 16.



LaLumia, Sara. 2012. “Tax Preferences for Higher Education and Adult College Enrollment.”

     National Tax Journal 65 (1): 59-90.



Lavecchia, Adam M., Heidi Liu, & Philip Oreopoulos. 2014. “Behavioral Economics of Education:

     Progress and Possibilities.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 20609.




                                                                                                 30
Lederman, Doug. 2016. “In Giving to Colleges, the One Percenters Gain.” Inside Higher Ed, January

     27. https://www.insidehighered.com/news/2016/01/27/giving-colleges-hits-another-record-high-

     wealthy-institutions-get-most.



Long, Bridget T. 2004. “The Impact of Federal Tax Credits for Higher Education Expenses.” In

     College Choices: The Economics of Where to Go, When to Go, and How to Pay for It, edited by

     Caroline Hoxby. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.



Moynihan, Daniel P. 1978. “Why Private Schools Merit Public Aid: The Constitutional Case for

     Tuition Tax Credits.” Address to the National Association of Independent Schools Annual

     Conference, New York City, New York.



National Center for Education Statistics. 2013. “Average Undergraduate Tuition and Fees and Room

     and Board Rates Charged for Full-time Students in Degree-granting Postsecondary Institutions,

     by Level and Control of Institution: 1963-64 through 2012-13.” Institute of Education Sciences.

     nces.ed.gov/programs/digest/d13/tables/dt13_330.10.asp (accessed October 29, 2015).



Page, Lindsay, and Judith Scott-Clayton. 2016. “Improving College Access in the United States:

     Barriers and Policy Responses.” Economics of Education Review. Forthcoming.



Randolph, William C. 2015. “Tax Topics: Charitable Deductions.” Tax Policy Center: A joint project

     of the Urban Institute and Brookings Institution.




                                                                                                   31
    http://www.taxpolicycenter.org/taxtopics/encyclopedia/Charitable-Deductions.cfm (accessed

    March 3, 2016).



Silliman, Benjamin. R. 2011. “College Tuition Tax Credits: An Examination of the Impact of the

    American Opportunity, HOPE, and Lifetime Learning Tax Credits Since 1998.” Proceedings of

    American Society of Business and Behavioral Sciences 18:279-88.



Simon, Ruth, and Rob Barry. 2012. “College Debt Hits Well-Off.” Wall Street Journal, August 9.

    http://www.wsj.com/articles/SB10000872396390444246904577575382576303876.



Tax Policy Center. 2016. “The Tax Policy Briefing Book: A Citizens' Guide for the 2016 Election and

    Beyond.” Forthcoming.



Treasury Inspector General for Tax Administration. 2011. “Billions of Dollars in Education Credits

    Appear to Be Erroneous.” Reference Number: 2011-41-083.



Turner, Nicholas. 2011a. “Why Don’t Taxpayers Maximize their Tax- Based Student Aid? Salience

    and Inertia in Program Selection.” B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis and Policy 11 (1): 1-24.



Turner, Nicholas. 2011b. “The Effect of Tax-Based Federal Student Aid on College

    Enrollment.” National Tax Journal 64 (3): 839-62.




                                                                                                     32
Turner, Nicholas. 2012. “Who Benefits from Student Aid? The Economic Incidence of Tax-based

    Federal Student Aid.” Economics of Education Review 31 (4): 463-481.



Tyson, Charlie. 2014. “Still a Charity Case.” Inside Higher Ed, June 17.

    https://www.insidehighered.com/news/2014/06/17/charitable-giving-higher-education-restored-

    pre-recession-levels-report-indicates.



U.S. Government Accountability Office. 2012. “Higher Education: Improved Tax Information Could

    Help Families Pay for College.” GAO-12-560.



Woodhouse, Kellie. 2015. “Widening Wealth Gap.” Inside Higher Ed, May 21.

    https://www.insidehighered.com/news/2015/05/21/rich-universities-get-richer-are-poor-students-

    being-left-behind.




                                                                                                33
                                         Table 1
          Federal Support for Postsecondary Students by Source, 2013 (in Billions)

Tax Credits/Deductions/Exclusions                                              $31.8

Grants                                                                         $48.9
      Pell                                                                       $33.7
      Veterans/Military                                                          $13.8
      Supplemental Educational Opportunity                                        $0.7
      Other                                                                       $0.7

Loans                                                                          $95.9
        Unsubsidized Stafford                                                    $51.9
        Subsidized Stafford                                                      $25.4
        PLUS                                                                     $17.5
        Perkins                                                                   $1.0
        Other                                                                     $0.1

Work-Study                                                                      $1.0

Total Federal Support                                                         $182.9

Notes: Grants, loans, and work study information for 2013-14; tax benefits information for
2013. Loan amounts represent total amounts disbursed (rather than net costs to the
government). Table adapted from College Board (2014) for grants, loans, and work study, and
Crandall-Hollick (2014a) for tax benefits. All values in 2013 constant dollars.




                                                                                              34
                                       Table 2
           Description of Key Federal Programs for Postsecondary Students


                            Federal Tax Credits and Deductions
     Hope Credit       Provided a maximum credit of $1,800 for qualifying expenses relating
                       to tuition and fees, only for students in their first two years of college,
                       and only for families with tax liability. The American Opportunity Tax
                       Credit replaced the Hope credit in 2009.
 Lifetime Learning     Eligible tax filers are able to receive a maximum credit of $2,000 for
    Credit (LLC)       tuition and fees expenses.
American               AOTC replaced the Hope the credit in 2009 and allows for a credit up
 Opportunity Tax       to $2,500 for expenses relating to tuition and fees and course materials.
 Credit (AOTC)         The credit rate is 100 percent for the first $2,000 of expenses and 25
                       percent on the next $2,000. Up to $1,000 of the credit is refundable for
                       families with limited or no tax liability.
   Tuition & Loan      These deductions offer filers a maximum deduction of $4,000 for
 Interest Deductions   expenses relating to tuition and fees. To date, this deduction only
                       extends through 2016.
  Saving Incentives    Interest accumulates tax-free when families save for college using
                       Federal Coverdell accounts and state 529 savings plans. Withdrawals
                       from these accounts are not taxed unless the amount withdrawn is
                       greater than the student’s education expenses.
Dependent Exemption    A parent or guardian has the ability to claim an exemption for a
                       dependent who is between the ages 19 and 23 and is a full-time student.
                       The filer is allowed an exemption of $3,950 per dependent.
                               Federal Student Aid Programs
      Pell Grant       The largest funded need-based aid program in the United States.
                       Currently, students can receive a grant amount up to $5,500. The size
                       of the Pell award depends primarily upon family income and
                       enrollment intensity.
  Unsubsidized &       Subsidized and unsubsidized loans, also known as Stafford Loans, are
 Subsidized Stafford   administered by the federal government through the Federal Direct
       Loans           Loan Program (FDLP). Unsubsidized loans are available to all students
                       regardless of need. With subsidized loans, eligibility is based on need
                       and the federal government pays the interest on these loans while the
                       student is in college. The maximum amount a dependent student can
                       borrow for an undergraduate degree under the Stafford Loan programs
                       is currently $31,000.

Sources: U.S. Government Accountability Office (2012) and Crandall-Hollick (2014a)




                                                                                             35
                                       Table 3
     Estimated Tax Expenditures on Tax Benefits for Education (in Billions of Dollars)

Tax Benefit                                     2015 2016 2017 2018 2019
Benefits exclusively for higher education:
Credits for tuition for post-secondary
education                                       19.7   21.0    21.1   14.8   21.3
Parental personal exemption for students
aged 19 to 23                                    4.5     4.7    4.9    5.2    5.5
Exclusion of scholarship and fellowship
income                                           2.7     2.9    3.0    3.2    3.4
Deduction for interest on student loans          2.0     2.1    2.2    2.3    2.4
Exclusion of employer-provided education
assistance                                       1.2     1.2    1.2    1.3    1.3
Exclusion of tax on earnings of qualified
tuition programs:                                0.7     0.9    1.2    1.4    1.5
Exclusion of employer-provided tuition
reduction benefits                               0.3     0.3    0.3    0.3    0.3
Deduction for tuition and fees                   0.3     0.4    0.2    0.0    0.0
Exclusion of certain discharged student loans
from income                                      0.2     0.2    0.2    0.2    0.2
Exclusion of earnings of Coverdell education
savings accounts                                 0.1    0.1     0.1    0.1    0.1
Subtotal                                        31.7   33.8    34.5   28.8   36.0
Other tax benefits for education:
Deduction for charitable contributions to
educ. institutions                               6.2     6.4    6.6    6.8    7.1
Exclusion of interest on State/local govt
bonds for educational facilities                  2.6     2.6   2.8    2.9     3.1
Qualified school construction bonds               1.0     1.1   1.2    1.3     1.4
Exclusion of interest on State/local govt
bonds for student loans                           0.4     0.4   0.4    0.5     0.5
Deduction for expenses of elem./secondary
school teachers                                   n/a     0.3   0.2    0.2     0.3
Credit for holders of qualified zone academy
bonds                                             0.1     0.1   0.1    0.1     0.1
Grand Total                                      42.0 44.6 45.8 40.7 48.5
Source: Joint Committee on Taxation (2015a). To adjust reported amounts for
recent changes as a result of the Protecting Americans from Tax Hikes (PATH)
Act of 2015, budget impact estimates from the Joint Committee on Taxation
(2015b) are also incorporated. See Crandall-Hollick (2016) for addition notes on
the higher education tax benefits.



                                                                                         36
