                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          THE DISCOUNTED EULER EQUATION:
                                      A NOTE

                                        Alisdair McKay
                                        Emi Nakamura
                                         Jón Steinsson

                                      Working Paper 22129
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22129


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2016




We thank Susanto Basu, Gauti Eggertsson, Marc Giannoni, Fatih Guvenen, Nobuhiro Kiyotaki,
Benjamin Moll, Michael Peters, Oistein Roisland, Greg Thwaites, Aleh Tsyvinski, Nicolas
Werquin and seminar participants at various institutions for valuable comments and discussions.
We thank the National Science Foundation (grant SES-1056107) for financial support. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Alisdair McKay, Emi Nakamura, and Jón Steinsson. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Discounted Euler Equation: A Note
Alisdair McKay, Emi Nakamura, and Jón Steinsson
NBER Working Paper No. 22129
March 2016, Revised October 2016
JEL No. E21,E40,E50

                                         ABSTRACT

We present a simple model with income risk and borrowing constraints which yields a
“discounted Euler equation.” This feature of the model mutes the extent to which news about far
future real interest rates (i.e., forward guidance) affects current outcomes. We show that this
simple model approximates the outcomes of a rich model with uninsurable income risk and
borrowing constraints in response to a forward guidance shock. The model is simple enough to be
easily incorporated into standard DSGE models. We illustrate this with an application to the zero
lower bound.

Alisdair McKay                                  Jón Steinsson
Department of Economics                         Department of Economics
Boston University                               Columbia University
270 Bay State Road                              1026 International Affairs Building
Boston, MA 02215                                420 West 118th Street
and NBER                                        New York, NY 10027
amckay@bu.edu                                   and NBER
                                                jsteinsson@columbia.edu
Emi Nakamura
Columbia Business School
3022 Broadway, Uris Hall 820
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
enakamura@columbia.edu
1     Introduction

Recent work has highlighted that standard monetary business cycle models imply that far future
forward guidance has implausibly large effects on current outcomes (Carlstrom, Fuerst, and Paus-
tian, 2015; Del Negro, Giannoni, and Patterson, 2013).1 In earlier research, we showed that this
implausible behavior of standard models results from the highly forward looking nature of the stan-
dard consumption Euler equation (McKay, Nakamura, and Steinsson, 2016). To see this, consider
the response of consumption to a forward guidance announcement by the central bank in a standard
New Keynesian model. A key equation in this type of model is the standard consumption Euler
equation, which once it has been log-linearized, takes the form

                                     Ĉt = Et Ĉt+1 − σ(it − Et πt+1 − rtn ),                                   (1)

where Ĉt denotes consumption, it denotes the nominal interest rate, πt denotes inflation, rtn is the
natural real rate of interest, i.e., the real interest rate that would prevail with flexible prices (all
measured as percent deviations from steady state), Et denotes the expectations operator, and σ is
the intertemporal elasticity of substitution. Solving this equation forward yields
                                            ∞
                                            X
                                                                            n
                                 Ĉt = −σ         Et (it+j − Et+j πt+j+1 − rt+j ).                              (2)
                                            j=0

Notice that there is no discounting in the sum on the right hand side of this equation. This implies
that news about future real interest rates at any horizon—however far in the future—has the same
effect on current consumption as an equally large change to the current interest rate.2
    This prediction is sensitive to the presence of precautionary savings and liquidity constraints. In
McKay, Nakamura, and Steinsson (2016), we present a heterogeneous agents New Keynesian model
in which the response of current consumption to far future forward guidance is greatly muted
relative to the standard representative agent New Keynesian model.3 A drawback of the model
presented in that paper is that it is considerably more complicated to solve than a standard New
Keynesian model.
   1
     Since this “puzzle” is based on a thought-experiment rather than hard empirical evidence, not everyone agrees
that it is a puzzle. Haberis, Harrison, and Waldron (2014) point out that far future forward guidance may be time
inconsistent and therefore imperfectly credible, which would reduce its effect.
   2
     Here it is important to remember that consumption will return to its pre-shock steady state in the long run. In
other words, temporary monetary policy actions have no long-run effects in this model.
   3
     Kaplan, Moll, and Violante (2016) present similar results in a richer model. Werning (2015) presents conditions
under which the response of consumption to interest rates in a heterogeneous agents model will be the same as in a
representative agents model.


                                                          1
    In this note, we present a simple model with income risk and borrowing constraints which yields
a “discounted Euler equation.” The discounting in the Euler equation means that the effects of
future real interest rates on current consumption are muted relative to the standard New Keynesian
model.4 We show that this simple model approximates the outcomes of our richer model with
uninsurable income risk and borrowing constraints in response to a forward guidance shock. The
model is simple enough to be easily incorporated into standard DSGE models. We illustrate this
with an application to the zero lower bound.


2     Discounted Euler Equation Model

Consider a simplified version of the model presented in McKay, Nakamura, and Steinsson (2016),
in which idiosyncratic income is i.i.d. and takes one of two values each period, which we refer to as
high (z = 1) and low (z = 0). For simplicity, the income of those with low productivity is constant
and equal to m, which could reflect a social welfare benefit. Agents are not allowed to borrow in
the model. In this version of the model, we furthermore assume for tractability that the only assets
available are risk-free bonds in zero net supply.
    We show in appendix A that under these assumptions we can derive the following log-linearized
consumption Euler equation

                                    Ĉt = αEt Ĉt+1 − σζ(it − Et πt+1 − rtn ).                                    (3)

This equation differs from the standard consumption Euler equation because of the coefficients
α < 1 and ζ < 1. We also derive a New Keynesian Phillips curve for this model and show that
it takes the same form as in the textbook representative agent model, the only difference being a
slight increase in its slope for a given set of parameters.
    Solving the Euler equation forward yields
                                              ∞
                                              X
                               Ĉt = −σζEt          αj (it+j − Et+j πt+j+1 − rt+j
                                                                              n
                                                                                  ).                              (4)
                                              j=0

Notice that the effect of interest rates j periods in the future on current consumption is discounted
by a factor αj . For this reason, we refer to equation (3) as the “discounted Euler equation.” The
presence of α < 1 implies that far future interest rate changes have much smaller effects on current
   4
     Interestingly, such a formulation of the consumption Euler equation has actually been used in policy calculations
by the Central Bank of Norway, to combat the forward guidance puzzle. We thank Oistein Roisland for pointing this
out to us.

                                                          2
consumption than near term interest rate changes. The presence of ζ is less consequential. It is
equivalent to a change in the intertemporal elasticity of substitution σ.5
       In this version of the model, the low productivity households are liquidity constrained, while the
high productivity households are not. The presence of α in equation (3) results from the fact that
with some probability the currently highly productive households will have low productivity next
period and next period’s expected marginal utility is therefore partly determined by the exogenous
marginal utility in the low productive state. For this reason, the currently highly productive
households put some probability on the outcome that they will not benefit from an increase in next
period’s consumption and therefore do not increase current consumption one-for-one with next
period’s expected consumption.
       The key feature of this stylized model is that the income and consumption of the high types
is more cyclically sensitive than the income and consumption of the low types (Werning, 2015).6
Recent work by Guvenen, Ozkan, and Song (2014) shows that top incomes rise substantially more
than average incomes in expansions in the US. Parker and Vissing-Jorgensen (2009) show that
consumption growth of high-consumption households in the US is much more exposed to aggregate
fluctuations than consumption growth of the typical household. Our model is meant to capture
this feature of the data in a stylized way.
       Figure 1 shows that the discounted Euler equation—equation (3)—with α = 0.97 and ζ = 3/4
provides a good approximation to the response of output to a real interest rate shock 20 quarters in
the future in the baseline incomplete markets model analyzed in McKay, Nakamura, and Steinsson
(2016). The approximation is nearly perfect up until the time that the interest rate changes. What
the discounted Euler equation misses is the fall in consumption after the interest rate shock. This
fall is due to redistribution of wealth in the incomplete markets model (from households with high
MPCs to households with low MPCs), which the discounted Euler equation does not capture.
       The tractability of our model relies heavily on the simplifying assumption that households
   5
      Our model is quite different from one with a fraction of hand-to-mouth agents. Such a model does not give rise
to an α < 1. Hand-to-mouth agents give rise to a ζ < 1 but also yield an additional income term in the consumption
Euler equation (Gali, Valles, and Lopez-Salido, 2007).
    6
      Werning (2015) shows that if the income, liquidity, and borrowing constraints of all agents scale proportionately
with aggregate income, the presence of uninsurable income risk and borrowing constraints will not affect the response
of output to current or future interest rates. The reason for this is that stronger general equilibrium multiplier effects
of the higher income that results from the change in interest rates makes up for the more muted partial equilibrium
effects of interest rate change. If, however, high income agents (with low marginal propensities to spend) get a
disproportionate share of the additional income when aggregate income rises, then this general equilibrium feedback
is not strong enough to make up for the weaker partial equilibrium effect and the overall effects of interest rates are
muted.



                                                            3
                                                                      Discounted Euler Equation Model
                                                                      Incomplete Markets
                                   0.25



              Percentage Points     0.2



                                   0.15



                                    0.1



                                   0.05



                                     0



                                  −0.05
                                       0   5   10   15        20         25      30        35           40
                                                      Horizon in Quarters



Figure 1: Response of output to a 50 basis point change in the expected real interest rate in quarter
20 in the incomplete markets model and in the discounted Euler equation model.


do not have any tradable wealth. We are following Krusell, Mukoyama, and Smith (2011) and
Ravn and Sterk (2013) in using this approach to formulate tractable incomplete markets models.
This has the downside that our model cannot be embedded in medium scale DSGE models that
incorporate capital or government debt in positive net supply without substantial loss of tractability.
However, the textbook New Keynesian model without such features is widely used to illustrate
basic conceptual points about monetary economics. We therefore think it is valuable to illustrate
a tractable way of incorporating the effects of precautionary savings into this benchmark model.
   Piergallini (2006) and Nistico (2012) provide an alternative micro-foundation for discounting in
the Euler equation based on mortality shocks as in Blanchard’s (1985) perpetual-youth model. This
model has recently been applied to the power of forward guidance by Del Negro, Giannoni, and
Patterson (2013). In this model, discounting only arises from aggregation over different generations,
and to generate a quantitatively important deviation from the standard Euler equation, these
authors need to assume counter-factually high death rates. Our approach rationalizes why long-lived
consumers can have short planning horizons. Moreover, in Piergallini and Nistico’s formulation,
the discounting in the Euler equation is larger the larger is the amount of financial wealth in
the economy and disappears when financial wealth is in zero-net supply. In contrast, in McKay,


                                                             4
Nakamura, and Steinsson (2016), agents discount the future more when they have little liquid
financial wealth to buffer shocks to income.7


3        Application to the ZLB

We now illustrate the importance of discounting in the Euler equation using an application to
the Zero Lower Bound (ZLB). We follow the classic paper by Eggertsson and Woodford (2003) in
how we model the ZLB, but show that our discounted Euler Equation model yields substantially
different conclusions.
        First, using the aggregate resource constraint we rewrite the Euler equation in terms of the
output gap Ŷt 8
                                    Ŷt = αEt Ŷt+1 − ζσ(it − Et πt+1 − rtn ),                                    (5)

where ζ is the factor by which we need to change σ to match reponse of output to a contemporaneous
interest rate shock in baseline incomplete markets model in McKay, Nakamura, and Steinsson (2016)
(i.e. the amount by which the effects of even contemporaneous interest rate shocks are muted in
the incomplete markets model).
        The Calvo Phillips curve is
                                              πt = βEt πt+1 + κŶt .                                              (6)

Finally, we assume that the central bank follows a “naive” monetary policy,

                                             it = max(0, rtn + φπt ).                                             (7)

where φ > 1. For comparability with Eggertsson and Woodford (2003), we assume that β = 0.99,
σ = 0.5, and κ = 0.02.
        Following Eggertsson and Woodford (2003), we assume that the ZLB binds due to a shock that
lowers the natural rate below zero and persists at the same negative value with probability λ each
quarter. With probability 1 − λ, it reverts back to normal. For simplicity, we assume that once the
natural rate reverts back to normal, the zero lower bound on nominal interest rates never binds
again in the future.
        We start by solving for the level of the output gap and inflation after the shock has dissipated.
Since we have assumed that the natural rate will never go negative again, it is feasible for the
    7
    Discounting of this kind does not arise in the spender-saver setup (see, e.g., Bilbiie, 2008).
    8
    In our model the level of output under flexible prices is constant so Ŷt is both the log-deviation of output from
steady state and the output gap.

                                                          5
monetary authority to set it = rtn at all times after the shock dissipates. This implies that both
the output gap and inflation will be zero at all times after the shock dissipates. Given this, it is
easy to solve for the output gap and inflation while the shock persists. First, notice that all periods
while the shock persists are identical since the probability of the shock reverting to normal does not
change over time. This implies that output and inflation will be constant while the shock persists.
We refer to the period during which the shock persists as the short run. Next, notice that in the
short run Et Ŷt+1 = λŶt and Et πt+1 = λπt since with probability 1 − λ the economy will revert to
normal (in which case Ŷt = πt = 0). Using these facts and equations (6) and (5), a few steps of
algebra (presented in appendix B) yield

                                                           κ
                                                 πS =          ŶS ,                                          (8)
                                                        1 − βλ
                                                          ζσ
                                            ŶS =                   rn ,
                                                               ζσλκ S
                                                                                                              (9)
                                                    1 − αλ −   1−λβ

where πS and ŶS denote inflation and the output gap in the short run, and rSn denotes the natural
real rate of interest in the short run.


3.1      How Deep is a ZLB Recession?

Our first result is that the discounted Euler equation model implies that the same shocks that
generate a huge recession at the ZLB in the standard model, imply a much smaller recession in
the discounted Euler Equation model. Eggertsson and Woodford (2003) present results for a shock
that lowers the natural rate to rSn = −0.02 (annualized) and reverts to normal with probability
1 − λ = 0.1 (per quarter). They show that in the standard model, a shock of this size and
persistence generates a very large recession—an output gap of -14.3%—accompanied by a large
amount of deflation (-10.5%). In Table 1, we show that in the discounted Euler equation model,
this same shock leads to a much more modest recession. The output gap is a mere -2.9%, and
inflation falls by only 2.1%. Clearly, incorporating discounting of future interest rates radically
alters the conclusions one comes to about the severity of the problem that the monetary authority
faces with this type of shock.9
  9
      We set α = 0.97 and ζ = 0.75 as in Figure 1. We compare this to the standard case of α = 1 and ζ = 1.




                                                         6
                              Table 1: How Deep is a ZLB Recession?

                                                                 Output      Inflation

                       Standard Model                             -14.3%      -10.5%
                       (α = 1, ζ = 1)
                       Discounted Euler Equation Model            -2.9%        -2.1%
                       (α = 0.97, ζ = 0.75)
                      Response of output and inflation when the natural rate falls to -2%
                     (annualized) with a 10% per quarter probability of returning to nor-
                     mal.



3.2   When does the Deflationary Death Spiral Occur

Our second result is that the discounted Euler equation model implies that the economy is less
prone to a “deflationary death spiral” at the ZLB. The strength of the deflationary forces in the
standard model are due to a feedback loop that gets stronger the more persistent is the shock to
the natural rate (Eggertsson, 2010). The basic feedback loop results from the following chain of
logic: The negative natural rate leads to a positive interest rate gap—a real rate that is higher than
the natural rate—because the nominal rate can’t fall below zero. This leads output to fall, and if
the shock is persistent it leads expectations of future output to fall, which in turn leads expected
inflation to fall, which causes the current real rate to rise further, and current output to fall further,
etc. The more persistent is the shock, the more it affects expected inflation and the stronger this
feedback loop becomes.
   It is well known that the strength of the deflationary forces associated with negative shocks to
the natural real rate become infinitely strong—i.e. imply that the (log) output gap and inflation go
to negative infinity—for even relatively modest levels of persistence. This can be seen by looking at
the denominator of the expression for the short run output gap in equation (9). As this denominator
goes to zero, the short run output gap goes to negative infinity. In the standard model (with α = 1
and ζ = 1), this occurs for a shock with an expected duration of 11 quarters.
   In the discounted Euler equation model, the strength of the deflationary forces are muted and
consequently the persistence of the ZLB shock needs to be greater for this “deflationary death
spiral” to occur. This is depicted in Figure 2, which plots the drop in output for different levels
of persistence of the ZLB shock. The solid line is the standard model, while the two broken lines
are two calibrations of the discounted Euler equation model that match the baseline and high-

                                                      7
                                                                       Output
                                      0

                                     −2

                                     −4

                                     −6
                Percentage Points


                                     −8

                                    −10

                                    −12

                                    −14

                                    −16

                                           Standard Model
                                    −18
                                           Disc. Euler (Baseline)
                                           Disc. Euler (High Risk)
                                    −20
                                       0   2      4       6       8      10      12       14    16   18   20
                                                         Expected Duration of ZLB in Quarters


Figure 2: Response of output to shock that makes the natural real rate of interest -2% (annualized)
for different levels of persistence of the shock (different values of λ).


risk calibrations of the incomplete markets model in McKay, Nakamura, and Steinsson (2016),
respectively.10 The deflationary death spiral occurs only for shocks that are considerably more
persistent in the discounted Euler equation model than in the standard model.


4    Conclusion

In this note, we develop simple microfoundations for a “discounted Euler equation” that is easy to
incorporate into standard DSGE models. This discounted Euler equation implies that the effects
of far future changes in real interest rates as well as far future changes in the natural real rate have
much smaller effects on contemporaneous outcomes than in the standard New Keynesian model.
We show that this has important implications for policy experiments when nominal interest rates
are constrained by their zero lower bound.
  10
     As we discuss in the text, α = 0.97 and ζ = 0.75 matches the baseline calibration of the incomplete markets
model in McKay, Nakamura, and Steinsson (2016). We use the same approach to match the high-risk calibration
with the discounted Euler equation model. This yields α = 0.94 and ζ = 0.7.




                                                                          8
A      A Simple Incomplete Markets Model

The discounted Euler equation (3) can be micro-founded with a simplified version of the model
analyzed in McKay, Nakamura, and Steinsson (2016). The simplified model deviates from the full
model in the following ways:
    1. The idiosyncratic productivity shock takes just two values, which we will call high (z = 1)
       and low (z = 0).
    2. Idiosyncratic productivity is i.i.d. across time: Pr(z 0 |z) = Pr(z 0 ).
    3. The supply of government debt is zero: B = 0.
    4. The tax system pays a social benefit m to low productivity households financed by lump-sum
       taxes on high productivity households.
    5. Firm dividends Dt are distributed only to the high-productivity households.
This version of our model is analytically tractable because there is no wealth in the economy and
there is a strict borrowing constraint, b0 ≥ 0. As the gross supply of assets is zero, there is no
possibility of saving in equilibrium and so the distribution of wealth remains degenerate at zero.


A.1     The Environment

Here we briefly summarize the model in McKay, Nakamura, and Steinsson (2016) including the
simplifications above. The economy is populated by a unit continuum of ex ante identical households
with preferences given by
                                           ∞
                                                               c1−γ          `1+ψ
                                                           "                          #
                                                                h,t           h,t
                                           X
                                      E0         β t eqt               −                  ,
                                                               1−γ           1+ψ
                                           t=0
where ch,t is consumption of household h at time t and `h,t is labor supply of household h at
time t. The random variable qt is an aggregate patience shock that determines the natural rate of
                                      n
interest and is given by qt = qt−1 + rt−1 with q0 = 0. This shock is an addition to the model in
McKay, Nakamura, and Steinsson (2016). Households are endowed with stochastic idiosyncratic
employment status zh,t ∈ {0, 1}, which is drawn i.id. with probabilities Pr(zh,t = 0) = ρ and
Pr(zh,t = 1) = 1 − ρ. High-productivity households earn labor income Wt `h,t , where Wt is the
aggregate real wage. Low-productivity households receive m units of the consumption good as a
transfer and high productivity households pay a tax of ρm/(1 − ρ) to finance the transfer.
    In this economy, a final good is produced from intermediate inputs according to the production
function                                                                     µ
                                                      Z       1
                                                                    1/µ
                                            Yt =                   yj,t dj        ,
                                                           0
                                                               9
where Yt denotes the quantity of the final good produced at time t and yj,t denotes the quantity of
the intermediate good produced by firm j in period t. The intermediate goods are produced using
labor as an input according to the production function

                                                      yj,t = nj,t ,

where nj,t denotes the amount of labor hired by firm j in period t.
       While the final good is produced by a representative competitive firm, the intermediate goods
are produced by monopolistically competitive firms. The intermediate goods firms face frictions
in adjusting their prices that imply that they can only update their prices with probability θ per
period as in Calvo (1983). These firms are controlled by a risk-neutral manager who discounts future
profits at rate β. Whatever profits are produced are paid out immediately to the high-productivity
households with each of them receiving an equal share.
       Households trade a risk-free real bond with real interest rt between periods t and t+1. Borrowing
constraints prevent these households from taking negative bond positions. There is no external
supply of bonds. Finally, a monetary authority determines the nominal interest rate.


A.2       Discounted Euler equation

As individual assets are constant at zero, it follows that all households of a given productivity status
must choose the same consumption. Let cH,t be the consumption of the high productivity agents
and cL,t be the consumption of the low productivity agents. Moreover, the absence of opportunities
to borrow and save implies that consumption must be equal to income for all individuals. The low
productivity group will therefore consume m. The Euler equation for high-productivity agents is
                                                         h                        i
                                         rtn
                                c−γ
                                 H,t ≥ βe    (1 + rt )Et   (1 − ρ)c −γ
                                                                    H,t+1 + ρm −γ
                                                                                    .                              (10)

The Euler equation for a low-productivity agent is

                                        n
                                                     h                     i
                               m−γ ≥ βert (1 + rt )Et (1 − ρ)c−γ
                                                              H,t+1 + ρm−γ
                                                                             .

Notice that the right hand side of the Euler equation is independent of current productivity as
productivity is i.i.d. across time. Therefore, if m < cH,t the low-productivity households must be
constrained and their Euler equation will not hold with equality. We assume that m is low enough
that m < cH,t for all t.11
  11
    It is easy to relax the assumption that idiosyncratic productivity is i.i.d., however, with i.i.d. productivity it is
especially easy to see that the low-productivity households will be constrained if m is low enough.

                                                           10
       Following Krusell, Mukoyama, and Smith (2011) and Ravn and Sterk (2013), we will focus on
the equilibrium of this economy in which the Euler equation of the high-productivity households
holds with equality in all periods. In this equilibrium, the high-productivity households choose
zero savings and are therefore up against their constraint. But the constraint does not bind in the
sense that they would not strictly prefer to borrow more if allowed. There are other equilibria of
this economy in which the Euler equation for the high-productivity household holds with inequality
(implying that the high-productivity households would strictly prefer to borrow if allowed). We
focus on the equilibrium in which the high-productivity households’ Euler equation holds with
equality for the following reason. In the more realistic case in which the gross supply of assets
(either internal or external) is positive there is a unique equilibrium in which the high-productivity
households’ Euler equation holds with equality. Consider a sequence of such economies with smaller
and smaller gross supplies of assets. The equilibrium we focus on is the unique equilibrium of the
limiting economy for which the supply goes to zero.12
       Aggregate consumption is

                                             Ct = ρm + (1 − ρ)cH,t .                                              (11)

Substituting into the high-productivity Euler equation we have
                                              "                              #
                         ρm −γ
                                                                −γ
                Ct                     n                C t+1   ρm
                     −           = βert Rt Et (1 − ρ)         −        + ρm−γ .                                   (12)
               1−ρ 1−ρ                                  1−ρ 1−ρ
Log-linearizing this equation and using the Fisher equation yields
                                                                h      i
                              Ĉt = −σζ [it − Eπt+1 − rtn ] + αE Ĉt+1                                            (13)

where
                                                               1
                                               α≡          ρ
                                                          c̄H
                                                                   γ ,                                           (14)
                                                  1+      1−ρ
                                                           m
                                                     ρm 
                                               ζ ≡ 1−                                                             (15)
                                                       C̄
                                                  1
                                               σ≡ .                                                               (16)
                                                  γ
  12
     Suppose there is an outstanding supply of government debt in amount ε > 0 financed by a lump sum tax. In
this case, bond market clearing requires some household to hold this debt at the prevailing interest rate (which is set
by the monetary authority). This household must be indifferent at the margin regarding how much they hold of the
debt (i.e., their Euler equation must hold with equality). If instead the Euler equation of all households held with
strict inequality, no household would want to hold the outstanding bonds. There would be excess supply of bonds
and excess demand for consumption goods. Since firms must meet demand at posted prices, they would produce
more, which would increase income and consumption and lead marginal utility of consumption to fall. This process
would continue until the agents with the lowest marginal utility of consumption—the high-productivity agents—were
willing to hold the bonds. Thus, for any positive ε the Euler equation of the high-productivity households will hold
with equality in equilibrium and the equilibrium we focus on is the limit of these equilibria as ε goes to zero.

                                                          11
and bars denote steady state values and hats denote log deviations from steady state. Notice that
α is decreasing in the probability of having low productivity, ρ, and the consumption differential,
c̄H /m.
       In section 2 we argue that α = 0.97 and ζ = 0.75 matches the dynamics produced by the model
in McKay, Nakamura, and Steinsson (2016) shown in Figure 1. It is hard to get these two values
for reasonable values of the underlying parameters ρ, c̄H , m, and γ. Values of these parameters
that yield ζ = 0.75 tend to yield values of α below 0.97. This reflects the fact that the larger model
we work with in McKay, Nakamura, and Steinsson (2016) generates a somewhat different initial
drop relative to the subsequent discounting than the model analyzed here. However, what really
matters is not ζ itself but the product ζσ. We can interpret our calibration as a combination of
underlying parameters that generate α = 0.97, a ζ slightly below one, and a value of σ that is
somewhat smaller than 0.5.


A.3        Phillips curve

Market incompleteness does not change the form of the New Keynesian Phillips curve, but slightly
changes the relationship between the slope of the Phillips curve and the structural parameters. To
see this, note that the labor supply condition for the high-productivity workers is

                                                     c−γ        ψ
                                                      H,t Wt = `t .


Using the fact that aggregate labor supply is Lt = (1 − ρ)`t and aggregate consumption is given by
equation (11), this last expression can be rewritten as
                                                       −γ                     ψ
                                           Ct   ρm                          Lt
                                              −                 Wt =                  .
                                          1−ρ 1−ρ                          1−ρ

Log-linearizing this equation and using the aggregate resource constraint Ct = Yt and a first-order
approximation to the aggregate production function,13 L̂t = Ŷt , yields
                                                       !
                                                  γ
                                   Ŵt = ψ +              Ŷt .
                                               1 + ρm
                                                    Ȳ

If we set ρ = 0 we arrive at the standard, complete-markets case. The effect of market incomplete-
ness is to strengthen the wealth effect on labor supply because a subset of the workers are bearing
the full effects of aggregate income movements.
  13
       Here we abstract from the efficiency loss due to price dispersion, which is zero in a first-order approximation
around a zero-inflation steady state.

                                                           12
    Market incompleteness does not change the relationship between inflation and marginal cost.
To a first-order approximation, this relationship is

                                                   (1 − β(1 − θ))θ ˆ
                                πt = βEt πt+1 +                   M C t.
                                                        1−θ

As the real marginal cost is the wage, we have
                                                                             !
                                         (1 − β(1 − θ))θ              γ
                         πt = βEt πt+1 +                        ψ+               Ŷt .            (17)
                                              1−θ                  1 + ρm
                                                                        Ȳ


As the flexible price equilibrium is constant in our model, Ŷt is the output gap and (17) is the
standard New Keynesian Phillips curve when ρ = 0 and differs in the strength of the wealth effect
when ρ > 0.


B     Algebra Behind Equations (8) and (9)

Consider first the Phillips curve:
                                         πt = βEt πt+1 + κŶt .

Since the output gap and inflation are constant at ŶS and πS , respectively, and Et πt+1 = λπS in
the short run, we have that
                                          πS = βλπS + κŶS ,

which implies
                                                      κ
                                            πS =          ŶS                                     (18)
                                                   1 − βλ
as long as ŶS and πS are finite.
    Consider next the discounted Euler equation

                                Ŷt = αEt Ŷt+1 − ζσ(it − Et πt+1 − rtn ).

Again, since the output gap and inflation are constant at ŶS and πS , respectively, and Et πt+1 = λπS
and Et Ŷt+1 = λŶS in the short run, and, in addition, since the natural real rate is rSn in the short
run, we have that
                                     ŶS = αλŶS + ζσ(λπS + rSn ).

If we now use equation (18) to eliminate πS from this equation we obtain
                                                                 
                                                    κ           n
                              ŶS = αλŶS + ζσ λ         ŶS + rS ,
                                                 1 − βλ
                                                    13
which implies
                                         ζσ
                            ŶS =                   rn
                                               ζσλκ S
                                    1 − αλ −   1−λβ

as long as ŶS is finite.




                                       14
References
Bilbiie, F. O. (2008): “Limited Asset Markets Participation, Monetary Policy, and (Inverted)
  Aggregate Demand Logic,” Journal of Economic Theory, 140, 162–196.
Blanchard, O. J. (1985): “Debt, Deficits, and Finite Horizons,” Journal of Political Economy,
 93(2), 223–247.
Calvo, G. A. (1983): “Staggered Prices in a Utility-Maximizing Framework,” Journal of Monetary
 Economics, 12, 383–398.
Carlstrom, C. T., T. S. Fuerst, and M. Paustian (2015): “Inflation and Output in New
 Keynesian Model a Transient Interest Rate Peg,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 76, 230–243.
Del Negro, M., M. Giannoni, and C. Patterson (2013): “The Forward Guidance Puzzle,”
 Working Paper, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Eggertsson, G. B. (2010): “What Fiscal Policy is Effective at Zero Interest Rates?,” NBER
 Macroeconomics Annual, 25(1), 59–112.
Eggertsson, G. B., and M. Woodford (2003): “The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and Optimal
 Monetary Policy,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2003(1), 139–211.
Gali, J., J. Valles, and J. D. Lopez-Salido (2007): “Understanding the Effects of Government
 Spending on Consumption,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 5(1), 227–270.
Guvenen, F., S. Ozkan, and J. Song (2014): “The Nature of Countercyclical Income Risk,”
 Journal of Political Economy, 122(3), pp. 621–660.
Haberis, A., R. Harrison, and M. Waldron (2014): “Transitory Interest-Rate Pegs under
 Imperfect Credibility,” Center for Macroeconomics Working Paper No 1422.
Kaplan, G., B. Moll, and G. L. Violante (2016): “A Note on Unconventional Monetary
 Policy in HANK,” Working Paper, Princeton University.
Krusell, P., T. Mukoyama, and A. A. Smith (2011): “Asset Prices in a Huggett Economy,”
 Journal of Economic Theory, 146(3), 812–844.
McKay, A., E. Nakamura, and J. Steinsson (2016): “The Power of Forward Guidance Revis-
 ited,” American Economic Review, Forthcoming.
Nistico, S. (2012): “Monetary Policy and Stock-Price Dynamics in a DSGE Framework,” Journal
  of Macroeconomics, 34, 126–146.
Parker, J. A., and A. Vissing-Jorgensen (2009): “Who Bears Aggregate Fluctuations and
  How?,” American Economic Review, 99(2), 399–405.
Piergallini, A. (2006): “Real Balance Effects and Monetary Policy,” Economic Inquiry, 44(3),
  497–511.
Ravn, M., and V. Sterk (2013): “Job Uncertainty and Deep Recessions,” UCL Working Paper.
Werning, I. (2015): “Incomplete Markets and Aggregate Demand,” Working Paper, MIT.




                                             15
