                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   MARKET REFORMS IN THE TIME OF IMBALANCE

                                       Matteo Cacciatore
                                        Romain Duval
                                        Giuseppe Fiori
                                        Fabio Ghironi

                                      Working Paper 22128
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22128


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2016




This paper was prepared for the St. Louis Fed-JEDC-SNB-SCG Conference on "International
Economics," Gerzensee, October 23-24, 2015. We thank Robert Kollmann and Lukas Vogel for
their very helpful discussion. We are also grateful to Mario Crucini, the Conference participants,
and participants in seminars at the European Central Bank, the International Monetary Fund, the
Johns Hopkins Carey Business School, the University of British Columbia, and the University of
California-Santa Cruz. The views in this paper are those of the authors and do not represent the
views or policies of the Centre for Economic Policy Research, the International Monetary Fund,
or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Matteo Cacciatore, Romain Duval, Giuseppe Fiori, and Fabio Ghironi. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Market Reforms in the Time of Imbalance
Matteo Cacciatore, Romain Duval, Giuseppe Fiori, and Fabio Ghironi
NBER Working Paper No. 22128
March 2016
JEL No. E24,E32,F41,J64,L51

                                          ABSTRACT

We study the consequences of product and labor market reforms in a two-country model with
endogenous producer entry and labor market frictions. We focus on the role of business cycle
conditions and external constraints at the time of reform implementation (or of a credible
commitment to it) in shaping the dynamic effects of such policies. Product market reform is
modeled as a reduction in entry costs and takes place in a non-traded sector that produces services
used as input in manufacturing production. Labor market reform is modeled as a reduction in
firing costs and/or unemployment benefits. We find that business cycle conditions at the time of
deregulation significantly affect adjustment. A reduction of firing costs entails larger and more
persistent adverse short-run effects on employment and output when implemented in a recession.
By contrast, a reduction in unemployment benefits boosts employment and output by more in a
recession compared to normal times. The impact of product market reforms is less sensitive to
business cycle conditions. Credible announcements about future reforms induce sizable short-run
dynamics, regardless of whether the announcement takes place in normal times or during an
economic downturn. Whether the immediate effect is expansionary or contractionary varies
across reforms. Finally, lack of access to international lending in the wake of reform can amplify
the costs of adjustment.

Matteo Cacciatore                                Giuseppe Fiori
HEC Montréal                                     North Carolina State University
Institute of Applied Economics                   Poole School of Management
3000 chemin de la Côte-Sainte-Catherine          Department of Economics
Montréal (Québec), Canada H3T 2A7                2801 Founders Dr, Box 8110
matteo.cacciatore@hec.ca                         Raleigh (NC), 27695-8110
                                                 giuseppefiori@gmail.com
Romain Duval
Research Department                              Fabio Ghironi
International Monetary Fund                      Department of Economics
700 19th Street, N.W.                            University of Washington
Washington, D.C. 20431, U.S.A.                   Savery Hall, Box 353330
rduval@imf.org                                   Seattle, WA 98195
                                                 and NBER
                                                 ghiro@uw.edu
1   Introduction

Labor and product market reforms are at the heart of the structural reform agenda advocated by
many economists and international institutions to lift economic performance in advanced economies,
notably in Europe and Japan (e.g., IMF, 2015a,b, and OECD, 2015). Calls for easing of market
regulation have predominantly focused on barriers to market entry, firing restrictions, and the
generosity of unemployment benefits (OECD, 2005). The theoretical case has been laid out by an
extensive literature that highlights the long-term gains from structural reforms. Thus far, however,
no consensus has been established on their short-term impact, and even less is known on whether
short-run eﬀects depend on the state of the business cycle or other initial conditions, such as the
stringency of external borrowing constraints, when reforms are implemented.
    The fallout from the 2008-2009 global financial crisis has given fresh importance to such transi-
tional dynamics issues. The central question is whether implementing reforms in a time of crisis–
the “time of imbalance” we refer to in our title, with a slight abuse of language–and/or when
external borrowing is constrained weakens or instead strengthens the short-term impact of mar-
ket reform. For instance, for given long-term impact of re-designing unemployment benefits and
employment protection legislation, do such reforms entail larger short-run costs when aggregate de-
mand is low, further deepening the recession by increasing job destruction and reducing aggregate
income? Or, in contrast, do they speed up the recovery by facilitating wage adjustment? Does
the removal of barriers to entry in product markets trigger more or less entry by new firms in a
depressed economy, and what are the consequences for transition dynamics? Are the eﬀects of re-
forms stronger or weaker when countries have limited access to international financial markets–as
was the case to diﬀerent degrees in euro area periphery countries throughout the recent eurozone
crisis? The purpose of this paper is to address these questions.
    Our contribution to the literature is two-fold. First, we add to a fast-growing literature on
the short-run eﬀects of labor and product market reforms by addressing this issue in a model
that captures empirical features of product and labor market regulation and reform as well as
the narrative of policymakers. Second, and most important, this paper is the first to use such a
theoretical framework to assess how the short-term eﬀects of market reforms vary according to the
economy’s cyclical position–and how the stringency of its external borrowing constraint further
shapes these eﬀects.
    We build a two-country, two-sector model featuring endogenous producer entry and search and



                                                  1
matching market frictions in the labor market. Endogenous variation in the number of monopo-
listically competitive firms builds on Bilbiie, Ghironi, and Melitz (2012) and Ghironi and Melitz
(2005). Labor markets are characterized by search-and-matching frictions with endogenous job
creation and destruction as in Mortensen and Pissarides (1994) and den Haan, Ramey, and Watson
(2000).
   We calibrate the model using parameter values from the literature and to match features of
macroeconomic data for the euro area. We then study the dynamic response of the economy to
three distinct types of reforms: (1) product market reform, modeled as a reduction in regulatory
costs of entry in the non-tradable sector; (2) easing of employment protection legislation, in the
form of a decline in firing costs; and (3) a decline in the generosity of unemployment benefits. We
consider two alternative scenarios, assuming that reforms are either implemented in the aftermath
of a large adverse productivity shock that temporarily depresses the economy or in normal times,
assuming that the economy is at the steady state. This allows us to explore how business cycle
conditions aﬀect the dynamic response to market reform. To assess the role of external borrowing
constraints–an important feature of the crisis in the euro area periphery–we also consider the
case in which the deregulating economy faces international financial autarky. Finally, we discuss
the implications of credible commitment to future market deregulation as an interesting contrast
to implementing unanticipated reforms.
   In line with existing literature, we find that deregulation increases output and employment in
the long run. Moreover, when reforms are implemented in normal times, their short-term eﬀects
on output and employment vary, and can be negative in some cases. Product market deregulation
involves gradual and costly reallocation of resources from incumbents to new entrants; along the
way, sunk entry costs need to be financed by (partly) reducing consumption and physical capital
accumulation. The removal of firing restrictions triggers an immediate lay-oﬀ of less productive
workers, while their re-employment takes time, also because this reform does not foster much
entry of new firms. By contrast, a reduction in unemployment benefits entails no significant short-
term costs because the reduction in the workers’ outside option leads to wage moderation, which
ultimately boosts job creation without triggering a significant increase in job destruction. Across
all the various reforms we consider, the deregulating economy always experiences a current account
deficit along the transition, as market reforms stimulate domestic investment.
   The key new finding of our paper is that the business cycle conditions prevailing at the time
of deregulation significantly aﬀect the adjustment to market reform. A reduction of firing costs


                                                2
entails larger and more persistent adverse short-run eﬀects on employment and output when imple-
mented in a recession. The reason is that, for a given level of aggregate productivity, positive firing
costs imply that relatively unprofitable jobs survive job destruction. When aggregate productivity
is below trend, the share of unprofitable matches is greater compared to the steady state. As a
consequences, the removal of firing costs leads to much larger job destruction, which further de-
presses aggregate demand and output. By contrast, a reduction in the generosity of unemployment
benefits boosts employment and output by more in a recession compared to normal times. The
additional positive eﬀect is due to the fact that, at times of high unemployment, a larger pool of
workers is searching for jobs. As a result, the probability of filling a vacancy is higher, and thus
the expected cost of job creation is lower in a recession. Furthermore, since real wages are already
low relative to the steady state, the same reduction in unemployment benefits generates more job
creation by firms. Importantly, these positive eﬀects on job creation prevail even when we allow
the unemployment benefits reform to reduce aggregate income and demand directly.1 Finally, the
impact of product market reforms is less sensitive to business cycle conditions. The reason is that
a recession has oﬀsetting eﬀects on the present discounted value of product creation. On one side,
lower aggregate demand reduces the expected stream of profits. On the other side, when produc-
tivity is below trend, a reduction in the number of producers causes markups to be higher, which
encourages product creation. These two opposite eﬀects largely cancel out, unless the recession is
very persistent. If so, the reduction in aggregate demand prevails, and product market deregulation
becomes more costly relative to the steady state in the short term.
       Credible announcements about future deregulation induce sizable short-run dynamics, regard-
less of whether the announcement takes place in normal times or during an economic downturn.
Whether the immediate eﬀect of committing to future deregulation is expansionary or contrac-
tionary varies across reforms. For instance, the announcement of future product market deregu-
lation has contractionary eﬀects in the short run, while the opposite is true for an unemployment
benefits reform. The eﬀects of reform announcements in general do not significantly depend on
the state of the business cycle. However, credible commitment about lowering firing costs can sig-
nificantly reduce the adverse short-run eﬀects of this reform during a recession. Intuitively, since
the announcement stimulates job creation without triggering immediate job destruction, a smaller
   1
    As discussed below, unemployment benefits can be either modeled as a transfer from the government financed
by lump sum taxes or as an exogenous income endowment distributed to unemployed workers. In the former case,
unemployment benefits do not directly aﬀect aggregate demand in our representative household setup because benefits
and lump sum taxes oﬀset each other in the household’s budget constraint.



                                                        3
number of workers are displaced when the reform is actually implemented.
       Finally, the existence of binding borrowing constraints in the wake of deregulation can amplify
the costs of adjustment to market reform. This is the case for product market deregulation: With a
closed current account, domestic households must reduce consumption and investment in physical
capital by more to finance product creation, leading to lower aggregate demand in the short run.
       In the above discussion, we focused on the comparison between the adjustment to market
reform in normal and recession times. Our analysis also oﬀers an assessment of the eﬀectiveness
of market deregulation as a tool to boost economic performance in response to recession. From
this perspective, our findings suggest that a reduction in firing costs that is not accompanied
by a reduction in barriers to producer entry and unemployment benefits can significantly deepen
recessions and delay the recovery. To a lesser extent, the same is true of a reduction in barriers to
producer entry.
       Our paper contributes to the large and varied literature on market regulation and reform. A
large strand of this literature focuses mostly on the long-run consequences of market reforms,
without addressing the transition dynamics from short- to long-run eﬀects of product and labor
market reforms. In this literature, our study is most closely related to the seminal paper by
Blanchard and Giavazzi (2003), who study the eﬀects of market deregulation in a two-period model
with entry costs and Nash wage bargaining.2
       A more recent literature studies the fully dynamic adjustment to market reform. The closest
antecedent is Cacciatore and Fiori (2016), who study, both theoretically and empirically, the short-
run eﬀects of the types of reforms discussed in this paper. We extend their theoretical framework
to a two-country, two-sector model, and focus on the consequences of business cycle conditions for
the eﬀects of market deregulation.3 Cacciatore, Duval, Fiori, and Ghironi (2016a) and Cacciatore,
Fiori, and Ghironi (2016) study the role of monetary policy for the short-run adjustment to market
deregulation in normal times. A significant diﬀerence between this paper and our earlier work is
that we focus on producer entry dynamics and market deregulation in a non-traded sector that
produces services used as inputs in manufacturing. This allows us to capture a key aspect of the
policy debate on market reforms, much of which revolves around the deregulation of access to non-
traded services and professions, and to study whether product market reform in upstream service
   2
    See Cacciatore and Fiori (2016) for a more complete list of references.
   3
    Cacciatore and Fiori (2016) study how market deregulation aﬀects business cycle fluctuations in the long-run,
post-reform environment, i.e., once the economy has already reached the new steady state with respect to market
regulation. By contrast, in this paper, we focus on the short-run relationship between business cycle fluctuations and
market reforms.


                                                          4
sectors can be beneficial for external competitiveness by reducing traded sector costs.4
       Some recent contributions address the consequence of product and labor market reforms when
the zero lower bound on the nominal interest rate is binding. In such a situation, depending on
whether they are inflationary or deflationary, reforms can aﬀect the real interest rate and thereby
either mitigate or exacerbate the recession. For instance, in a benchmark New Keynesian model
with price and wage rigidities, Eggertsson, Ferrero, and Raﬀo (2014) argue that market reforms
are contractionary when monetary policy cannot oﬀset the deflationary eﬀects of falling price and
wages. Importantly, Eggertsson, Ferrero, and Raﬀo treat reforms as exogenous cuts in price and
wage markups in a model that abstracts from deeper product and labor market dynamics. In
their basic New Keynesian framework, reforms are automatically deflationary. Building on this,
Gerali, Notarpietro, and Pisani (2015) and Vogel (2014) show that investment dynamics aﬀect the
response of inflation to exogenous markup reductions. Andres, Arce and Thomas (2014) model
reforms similarly as exogenous markup cuts and study their consequences in an environment of
debt deleveraging. They find that product market reforms have a positive eﬀect on output and
employment even when they are deflationary. Explicit modeling of product and labor market
dynamics and regulation diﬀerentiates our exercise from these recent studies.
       We show that modeling primitive features of market regulation and the underlying frictions in
the creation of products and jobs are crucial elements to further our understanding of the conse-
quences of market reform at times of imbalance–consider again, for instance, the opposite eﬀects of
reforming firing costs and unemployment benefits. Moreover, we find significant diﬀerences between
implementing market deregulation in normal and crisis times, even in the absence of nominal rigidi-
ties and zero-lower-bound considerations.5 Our analysis shows that micro-level product and labor
market dynamics and frictions introduce key elements not captured by “reduced-form” models of
structural reforms.6
       Our analysis of the impact of changes in unemployment benefit provisions in a recession versus
normal times bears some connection to the recent, unsettled literature on optimal unemployment
insurance over the business cycle. In our model, a change in unemployment benefits aﬀects the
workers’ outside option, and thereby wages, with consequences for job creation. By contrast, a
   4
     In Cacciatore, Duval, Fiori, and Ghironi (2016a) and Cacciatore, Fiori, and Ghironi (2016), product market
deregulation takes place in tradable production and causes terms of trade appreciation rather than depreciation as
increased entry puts upward pressure on costs.
   5
     For analysis of market reforms at the zero lower bound, see Cacciatore, Duval, Fiori, and Ghironi (2016b).
   6
     A number of large-scale DSGE models have been used to explore the dynamic impact of reforms in normal times.
See Varga and in ’t Veld (2011), Everaert and Schule (2008), and Gomes (2014). Market reforms are modeled in
reduced-form fashion also in these studies, focusing on exogenous reductions in price and wage markups.


                                                        5
number of recent papers on optimal unemployment insurance over the cycle either ignore firm hir-
ing behavior altogether (Kroft and Notowidigdo, 2011) or incorporate it but ultimately consider
its relevance limited because recessions are periods when the number of available jobs tends to be
rationed (Landais, Michaillat, and Saez, 2010), or periods when hiring is less responsive to bene-
fit policy changes more broadly (Jung and Kuester, 2015). Our contribution to this literature is
to highlight the relevance of the firm hiring channel, highlighted also by Mitman and Rabinovich
(2015). In so doing we stress, more broadly, the beneficial eﬀects of labor market policies promoting
wage flexibility (through reductions in the generosity of wage replacement) as opposed to employ-
ment flexibility during downturns. This result is consistent with the empirical evidence in Gnocchi,
Lagerborg, and Pappa (2015) and echoes the discussion in Boeri and Jimeno (2015). However, our
assumptions of full insurance within the representative household and constant job search eﬀort
imply that we do not incorporate the traditional insurance versus moral hazard tradeoﬀ that is
central in the optimal unemployment insurance literature.7
        Finally, our results about the positive eﬀects of relaxing unemployment benefits on job creation
during a recession are consistent with the empirical evidence in Hagedorn, Karahan, Manovskii, and
Mitman (2013), who show that benefit extensions during the Great Recession raised equilibrium
wages and led to a sharp contraction in vacancy creation and employment, and a rise in unemploy-
ment in the U.S. economy. Hagedorn, Manovskii, and Mitman (2015) find positive eﬀects on job
creation of the 2014 benefit cut.
        The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the model. Section 3 describes
the calibration and discusses the performance of the model in relation to the data. Section 4
studies the adjustment to unanticipated market deregulation in normal times. Section 5 focuses on
unanticipated market reforms during recessions. Section 6 discusses the consequences of credible
commitment to future market reform. Section 7 focuses on constraints on external borrowing and
conducts additional experiments. Section 8 concludes.


2       The Model

We model a world economy that consists of two countries, Home and Foreign. Foreign variables
are denoted with a superscript star. We use the subscript  to denote quantities and prices of a
country’s own goods consumed domestically, and the subscript  to denote quantities and prices
    7
   We leave this extension of our framework for future work. Promising directions in this vein include Atkeson and
Kehoe (1996), Krusell, Mukoyama, and Sahin (2010), and Nakajima (2012).



                                                        6
of exports. We focus on the Home economy in presenting our model, with the understanding that
analogous equations hold for Foreign. We abstract from monetary frictions that would motivate
a demand for currency in each country, and we resort to a cashless economy following Woodford
(2003). Money serves the purpose of a convenient unit of account in the presence of endogenous
product variety. All prices and wages are flexible, so we will focus only on real variables in the
solution of the model.


Household Preferences

Each economy is populated by a unit mass of atomistic, identical households. Each household is
thought of as a large extended family containing a continuum of members along a unit interval.
The household does not choose how many family members work; the measure of family members
who work is determined by a labor matching process. Unemployed workers receive a fixed amount
  0 of household production units. Following Andolfatto (1996), Merz (1995), and much of the
subsequent literature, we assume full consumption insurance between employed and unemployed
individuals, so that there is no ex-post heterogeneity across individuals in the household. We
assume habit persistence in consumption utility as this improves the quantitative performance of
the model by slowing down the response of consumption to shocks.
   The representative household maximizes expected intertemporal utility,
                                     "   ∞        ¡              ¢1− #
                                         X           −    
                                            −           −1
                                                                         
                                         =
                                                        1 −  

where the discount factor  and habit parameter  both lie between 0 and 1, and   0. Household
consumption  is defined as
                                           ≡  +  (1 −  )

where  is consumption of market goods, and  denotes the number of employed workers.
   Market consumption is a composite of tradable and non-tradable baskets,  and  :

                  ∙                                    ¸ 
                              1 ¡  ¢  −1  1
                                              ¡ ¢  −1  −1
                                                         
               = (1 −  )    +   
                                           
                                                                            0    1


where  ∈ (0 1] is the share of non-tradables in total market consumption, and  denotes the




                                                      7
constant elasticity of substitution. The consumption-based price index is

                                     h         ¡ ¢1−     ¡    ¢1− i 1−1 
                                  = (1 −  )     +                  


where  is the price of the tradable basket, and  is the price of the non-tradable basket.
                                                      ¡      ¢−
The domestic demand for tradables is  = (1 −  )          ; the domestic demand for
                          ¡       ¢−
non-tradables is  =       
                                        .
   The tradable consumption basket  aggregates homogenous Home and Foreign consumption
goods in Armington form with elasticity of substitution   0:

                        "                                                             #    
                                                           1 ³    ´  −1
                                         1   ¡  ¢  −1      ∗    
                                                                                           −1

                  = (1 −  )
                                                          
                                        
                                                +                                        0    1


A similar basket describes consumption in the Foreign country. Importantly, in each country’s
tradable consumption basket, 1 −  is the weight attached to the country’s own good. Therefore,
preferences are biased in favor of domestic goods whenever   12. The tradable consumption-
based price index that corresponds to the basket  is given by

                                    ∙                       ³ ∗ ´1− ¸ 1−
                                                                          1
                                              ¡  ¢1−                     
                                = (1 −  )            
                                                        +               

                                                               ³          ´−
The demand for Home tradable consumption is                    
                                                   = (1 −  )              , while the
                                                                        
                                                   ³ ∗       ´−
                                             =
demand for Foreign tradable consumption is                   .
                                                    

   At any given point in time, only a subset of non-tradable goods Ω ∈ Ω is available. We assume
that the aggregator  takes a translog form following Feenstra (2003). As a result, the elasticity of
substitution across varieties within the basket  is an increasing function of the number of goods
available. The translog assumption allows us to capture the pro-competitive eﬀect of deregulating
in the goods market on markups, documented by the empirical literature–see Griﬃth, Harrison,
and Macartney (2007). Translog preferences are characterized by defining the unit expenditure
function (i.e., the price index) associated with the preference aggregator. Let 
                                                                                  be the nominal

price for the good  ∈ Ω . The unit expenditure function on the basket of goods  is given by:
                 µ           ¶          Z                            Z     Z
             1       1   1         1                           
 ln    =            −         +           ln 
                                                    ()  +                     ln                         0      0
                                                                                       () (ln  () − ln  ( ))  (1)
            2        ̃                                  2
                                    ∈Ω                           ∈Ω  0 ∈Ω

where   0 denotes the price-elasticity of the spending share on an individual good,  is the


                                                               8
total number of products available at time , and ̃ is the mass of Ω.


Production

In each country, there are two vertically integrated production stages. At the upstream level,
perfectly competitive firms use capital and labor to produce a non-tradable intermediate input.
At the downstream level, there are two sectors producing final consumption goods. In one sector,
monopolistically competitive firms purchase intermediate inputs and produce diﬀerentiated non-
tradable varieties. In the second sector, perfectly competitive firms combine intermediate inputs
and non-tradable goods to produce a consumption good that is sold to consumers in both countries.
This production structure is consistent with the evidence provided by Boeri, Castanheira, Faini,
and Galasso (2006), who document how service industries are a key supplier of the manufacturing
sector.


Intermediate Goods Production

There is a unit mass of perfectly competitive intermediate producers. Production requires capital
and labor. Within each firm there is a continuum of jobs; each job is executed by one worker.
Following Gertler and Trigari (2009) and den Haan, Ramey, and Watson (2000), we assume that
capital is perfectly mobile across firms and jobs and that there is a competitive rental market in
capital. While firms are “large” as they employ a continuum of workers, firms are still of measure
zero relative to the aggregate size of the economy.
                                  ¡ ¢
    A filled job  produces    units of output, where  denotes aggregate productivity, 
represents a random disturbance that is specific to match , and  is the stock of capital allocated
to the job. Within each firm, jobs with identical productivity  produce the same amount of
output. For this reason, in the remainder of the paper we suppress the job index  and identify a
job with its idiosyncratic productivity  . As common practice in the literature, we assume that
 is a per-period  draw from a time-invariant distribution with c.d.f. (), positive support,
and density  (). When solving the model, we assume that () is lognormal with log-scale 
and shape   . Aggregate productivity  is exogenous and common to all firms. We assume that
 and ∗ follow a bivariate (1) process in logs, with Home (Foreign) productivity subject to
innovations  (∗ ). The diagonal elements of the autoregressive matrix Φ, Φ11 and Φ22 , measure
the persistence of exogenous productivity and are strictly between 0 and 1, and the oﬀ-diagonal
elements Φ12 and Φ21 measure productivity spillovers. The productivity innovations  and ∗

                                                  9
are normally distributed with zero mean and variance-covariance matrix Σ ∗ .
       The representative intermediate firm produces output
                                                                Z   ∞
                                                      1
                                       =                          () ()                              (2)
                                                  1 − ( )   


where  is the measure of jobs within the firm,  () is the amount of capital allocated to a job
with idiosyncratic productivity , and the term  represents an endogenously determined critical
threshold below which jobs that draw    are not profitable. In this case, the value to the
firm of continuing the match is less than the value of separation, and the job is destroyed. When
terminating a job, each firm incurs a real cost  . Firing costs are not a transfer to workers here and
are treated as a pure loss (administrative costs of layoﬀ procedures). Severance transfers from firms
to workers would have no allocative eﬀects with wage bargaining as assumed below (see Mortensen
and Pissarides, 2002). Finally, the relationship between a firm and a worker can also be severed
for exogenous reasons; in which case, however, no firing costs are paid. Denote with  the fraction
of jobs that are exogenously separated from each firm in each period.
       Job creation is subject to matching frictions. To hire a new worker, firms have to post a vacancy,
incurring a real fixed cost . The probability of finding a worker depends on a constant returns
to scale matching technology, which converts aggregate unemployed workers  and aggregate
vacancies  into aggregate matches  =  1− , where 0    1. Each firm meets unemployed
workers at a rate  ≡   . Searching workers in period  are equal to the mass of unemployed
workers:  = (1 −  ).
       The timing of events is as follows. At the beginning of each period, a fraction  of jobs
are exogenously separated. Aggregate and idiosyncratic shocks are then realized, after which the
representative firm chooses the productivity threshold  that determines the measure of jobs
endogenously destroyed,  ( ). Once the firing round has taken place, firms post vacancies,  ,
                                                               R∞
and select their total capital stock,  =  ̃ , where ̃ ≡   () () [1 −  ( )].8 The
                                                                                  

assumption that firms select capital after observing aggregate and idiosyncratic shocks follows den
Haan, Ramey, and Watson (2000).
       The inflow of new workers and the outflow of workers due to separations jointly determine the
   8
    With full capital mobility and price-taker firms in the capital market, it is irrelevant whether producers choose the
total stock of capital  , or, instead, determine the optimal capital stock for each existing job,  (). See Cacciatore
and Fiori (2016) for the proof.




                                                           10
evolution of firm-level employment:


                                 = (1 − ) (1 −  ( )) (−1 + −1 −1 )                              (3)


All separated workers are assumed to immediately reenter the unemployment pool.
   As shown in Cacciatore and Fiori (2016), owing to perfectly mobile capital rented in a compet-
itive market, producer’s output exhibits constant returns to scale in labor and capital:


                                               =  ̃  1−
                                                                   


where                                  "                                           #1−
                                                       Z   ∞
                                            1
                                  ̃ ≡                          1(1−) ()
                                        1 −  ( )   

is a weighted average of the idiosyncratic productivity of individual jobs. Intermediate goods
producers sell their output to final producers at a real price  in units of consumption. Per-period
real profits are given by


             =   ̃  1−
                                    − ̃  −   −  − ( ) (1 − ) (−1 + −1 −1 )  

                                                       R∞
where  is the rental rate of capital and ̃ ≡          ()() [1 −  ( )] is the average wage paid
by the firm, weighted according to the distribution of the idiosyncratic job productivities. Given the
constraint in (3), the representative intermediate input producer chooses employment  , capital
 , the number of vacancies to be posted  , and the job destruction threshold  to maximize the
                                              ¡P∞           
                                                              ¢                 −
present discounted value of real profits:      =    , where   ≡            denotes
the stochastic discount factor of Home households, who are assumed to own intermediate input
firms. The term    denotes the marginal utility of consumption:

                                 ¡              ¢         h¡             ¢− i
                                             −
                           ≡  −  −1              
                                                  −   +1 −         


   By combining the first-order conditions for  and  , we obtain the following job creation
equation:
                     ½       ∙            µ                                ¶              ¸¾
                             ¡    ¡  ¢¢                                    ¡  ¢
         = (1 − )   +1 1 −  +1   (1 − ) +1 +1 − ̃+1 +        −  +1 +1                    (4)
                                                     +1           +1

Equation (4) equalizes the marginal cost and the marginal benefit of posting a vacancy. With


                                                           11
probability  the vacancy is filled; in which case, two events are possible: Either the new recruit will
be fired in period  + 1, and the firm will pay firing costs, or the match will survive job destruction,
generating value for the firm. The marginal benefit of a filled vacancy includes expected discounted
savings on future vacancy posting, plus the average profits generated by a match. Profits from the
match take into account the marginal revenue product from the match and its wage cost. Forward
looking iteration of equation (4) implies that, at the optimum, the expected discounted value of
the stream of profits generated by a match over its expected lifetime is equal to  .
       The first-order condition for the job-productivity threshold  implies the following job destruc-
tion equation:
                                                  µ         ¶    1
                                                           1−                  
                                 (1 − )                           −  ( ) +      = −                       (5)
                                                    ̃                            

At the optimum, the value to the firm of a job with productivity  must be equal to zero, implying
that the contribution of the match to current and expected future profits is exactly equal to the
firm outside option–firing the worker, paying  . When unprofitable jobs are terminated, the firm
loses current and expected profits it would have earned had it kept the laid-oﬀ workers. At the
same time, however, the firm benefits from job destruction, as unproductive jobs are removed and
the distribution of job productivities within the firm is improved.9
       The optimal capital demand implied by the first-order condition for  equates the marginal
revenue product of capital to its marginal cost:    =  .


Wage Setting

As is standard practice in the literature, we assume surplus splitting between an individual worker
and the firm. The surplus-splitting rule divides the surplus of each match in shares determined by
an exogenous bargaining weight  ∈ (0 1), which identifies the workers’ bargaining power.10 The
analytical derivation of the wage equation is presented in an Online Appendix–henceforth referred
to simply as the Appendix–along with other technical details and additional material.11 We show
there that the wage payment to each worker is a weighted average between the marginal revenue
   9
     Equation (5) implies that the firm keeps some currently unprofitable jobs occupied. This happens because current
job productivity can improve in the future, and the firm has to incur firing and recruitment costs in order to replace
a worker.
  10
     Following standard practice in the literature, we formulate the problem as though the worker is interested in
maximizing expected discounted income. As pointed out by Rogerson, Shimer, and Wright (2005), this is the same
as maximizing expected utility if the worker is risk neutral, of course, but also if (s)he is risk averse and markets are
complete, since then (s)he can maximize utility by first maximizing income and then smoothing consumption.
  11
     The Appendix is available at http://faculty.washington.edu/ghiro/CacciatoreDuvalFioriGhiroJEDC16Appx.pdf.




                                                                 12
product of the match (plus a firing costs component) and the worker’s outside option, denoted with
 :                   "                                                              #
                                            µ ¶1(1−)
                                                                     ¡            ¢
             () =  (1 − )                      +  − (1 − )   +1 +1 + (1 − )                 (6)
                                           ̃

The worker’s outside option  corresponds to the value of unemployment, which includes home
production,  , unemployment benefit from the government,  , and the expected discounted value
of searching for other jobs:

                                                       n       £     ¡  ¢¤  o
                            ≡  +  +  (1 − )   +1 1 −  +1 ˜ +1 
                                                                           ∆                                       (7)


where  ≡   is the job-finding probability. Unemployment benefits, in units of final consump-
                                                                                  ˜  denotes
tion, are a transfer from the government financed with lump-sum taxes.12 The term ∆ +1

the average worker surplus:

                                                      n       £     ¡  ¢¤  o
                           ˜
                           ∆                                              ˜
                             = ̃ −   + (1 − )   +1 1 −  +1 ∆+1 



       Finally, notice that firing costs aﬀect the wage payment in the following way: The firm rewards
the worker for the saving in firing costs today (the  term in the square bracket in equation (6)),
but it penalizes the worker for the fact that, in the case of firing, it will have to pay firing costs
tomorrow.
       In equilibrium, the worker’s outside option is
                                               µ          ¶
                                                             £                   ¡            ¢¤
                            ≡  +  +                       + (1 − )    +1 +1 
                                                    1−

which implies:
              "                µ         ¶1(1−)                                                   #
                                  
 () =  (1 − )                               +  +  − (1 − ) (1 −  )   +1 +1 +(1 − ) ( +  ) 
                                 ̃

where  ≡   denotes labor market tightness.


Non-Tradable Sector

There is a continuum of monopolistically competitive firms, each producing a diﬀerent non-traded
variety . Following the language convention of most of the macroeconomic literature, we assume
  12
       The distinction between home production and unemployment benefits follows Mortensen and Pissarides (2002).


                                                                 13
coincidence between a producer, a product, and a firm. However, as in Bilbiie, Ghironi, and Melitz
(2012), each unit in the model is best interpreted as a production line that could be part of a
multi-product firm whose boundary is left undetermined. In this interpretation, producer entry
and exit capture the product-switching dynamics within firms documented by Bernard, Redding,
and Schott (2010).
       The number of firms serving the market is endogenous. Prior to entry, firms face a sunk entry
cost  , in units of consumption.13 Sunk entry costs reflect both a technological constraint ( )
and administrative costs related to regulation ( ), i.e.,  ≡  +  . In every period , there
is an unbounded mass of prospective entrants in the final goods sector in each country. All firms
that enter the economy produce in every period until they are hit by a “death” shock, which occurs
with probability  ∈ (0 1) in every period. As noted by Bilbiie, Ghironi, and Melitz (2012), the
assumption of exogenous exit is a reasonable starting point for analysis, since, in the data, product
destruction and plant exit rates are much less cyclical than product creation and plant entry (see
Lee and Mukoyama, 2008 and Broda and Weinstein, 2010).
       Denote with  aggregate demand of the consumption basket of non-tradable goods. Aggregate
demand includes sources other than household consumption but takes the same translog form as the
consumption bundle  . This ensures that the non-tradable consumption price index is also the
price index for aggregate demand of the non-tradable basket. The producer  faces the following
demand for its output:                                    µ            ¶
                                                                ̄
                                                                           
                                         () =  ln                                                        (8)
                                                              
                                                                ()       
                                                                             ()
                                     R
where ln ̄
            ≡ (1 ) + (1 )      ∈Ω   ln 
                                                   ()  is the maximum price that a domestic producer

can charge while still having a positive market share. To gain some intuition about the firm de-
mand structure, notice that firm revenue,       
                                            ()  (), is a time-varying fraction of the aggregate
                                                                ¡          ¢
demand   . The firm’s time-varying market share,  ln ̄       
                                                                    () , depends on the price

chosen by the firm relative to the maximum admissible price.
       Total real profits are given by
                                                    µ              ¶
                                                        
                                                          ()
                                      
                                           () =              −   () 
                                                          
  13
    Bilbiie, Ghironi, and Melitz (2012) and Ghironi and Melitz (2005) assume that the same input is used to produce
existing varieties and create new ones. In the Appendix, we consider an alternative version of the model in which
entry costs are denominated in units of the intermediate input. None of our results is significantly aﬀected by the
denomination of sunk entry costs.




                                                           14
All profits are returned to households as dividends. Firms "maximize the expected present
                                                                                       #     discounted
                                                             ∞
                                                             X
value of the stream of current and future real profits:         (1 − )− 
                                                                                   () . Future profits
                                                             =
are discounted with the Home household’s stochastic discount factor, as Home households are
assumed to own Home final goods firms. As discussed below, there is a probability  ∈ (0 1) that
each final good producer is hit by an exogenous, exit-inducing shock at the end of each period.
Therefore, discounting is adjusted for the probability of firm survival.
    Optimal price setting implies that the real output price is equal to a markup  () over marginal
cost  :
                                         
                                           ()
                                                = 
                                                    ()  
                                           
                                                                     
                                                                             £         ¤
The endogenous, time-varying markup                      
                                         () is given by  () ≡   ()    () − 1 , where
                           ¡         ¢
              
  () ≡ − ln  ()  ln  ()  denotes the price elasticity of total demand for variety

. Translog preferences imply that substitutability across varieties increases with the number
of available varieties. As a consequence, the price elasticity of total demand facing producer 
increases when the number of Home producers is larger.


Producer Entry and Exit Prospective entrants are forward-looking and form rational expecta-
tions of their future profits  in any period    subject to the exogenous probability  of incurring
an exit-inducing shock at the end of each period. Following BGM and Ghironi and Melitz (2005),
we introduce a time-to-build lag in the model and assume that entrants at time  will start produc-
ing only at +1. Our assumptions on exit shocks and the timing of entry and production imply that
the law of motion for the number of producing Home firms is given by  = (1 − )(−1 + −1 ).
    Prospective entrants compute their expected post-entry value 
                                                                   , given by the expected present
                                                                   £P∞                    −     ¤
discounted value of the stream of per-period profits: 
                                                        () =       =+1   (1 − )    () .
Entry occurs until firm value is equalized to the entry cost, leading to the free entry condition
                                                                               
  () =  , which in turn implies symmetry across incumbents, i.e.,  () =  for any .

    Equality of prices across firms implies         
                                              () =  . Denote the real price of each variety, in

units of consumption, with       
                             ≡   , where we maintain the subscript  to avoid confusion

with the real price of the non-tradable consumption basket,     
                                                              ≡   . Household’s preferences

imply that the non-tradable price index  and the firm-level price 
                                                                       are such that

                                                (           )
                                   
                                             ̃ − 
                                       ≡  = exp −            
                                              2 ̃ 


                                                  15
where exp() denotes the exponential of  to avoid confusion with the notation for firm value. Pro-
                     ¡         ¢¡      ¢
ducer output is  =    
                             , while the elasticity of substitution across non-tradable
varieties is 
               = 1 +  .



Tradable Sector

In each country, a unit mass of perfectly competitive, symmetric firms produce a tradable con-
sumption good,  . Production requires both intermediate inputs and non-tradable goods. When
serving the export market, producers face per-unit iceberg trade costs,    1. Thus, in equilibrium,
 = 
        +    , where   and   denote, respectively, the domestic and foreign demand
                           

for the Home tradable good, introduced before. The production function is

                                            ¡  ¢ ¡  ¢1−
                                        =        

        and   denote, respectively, the amount of intermediate inputs and non-tradable goods
where     

used in the production of the tradable good.
   Under perfect competition, Home and Foreign producers take the price of output as given, both
in the domestic and export markets. No arbitrage implies that the price of export (in units of
                        =     , where  denotes the nominal exchange rate. Let  denote
Foreign currency) is                                                        
                                    ³        ´       ³         ´                 ¡      ¢ 
                                                                       
per-period profits, defined by  =    +     −   −    .
Notice that, using the above results,  can be expressed as

                                     ¡  ¢ ¡  ¢1− ¡                 ¢
                           =              
                                                    −   +   
                                                                                            (9)


where  ≡ 
                 is the real price, in units of Home consumption, of the tradable consump-
                   

tion basket. The representative producer chooses the production inputs in order to maximize the
                                                                    ¡P∞          
                                                                                   ¢
expected present discounted value of the stream of real profits,    =    . The first-order,

optimal conditions for  and  imply, respectively:

                                         ¡               ¢
                                            
                                               +            
                                                            =   

                                            ¡               ¢
                               (1 − )          
                                                  +      =   
                                                                    


Finally, the real export price, in units of Foreign consumption, is  ≡ 
                                                                               ∗ =     ,
                                                                                         




                                                   16
where  ≡ ∗   denotes the consumption-based real exchange rate.14


Household Budget Constraint, Intertemporal Choices, and Capital Utilization

The representative household can invest in two types of financial assets: shares in a mutual fund of
non-tradable-sector firms and non-contingent, internationally traded bonds denominated in units
of domestic and foreign currency that generate risk-free real returns.15 In addition, the household
owns the total stock of capital of the economy.
       Investment in the mutual fund of non—tradable-sector firms in the stock market is the mech-
anism through which household savings are made available to prospective entrants to cover their
entry costs. Since there is no entry in the intermediate and tradable sectors (and, therefore,
no need to channel resources from households for the financing of such entry), we do not model
trade in intermediate- and tradable-sector equities explicitly. We also assume that the profits of
intermediate-sector firms are rebated to households in lump-sum fashion.16 Profits in the tradable
sector are zero in equilibrium.
       Let  be the share in the mutual fund of Home non—tradable-sector firms held by the repre-
sentative household entering period . The mutual fund pays a total profit in each period (in units
of currency) that is equal to the total profit of all firms that produce in that period,  
                                                                                              . During

period , the representative household buys +1 shares in a mutual fund of  +  firms (those
already operating at time  and the new entrants). Only a fraction 1 −  of these firms will produce
and pay dividends at time  + 1. Since the household does not know which firms will be hit by the
exogenous exit shock  at the end of period , it finances the continuing operation of all pre-existing
firms and all new entrants during period . The date  price of a claim to the future profit stream
of the mutual fund of  +  firms is equal to the nominal price of claims to future profits of
Home firms,  
                 .

       International asset markets are incomplete, since only risk-free bonds are traded across countries.
Home bonds, issued by Home households, are denominated in Home currency. Foreign bonds,
issued by Foreign households, are denominated in Foreign currency. We maintain the assumption
that nominal returns are indexed to welfare-consistent CPI inflation in each country, so that bonds
  14
                                                                                      
                               
     To see this, recall that         
                                   =     . Thus:  ≡  ∗ =   
                                                                                   
                                                                                        (  ∗ ) =     .
  15
     For simplicity, we assume extreme home bias in equity holdings and rule out international trade in firm shares.
  16
     As long as the wage negotiated by workers and firms is inside the bargaining set (and, therefore, smaller than or
equal to the firm’s outside option), the surplus from a match that goes to the firm is positive, even if intermediate
producers are perfectly competitive. Since all workers are identical, the total surplus of the intermediate sector is
positive, and so is the profit rebated to households.



                                                           17
issued by each country provide a risk-free real return in units of that country’s consumption basket.
Home (Foreign) real holdings of Home bonds are denoted with  (∗ ), while Home (Foreign)
real holdings of Foreign bonds are denoted by ∗ (∗∗ ). To induce steady-state determinacy and
stationary responses to temporary shocks in the model, we follow Turnovsky (1985), and, more
recently, Benigno (2009), and we assume a quadratic cost of adjusting bond holdings. The real cost
of adjusting Home bond holdings is 2+1 2, while the cost of adjusting Foreign bond holdings is
2∗+1 2. These costs are paid to financial intermediaries whose only function is to collect these
transaction fees and rebate the revenue to households in lump-sum fashion in equilibrium.
       The household accumulates the physical capital and rents it to intermediate input producers in
a competitive capital market. Investment in the physical capital stock,  , requires the use of the
same composite of all available varieties as the basket  . As standard practice in the literature,
we introduce convex adjustment costs in physical investment and variable capital utilization in
order to account for the smooth behavior of aggregate investment and the pronounced cyclical
variability in capacity utilization observed in the data.17 We assume that the utilization rate of
capital is set by the household.18 Thus, eﬀective capital rented to firms,  , is the product of
physical capital, ̃ , and the utilization rate,  :  =  ̃ . Increases in the utilization rate
are costly because higher utilization rates imply faster depreciation rates. Following Greenwood,
Hercowitz, and Huﬀman (1988) and Burnside and Eichenbaum (1996), we assume the following
convex depreciation function:   ≡ κ1+
                                          (1 + ). Physical capital, ̃ , obeys a standard law of

motion:                                                      "        µ              ¶2 #
                                                                         
                           ̃+1 = (1 −   ) ̃ +     1−                   −1                           (10)
                                                                  2       −1

where    0 is a scale parameter.
       The per-period household’s budget constraint is:

                                      2        
                +1 +  ∗+1 +       +1 +  2∗+1 +  +      ( +  )+1 +  =         (11)
                                      2        2    2
                                                                                                   
       = (1 +  ) + (1 + ∗ )∗  + (                                                        
                                              +  )  + ̃  +   +  (1 −  ) +  +  +  



where  and ∗ denote, respectively, real returns on Home and Foreign bond holdings between  − 1
  17
      For simplicity, we do not provide a microfoundation of capital market frictions. Baxter and Crucini (1993)
first introduced adjustment costs in the international real business cycle model, explicitly calibrating them to match
investment volatility in the one-sector two-country framework.
   18
      Our assumption that households make the capital accumulation and utilization decisions is standard in the
literature. At the cost of more complicated notation, we could work with an alternative decentralization scheme in
which firms make these decisions (leaving the model unaﬀected).



                                                         18
and ,  is a lump-sum transfer (or tax) from the government, and  is a lump-sum rebate of
the cost of adjusting bond holdings from the intermediaries to which it is paid.
   The household maximizes its expected intertemporal utility subject to (10) and (11). This yields
standard Euler equations for share holdings, capital accumulation, investment, and bond holdings,
as well as the optimality condition for capital utilization, which we relegate to the Appendix.


Some Equilibrium Relations
                                                                   ¡                 ¢
In equilibrium,  = +1 = 1,  = − (1 −  ), and  = (2) 2+1 +  2∗+1 . Aggregate de-
mand of the final consumption basket must be equal to the sum of market consumption, investment
in physical capital, and the costs associated to product creation, job creation, and job destruction:

                                                                           ( ) 
                          =  +  +   +  +                           
                                                                         1 −  ( )

Labor market clearing requires:
                                                      (              )
                                                          ̃ − 
                             ̃  1−
                                             = exp                       + 
                                                                                
                                                                                    
                                                          2 ̃ 

                                                             ³           ´
Total aggregate demand for the non-tradable good is  =  +     , while market clearing
                                              ³     ´ ³     ´1−
                                  +   =  
in the tradable sector requires                             . The equilibrium price indexes
                                                  

imply:
                                          ¡ ¢1−     ¡ ¢1−
                             1 = (1 −  )     +  
                                                             
                                          ¡      ¢1−     ³ ∗ ´1−
                            = (1 −  )        +      

   Finally, bonds are in zero net supply, which implies the equilibrium conditions +1 + ∗+1 = 0
and ∗∗+1 + ∗+1 = 0 in all periods. Net foreign assets are determined by:


                       +1 +  ∗+1 = (1 +  )  +  (1 + ∗ ) ∗ +   

                              ∗    ∗
where   ≡   
                        −    denotes the trade balance.
                             

   The Appendix summarizes the model’s endogenous and exogenous variables and the equations
that determine the endogenous variables in equilibrium.




                                                      19
3    Calibration

Given the nonlinear nature of the equilibrium conditions, the decision rules that determine present
and future values of all the variables cannot be solved for analytically. Thus, we must assign specific
values to the model parameters and solve for the decision rules numerically.
    We assume a symmetric calibration across countries.19 We interpret periods as quarters and
choose parameter values from the literature and to match features of euro area macroeconomic data
from 1995:Q1 to 2013:Q1. Unless otherwise noted, data are taken from the Eurostat database.20
We use the NIPA definition of GDP as total income:  ≡ ̃  +   +      
                                                                                +  , which equals

the sum of consumption, investment in physical capital, product creation expenses, and the trade
balance:  =  +  +  ( +  ) +   .21 Below, variables without a time subscript
denote steady-state values.
    We use standard values for all the parameters that are conventional in the business cycle lit-
erature. We set the discount factor  equal to 099, the risk aversion  equal to 1, the “share”
parameter on capital in the Cobb-Douglas production function  equal to 033, the capital de-
preciation rate   equal to 0025, and the elasticity of marginal depreciation with respect to the
utilization rate  equal to 041.22 We set consumption habit,  , equal to 06, as estimated by
Smets and Wouters (2004) for the euro area. We calibrate the elasticity of substitution between
tradable and non-tradable goods,  , equal to 05, consistent with the estimates for industrialized
countries in Mendoza (1991). We set the elasticity of substitution between tradable goods produced
in Home and Foreign,  , equal to 6, consistent with recent estimates provided by Imbs and Mejean
(2015).23 For the bivariate productivity process, we set persistence and spillover parameters con-
sistent with Baxter and Farr (2005), implying zero spillovers across countries and persistence equal
  19
     Our choice is motivated by the fact that the level of market regulation in the euro-area is rather homogenous
across countries; see the Appendix for details. For robustness, we have repeated our exercises by considering an
asymmetric calibration in which Home and Foreign feature characteristics of the periphery and core of the euro are,
respectively. None of our results is significantly aﬀected by this alternative parameterization. Details are available
upon request.
  20
     Data are available at http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu
  21
     The inclusion of product creation expenses in  is consistent with the fact that intangible capital and nonres-
idential structures (the technological components of the entry cost) are accounted for by statistical agencies when
constructing GDP; see the documentation available at http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained. Moreover,
the cost of complying with legal requirements of market entry involves the purchase of goods and services, over and
beyond licence fees; see Djankov, Porta, Lopez-De-Silanes, and Shleifer (2002).
  22
     Although the term 1 −  does not necessarily correspond to the labor share (since the labor share in general
depends on the outcome of the bargaining process), our conventional choice for  implies that ̃ = 061, in line
with the data. For the period 1995-2013, the average labor share in the euro area is 062.
  23
     None of our main results is significantly aﬀected if we use  = 15, the standard value in the international
business cycle literature.



                                                         20
to 0999. Finally, we set the elasticity of matches to unemployment, , equal to 06, the midpoint
of estimates reported by Petrongolo and Pissarides (2006). To maintain comparability with much
of the existing literature, we choose the worker’s bargaining power parameter, , such that the
so-called Hosios condition is satisfied, i.e.,  = .24
       We calibrate the remaining parameters to match statistics from simulated data to empirical
targets. Concerning the parameters that are specific to the product market, we set the firm exit
rate, , such that gross steady-state job destruction accounted for by firm exit is 25 percent, the
midpoint of estimates in Haltiwanger, Scarpetta, and Schweiger (2006). (Their estimates for France,
Germany, and Italy range between 20 and 30 percent.) In order to calibrate the entry costs related
to regulation,  , we update the procedure in Ebell and Haefke (2009) and convert into months of
lost output the OECD indicator for administrative burdens on start-ups (OECD, Product Market
Regulation Database, 2013). See the Appendix for details. Following this procedure, the aggregate
cost of product market regulation is 2 percent of GDP.25 We choose  such that aggregate R&D
expenditures are 197 percent of GDP (OECD, Science and Technology Database).26 We set the
price-elasticity of the spending share on individual goods, , such that the steady-state markup, ,
is 25 percent, a weighted-average for the euro area of the estimates provided by Thum-Thysen and
Canton (2015). We calibrate the degree of home bias,  , and the size of the tradable sector,  ,
to match a steady-state import share of 15 percent (corresponding to the average within-eurozone
import share) and a steady-state output share of 38 percent in manufacturing (from the EU-KLEMS
database). Finally, we set the share of non-tradable goods in the production of tradables, , such
that the share of manufacturing value added from services averages forty percent, as documented
by Boeri, Castanheira, Faini, and Galasso (2006). This implies setting  = 06.
       We now turn to the parameters that are specific to the conventional search and matching
framework. We set unemployment benefits such that the average benefit replacement rate, ̃,
is 32 percent (OECD, Benefits and Wages Database, 2013).27 We choose the cost of posting a
vacancy, , such that the steady-state hiring cost is 13 percent of the average wage, as estimated
  24
     Absent other distortions, the Hosios condition requires the equality of the worker share of the surplus,, and
the worker’s contribution to matching, . This implies that congestion and trading externalities that characterize the
search and matching process exactly cancel out, leading to eﬃcient job creation and destruction. In the presence of
other distortions, the basic Hosios condition  =  must be adjusted to include an appropriate additional term in
order to deliver eﬃciency. For simplicity of exposition and consistency with much literature (for instance, Arseneau
and Chugh, 2012), we simply refer to the condition  =  as the Hosios condition.
  25
     The implied entry cost at the producer level is a loss of 13 months of steady-state firm’s output.
  26
     The implied cost of non-regulatory entry barriers at the producer level is 65 percent of output per worker, a
midpoint of the values used by Barseghyan and DiCecio (2011) for the U.S. economy.
  27
     As before, we consider a weighted average of the unemployment benefits across euro area member countries.



                                                         21
by
       Abowd and Kramarz (2003) for France. Following the argument in den Haan, Ramey, and
Watson (2000), we assume that firms experiencing exogenous separations attempt to refill the
positions by posting vacancies in the ensuing matching phase. Accordingly, we choose the exogenous
separation rate,  , so that the percentage of jobs counted as destroyed in a given year that fail to
reappear in the following year is 71 percent, as reported by Gomez-Salvador, Messina, and Vallanti
(2004) for the euro area as a whole. We set home production,  , the matching function constant,
, and firing costs,  , to match the total separation rate,  , the unemployment rate, , and
the probability of filling a vacancy, . We set  = 009, the average unemployment rate in our
sample period,  = 06, as reported by Weber (2000), and  = 0036, in line with the estimates in
Hobijn and Sahin (2009). With this calibration targets, firing costs and home production amount,
respectively, to 11 and 23 percent of the average wage.28
       Three parameters are left to calibration: the lognormal scale and shape parameters,  and
  , and the investment adjustment costs, . As standard practice we choose  such that the model
reproduces the variability of investment in physical capital,  . Following den Haan, Ramey, and
Watson (2000) and Krause and Lubik (2007), we normalize  to zero and set   to match the
variability of unemployment relative to output. The model calibration is summarized in Table 1.


Model Properties

Our parameterization implies a quarterly job-finding probability equal to 034, not too distant from
the euro area quarterly average of 025 (see Hobijn and Sahin, 2009). Furthermore, the steady-state
decile ratio of gross earnings between ninth-to-first deciles in the artificial economy is equal to 99
(where ninth and first deciles are upper-earnings decile limits). The corresponding (median) figure
for yearly gross earnings in the euro area is 92 (see Eurostat, 2010, Table 2 on page 21). This
result provides additional support to our choice for   .
       In Table 2, we further investigate the model properties by comparing the model-implied second
moments for key macroeconomic variables (normal fonts) to their empirical counterparts (bold
fonts). Actual and model-generated data are HP-filtered, with a smoothing parameter set to 1600.
We solve for the dynamics in response to exogenous productivity shocks using a second-order
approximation of the model equilibrium conditions around the deterministic steady state.
  28
    The implied value of  is lower than the average value estimated for European countries, which is typically around
25 percent of yearly wages; see Doing Business Database, World Bank (2008). The reason for this discrepancy is that
empirical estimates include severance payments, while, as explained before, the model does not.


                                                         22
         An issue of special importance when comparing our model to properties of the data concerns the
treatment of variety eﬀects. As argued by Ghironi and Melitz (2005), as the economy experiences
entry of Home and Foreign firms, the welfare-consistent non-tradable price index  can fluctuate
even if product prices remain constant.29 In the data, however, aggregate price indexes do not take
these variety eﬀects into account.30 To resolve this issue, we follow Ghironi and Melitz (2005) and
introduce the data-consistent price index, ̃ . In turn, given any variable  in units of consumption,
we then construct its data-consistent counterpart as  ≡  ̃ , where ̃ ≡  ̃ . (Additional
details, including the analytical expression for ̃ , are presented in the Appendix.)
         While the volatility of output, unemployment, and investment is matched by virtue of our
calibration strategy, the model reproduces rather well the volatility of market consumption, and
vacancies.31 The model also generates a negative Beveridge curve (given by the contemporaneous
correlation between vacancies and unemployment), and it reproduces well the contemporaneous
correlation between output and all the other macroeconomic variables. Moreover, consistent with
the evidence in Elsby, Hobijn, and Sahin (2013), the job finding rate is procyclical, while the
separation rate is countercyclical. Finally, as in Bilbiie, Ghironi, and Melitz (2012), our model can
jointly reproduce important stylized facts about product creation and the dynamics of profits and
markups: procyclical entry and profits with countercyclical markups.


4        Market Reforms in Normal Times

We begin to investigate the consequences of structural reforms by studying the dynamic adjustment
to market deregulation assuming that the economy is at the non-stochastic steady state. We
consider a permanent reduction of policy parameters in a perfect foresight environment: the policy
shock comes as an initial surprise to agents, who then have perfect foresight from that moment
on.32 Given the large size of the shocks, transition dynamics from the initial equilibrium to the
                                    
    29
      The term (12) 1 − 1̃ in equation (1) implies that even if prices are the same for all goods, the ex-
penditure needed to reach a certain level of consumption declines with  . Thus, provided that   0, the utility
function from the translog expenditure function exhibits love of variety.
   30
      There is much empirical evidence that gains from variety are mostly unmeasured in CPI data, as documented
most recently by Broda and Weinstein (2010). Furthermore, the adjustment for variety neither happens at the
frequency represented by periods in the model, nor using the specific functional form for preferences that the model
assumes.
   31
      Following ECB (2002) and Christoﬀel, Kuester, and Linzert (2009), our empirical measure of vacancies is a
population-weighted euro area vacancy measure.
   32
      Market reforms are usually the outcome of legislative processes such that implementation is anticipated by agents
when it happens. This notwithstanding, treating reforms as unanticipated shocks remains a useful benchmark for
analysis. We address the issue of anticipated reforms by considering the case of credible reform commitment below.




                                                          23
final equilibrium are found by solving the model as a nonlinear, forward-looking, deterministic
system using a Newton-Raphson method, as described in Laﬀargue (1990). This method solves
simultaneously all equations for each period, without relying on low-order, local approximations.
    We assume that policy parameters in the Home economy are lowered to their corresponding
U.S. levels.33 To recalibrate entry costs related to regulation,  , we follow the same procedure
described in Section 4, which implies a loss of steady-state firm’s output equal to 1 month. We
assume that unemployment benefits corresponds to 28 percent of the average wage (OECD, Benefits
and Wages Database, 2013), and set firing costs to zero as in Veracierto (2008). Since in the model
unemployment benefits are financed with lump-sum taxes, the aggregate resource constraint is not
directly aﬀected by a cut in unemployment benefits. That is, in the model a cut in unemployment
benefits only aﬀects the worker’s outside option at the bargaining stage, without directly changing
household’s income. In order to address this issue, we consider an alternative labor market reform
which reduces the value of home production. We assume the same percentage reduction implied
by the cut in unemployment benefits.34
    Macroeconomic dynamics in the deregulating economy are similar to what described in Cac-
ciatore and Fiori (2016). Figure 1 (continuous lines) shows the eﬀects of a permanent decrease
in barriers to entry ( ). In the aftermath of the reform, output and employment are essentially
unaﬀected. On one hand, producer entry increases aggregate demand, since in order to pay for sunk
entry costs producers need to purchase final output. On the other hand, consumption (and thus
aggregate demand) fall relative to their initial pre-reform equilibrium, since households increase
saving to finance product creation. With an open capital account, increased entry can also be
financed by borrowing from abroad. As a result, the deregulating economy runs a current account
deficit during the first part of the transition. Importantly, the terms of trade,   ≡   ∗ ,
appreciate on impact in response to the reform, and remain above the initial steady state for ap-
proximately 5 years. Increased entry in the non-traded sector puts upward pressure on the price of
Home intermediate goods relative to Foreign (as shown in Figure 1, the marginal cost of production
in Home’s non-traded sector,  , rises relative to Foreign). In turn, higher intermediate good prices
and higher non-traded good prices (relative to Foreign) imply higher production costs in Home’s
  33
     We take the United States as the benchmark for market flexibility, but we make no presumption that U.S. market
regulation levels should be optimal for other countries–or, for that matter, that they are optimal for the U.S. We
leave optimal market regulation and reform in a dynamic stochastic macroeconomic framework as a topic for future
study.
  34
     Alternatively, we could change the baseline model assuming that both home production and unemployment
benefits are exogenous endowments that contribute to household’s income. The adjustment to a reduction in unem-
ployment benefits in this case would be isomorphic to a reduction in home production


                                                        24
traded sector and an appreciation of the terms of trade that is reversed only gradually.35
    Over time, as new firms enter the market, fiercer competition in the non-tradable sector erodes
the market share of incumbents, who downsize. This eﬀect leads to a reduction in the demand
for the intermediate input, and, as a consequences, higher job destruction. Labor market frictions
further propagate the adjustment to deregulation, since job creation induced by new entrants is
a gradual process, the slow reallocation of workers across producers increases unemployment and
lowers aggregate output. Unemployment peaks at 03 percent, while GDP falls by 03 percent at
the trough.
    The Foreign economy is negatively aﬀected by the initial reduction in Home entry barriers, with
both GDP and employment that temporarily fall relatively to the initial steady state. The reason
is twofold. First, the temporary decline in Home aggregate demand reduces the demand for Foreign
tradables goods. Moreover, since Foreign households invest in the Home economy, there are fewer
resources available for domestic production.
    Both Home and Foreign recover over time. Once the number of producing firms in the deregu-
lating economy has increased, the reduction in red-tape implies that more resources can be devoted
to consumption and investment in physical capital. In addition, as jobs are reallocated to new
entrants, unemployment falls, further boosting aggregate demand at Home and abroad. The larger
number of available goods results in higher goods substitutability and lower markups. In the long
run, Home GDP increases by 221 percent. There are positive, yet small, spillover eﬀects on Foreign
GDP, which increases by 018 percent.
    Figure 2 (continuous lines) plots the dynamic adjustment to a permanent reduction in firing
costs. Deregulation, in this case, presents a diﬀerent intertemporal trade-oﬀ. Lower firing costs
reduce the profitability of low productive matches, increasing job destruction. At the same time,
however, lower firing costs reduce the expected cost of terminating a match, boosting job creation.
Since destroying existing jobs is an instantaneous process, while matching firms and workers takes
times, employment, output, and consumption decrease in the aftermath of the reform but recover
over time. It takes about one year for unemployment to fall below its pre-deregulation level. This
happens because the expected present discounted value of job creation increases slowly over time,
reflecting the production lag for new matches and the initial reduction in aggregate demand induced
by firing. In the long run, GDP increases by 033 percent.
  35
     From a policy perspective, this result suggests that policymakers should not expect deregulation of upstream
service sectors to boost downstream external competitiveness quickly.




                                                       25
       The deregulating economy initially runs a current account surplus in the aftermath of the
reform, which then turns into a deficit. The initial surplus reflects the initial contractionary eﬀects
implied by the removal of firing costs, since Foreign households find it more profitable to invest
domestically. Current account dynamics counteract the reduction of export demand for Foreign
goods. As a consequence, the Foreign economy is not significantly aﬀected by Home deregulation
along the transition. As for product market deregulation, there are positive but small international
spillovers from asymmetric deregulation.
       In contrast to a reduction in entry barriers or firing costs, a reform that lowers unemployment
benefits does not have short-run contractionary eﬀects. The reason is that lower unemployment
benefits reduce the workers’ outside option and boost job creation without increasing job destruc-
tion. Thus, as shown in Figure 3 (continuous lines), unemployment gradually falls over time,
with beneficial eﬀects for aggregate consumption, output, and investment. In the long run, GDP
increases by 157 percent.
       The reduction in unemployment benefits leads to an initial current account surplus, followed
by a prolonged reversal.36 In contrast to the removal of firing costs, the initial current account
surplus reflects the depreciation of Home’s terms of trade and the corresponding surplus in the
trade balance. In particular, the reduction in unemployment benefits leads to wage moderation,
reducing the marginal cost of non-tradable production at Home relatively to Foreign. In turn,
expenditure switching toward Home tradables goods increases Home net exports.
       The short-run adjustment to a reduction in home production mirrors the dynamics following
deregulation of unemployment benefits (see the Appendix for details). This result suggests that,
in a highly regulated economy, the beneficial eﬀects on job creation and destruction implied by a
reduction of the worker’s outside option dominate the potential costs associated to lower household’s
consumption.
       Table 3 computes the welfare eﬀects of Home product market deregulation. We compute the
percentage increase of steady-state consumption ∆ that would make the household indiﬀerent
between not implementing a given reform (consuming , constant, in each period) and deregulating
(consuming  , time varying until the economy reaches the new steady state); see the Appendix for
the analytical details. All the reforms we consider have beneficial long-term eﬀects, although the
  36
    In an estimated, three-country, dynamic stochastic general equilibrium model, Kollmann, Ratto, Roeger, in’t Veld,
and Vogel (2015) find that shocks to leisure, interpreted as changes in unemployment benefit legislation, contributed
to the current account surplus experienced by Germany in the aftermath of the labor market reforms initiated by
then Chancellor Gerhard Schröder in 2003.



                                                         26
eﬀect is quantitatively stronger for a reduction in barriers to entry and unemployment benefits (the
gains is 059 percent of pre-deregulation, steady state consumption in both cases). By contrast, the
removal of firing costs induces a smaller gain, equal to 011 percent of the pre-deregulation steady-
state consumption. As discussed in Cacciatore and Fiori (2016), the reason is that positive firing
costs counterbalance the distortionary eﬀect of high barriers to entry and unemployment benefits
on the job destruction rate. Thus, while removing firing costs increases eﬃciency along the job
creation margin, there are eﬃciency losses stemming from more ineﬃciently high job destruction.
In turn, the severity of this trade-oﬀ explains why the welfare gains induced by lowering firing costs
are smaller relative to the other dimensions of deregulation.


5        Market Reforms in Times of Imbalance

We now study how business cycle conditions at the time of reform implementation aﬀect the
adjustment to market deregulation. We consider the following experiment. We assume that at
quarter 0 both Home and Foreign are hit by a symmetric, negative productivity shock. We calibrate
the size of the shock so that we can reproduce the peak-to-trough decline of euro-area output
of about 4 percent following the collapse of Lehman Brothers in September 2008. We set the
persistence of the shock such that it takes about 4 years for Home and Foreign to return to the
initial steady state in the absence of market reform. Next, we assume that at quarter 1 there is a
permanent change in regulation. As before, we consider a permanent reduction in barriers to entry,
firing costs, and unemployment benefits, and we treat this policy shock as unanticipated.37
         Figure 4 presents the impulse responses following the symmetric, negative productivity shock in
the absence of market deregulation. Lower aggregate productivity reduces the present discounted
value of product and job creation. Over time, more jobs become unprofitable, leading intermediate
input producers to increases job destruction. As a result, GDP and the number of producers fall,
and unemployment rises. Product market dynamics result in temporarily higher markups. Notice
that due to the symmetric reduction in aggregate productivity in both countries, there are no
movements in the current account, terms of trade, and the real exchange rate.
         We now turn to the consequences of market deregulation. We construct the net eﬀect of deregu-
lating markets in a recession as the diﬀerence between the impulse responses following deregulation
and the impulse responses following the negative productivity shock in the absence of market re-
    37
    This amounts to considering an unanticipated regulation shock assuming that all the state variables of the model
take the value implied by the impact response to the productivity shock.



                                                        27
form. Figure 1 (dashed lines) shows the net eﬀect of lowering entry barriers when the economy is
an a recession.
       The eﬀect is rather similar to that obtained when product market deregulation is implemented
in normal times, although short-run costs are marginally higher in a recession. The intuition is
straightforward and hinges on the fact that recession has oﬀsetting eﬀects on the present discounted
value of product creation. On one side, lower aggregate demand reduces the expected stream of
profits, with a negative eﬀect on the incentive to enter. On the other side, markups are higher when
productivity is below trend, which encourages product creation. This two opposite eﬀects largely
cancel out, and this implies a small diﬀerence between product market reform in normal times or
during recession.
       Consistent with this intuition, the welfare gains from product market deregulation are only
slightly smaller in a recession relative to normal times (see Table 3). (Details about the welfare
calculations are relegated to the Appendix.) Importantly for the ongoing policy debate, these
results suggest that deregulating product markets, if used as a response to cyclical conditions, does
little to boost the recovery from a recession. To substantiate this, in the Appendix, we compare the
response of the economy to the negative productivity shock with and without the policy response
of a product market deregulation. Not surprisingly, dynamics are remarkably similar.3839
       Figure 2 (dashed lines) shows the net eﬀect of removing firing costs when the economy is in a
recession. This reform entails larger and more persistent adverse short-run eﬀects on employment
and output when implemented in a recession. Correspondingly, the small beneficial welfare eﬀects
of removing firing costs in normal times become even smaller (see Table 3).
       Once again, the intuition is straightforward: For a given level of aggregate productivity, pos-
itive firing costs imply that relatively unprofitable jobs survive job destruction. When aggregate
productivity is below trend, the share of unprofitable matches that survive job destruction because
of firing costs is greater compared to the steady state. As a consequences, the removal of firing
costs leads to larger job destruction, which further depresses aggregate demand and output in the
short run. The increase in unemployment is twice as large relative to normal times (08 percent
  38
     It is important to clarify that while we find that product market reform is of limited use as a policy response to
recession, this is not saying that recessions display virtually identical dynamics in the pre- and post-reform environ-
ment (i.e., around the pre- and post- deregulation steady states). For instance, see Cacciatore and Fiori (2016) for
the benefits of market reforms in terms of business cycle dynamics in a more flexible economy.
  39
     Notice also that if we assume a more persistence recession (output below trend for 7 years, in line, for instance,
with the experience of Italy) the reduction in aggregate demand becomes suﬃciently strong that it more than oﬀsets
the entry incentive from higher markups. In this case, product market reform becomes a more eﬀective instrument
to boost recovery, and the trough for GDP is approximately 03 percent lower compared to what observed in normal
times.


                                                          28
versus 04), and the beneficial eﬀects of the reform materialize only after 2 and a half years, when
output finally increases above its pre-deregulation level.
         Figure 3 (dashed lines) shows the net eﬀect of reducing unemployment benefits when the econ-
omy is in a recession. Output and employment increase more strongly in a recession relative to
normal times. As in these times, the reduction in unemployment benefits (or home production)
reduces the worker’s outside option, boosting job creation. In a recession, unemployment is higher
relative to the steady state, implying that a larger pool of workers is searching for jobs. As a result,
the probability of filling a vacancy is higher, and thus the expected cost of job creation is lower.
Furthermore, for a given level of unemployment benefits, real wages are below steady state during
a recession, a second factor that contributes to the larger increase in job creation. The welfare
gain from reducing unemployment benefits is thus higher in a recession (see Table 3). As we show
in the Appendix, the same results apply when considering a reduction in home production. This
suggests that, at the aggregate level, the loss of household consumption associated to a reduction
in unemployment benefits is more than oﬀset by the beneficial eﬀects of increased job creation even
during a recession.


6        Credible Commitment to Future Deregulation

We now conduct a second experiment, studying the eﬀects of credible announcements to implement
structural reforms at some future date. This scenario captures the existence of legislative delays
that often drive a time-wedge between the executive decision of the government in oﬃce, the final
ratification of market reforms by the legislative authorities, and the implementation of reforms. In
this scenario, market deregulation acts as a news shock.
         To address this issue, we assume that the government credibly announces that market dereg-
ulation will be implemented within a year, i.e., after 3 quarters. The reform is then eﬀectively
implemented. When the economy is in a recession, the announcement takes place at quarter 1
and it is unexpected in the prior quarter, i.e., when the negative productivity shocks in Home and
Foreign are realized.
         The general message of our analysis is twofold. First, regardless of whether reforms are im-
plemented in normal times or during an economic downturn, the announcement of future reforms
induces short-run dynamics, which can be either expansionary or contractionary depending on the
reform considered.40 Second, concerning the relative merits of deregulating in normal versus crisis
    40
         The response of the economy when deregulation is actually implemented remains (at least qualitatively) similar


                                                            29
times, credible commitment to future deregulation significantly reduces the adverse short-run ef-
fects of an unanticipated removal of firing costs in a recession. By contrast, the consequences of
deregulating barriers to entry and unemployment benefits are less aﬀected.
    Figure 5 presents the adjustment following the announcement (and the subsequent implementa-
tion) of product market deregulation. Regardless of whether the reform is implemented in normal
versus crisis times, the Home economy reacts to the announcement by reducing investment in
product creation, since agents anticipate that it will be cheaper to create new products in the near
future. The reduction in investment causes an immediate drop in GDP, and an increase in unem-
ployment. However, in contrast to an unanticipated reform, consumption does not fall on impact,
and welfare rises (see Table 4).
    Since agents expect the reform to increase permanent income, the Home economy borrows from
abroad immediately in order to smooth consumption over time. When the reform is implemented,
the adjustment is similar to that previously described.41 Credible commitment to future deregula-
tion does not change the conclusion about the alternative merits of deregulating product markets
in normal versus crisis times, as the dynamics remain very similar in the two scenarios. This result
is not surprising, as the commitment to future deregulation aﬀects symmetrically the expected
present discounted value of profits and the behavior of markups.
    Figure 6 presents the adjustment following the announcement (and the subsequent implemen-
tation) of the removal of firing restrictions. In this case, the commitment to future deregulation
of firing changes the short-run adjustment more significantly relative to unanticipated reforms.
The contractionary eﬀects of the reform are much smaller, since committing to a future reduction
in firing costs boosts current job creation (by increasing the present discounted value of product
creation) without triggering a large and immediate increase in job destruction. In turn, aggregate
demand is higher. In contrast to product market deregulation, the eﬀect of commitment to future
cuts in firing costs are larger in a recession, since a larger share of workers survive job destruction
relative to the steady state. As a consequence, the discrepancy between lifting firing restrictions in
normal and crisis times is significantly mitigated relative to the case of unanticipated reforms.
    Figure 7 presents the adjustment following the announcement (and the subsequent implemen-
tation) of a future reduction in unemployment benefits. The main diﬀerence relative to the unan-
ticipated scenario is that commitment to future benefit reduction triggers product creation at the
to that observed with unanticipated reforms.
   41
      The presence of habits smooths the adjustment of consumption, which initially is virtually unchanged and then
falls smoothly over time when investment in new products needs to be financed.


                                                        30
time of the announcement (regardless of business cycle conditions). The intuition is as follows: On
one side, agents expect lower wages in the future, which boosts the present discounted value of
product creation; On the other, agents anticipate that at the time of the reform incumbent firms
will immediately benefit from the cut in unemployment benefits, thus having the same competitive
advantage relative to new entrants discussed above.
         GDP increases by more relative to an unanticipated reform, as increased product creation
stimulates aggregate demand and wages.42 However, the increase in entry is temporary, as once
unemployment benefits are eﬀectively reduced, and aggregate demand and employment increase
toward their higher long-run values, the demand for physical capital increases. As a result, the
composition of Home investment shifts from product creation to capital accumulation.
         Similarly to product market deregulation, credible commitment to future reduction of unem-
ployment benefits does not change the conclusion about the merits of deregulating in normal versus
crisis times. The relative diﬀerence remains similar to that under unanticipated reforms–and as
in that case, results are unchanged when considering a reduction in home production (see the
Appendix).


7        Constraints on External Borrowing

To complete our analysis of the importance of the conditions under which reforms are implemented,
we study whether the existence of constraints on external borrowing during a recession aﬀect the
adjustment to market reforms. We capture the existence of binding borrowing constraints in a
simple fashion by assuming financial autarky, i.e., assuming that non-contingent bonds are traded
only domestically. This implies that bond market equilibrium conditions become +1 = ∗+1 = 0
                                                                                                        ∗    ∗
and ∗∗+1 = ∗+1 = 0, and trade must be balanced in each period:   ≡   
                                                                                    −   = 0.
                                                                                        

         Figure 8 shows that the short-run contractionary eﬀects induced by a reduction in barriers to
producer entry in the service sector are larger when Home cannot borrow from abroad. Home
households must reduce consumption by more to finance increased entry in production of services,
and this reduces aggregate demand. Notice, however, that output and employment fall by less in
Foreign, as less resources are shifted across the border to the deregulated trade partner.
    42
    Notice that investment increases by 4 percent on impact, not too far from the outcome with an unanticipated
product market reform. The key diﬀerence relative to this scenario is that consumption does not fall as much, leading
to an immediate increase in GDP. This happens because the permanent income eﬀect following the expected reduction
in unemployment benefits is stronger relative to the permanent income eﬀect of an immediate reduction in barriers to
entry–long-run benefits materialize more slowly with product market deregulation, since producer entry is a gradual
process.


                                                         31
         By contrast, lack of access to international financial markets does not significantly aﬀect the
adjustment of the Home economy following labor market deregulation (hence, we relegate the
corresponding figures to the Appendix). The reason is that current account movements play a
smaller role for the short-run adjustment to labor market reforms to begin with.43


8        Conclusions

This paper studied the consequences of implementing or credibly announcing market reforms under
diﬀerent economic conditions. We showed that the situation of the cycle and the ability of a country
to access international lending matter for the dynamics triggered by changes in product and labor
market regulation. Reducing firing costs during recessions exacerbates the short-run adjustment
costs to this reform, while reduction in unemployment benefits is more beneficial during recession
than in normal times. Lack of access to international financial markets makes product market
reform more costly in terms of short-run consumption and output, as more domestic resources
must be directed to producer entry in the deregulated sector.
         Our results suggest that policymakers should be cautious in trying to use reforms as instruments
to address crisis situations, as costs and benefits can vary significantly across reforms. Even when
reforms generate long-run benefits and more favorable business cycle dynamics in the post-reform
environment, implementing the “wrong” reform at the “wrong” time could derail the political
support necessary to push through implementation and eventually reap important benefits.44
         Finally, we considered only exogenous changes in regulation policy parameters. Thus, we did
not study the optimal level of market regulation, optimal reforms, or their optimal sequencing,
neither in the long run nor over the business cycle. We view these topics as important avenues for
future research.45
    43
     The Appendix also presents an analysis of the quantitative relevance of sectoral spillovers for the propagation of
product market reforms through input-output linkages. This is accomplished by studying how the eﬀects of reforms
vary with the share of non-tradables in production of tradables, 1 − .
  44
     The argument could be made that recessions make reforms costly but also create pressure to reform. The evidence
in Bonfiglioli and Gancia (2015) suggests that uncertainty has a positive eﬀects on reform adoption, but recessions
are generally associated with smaller reforms.
  45
     In a complementary study, Asturias, Hur, Kehoe, and Ruhl (2016) study the optimal sequencing of market
reforms, focusing on changes in entry barriers, trade costs, and contract enforcement.




                                                          32
References

 [1] Abowd, J. M., and F. Kramarz (2003): “The Costs of Hiring and Separations,” Labour Eco-
     nomics, 10: 499—530.

 [2] Andolfatto, D. (1996): “Business Cycles and Labor-Market Search,” American Economic Re-
     view, 86: 112—32.

 [3] Andrés, J., Arce, Ó., and C. Thomas (2014): “Structural Reforms in a Debt Overhang,” Banco
     de España. WP 1421.

 [4] Arsenau, D. M., and S. K. Chugh (2012): “Tax Smoothing in Frictional Labor Markets,”
     Journal of Political Economy, 120: 926—985.

 [5] Asturias, J., S. Hur, T. J. Kehoe, and K. J. Ruhl (2016): “The Interaction and Sequencing of
     Policy Reforms,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, this issue.

 [6] Atkeson, A., and P. J. Kehoe (1996): “Social Insurance and Transition,” International Eco-
     nomic Review, 37: 377—401.

 [7] Barseghyan, L., and R. DiCecio (2011): “Entry Costs, Industry Structure, and Cross-Country
     Income and TFP Diﬀerences, ” Journal of Economic Theory, 146: 1828—1851.

 [8] Baxter, M., and M. J. Crucini (1993): “Explaining Saving-Investment Correlations,” American
     Economic Review 83: 416-436.

 [9] Baxter, M., and D. D. Farr (2005): “Variable Capital Utilization and International Business
     Cycles,” Journal of International Economics, 65: 335—347.

[10] Benigno, P. (2009): “Price Stability with Imperfect Financial Integration,” Journal of Money,
     Credit and Banking, 41: 121—149.

[11] Bernard, A. B., S. J. Redding, and P. K. Schott (2010): “Multiple-Product Firms and Product
     Switching,” American Economic Review, 100: 70—97.

[12] Bilbiie, F., F. Ghironi, and M. J. Melitz (2012): “Endogenous Entry, Product Variety, and
     Business Cycles,” Journal of Political Economy, 120: 304 —345.

[13] Blanchard, O., and F. Giavazzi (2003): “Macroeconomic Eﬀects of Regulation and Deregula-
     tion in Goods and Labor Markets,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118: 879—907.

[14] Boeri, T., M. Castanheira, R. Faini, and V. Galasso (eds.) (2006): Structural Reforms Without
     Prejudices, Oxford University Press.

[15] Boeri, T., and J. F. Jimeno (2015): “Unemployment in Europe: What Does It Take to Bring
     It Down?” mimeo, Bocconi University.

[16] Bonfiglioli, A., and G. Gancia (2015): “Economic Uncertainty and Structural Reforms,” CEPR
     DP 10937.

[17] Broda, C., and D. E. Weinstein (2010): “Product Creation and Destruction: Evidence and
     Price Implications,” American Economic Review, 100: 691—723.



                                               33
[18] Burnside, C., and M. Eichenbaum (1996): “Factor-Hoarding and the Propagation of Business-
     Cycle Shocks,” American Economic Review, 86: 1154—74.

[19] Cacciatore, M., R. Duval, G. Fiori, and F. Ghironi (2016a): “Short-Term Pain for Long-
     Term Gain: Market Deregulation and Monetary Policy in Small Open Economics,” Journal of
     International Money and Finance, forthcoming.

[20] Cacciatore, M., R. Duval, G. Fiori, and F. Ghironi (2016b): “Market Reforms at the Zero
     Lower Bound,” mimeo, HEC Montréal, International Monetary Fund, North Carolina State
     University, and University of Washington.

[21] Cacciatore, M., and G. Fiori (2016): “The Macroeconomic Eﬀects of Goods and Labor Markets
     Deregulation,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 20: 1-24.

[22] Cacciatore, M., G. Fiori, and F. Ghironi (2016): “Market Deregulation and Optimal Monetary
     Policy in a Monetary Union,” Journal of International Economics 99: 120-137.

[23] Christoﬀel, K., K. Kuester, and T. Linzert (2009): “The Role of Labor Markets for Euro Area
     Monetary Policy,” European Economic Review, 53: 908—936.

[24] den Haan, W. J., G. Ramey, and J. Watson (2000): “Job Destruction and Propagation of
     Shocks,” American Economic Review, 90: 482—498.

[25] Djankov, S., R. L. Porta, F. Lopez-De-Silanes, and A. Shleifer (2002): “The Regulation Of
     Entry,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117: 1—37.

[26] Ebell, M., and C. Haefke (2009): “Product Market Deregulation and the U.S. Employment
     Miracle,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 12: 479—504.

[27] ECB (2002): “Labor Market Mismatches in the Euro Area Countries,” European Central Bank
     WP 138.

[28] Eggertsson, G., A. Ferrero, and A. Raﬀo (2014): “Can Structural Reforms Help Europe?,”
     Journal of Monetary Economics, 61(C): 2—22.

[29] Elsby, M. W. L., B. Hobijn, and A. Sahin (2013): “Unemployment Dynamics in the OECD,”
     The Review of Economics and Statistics, 95: 530—548.

[30] Eurostat (2010): “The Distribution of Employees Labour Earnings in the EU: Data, Concepts
     and First Results,” European Commission.

[31] Everaert, L., and W. Schule (2008): “Why It Pays to Synchronize Structural Reforms in the
     Euro Area Across Markets and Countries,” IMF Staﬀ Papers, 55: 356—366.

[32] Feenstra, R. C. (2003): “A Homothetic Utility Function for Monopolistic Competition Models,
     without Constant Price Elasticity,” Economics Letters, 78(1), 79—86.

[33] Gerali, A., A. Notarpietro, and M. Pisani (2015): “Structural Reforms and Zero Lower Bound
     in a Monetary Union,” Temi di Discussione 1002, Bank of Italy.

[34] Gertler, M., and A. Trigari (2009): “Unemployment Fluctuations with Staggered Nash Wage
     Bargaining,” Journal of Political Economy, 117: 38—86.



                                              34
[35] Ghironi, F., and M. J. Melitz (2005): “International Trade and Macroeconomic Dynamics with
     Heterogeneous Firms,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120: 865—915.

[36] Gomes, S. (2014): “Euro Area Structural Reforms in Times of a Global Crisis,” Banco de
     Portugal WP 8.

[37] Gnocchi, S., A. Lagerborg, and, E. Pappa (2015): “Do Labor Market Institutions Matter for
     Business Cycles?,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, Elsevier, 51: 299-317.

[38] Greenwood, J., Z. Hercowitz, and G. W. Huﬀman (1988): “Investment, Capacity Utilization,
     and the Real Business Cycle,” American Economic Review, 78: 402—17.

[39] Griﬃth, R., R. Harrison, and G. Maccartney (2007): “Product Market Reforms, Labour
     Market Institutions and Unemployment,” Economic Journal 117: 142-166.

[40] Gómez-Salvador, R., J. Messina, and G. Vallanti (2004): “Gross Job Flows and Institutions
     in Europe,” European Central Bank WP 0318.

[41] Hagedorn, M., F. Karahan, I. Manovskii, and K. Mitman (2013): “Unemployment Benefits
     and Unemployment in the Great Recession: The Role of Macro Eﬀects,” NBER WP 19499.

[42] Hagedorn, M., I. Manovskii, and K. Mitman (2015): “The Impact of Unemployment Benefit
     Extensions on Employment: The 2014 Employment Miracle?,”NBER WP 20884.

[43] Haltiwanger, J. C., S. Scarpetta, and H. Schweiger (2006): “Assessing Job Flows across Coun-
     tries: The Role of Industry, Firm Size and Regulations,” NBER WP 13920

[44] Hobijn, B., and A. Sahin (2009): “Job-Finding and Separation Rates in the OECD,” Eco-
     nomics Letters, 104: 107 —111.

[45] Imbs, J., and I. Mejean (2015): “Elasticity Optimism,” American Economic Journal: Macro-
     economics, 7: 43—83.

[46] IMF (2015a): “Japan 2015 Article IV Consultation Process,” International Monetary Fund
     Country Report 15/197.

[47] IMF (2015a): “Where are We Headed? Perspectives on Potential Output,” World Economic
     Outlook, Chapter 3, International Monetary Fund.

[48] Jung, P., and K. Kuester (2015): “Optimal Labor-Market Policy in Recessions,” American
     Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 7: 124—56.

[49] Kollmann, R., M. Ratto, W. Roeger, J. in’t Veld, and L. Vogel (2015): “What Drives the
     German Current Account? And How Does It Aﬀect Other EU Member States?,” Economic
     Policy, 30: 47—93.

[50] Koske, I., I. Wanner, R. Bitetti, and O. Barbiero (2014): “The 2013 Update of the OECD
     Product Market Regulation Indicators: Policy Insights for OECD and non-OECD Countries,”
     OECD Economics Department Working Papers.

[51] Krause, M., and T. A. Lubik (2007): “The (Ir)Relevance of Real Wage Rigidity in the New
     Keynesian Model with Search Frictions,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 54: 706—727.



                                               35
[52] Kroft, K., and M. J. Notowidigdo (2011): “Should Unemployment Insurance Vary With the
     Unemployment Rate? Theory and Evidence,” NBER WP 17173.

[53] Krusell, P., T. Mukoyama, and A. Sahin (2010): “Labour-Market Matching with Precautionary
     Savings and Aggregate Fluctuations,” Review of Economic Studies, 77: 1477—1507.

[54] Laﬀargue, J.-P. (1990): “Résolution d’un Modèle Macroéconomique avec Anticipations Ra-
     tionnelles,” Annales d’Economie et de Statistique 17.

[55] Landais, C., P. Michaillat, and E. Saez (2010): “Optimal Unemployment Insurance over the
     Business Cycle,” CEPR DP 8132.

[56] Lee, Y., and T. Mukoyama (2008): “Entry, Exit and Plant-Level Dynamics over the Business
     Cycle,” Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Working Paper 07-18.

[57] Mendoza, E. G. (1991): “Real Business Cycles in a Small Open Economy,” American Economic
     Review, 81: 797—818.

[58] Merz, M. (1995): “Search in the Labor Market and the Real Business Cycle,” Journal of
     Monetary Economics, 36: 269—300.

[59] Mitman, K., and S. Rabinovich (2015): “Optimal Unemployment Insurance in an Equilibrium
     Business-Cycle Model,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 71(C): 99—118.

[60] Mortensen, D. T., and C. A. Pissarides (1994): “Job Creation and Job Destruction in the
     Theory of Unemployment,” Review of Economic Studies, 61: 397—415.

[61] Mortensen, D. T., and C. A. Pissarides (2002): “Taxes, Subsidies and Equilibrium Labor
     Market Outcomes,” CEP DP 0519.

[62] Nakajima, M. (2012): “A Quantitative Analysis of Unemployment Benefit Extensions,” Jour-
     nal of Monetary Economics, 59: 686-702.

[63] OECD (2005): “Taking Stock of Structural Policies in OECD Countries,” Economic Policy
     Reforms: Going for Growth, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development.

[64] OECD (2015): “Economic Policy Reforms: Going for Growth,” Organisation for Economic
     Co-operation and Development.

[65] Petrongolo, B., and C. Pissarides (2006): “Scale Eﬀects in Markets with Search,” Economic
     Journal, 116: 21—44.

[66] Pissarides, C. A. (2003): “Company Startup Costs and Employment,” in Aghion, P., R. Fryd-
     man, J. Stiglitz, and M. Woodford, eds., Knowledge, Information, and Expectations in Modern
     Macroeconomics: In Honor of Edmund S. Phelps, Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ,
     pp. 479-504.

[67] Rogerson, R., R. Shimer, and R. Wright (2005): “Search-Theoretic Models of the Labor
     Market-A Survey,” Journal of Economic Literature, 43: 959—9888.

[68] Smets, F., and R. Wouters (2004): “Forecasting with a Bayesian DSGE Model: An Application
     to the Euro Area,” Journal of Common Market Studies, 42: 841—867.



                                              36
[69] Thum-Thysen, A., and E. Canton (2015): “Estimation of Service Sector Mark-Ups Determined
     by Structural Reform Indicators,” European Commission, European Economy EP 547.

[70] Turnovsky, S. J. (1985): “Domestic and Foreign Disturbances in an Optimizing Model of
     Exchange Rate Determination,” Journal of International Money and Finance, 4: 151—171.

[71] Varga, J., and J. in ’t Veld (2011): “A Model-Based Analysis of the Impact of Cohesion Policy
     Expenditure 2000-06: Simulations with the QUEST III Endogenous R&D Model,” Economic
     Modelling, 28: 647—663.

[72] Veracierto, M. (2008): “Firing Costs and Business Cycle Fluctuations,” International Eco-
     nomic Review, 49: 1—39.

[73] Vogel, L. (2014): “Structural Reforms at the Zero Bound,” European Commission, European
     Economy EP 537.

[74] Weber, A. (2000): “Vacancy Durations—A Model for Employer’s Search,” Applied Economics,
     32: 1069—75.

[75] Woodford, M. (2003): Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy,
     Princeton University Press, Princeton, N




                                               37
                                   TABLE 1: CALIBRATION

Variety elasticity                         = 034      Unemployment benefit                  = 033
Risk aversion                             =1           Firing costs                          = 006
Discount factor                            = 099      Matching function elasticity          = 06
EOS, home and foreign goods                = 6        Home bias                            1 −  = 06
EOS, tradables and non-tradables           = 05      Share of non-tradables consumption    = 080
Share of non-tradables in manufacturing    = 06       Bond adjustment cost                  = 00025
Technological entry cost                   = 073     Workers’ bargaining power             = 06
Regulation entry cost                      = 109     Home production                       = 06
Plant exit                                 = 0004     Matching eﬃciency                     = 045
Investment adjustment costs                 = 016    Vacancy cost                          = 011
Capital depreciation rate                   = 0025   Exogenous separation rate             = 0036
Capital share                              = 033      Lognormal shape                       = 014
Capital utilization, scale                κ = 0035     Lognormal scale                       = 0
Consumption habits                         = 06      Capital utilization, convexity        = 041
TFP, standard deviation                    = 0007    TFP, covariance                       ∗ = 0253
TFP, persistence                          11 = 0999   TFP, spillover                       12 = 0




                                                 38
                       TABLE 2: MODEL PROPERTIES

                                       (   )      (  −1 )
   Variable           Data Model        Data Model         Data      Model
GDP ( )               1.45     1.45      1          1      0.76          0.83
                
Consumption (   )     0.63     0.80     0.63      0.92     0.78          0.92
Investment ( )       3.02     3.02     0.92      0.89     0.90          0.94
Unemployment ( )       5.55     5.55    -0.87     -0.82     0.93          0.92
Vacancies ( )          9.01    11.00     0.80      0.78     0.93          0.55
(   )         -0.66    -0.26
Note: Data moments are computed for the period 1995:Q1 to 2013:Q1.
Actual and model-generated data are HP-filtered with smoothing parameter equal to 1600.
  ≡ standard deviation of variable  (in percentage terms).




                                          39
              TABLE 3: WELFARE EFFECTS OF UNANTICIPATED REFORMS

                          Reform in Steady State            Reform in a Recession                Reform in a Boom∗
                                                          Home Welfare Change∗∗
Entry Barriers                     0.59%                             0.58%                            0.59%
Firing Costs                       0.11%                             0.08%                            0.12%
Unemployment Benefit               0.59%                             0.62%                            0.58%
Home Production                    0.55%                             0.59%                            0.52%
Joint Reform∗∗∗                    0.68%                             0.69%                            0.68%
                                                          Foreign Welfare Change∗∗
Entry Barriers                     0.03%                             0.03%                            0.03%
Firing Costs                       0.01%                             0.01%                            0.01%
Unemployment Benefit               0.06%                             0.06%                            0.05%
Home Production                    0.08%                             0.09%                            0.08%
Joint Reform∗∗∗                    0.04%                             0.03%                            0.04%
Notes: * Included for completeness of comparison. Expansion is assumed symmetric to recession.
** Welfare change ∆ expressed as percentage of pre-deregulation steady-state consumption.
*** Reduction in barriers to entry, firing costs, and unemployment benefits.




                                                     40
                TABLE 4: WELFARE EFFECTS OF ANTICIPATED REFORMS

                          Reform in Steady State             Reform in a Recession               Reform in a Boom∗
                                                          Home Welfare Change∗∗
Entry Barriers                      0.59%                             0.59%                           0.59%
Firing Costs                        0.11%                             0.10%                           0.12%
Unemployment Benefit                0.59%                             0.61%                           0.58%
Home Production                     0.55%                             0.59%                           0.52%
Joint Reform∗∗∗                     0.68%                             0.69%                           0.68%
                                                          Foreign Welfare Change∗∗
Entry Barriers                      0.03%                             0.03%                           0.03%
Firing Costs                        0.01%                             0.01%                           0.01%
Unemployment Benefit                0.06%                             0.06%                           0.05%
Home Production                     0.08%                             0.09%                           0.08%
Joint Reform∗∗∗                     0.04%                             0.03%                           0.04%
Notes: * Included for completeness of comparison. Expansion is assumed symmetric to recession.
** Welfare change ∆ expressed as percentage of pre-deregulation steady-state consumption.
*** Reduction in barriers to entry, firing costs, and unemployment benefits.




                                                     41
                         Home Consumption            Foreign Consumption              Home GDP                      Foreign GDP
                                                                                                        −0.08
                                             −0.04                           0.4
                  −0.5                                                                                   −0.1
                                             −0.06                           0.2
                                                                                                        −0.12
                   −1                        −0.08                            0                         −0.14
                                              −0.1
                  −1.5                                                      −0.2                        −0.16
                                             −0.12                                                      −0.18
                            10   20     30               10    20      30             10    20    30                10    20      30


                         Home Investment              Foreign Investment           Home Unemployment            Foreign Unemployment
                                                                             0.4                          0.1
                    6                         −0.5
                                                                             0.2                         0.08
                   5.5                         −1
                                                                                                         0.06
                    5                         −1.5                            0
                                                                                                         0.04
                                               −2
                   4.5
                                                                            −0.2                         0.02
                                              −2.5
                            10   20     30               10    20      30             10    20    30                10    20      30


                          Home Producers              Foreign Producers            Home Marginal Cost           Foreign Marginal Cost
                                                0
                                                                             1.2                        −0.04
                    4
                                             −0.05                            1
                    3
                                              −0.1                           0.8                        −0.06
                    2                                                        0.6
                                             −0.15
                    1                                                        0.4                        −0.08
                                              −0.2                           0.2
                    0
                            10   20     30               10    20      30             10    20    30                10    20      30


                            Home Wage                   Foreign Wage                 Terms of Trade               Current Account
                   1.4
                                                                             0.8
                   1.2                                                                                   −0.1
                                             −0.08                           0.6
                    1                                                        0.4                         −0.2
                   0.8                       −0.09                           0.2                         −0.3
                   0.6                                                        0
                                                                                                         −0.4
                   0.4                        −0.1                          −0.2
                            10   20     30               10    20      30             10    20    30                10    20      30




Figure 1. Home product market reform, normal times (continuous lines) versus recession (dashed lines). Responses show percentage
deviations from the initial steady state. Unemployment is in deviations from the initial steady state.
                                                       −3                                                              −3
                          Home Consumption          xForeign
                                                     10        Consumption                Home GDP                 x 10 Foreign    GDP
                                                                                 0.2
                    0.1                         8
                                                                                                              8
                     0                          7                                 0
                   −0.1                                                                                       6
                                                6                               −0.2
                   −0.2                         5                                                             4
                                                                                −0.4
                   −0.3                         4
                                                                                                              2
                             10   20     30              10        20     30              10    20    30                  10      20     30


                                                                                                                     −3
                          Home Investment             Foreign Investment               Home Unemployment           Foreign
                                                                                                                   x 10    Unemployment
                                                                                 0.8

                     0                        0.2                                0.6                         1.5

                                                                                 0.4                          1
                   −0.5                       0.1
                                                                                 0.2
                    −1                                                                                       0.5
                                                0                                 0
                                                                                                              0
                             10   20     30              10        20     30              10    20    30                  10     20      30


                                                        −3                                                             −3
                           Home Producers           x 10Foreign   Producers            Home Marginal Cost          xForeign
                                                                                                                     10        Marginal Cost
                     0
                                                5                                                             3
                                                                               −0.01
                  −0.05                         0                                                             2
                                                                               −0.02
                                              −5                                                              1
                   −0.1                                                        −0.03
                                              −10
                                                                                                              0
                             10   20     30              10        20     30              10    20    30                  10     20      30


                                                        −3
                             Home Wage              x 10 Foreign   Wage                  Terms of Trade               Current Account
                    0.1                         4                              −0.02                        0.04
                   0.05                         3
                                                                               −0.04
                                                2                                                           0.02
                     0
                                                                               −0.06
                                                1                                                             0
                  −0.05
                                                0                              −0.08
                             10   20     30              10       20    30                10    20    30                  10      20     30




Figure 2. Home firing costs reform, normal times (continuous lines) versus recession (dashed lines). Responses show percentage
deviations from the initial steady state. Unemployment is in deviations from the initial steady state.
                         Home Consumption            Foreign Consumption               Home GDP                       Foreign GDP
                                              0.05
                   1.2
                    1                                                                                      0.05
                                              0.04                             1
                   0.8
                   0.6                        0.03                            0.5                          0.04

                   0.4
                                              0.02                             0
                   0.2                                                                                     0.03
                            10   20     30               10   20       30              10    20    30                 10    20      30


                         Home Investment             Foreign Investment             Home Unemployment             Foreign Unemployment
                                                                                                             0
                    2                          0.4
                                                                             −0.5
                    1
                                               0.2                                                       −0.005
                    0                                                         −1
                                                0
                   −1                                                        −1.5
                                              −0.2                                                        −0.01
                            10   20     30               10   20       30              10    20    30                 10    20    30


                          Home Producers              Foreign Producers             Home Marginal Cost            Foreign Marginal Cost
                    0
                                                                                                          0.028
                                                0                           −0.04
                  −0.1                                                                                    0.026
                                             −0.01                          −0.06
                                                                                                          0.024
                  −0.2                                                      −0.08
                                             −0.02                                                        0.022
                                                                             −0.1
                  −0.3                       −0.03                                                         0.02
                                                                            −0.12
                                             −0.04                                                        0.018
                            10   20     30               10   20       30              10    20    30                 10    20      30


                            Home Wage                   Foreign Wage                  Terms of Trade                Current Account
                                                                                                            0.1
                                             0.034
                 −0.35
                                                                            −0.25
                                             0.032                                                         0.05
                  −0.4
                                              0.03                           −0.3
                 −0.45                                                                                       0
                  −0.5                       0.028                          −0.35
                                                                                                          −0.05
                            10   20     30               10   20       30              10    20    30                 10    20      30




Figure 3. Home unemployment benefits reform, normal times (continuous lines) versus recession (dashed lines). Responses show
percentage deviations from the initial steady state. Unemployment is in deviations from the initial steady state.
                         Home Consumption           Foreign Consumption               Home GDP                      Foreign GDP
                  −0.5                       −0.5
                                                                             −1                           −1
                  −0.6                       −0.6

                  −0.7                       −0.7                            −2                           −2

                  −0.8                       −0.8                            −3                           −3
                  −0.9                       −0.9
                                                                             −4                           −4
                            10   20     30              10   20       30              10    20    30                10    20      30


                         Home Investment            Foreign Investment             Home Unemployment            Foreign Unemployment
                    0                          0
                                                                              1                            1

                   −5                         −5                             0.8                          0.8

                                                                             0.6                          0.6
                  −10                        −10
                                                                             0.4                          0.4

                                                                             0.2                          0.2
                            10   20     30              10   20       30              10    20    30                10    20      30


                          Home Producers             Foreign Producers             Home Marginal Cost           Foreign Marginal Cost
                                                                            −0.1                         −0.1
                  −0.4                       −0.4

                  −0.5                       −0.5                          −0.15                        −0.15

                  −0.6                       −0.6

                  −0.7                       −0.7                           −0.2                         −0.2

                            10   20     30              10   20       30              10    20    30                10    20      30


                            Home Wage                  Foreign Wage                  Terms of Trade               Current Account
                                                                              1                            1
                  −0.5                       −0.5
                                                                             0.5                          0.5
                   −1                         −1
                                                                              0                            0
                  −1.5                       −1.5
                                                                            −0.5                         −0.5
                   −2                         −2
                                                                             −1                           −1
                            10   20     30              10   20       30              10    20    30                10    20      30




Figure 4. Home and Foreign negative productivity shock with high regulation. Responses show percentage deviations from the steady
state. Unemployment is in deviations from the steady state.
                         Home Consumption            Foreign Consumption              Home GDP                      Foreign GDP
                                                                                                          0.4
                  −0.5                       −0.04
                                                                              0
                                             −0.06                                                        0.2
                   −1
                                             −0.08                          −0.5                           0
                  −1.5
                                              −0.1
                                                                             −1                          −0.2
                            10   20     30               10   20       30             10    20    30                10    20      30


                         Home Investment             Foreign Investment            Home Unemployment            Foreign Unemployment
                                                8                            0.4
                    5                           6                                                        0.08

                                                                             0.2                         0.06
                                                4
                    0                                                                                    0.04
                                                2
                                                                              0                          0.02
                   −5                           0
                                                                                                           0
                                               −2                           −0.2
                  −10                                                                                   −0.02
                            10   20     30               10   20       30             10    20    30                10    20      30


                          Home Producers              Foreign Producers            Home Marginal Cost           Foreign Marginal Cost
                                                                                                          0.3
                    4
                                               0.2                            1
                    3                                                                                     0.2

                    2                                                        0.5                          0.1
                                                0
                    1
                                                                              0                            0
                    0
                                              −0.2
                            10   20     30               10   20       30             10    20    30                10    20      30


                            Home Wage                   Foreign Wage                 Terms of Trade               Current Account
                                               0.2                            1
                    1                                                                                      1
                                                                              0
                   0.5                         0.1                                                        0.5
                                                                             −1
                    0                           0                                                          0
                                                                             −2
                  −0.5                                                                                   −0.5
                            10   20     30               10   20       30             10    20    30                10    20      30




Figure 5. Anticipated Home product market reform, normal times (continuous lines) versus recession (dashed lines). Responses show
percentage deviations from the initial steady state. Unemployment is in deviations from the initial steady state.
                                                           −3
                          Home Consumption             xForeign
                                                         10       Consumption                Home GDP                      Foreign GDP
                   0.15
                                                                                    0.2
                                                                                                                  0
                    0.1                           5
                   0.05                                                             0.1
                                                  0                                                            −0.02
                     0
                                                                                     0
                  −0.05                          −5
                                                                                                               −0.04
                             10   20     30                 10      20       30              10    20    30                   10   20    30


                                                                                                                         −3
                          Home Investment               Foreign Investment                Home Unemployment            Foreign
                                                                                                                       x 10    Unemployment
                     1                                                                                            6
                                                  0                                 0.1

                                                −0.2                                                              4
                    0.5                                                              0

                                                −0.4                                                              2
                                                                                   −0.1
                     0
                                                −0.6
                                                                                                                  0
                             10   20     30                 10      20       30              10    20    30                   10   20   30



                           Home Producers               Foreign Producers                 Home Marginal Cost           Foreign Marginal Cost
                                                  0
                                                                                                                  0
                   0.05                       −0.005                               0.02

                                                                                                               −0.01
                     0                         −0.01                                 0

                  −0.05                       −0.015                                                           −0.02
                                                                                  −0.02

                             10   20     30                 10      20       30              10    20    30                   10   20    30


                                                           −3
                             Home Wage                 x 10 Foreign   Wage                  Terms of Trade               Current Account
                                                  5
                                                                                    0.2
                                                                                                                  0
                     2                            0
                                                 −5                                 0.1
                                                                                                               −0.05
                     1
                                                −10
                                                                                     0
                                                −15                                                             −0.1
                     0
                             10   20     30                 10      20       30              10    20    30                   10   20    30




Figure 6. Anticipated Home firing costs reform, normal times (continuous lines) versus recession (dashed lines). Responses show
percentage deviations from the initial steady state. Unemployment is in deviations from the initial steady state.
                         Home Consumption            Foreign Consumption              Home GDP                      Foreign GDP
                                                                             1.4
                                              0.04
                    1                                                                                      0
                                                                             1.2
                                              0.02
                                                                              1
                   0.5                                                                                   −0.1
                                                0                            0.8

                    0                        −0.02                           0.6
                                                                                                         −0.2
                            10   20     30               10    20      30             10    20    30                10    20      30


                         Home Investment             Foreign Investment            Home Unemployment            Foreign Unemployment
                    6                                                                                    0.03
                                                0
                                                                            −0.5                         0.02
                    4                          −1
                                                                                                         0.01
                                               −2                            −1
                    2
                                                                                                           0
                                               −3
                                                                            −1.5
                    0
                            10   20     30               10    20      30             10    20    30                10    20      30


                          Home Producers              Foreign Producers            Home Marginal Cost           Foreign Marginal Cost
                                                0
                   0.4                                                                                     0
                                                                             0.1
                   0.2                       −0.05                                                      −0.05
                    0                                                         0
                                                                                                         −0.1
                  −0.2                        −0.1                          −0.1

                            10   20     30               10    20      30             10    20    30                10    20      30


                            Home Wage                   Foreign Wage                 Terms of Trade               Current Account
                                              0.02                            1                            0
                    1                           0
                                             −0.02                           0.5                         −0.2
                   0.5
                                             −0.04
                                                                                                         −0.4
                    0                        −0.06                            0
                                             −0.08                                                       −0.6

                            10   20     30               10    20      30             10    20    30                10    20      30




Figure 7. Anticipated Home unemployment benefits reform, normal times (continuous lines) versus recession (dashed lines).
Responses show percentage deviations from the initial steady state. Unemployment is in deviations from the initial steady state.
                         Home Consumption            Foreign Consumption              Home GDP                      Foreign GDP
                                                                             0.4                           0
                                                0
                  −0.5
                                                                             0.2                        −0.05
                   −1                        −0.05                            0
                                                                                                         −0.1
                                                                            −0.2
                  −1.5
                                              −0.1                                                      −0.15
                                                                            −0.4

                            10   20     30               10    20      30             10    20    30                10    20      30


                         Home Investment             Foreign Investment            Home Unemployment            Foreign Unemployment
                    6                                                                                     0.1
                                              −0.5                           0.4
                                                                                                         0.08
                    5                          −1                            0.2
                                                                                                         0.06
                                              −1.5
                                                                              0                          0.04
                    4
                                               −2
                                                                            −0.2                         0.02
                                              −2.5
                            10   20     30               10    20      30             10    20    30                10    20      30


                          Home Producers              Foreign Producers            Home Marginal Cost           Foreign Marginal Cost
                                                0                                                          0
                    4
                                             −0.05                            1                         −0.02
                    3
                                              −0.1                                                      −0.04
                    2                                                        0.5
                                             −0.15                                                      −0.06
                    1
                                              −0.2                                                      −0.08
                    0                                                         0
                            10   20     30               10    20      30             10    20    30                10    20      30


                            Home Wage                   Foreign Wage                 Terms of Trade               Current Account
                   1.4                          0                                                          0
                                                                             0.8
                   1.2                                                                                   −0.1
                                                                             0.6
                    1
                                                                             0.4                         −0.2
                                             −0.05
                   0.8                                                       0.2
                                                                                                         −0.3
                   0.6                                                        0
                   0.4                                                      −0.2                         −0.4
                                              −0.1
                            10   20     30               10    20      30             10    20    30                10    20      30




Figure 8. Home product market reform in a recession, open capital account (continuous lines) versus financial autarky (dashed lines).
Responses show percentage deviations from the initial steady state. Unemployment is in deviations from the initial steady state.
                    Market Reforms in the Time of Imbalance:
                                          Online Appendix
                      Matteo Cacciatore∗                       Romain Duval†
                       HEC Montréal                     International Monetary Fund
                      Giuseppe Fiori‡                                     Fabio Ghironi§
               North Carolina State University                       University of Washington,
                                                                    CEPR, EABCN, and NBER

                                                   April 8, 2016




A       Individual Demand for Non-Tradable Varieties

Recall the translog unit-expenditure function, equation (1) in the main text:
             ∙ µ            ¶¸       Z                   Z Z
              1    1     1        1                   
   ln  =            −         +         ln   +              ln  (ln  − ln 0  ) 0 
              2  ̃                              2
                                          ∈Ω                        ∈Ω 0 ∈Ω

Taking the derivative of equation (1) with respect to ln  –the Shephard’s lemma–we get that
the share of good  in the expenditure of the representative household is given by
                                                               µ            ¶
                                                                   ̄
                                                                      
                                               () ≡  ln                    
                                                                    ()

where                                                          Z
                               ln ̄
                                     ≡ (1 ) + (1 )                  ln 
                                                                                 () 
                                                                    ∈Ω

is the maximum price that a domestic producer can charge while still having a positive market
                                                                             
share. The Home household’s demand for good  is then  () =  ()   (), where
   
 ≡   is the nominal income spent on non-tradable diﬀerentiated goods. Therefore, the
    ∗
     HEC Montréal, Institute of Applied Economics, 3000, chemin de la Côte-Sainte-Catherine, Montréal (Québec).
E-mail: matteo.cacciatore@hec.ca. URL: http://www.hec.ca/en/profs/matteo.cacciatore.html.
   †
     International Monetary Fund, 700 19th Street, N.W., Washington, D.C. 20431, U.S.A. E-mail: RDuval@imf.org.
URL: https://ideas.repec.org/e/pdu64.html.
   ‡
     North Carolina State University, Department of Economics, 2801 Founders Drive, 4150 Nelson Hall, Box 8110,
27695-8110 - Raleigh, NC, USA. E-mail: gfiori@ncsu.edu. URL: http://www.giuseppefiori.net.
   §
     Department of Economics, University of Washington, Savery Hall, Box 353330, Seattle, WA 98195, U.S.A. E-mail:
ghiro@uw.edu. URL: http://faculty.washington.edu/ghiro.



                                                        A-1
demand for variety  can be written as:
                                                          µ             ¶
                                                                ̄
                                                                            
                                          () =  ln        
                                                                                    
                                                               ()        
                                                                              ()


B    Wage Determination

Consider a worker with idiosyncratic productivity . The sharing rule implies:

                                             ∆ () = (1 − )∆
                                                                 ()                                  (A-1)

where ∆           
         () and ∆ () denote, respectively, worker’s and firm’s real surplus, and  is the worker’s
bargaining weight. The worker’s surplus is given by
                                                            ¡     ¡  ¢¢ 
                          ∆
                            () =  () −  +  ̃ +1 1 −  +1
                                                                        ˜ +1 
                                                                        ∆                               (A-2)

where ̃ +1 ≡ (1 − )  +1 , and
                                                                Z   ∞
                                    ˜             −1
                                    ∆ ≡ [1 −  ( )]                  ∆
                                                                          ()()
                                                                 


represents the average surplus accruing to the worker when employed in firm . The term  is the
worker’s outside option, defined in the text:
                                                 h        ¡     ¡  ¢¢  i
                              ≡  +  +   ̃ +1 1 −  +1 ˜ +1 
                                                                      ∆

    The firm surplus corresponds to the value of the job to the firm,  (), plus savings from firing
costs  , i.e., ∆ () =  () +  –as pointed out by Mortensen and Pissarides (2002), the outside
option for the firm in wage negotiations is firing the worker, paying firing costs. The value of the
job to the firm corresponds to the revenue generated by the match, plus its expected discounted
continuation value, net of the cost of production (the wage bill and the rental cost of capital):
                                                                       h¡     ¡  ¢¢        ¡  ¢     i
      () =    () −  () −   () +  ̃ +1         1 −  +1 ˜ +1 −  +1
                                                                                    ∆              +1 

                              R
where ∆˜  ≡ [1 −  ( )]−1 ∞    
                                ∆ ()() corresponds to the Lagrange multiplier   in the firm
profit maximization.
   For each job, the producer equates the marginal revenue product of capital to its rental cost:

                                                        −1
                                                  () =                                   (A-3)

                     )]−1
                             R∞
Let ̃ ≡ [1 −  (         
                                  () () be the average capital stock per worker. Equation (A-3)




                                                          A-2
implies:
                                               µ       ¶ −1
                                                          1
                                                             1
                                                               1−
                                     ̃ =                  ̃                                  (A-4)
                                              
                                                    hR                          i1−
                                                       ∞             ()
where ̃ is defined as in the main text: ̃ ≡   1(1−) 1−(      )       . Let  be the La-
                                                                       
grange multiplier on the constraint  = (1 −  ) (−1 + −1 −1 ), corresponding to the average
marginal revenue product of a job. The first-order condition for  and  imply, respectively:

                           n        £      ¡  ¢             ¡  ¢      ¤o
                        =  ̃ +1 (1 −  +1 ) +1 −  +1 +1                         (A-5)
                     
                                                                   
                                    =        − ̃ −  ̃ +                            (A-6)
                                                                   
By combining equations (A-3) and (A-4), we obtain
                                                        µ          ¶      1
                                                                        1−
                                        () = ̃                                             (A-7)
                                                            ̃

Using equations (A-3), (A-7), and (A-6),  () can then be written as

                                                                            
                                       () =   () −  () +                                 (A-8)
                                                                            

where                                                         µ          ¶1(1−)
                                                                  
                                    () ≡ (1 − ) 
                                                                 ̃
denotes the marginal revenue product of the worker. Therefore, the firm surplus is equal to

                                                                          
                                  ∆ () =   () −  () +               +                  (A-9)
                                                                          

                                                ˜
   Since the sharing rule in (A-1) implies that ∆    ˜
                                                  = ∆ (1 − ), the worker surplus can be
written as:

                                           n        £     ¡  ¢¤ ³                ´o
            ∆
              () =  () −   +        ̃ +1 1 −  +1   ˜+1 () + +1 
                                      1−

Using equation (A-5), we obtain:
                                                     ∙       ³             ´¸
                                                      
                       ∆
                         ()   =  () −  +          +  ̃ +1 +1                     (A-10)
                                                1 −  

Inserting equations (A-9) and (A-10) into the sharing rule (A-1), we finally obtain:
                              £                         ¡            ¢¤
                     () =    () +  − (1 − )   +1 +1 + (1 − )  




                                                    A-3
which corresponds to equation (6) in the main text. The average wage ̃ is then given by
                                  £                      ¡            ¢¤
                           ̃ =  ̃  +  − (1 − )   +1 +1 + (1 − )                           (A-11)

    Finally, notice that in the symmetric equilibrium the worker outside option reduces to:

                                                  h           ³             ´i
                               ≡  +  +         +   ̃ +1 +1 
                                                1−

Therefore, in equilibrium, the average wage is given by:
                    £                                      ¡            ¢¤
             ̃ =  ̃  +  +  − (1 − ) (1 −  )   +1 +1 + (1 − ) ( +  ) 


C    First-Order Conditions for Household Intertemporal Behavior and Capital
     Utilization
                                                     £     ¡           ¢¤
The Euler equation for share holdings is:                          
                                              =   +1 +1 + +1 ; the Euler equation for
                                           ©       £                                 ¤ª
capital accumulation requires:   =   +1 +1 +1 + (1 −  +1 )  +1 , where  
denotes the shadow value of capital (in units of consumption), defined by the first-order condition
for investment  :
                               "          µ            ¶2      µ            ¶µ         ¶#
                                                                        
                    −1
                        =    1−                  − 1 −             −1
                                    2     −1                 −1         −1
                                             "         µ           ¶µ         ¶2 #
                                                +1 +1          +1
                             +   +1                    −1                  
                                                                

The optimal condition for capital utilization implies:  = κ1+
                                                                  . Finally, the Euler equations
for bond holdings are:
                                                           ¡    ¢
                                 1++1 = (1++1 )   +1 
                                                         µ            ¶
                                           ¡     ∗
                                                    ¢           +1
                            1 + ∗+1 = 1 + +1   +1              
                                                                 

D    Equilibrium and Model Summary

In equilibrium, 57 equations determine 57 endogenous variables:  ,  ,  ,             ,   ,  ,  ,
                                                                                                              
                                                                      
 ,  ,  ,  ,  ,  ,  ,  , +1 ,  ,  ,  ,  ,  , ̃+1 ,  ,  ,   , +1 ,
∗+1 ,  , their Foreign counterparts, and  . Additionally, the model features eight exogenous
variables: the aggregate productivity processes,  and ∗ , red-tape costs of entry,  and                 ∗ ,

unemployment benefits,  and ∗ , and firing costs,  and ∗ . Table A.1 summarizes the key
equilibrium conditions of the model. For brevity, the Foreign counterparts of the first 28 equations
are omitted. The variables  ,  , ̃ ,          
                                              , and  that appear in the table depend on the variables
listed above as described in the main text.


                                                        A-4
E   Sunk Entry Costs in Units of Intermediate Input

For robustness, we consider an alternative version of the model in which the sunk entry cost is
denominated in units of final the intermediate input,  . Relative to the benchmark model, three
equations are aﬀected. First, the free entry condition now implies     =   , where  is the
price of the intermediate input. Second, aggregate demand of the consumption basket no longer
includes expenditures on product creation, i.e.,  is now equal to the sum of market consumption,
investment in physical capital, and the costs associated to job creation and destruction:

                                                           ( ) 
                                =  +  +  +                 
                                                         1 −  ( )

Finally, since the intermediate input is now used also to produce new products, labor market
clearing requires:                         (          )
                                1−         ̃ − 
                        ̃    = exp               + 
                                                               
                                                                   +   
                                             2 ̃ 
None of our results is significantly aﬀected by changing the denomination of the entry cost. Results
are available upon request.


F   Market Regulation

Regulation in the Euro Area: Core and Periphery

Table A.2 presents data on product and labor market regulation in core and periphery euro area
countries.

Calibration of Red Tape Costs

Ebell and Haefke (2009) estimate the regulation cost of market entry for 17 advanced countries in
the year 1997. They measure the average number of months of output lost due to administrative
delays and fees. Data about administrative delays are taken from the Logotech S.A dataset, as
reported by the OECD’s 1998 “Fostering Entrepreneurship” Report and Pissarides (2003). Data
    on entry fees come from Djankov, Porta, Lopez-De-Silanes, and Shleifer (2002).
    In the absence of more recent estimates, and in order to capture various product market reforms
carried out in most advanced economies since 1997, we update the Ebell and Haefke’s measure for
2013 by making use of the OECD’s barriers to entrepreneurship indicators, which are available for
the years 1998 and 2013 (see Koske, Wanner, Bitetti, and Barbiero, 2014 for details). The index,
measured on a 0-6 scale, measures “administrative burdens on start-ups”, capturing both delays
and fees.
    Our procedure is the following. First, for the year 1997, we regress the log of total entry costs
in Ebell and Haefke (2009) on the OECD indicator of administrative burdens on start-up. The
implied coeﬃcient is 0854 with a  −  of 487 corresponding to a correlation coeﬃcient of 078.


                                                A-5
The constant term is −1345. Not surprisingly, there is a very strong correlation between Ebell and
Haefke’s quantitative estimate of total entry costs and the OECD indicator.1 Next, we then plug
the numerical value of the OECD’s indicator for 2013 into this regression, obtaining an updated
estimate of Ebell and Haefke’s total entry costs for each country in 2013.
    Finally, we compute the relevant cross-country averages to calibrate the average value of reg-
ulatory entry costs. We consider a weighted average of the index values across euro area member
countries, with weights equal to the contributions of individual countries’ GDPs to euro area total
GDP.


G       Data-Consistent Variables

First, recall that the welfare-based price indexes imply:
                                 h         ¡  ¢1−     ¡  ¢1− i 1−1 
                              = (1 −  )        +                  
                                  ∙                       ³ ∗ ´1− ¸ 1−
                                                                        1
                                            ¡  ¢1−                     
                              = (1 −  )            
                                                      +               

Next, define the variety eﬀect as                        (              )
                                                             ̃ − 
                                             ∆
                                               ≡ exp                       
                                                             2 ̃ 
Therefore

                                                = ∆     
                                                        ̃ 
                                            
                                                     ¡  ¢−1 
                                               = ∆         ̃ 
                                               ∗
                                                     ³     ∗
                                                             ´−1
                                                                   ∗
                                               = ∆          ̃ 

Therefore                      ∙
                                         ¡  ¢1−     ³       ´1− ¸ 1−1 
                                                          
                            = (1 −  )        +  ∆ ̃

and                    "                                                                      #
                                h¡            i1−     ∙³    ´−1       ¸1−                      1
                                    ¢
                                    −1                  ∗        ∗
                                                                                                  1−

                  = (1 −  ) ∆     ̃       +  ∆        ̃                                 

By combining the above results, we obtain:

                       "                               µ³               ¶1−                     # 1−
                              ³¡  ¢         ´1−            ´−1                                  1−         ³       ´1−
 1−                              −1                   ∗        ∗                                             
      = (1 −  ) (1 −  ) ∆     ̃       +    ∆       ̃                                      + ∆ ̃       

    1
    Interestingly, there is no statistically significant cross-country correlation between Ebell and Haefke’s estimate
and the other components of the OECD’s barriers to entrepreneurship indicators, such as “complexity of regulatory
procedures” and “regulatory protection of incumbents”. This clearly indicates that the “administrative burdens on
start-ups” component does indeed capture firm entry costs.


                                                        A-6
The deflator is then given by

                  (                          µ³                          ) 1−
                            h¡  ¢ i1−            ´−1 ¶1−              1−
                                                                                      ¡   ¢1−
                                −1            ∗
    Ω ≡ (1 −  ) (1 −  ) ∆         +    ∆                                 +  ∆
                                                                                               


As discussed in the main text, we construct an average price index as
                                                      1
                                                      −1
                                          ̃ = Ω          

In turn, given any variable  in units of consumption, its data-consistent counterpart is:
                                                                   1
                                                     (1− )
                                     ≡         =  Ω  
                                              ̃

H    Welfare Calculations

Welfare Calculations

When reforms are undertaken at the steady state, we compute the percentage increase of steady-
state consumption ∆ that would make the household indiﬀerent between not implementing a given
reform (consuming , constant, in each period) and deregulating (consuming  , time varying until
the economy reaches the new steady state):
                             ∙ µ       ¶¸1−           ∞
                                                       X
                                    ∆
                               1+           = (1 − )     1−
                                   100
                                                                   =0

When the economy is out-of the steady state, we compute the welfare eﬀects of deregulating markets
as the diﬀerence
                                        ∆ = ∆ − ∆ 

The term ∆ is the the percentage of steady-state consumption that would leave the household
indiﬀerent between facing market deregulation at time  = 0 when aggregate productivity is in state
 (consuming  , time varying until the economy reaches the new steady state) and consuming
the pre-deregulation steady-state level, , constant, in each period:
                         ∙ µ       ¶¸1−           X∞
                               ∆                        ¡     ¢1−
                           1+           = (1 − )       
                               100                 =0


The term ∆ is the the percentage of steady-state consumption that would leave the household
indiﬀerent between facing the same temporary productivity realization that brings the economy in
state  at time  = 0 (consuming  , time varying until the economy returns to the initial steady




                                                A-7
state) and consuming the pre-deregulation steady-state level, , constant, in each period:
                           ∙ µ       ¶¸1−           X∞
                                 ∆                         ¡ ¢1−
                             1+           = (1 − )          
                                 100                 =0


I   Productivity Shocks with and without Reforms

See Figures A.1-A.4.


J   Home Production Reforms: Normal Times versus Recession

See Figures A.5 and A.6.


K    Labor Market Reforms under Financial Autarky

See Figures A.7-A.9.


L    The Role of Sectoral Spillovers

The model makes it possible to quantify the importance of input-output linkages for the conse-
quences of lowering barriers to entry in the non-tradable sector. The key parameter governing
sectoral interdependence is the share of non-tradables in production of tradables, 1 − . When
0  1 −  6 1, input-output linkages aﬀect the consequences of service-sector liberalization through
three channels. First, the increase in the number of producers in the non-tradable sector lowers
markups, reducing, other things equal, the marginal cost of production in the tradable sector. Sec-
ond, variety eﬀects associated with higher  reduce the price of the non-tradable basket, akin to
an endogenous increase in the productivity of the tradable sector. Finally, input-output linkages
increase total demand for non-tradable producers, expanding the market size.
    To address the importance of input-output linkages, we study the eﬀects of product market
deregulation when 1 −  = 0, i.e., in the absence of sectoral spillovers. In the long-run, product
market deregulation results in a smaller output gain for the Home economy (174 percent instead of
221 percent), and in a smaller increase in the number of Home producers (71 percent instead of 74
percent). During the dynamic adjustment, the Home economy runs a smaller current account deficit
relative to the benchmark scenario, and it experiences a smaller drop in aggregate consumption
and slower producer entry. These results reflect the combined eﬀect of the three channels discussed
above. First, a smaller market for non-tradable varieties dampens, other things equal, the increase
in the present discounted value of product creation, reducing the need to borrow from abroad.
Second, as markups fall by less and productivity gains are muted, aggregate demand is lower,
ultimately reducing the expansion of the deregulating economy.
    Home’s terms of trade continue to improve in the first phase of the transition following deregula-
tion, although the eﬀect is smaller in the absence of input-output linkages. In the long run, Home’s


                                                 A-8
terms of trade deteriorate by less relative to baseline scenario. Such dynamics reflect two opposing
forces induced by the absence of sectoral spillovers. On one side, lower demand for the intermediate
input by new entrants result, indirectly, in lower real marginal costs for tradable producers (and
thus lower export prices). On the other side, higher markups and lower productivity in the tradable
sector contribute to increase the price of Home tradables relative to Foreign. In the first phase of
the transition, the first eﬀect dominates, with a positive eﬀect on the external competitiveness of
the Home economy. By contrast, in the long-run, the negative eﬀect of smaller product creation
on markups and productivity prevails.
    Finally, as shown in Figures A.10 and A.11, the strength of input-output linkages does not aﬀect
the conclusion that product market deregulation has rather similar implications in normal and crisis
times. That is, even when 1 −  = 0, the dynamics of a product market reform implemented during
a recession remain rather similar to those observed in normal times, since the tradeoﬀs discussed
in previous section remain substantially unaﬀected.




                                                A-9
                                               TABLE A.1: MODEL SUMMARY
 = (1 − ) (1 −     ( )) (−1
                                 ∙   + −1 )
                                          ³         ´2 ¸
                                            
̃+1 = (1 −   ) ̃ +      1 − 2 −1 −1
+1 = (1 − ) ( +  )
                   
 =  (1 −  ) 1−
               ¡  ¢1−         ¡ ¢1−
1 = (1 −  )             +    
               µ        ¶1−        µ ∗ ¶1−
                                  
1 = (1 −  )               +    
           n         
                        o                

               ̃ −     
 = exp − 2̃ 
      ³        ´             n          o
 ̃  ̃ 1− = exp 2    ̃ −
                                     ̃
                                             + 
                                                   
                                          

 =  +  

 = 
             +   
  
        ¡  ¢ ¡  ¢1−
 =         
                                            ( )
 =  +  +   +  + 1−(           
          ½       ∙                               )
                                    ¡         ¡      ¢¢                 ³            ´ µ     ³  ´ 1−1 ¶            ¸¾
                                                                        +1 +1            +1
 =  ̃ +1 (1 − ) (1 − ) 1 −  +1             +1 +1 ̃+1      +1         1 − ̃+1          − +1
                        ∙                 ³         ´ ³  ´ 1−
                                                              1                ¸                              ³              ´
(  −1)                                        
           = (1 − )   (1 − )  ̃              ̃     −  ( +   )  + (1 − )  + (1  −  )  ̃ +1 +1

  =  
                      
(1 − )   = 
                
                          
                               

 = 
          
         ∙       ³                ´2        ³             ´³          ´¸                  ∙        ³          ´³        ´2 ¸
                                                                                    +1 +1       +1
 −1
   =   1 −  
                 2    −1    −  1    −    −1    −  1     −1     +     
                                                                                   +1              − 1    
            ½          ∙                      ³              ´−1                            ¸¾ 
                                                       +1
  =   +1 +1 +1 ̃+1 +1           +1            + (1 −  +1 )  +1
          ³         ´−1
  ̃    
                              = κ1+   
                      ½          ∙            ³           ´    +  ¸¾
                                                                      +1 ( +1     +1 )
  = (1 − )   +1 +1 +1 + 1 −  1                            +1
                                                              +1
                                 ¡       ¢
1++1 = (1++1 )   +1       ³              ´
                  ¡            ¢
1 + ∗+1 = 1 + +1      ∗
                                   +1 +1
            ¡ ¢− 
 =                  
                    ¡ ¢−
 = (1 −  )             
                                  
                      µ  ¶−
                        
   = (1 −  )               
                            
             µ        ¶−
                                ∗
 =   ∗    
                               
                 

+1 + ∗+1 = 0
∗∗+1 + ∗+1 = 0
                                                                        ∗
                                                                            ∗
+1 +  ∗+1 = (1 +  )  +  (1 + ∗ ) ∗ +   
                                                               
                                                                   −  




                                                            A-10
                       TABLE A.2: REGULATION IN THE EURO AREA
                                                                         Core   Periphery
Product Market Regulation, OECD Regulation Index Retail Industry, 2013   2.58   2.94
Unemployment Benefits, Gross Replacement Rate, 2013                      29.4   34.9
Employment Protection Legislation, OECD Index, 2013                      2.59   2.34




                                          A-11
                        Home Consumption           Foreign Consumption              Home GDP                      Foreign GDP
                 −0.5                                                       0
                                            −0.6                                                        −1
                  −1                                                       −1
                 −1.5                                                                                   −2
                                                                           −2
                                            −0.8
                  −2                                                                                    −3
                                                                           −3
                 −2.5                        −1                                                         −4
                                                                           −4
                           10   20     30              10   20       30             10    20    30                10    20      30


                        Home Investment            Foreign Investment            Home Unemployment            Foreign Unemployment
                                              0                            1.5
                                                                                                         1
                    0
                                             −5                             1
                                                                                                        0.8
                  −5
                                            −10                            0.5                          0.6
                  −10                                                                                   0.4
                                            −15
                                                                            0                           0.2
                           10   20     30              10   20       30             10    20    30                10    20      30


                         Home Producers             Foreign Producers            Home Marginal Cost           Foreign Marginal Cost
                    4                                                                                  −0.1
                                            −0.4                            1
                    3                                                                                 −0.15
                                            −0.5
                    2                       −0.6                           0.5                         −0.2
                    1                       −0.7                                                      −0.25
                    0                       −0.8                            0
                                                                                                       −0.3
                           10   20     30              10   20       30             10    20    30                10    20      30


                           Home Wage                  Foreign Wage                 Terms of Trade               Current Account
                                                                                                         0
                    1
                                            −0.5                           0.8
                                                                                                       −0.1
                                                                           0.6
                    0                        −1
                                                                           0.4                         −0.2
                  −1                        −1.5                           0.2
                                                                                                       −0.3
                                             −2                             0
                  −2                                                      −0.2                         −0.4

                           10   20     30              10   20       30             10    20    30                10    20      30




Figure A.1. Home and Foreign productivity shock followed by Home product market reform (continuous lines) versus Home and
Foreign productivity shock in the absence of Home product market reform (dashed lines). Responses show percentage deviations from
the initial steady state. Unemployment is in deviations from the initial steady state
                         Home Consumption           Foreign Consumption               Home GDP                      Foreign GDP
                  −0.4
                                             −0.5
                                                                             −1                           −1
                  −0.6                       −0.6
                                                                             −2                           −2
                  −0.8                       −0.7
                                                                             −3
                   −1                        −0.8                                                         −3
                                                                             −4
                                             −0.9
                  −1.2                                                                                    −4
                            10   20     30              10    20      30              10    20    30                10    20      30


                         Home Investment             Foreign Investment            Home Unemployment            Foreign Unemployment
                    0                          0
                                                                                                           1
                                                                             1.5
                   −5                         −5                                                          0.8
                                                                              1
                                                                                                          0.6
                  −10
                                             −10
                                                                             0.5                          0.4
                  −15                                                                                     0.2
                            10   20     30              10    20      30              10    20    30                10    20      30


                          Home Producers             Foreign Producers             Home Marginal Cost           Foreign Marginal Cost
                                                                            −0.1                         −0.1
                  −0.4                       −0.4
                  −0.5                                                     −0.15
                                             −0.5                                                       −0.15
                  −0.6
                                             −0.6                           −0.2
                  −0.7
                                             −0.7                                                        −0.2
                  −0.8
                            10   20     30              10    20      30              10    20    30                10    20      30


                            Home Wage                  Foreign Wage                  Terms of Trade               Current Account
                                                                              0
                  −0.5                       −0.5
                                                                                                         0.04
                   −1                         −1                           −0.02

                  −1.5                       −1.5                                                        0.02
                                                                           −0.04
                   −2                         −2                                                           0

                            10   20     30              10    20      30              10    20    30                10    20      30




Figure A.2. Home and Foreign productivity shock followed by Home firing costs reform (continuous lines) versus Home and Foreign
productivity shock in the absence of Home labor market reform (dashed lines). Responses show percentage deviations from the initial
steady state. Unemployment is in deviations from the initial steady state.
                        Home Consumption           Foreign Consumption               Home GDP                      Foreign GDP

                  0.5                       −0.5                                                         −1
                                                                             0
                                            −0.6
                   0                                                                                     −2
                                            −0.7
                                                                            −2
                 −0.5                       −0.8                                                         −3
                                            −0.9
                                                                            −4                           −4
                           10   20     30              10    20      30              10    20    30                10    20      30


                        Home Investment            Foreign Investment             Home Unemployment            Foreign Unemployment
                                              0                              1
                   0                                                                                      1
                                                                            0.5
                  −5                         −5                                                          0.8
                                                                             0
                                                                                                         0.6
                 −10                        −10                            −0.5
                                                                                                         0.4
                                                                            −1
                 −15                                                                                     0.2
                           10   20     30              10    20      30              10    20    30                10    20      30


                         Home Producers             Foreign Producers             Home Marginal Cost           Foreign Marginal Cost
                                                                           −0.1
                 −0.4
                                            −0.4                                                        −0.1
                                                                          −0.15
                 −0.6                       −0.5
                                                                           −0.2                        −0.15
                                            −0.6
                 −0.8                                                     −0.25
                                            −0.7                                                        −0.2

                           10   20     30              10    20      30              10    20    30                10    20      30


                           Home Wage                  Foreign Wage                  Terms of Trade               Current Account
                                                                             0
                 −0.5                       −0.5
                  −1                                                       −0.1                         0.05
                                             −1
                 −1.5                                                      −0.2
                                            −1.5                                                          0
                  −2
                                                                           −0.3
                 −2.5                        −2
                                                                                                       −0.05
                           10   20     30              10    20      30              10    20    30                10    20      30




Figure A.3. Home and Foreign productivity shock followed by Home unemployment benefits reform (continuous lines) versus Home
and Foreign productivity shock in the absence of Home labor market reform (dashed lines). Responses show percentage deviations
from the initial steady state. Unemployment is in deviations from the initial steady state.
                        Home Consumption           Foreign Consumption              Home GDP                      Foreign GDP
                                            −0.4
                    1                                                                                   −1
                                                                            0
                  0.5                       −0.6
                                                                                                        −2
                    0                                                      −2
                                            −0.8                                                        −3
                 −0.5
                                                                           −4                           −4
                           10   20     30              10   20       30             10    20    30                10    20      30


                        Home Investment            Foreign Investment            Home Unemployment            Foreign Unemployment
                                              0                             1
                    0                                                                                    1

                                             −5                             0                           0.8
                  −5
                                                                                                        0.6
                  −10                                                      −1
                                            −10
                                                                                                        0.4
                  −15
                                                                           −2                           0.2
                           10   20     30              10   20       30             10    20    30                10    20      30


                         Home Producers             Foreign Producers            Home Marginal Cost           Foreign Marginal Cost
                                                                          −0.1
                 −0.4
                                            −0.4
                                                                                                       −0.1
                 −0.6                       −0.5                          −0.2
                                                                                                      −0.15
                 −0.8                       −0.6
                                                                          −0.3
                  −1                        −0.7                                                       −0.2

                           10   20     30              10   20       30             10    20    30                10    20      30


                           Home Wage                  Foreign Wage                 Terms of Trade               Current Account
                                            −0.5                          −0.1                          0.1
                  −1
                                             −1                           −0.2
                                                                                                       0.05
                                                                          −0.3
                  −2                        −1.5                                                         0
                                                                          −0.4
                                             −2                           −0.5                        −0.05
                  −3
                           10   20     30              10   20       30             10    20    30                10    20      30




Figure A.4. Home and Foreign productivity shock followed by reduction in home production value at Home (continuous lines) versus
Home and Foreign productivity shock in the absence of Home labor market reform (dashed lines). Responses show percentage
deviations from the initial steady state. Unemployment is in deviations from the initial steady state.
                         Home Consumption            Foreign Consumption               Home GDP                         Foreign GDP
                   1.8                        0.07                             2                          0.08
                   1.6                                                        1.5
                                              0.06                                                        0.07
                   1.4
                   1.2                        0.05                             1
                                                                                                          0.06
                     1                        0.04                            0.5
                   0.8                                                                                    0.05
                                              0.03                             0
                   0.6
                            10   20     30               10   20       30              10    20    30                   10    20      30


                                                                                                                   −3
                         Home Investment             Foreign Investment             Home Unemployment            Foreign
                                                                                                                 x 10    Unemployment
                                               0.6                           −0.5
                    2
                                               0.4                            −1                           −5
                    0                          0.2
                                                                             −1.5
                                                0                                                         −10
                   −2                                                         −2
                                              −0.2
                                                                             −2.5                         −15
                            10   20     30               10   20       30              10    20    30                   10    20      30



                          Home Producers              Foreign Producers             Home Marginal Cost           Foreign Marginal Cost
                                                0                           −0.05
                  −0.1                                                                                    0.04
                  −0.2                                                       −0.1
                                             −0.02
                                                                                                         0.035
                  −0.3
                  −0.4                       −0.04                          −0.15
                                                                                                          0.03
                  −0.5                       −0.06                           −0.2
                            10   20     30               10   20       30              10    20    30                   10    20      30



                            Home Wage                   Foreign Wage                  Terms of Trade               Current Account
                                              0.05                          −0.35
                                                                                                           0.1
                  −0.6
                                                                             −0.4
                                                                                                          0.05
                  −0.7                       0.045                          −0.45
                                                                             −0.5                           0
                  −0.8                                                      −0.55                        −0.05
                                              0.04

                            10   20     30               10   20       30              10    20    30                   10    20      30




Figure A.5. Reduction in home production value at Home, normal times (continuous lines) versus recession (dashed lines). Responses
show percentage deviations from the initial steady state. Unemployment is in deviations from the initial steady state.
                         Home Consumption            Foreign Consumption              Home GDP                      Foreign GDP

                   1.5                        0.06                            2
                                                                                                           0
                                              0.04
                    1
                                              0.02                           1.5                         −0.1
                   0.5                          0
                                                                                                         −0.2
                    0                        −0.02                            1
                                             −0.04                                                       −0.3
                            10   20     30               10    20      30             10    20    30                10    20      30


                         Home Investment             Foreign Investment            Home Unemployment            Foreign Unemployment
                                                                                                         0.04
                    8                           0                           −0.5

                    6                                                        −1
                                               −2                                                        0.02
                    4                                                       −1.5
                    2                          −4                            −2                            0

                    0                                                       −2.5
                            10   20     30               10    20      30             10    20    30                10    20      30


                          Home Producers              Foreign Producers            Home Marginal Cost           Foreign Marginal Cost
                   0.8                          0
                   0.6                                                       0.2                           0
                   0.4                       −0.05
                                                                             0.1                        −0.05
                   0.2
                                              −0.1                            0                          −0.1
                     0
                  −0.2                                                      −0.1                        −0.15
                  −0.4                       −0.15
                                                                            −0.2                         −0.2
                            10   20     30               10    20      30             10    20    30                10    20      30


                            Home Wage                   Foreign Wage                 Terms of Trade               Current Account
                                              0.05
                    2                                                        1.5                           0
                                                0
                                                                              1
                    1                        −0.05                           0.5                         −0.5
                                                                              0
                    0                         −0.1
                                                                            −0.5
                                                                                                          −1
                            10   20     30               10    20      30             10    20    30                10    20      30




Figure A.6. Anticipated reduction in home production value at Home, normal times (continuous lines) versus recession (dashed lines).
Responses show percentage deviations from the initial steady state. Unemployment is in deviations from the initial steady state.
                          Home Consumption            Foreign Consumption               Home GDP                       Foreign GDP
                                                                                                             0.1
                    1.8                                                         2
                                               0.08                                                         0.08
                    1.6                                                        1.5
                    1.4                                                                                     0.06
                                               0.06                             1
                    1.2                                                                                     0.04
                     1                                                         0.5
                                               0.04                                                         0.02
                    0.8                                                         0
                             10   20     30               10   20       30              10    20    30                 10    20      30


                          Home Investment             Foreign Investment             Home Unemployment             Foreign Unemployment
                                                0.6                           −0.5
                                                                                                          −0.005
                     2
                                                0.4                            −1                          −0.01
                     0                          0.2                           −1.5                        −0.015
                                                 0
                                                                               −2                          −0.02
                    −2
                                               −0.2
                                                                              −2.5                        −0.025
                             10   20     30               10   20       30              10    20    30                 10    20      30


                           Home Producers              Foreign Producers             Home Marginal Cost            Foreign Marginal Cost
                                                                                                            0.05
                   −0.1                          0
                                                                             −0.05                          0.04
                   −0.2                       −0.02                           −0.1                          0.03
                   −0.3
                                              −0.04                                                         0.02
                   −0.4                                                      −0.15
                                                                                                            0.01
                   −0.5                       −0.06                           −0.2
                             10   20     30               10   20       30              10    20    30                 10    20      30


                             Home Wage                   Foreign Wage                  Terms of Trade                Current Account
                  −0.65                                                       −0.1
                                               0.06                                                          0.1
                   −0.7                                                       −0.2
                                               0.05                                                         0.05
                  −0.75                                                       −0.3
                                               0.04                                                           0
                   −0.8                                                       −0.4

                  −0.85                        0.03                           −0.5                         −0.05

                             10   20     30               10   20       30              10    20    30                 10    20      30




Figure A.7. Home firing costs reform in a recession, open capital account (continuous lines) versus financial autarky (dashed lines).
Responses show percentage deviations from the initial steady state. Unemployment is in deviations from the initial steady state.
                          Home Consumption            Foreign Consumption               Home GDP                         Foreign GDP
                    1.2                        0.06
                                                                                                           0.06
                     1                         0.05                             1
                                                                                                           0.04
                    0.8                        0.04
                    0.6                                                        0.5
                                               0.03                                                        0.02
                    0.4                        0.02                             0
                             10   20     30               10   20       30              10    20    30                   10    20      30


                                                                                                                    −3
                          Home Investment             Foreign Investment             Home Unemployment            Foreign
                                                                                                                  x 10    Unemployment
                     2                          0.4                           −0.5
                                                                                                            −5
                     1                          0.2
                                                                               −1                          −10
                     0
                                                 0
                    −1                                                        −1.5                         −15
                                               −0.2
                             10   20     30               10   20       30              10    20    30                   10    20      30



                           Home Producers              Foreign Producers             Home Marginal Cost           Foreign Marginal Cost
                     0
                                                                             −0.02                         0.03
                                                 0
                   −0.1                                                      −0.04
                                              −0.01
                                                                             −0.06                         0.02
                   −0.2                       −0.02                          −0.08
                                                                              −0.1                         0.01
                                              −0.03
                   −0.3                                                      −0.12
                                              −0.04
                             10   20     30               10   20       30              10    20    30                   10    20      30



                             Home Wage                   Foreign Wage                  Terms of Trade               Current Account
                   −0.4
                                               0.04
                                                                              −0.1
                                              0.035                                                        0.05
                  −0.45
                                               0.03                           −0.2
                   −0.5                       0.025                                                          0
                                                                              −0.3
                                               0.02
                  −0.55                                                                                   −0.05
                             10   20     30               10   20       30              10    20    30                   10    20      30




Figure A.8. Home unemployment benefits reform in a recession, open capital account (continuous lines) versus financial autarky
(dashed lines). Responses show percentage deviations from the initial steady state. Unemployment is in deviations from the initial
steady state.
                          Home Consumption            Foreign Consumption               Home GDP                       Foreign GDP
                                                                                2                            0.1
                    1.8
                    1.6                        0.08                                                         0.08
                                                                               1.5
                    1.4                                                                                     0.06
                                               0.06                             1
                    1.2                                                                                     0.04
                     1                                                         0.5
                                               0.04                                                         0.02
                    0.8                                                         0
                             10   20     30               10   20       30              10    20    30                 10    20      30


                          Home Investment             Foreign Investment             Home Unemployment             Foreign Unemployment
                                                0.8
                                                                              −0.5
                                                                                                          −0.005
                     2                          0.6
                                                                               −1                          −0.01
                                                0.4
                     0                                                        −1.5                        −0.015
                                                0.2
                    −2                                                         −2                          −0.02
                                                 0
                                                                              −2.5                        −0.025
                             10   20     30               10   20       30              10    20    30                 10    20      30


                           Home Producers              Foreign Producers             Home Marginal Cost            Foreign Marginal Cost
                                                                                                            0.05
                   −0.1                                                      −0.05                          0.04
                                                 0
                   −0.2
                                                                              −0.1                          0.03
                   −0.3                       −0.02                                                         0.02
                   −0.4                                                      −0.15
                                                                                                            0.01
                   −0.5                       −0.04                           −0.2
                             10   20     30               10   20       30              10    20    30                 10    20      30


                             Home Wage                   Foreign Wage                  Terms of Trade                Current Account
                  −0.65                                                                                     0.15
                                               0.06                           −0.1
                   −0.7                                                                                      0.1
                                                                              −0.2
                                               0.05
                  −0.75                                                       −0.3                          0.05
                   −0.8                        0.04
                                                                              −0.4
                                                                                                              0
                  −0.85                        0.03                           −0.5
                                                                                                           −0.05
                             10   20     30               10   20       30              10    20    30                 10    20      30




Figure A.9. Reduction in home production value at Home in a recession, open capital account (continuous lines) versus financial
autarky (dashed lines). Responses show percentage deviations from the initial steady state. Unemployment is in deviations from the
initial steady state.
                         Home Consumption            Foreign Consumption             Home GDP                      Foreign GDP
                                             −0.02
                    0
                                                                            0.4
                                             −0.04                                                     −0.08
                  −0.5                                                      0.2                         −0.1
                                             −0.06

                   −1                        −0.08                           0                         −0.12

                                              −0.1                                                     −0.14
                  −1.5                                                     −0.2
                                             −0.12                                                     −0.16
                           10    20     30               10    20    30              10    20    30                10    20      30

                         Home Investment              Foreign Investment          Home Unemployment            Foreign Unemployment
                    6                         −0.5                          0.2                         0.08
                   5.5
                                               −1                                                       0.06
                    5                                                        0
                                              −1.5
                   4.5                                                                                  0.04
                    4                          −2                          −0.2                         0.02
                   3.5                        −2.5
                           10    20     30               10    20    30              10    20    30                10    20      30

                          Home Producers              Foreign Producers           Home Marginal Cost           Foreign Marginal Cost
                                                0                                                      −0.02
                    5
                                                                            1.2
                    4                        −0.05                           1                         −0.04
                    3                         −0.1                          0.8
                                                                            0.6                        −0.06
                    2
                                             −0.15
                                                                            0.4
                    1                                                                                  −0.08
                                              −0.2                          0.2
                    0
                           10    20     30               10    20    30              10    20    30                10    20      30

                            Home Wage                   Foreign Wage                Terms of Trade               Current Account
                   1.4
                                             −0.05                          0.8
                   1.2                                                      0.6                         −0.2
                                             −0.06
                    1                                                       0.4
                                             −0.07                                                      −0.4
                   0.8                                                      0.2
                                             −0.08
                                                                                                        −0.6
                   0.6                                                       0
                                             −0.09
                   0.4                                                     −0.2                         −0.8
                                              −0.1
                           10    20     30               10    20    30              10    20    30                10    20      30




Figure A.10. Home product market reform, normal times, with ξ = 0.6 (continuous lines) versus Home product market reform, normal
times, with ξ = 1 (dashed lines). Responses show percentage deviations from the initial steady state. Unemployment is in deviations
from the initial steady state.
                         Home Consumption             Foreign Consumption              Home GDP                      Foreign GDP
                    0                         −0.02
                                                                              0.4
                                                                                                         −0.08
                                                                              0.3
                  −0.5                        −0.04
                                                                              0.2
                                                                                                          −0.1
                   −1                         −0.06                           0.1
                                                                               0                         −0.12
                  −1.5                                                       −0.1
                                              −0.08
                            10   20     30                10   20       30             10    20    30                10    20      30

                         Home Investment              Foreign Investment            Home Unemployment            Foreign Unemployment
                                                                                                          0.06
                   5.5                                                        0.2                         0.05
                                               −0.5
                    5                                                                                     0.04
                                                                               0
                   4.5                          −1                                                        0.03

                    4                                                                                     0.02
                                               −1.5                          −0.2
                   3.5                                                                                    0.01

                            10   20     30                10   20       30             10    20    30                10    20      30

                          Home Producers               Foreign Producers            Home Marginal Cost           Foreign Marginal Cost
                    5                            0                            1.2
                                                                               1
                    4                                                                                    −0.03
                                              −0.05                           0.8
                    3
                                                                              0.6                        −0.04
                    2
                                               −0.1                           0.4
                    1                                                                                    −0.05
                                                                              0.2
                    0
                            10   20     30                10   20       30             10    20    30                10    20      30

                            Home Wage                    Foreign Wage                 Terms of Trade               Current Account
                   1.2                       −0.045                                                      −0.05
                                                                              0.4                         −0.1
                    1
                                              −0.05                                                      −0.15
                   0.8                                                        0.2
                                                                                                          −0.2
                   0.6                       −0.055
                                                                               0                         −0.25
                   0.4                                                                                    −0.3
                            10   20     30                10   20       30             10    20    30                10    20      30




Figure A.11. Home product market reform, recession, with ξ = 0.6 (continuous lines) versus Home product market reform, recession,
with ξ = 1 (dashed lines). Responses show percentage deviations from the initial steady state. Unemployment is in deviations from the
initial steady state.
