                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      CAN IRON-FORTIFIED SALT CONTROL ANEMIA? EVIDENCE FROM TWO
                      EXPERIMENTS IN RURAL BIHAR

                                       Abhijit Banerjee
                                       Sharon Barnhardt
                                         Esther Duflo

                                      Working Paper 22121
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22121


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2016

Banerjee and Duflo are from The Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Barnhardt is from the
Indian Institute of Management Ahmedabad. For financial support, we thank the U.K.
Department for International Development, the International Initiative for Impact Evaluation, the
U.S. National Institutes of Health (P01AG005842), the International Food Policy Research
Institute, and the MIT Department of Economics. For dedicated research assistance we are
grateful to the team at J-PAL, including Urmi Bhattacharya, Shruti Bhimsaria, Anna George,
Dwijo Goswami, Radhika Jain, Seema Kacker, Sweta Kumari, Francine Loza, Bastien Michel,
Krutika Ravishankar, Prianthi Roy, Achill Rudolph, Laura Stilwell, Srinivasan Vasudevan,
Niloufer Taber, Micah Villareal and dozens of survey specialists. Dr. Vandana Sharma provided
medical expertise. Our partners at Tata Chemicals Limited made the distribution of DFS possible
in rural Bihar. The National Institute of Nutrition (Hyderabad) provided ongoing assistance with
the verification of iron and iodine content in salt samples. These studies can be found in the AEA
RCT Registry (AEARCTR-0000010, AEARCTR-0000013). We thank Nel Druce for detailed
comments on a DFID report that underlies the analysis in this paper. All errors are our own and
the paper does not represent the views of DFID or any other organization. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Abhijit Banerjee, Sharon Barnhardt, and Esther Duflo. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Can Iron-Fortified Salt Control Anemia? Evidence from Two Experiments in Rural Bihar
Abhijit Banerjee, Sharon Barnhardt, and Esther Duflo
NBER Working Paper No. 22121
March 2016
JEL No. I0,I00,I1,O11

                                          ABSTRACT

Iron deficiency anemia is frequent among the poor worldwide. While it can be prevented with the
appropriate supplement or food fortification, these programs often do not consistently reach the
poorest. This paper reports on the impact of a potential strategy to address iron deficiency anemia
in rural areas: double fortified salt (DFS) - salt fortified with iron and iodine. We conducted a
large-scale experiment in rural Bihar. In 200 villages, randomly selected out of 400, DFS was
introduced at a price that was half the regular retail price for DFS. After two years, we find no
evidence that either selling DFS in villages or providing it for free directly to households has an
economically meaningful or statistically significant impact on hemoglobin, anemia, physical
health, cognition or mental health. For the sales experiment, we can reject at the 95% level a
reduction of 2.5 percentage points in the fraction anemic in the entire sample, and 3.7 percentage
points among those who were previously anemic. Using an IV strategy, we find a statistically
significant, though relatively small, increase in hemoglobin and reduction in the fraction anemic
for adolescents, a subgroup that has responded well to supplements and fortification in earlier
studies. These disappointing results are explained both by relatively low take up and by low
impact of DFS even when consumed more regularly for the majority of the population.



Abhijit Banerjee                                             Esther Duflo
Department of Economics, E52-540                             Department of Economics, E52-544
MIT                                                          MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue                                      77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139                                          Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER                                                     and NBER
banerjee@mit.edu                                             eduflo@mit.edu

Sharon Barnhardt
Indian Institute of Management - Ahmedabad
Vastrapur
Ahmedabad 380015
INDIA
barnhardt@iimahd.ernet.in
1    Introduction
Iron deficiency is believed to be the most common nutrient deficiency in the world today. While
quantifying the number of affected people is difficult, the WHO estimates that 1.6 billion people
are anemic (de Benoist et al., 2008), and that about half of these cases can be traced to iron
deficiency (World Health Organization, 2001). Iron deficiency anemia is more common among
populations with a diet low in animal proteins, and high in rice or in whole wheat with high
phytate content (phytates reduce absorption) (Zijp et al., 2000). It is therefore a particularly
serious issue in Asia and in South Asia, where this type of diet is common. In Indonesia, a
large scale study of iron supplements found that 50 percent of women aged 15 and above and
40 percent of men sampled were anemic at baseline (Thomas et al., 2003).1
       Iron deficiency anemia (IDA) increases susceptibility to infection and increases the like-
lihood of experiencing weakness or fatigue (see Haas and Brownlie (2001) for a review of the
medical evidence). It has been linked to low productivity in adults and slowing of cognitive and
physical growth among children (Lozoff, 2007; Lozoff et al., 2006). Among pregnant women,
severe anemia can result in low birth weight and child mortality (Stoltzfus, 2001). Lower
hemoglobin levels in the elderly are associated with cognitive decline (Peters et al., 2008) and
worse physical performance (Penninx et al., 2004).
       While iron deficiency anemia has been recognized to be a serious public health problem in
developing countries for several years, not much progress has been made against it. Systematic
changes in diet seem to be less likely to achieve in the short run. The two alternatives to diet
change are supplementation and food fortification.
       The WHO recommends that countries with endemic anemia adopt costly large-scale
weekly iron and folic acid supplementation programs for children and adolescents, and several
countries have embarked on such efforts over the past decades (Chong et al., 2015). The largest
and most comprehensive study to date of such a program is Thomas et al. (2006) which found a
1
    Using standard thresholds of 12g/dL for women and 13g/dL for men.




                                                   2
large effect of an iron supplementation program (where each individual was given 120 milligram
of iron per week) on anemia and hemoglobin rates for those who were anemic at baseline.
That study also found increases in the labor supply of males who were anemic at baseline,
and an increase in the earnings of self-employed males, as well as improved health (including
mental health). Chong et al. (2015) set up a randomized encouragement intervention among
219 adolescents in Peru to measure the impact of such programs on test scores. Iron pills were
made available free at a local health center, and randomly selected students were exposed to two
versions of a short video that encouraged them to get the supplements. On average, students
in the treatment groups received 80% more pills than students in the control group over 10
weeks and were about twice as likely to receive at least 600 mg over 10 weeks (about a third
of the recommended dietary allowance (RDA)).They found large reductions in anemia among
treatment students who were previously anemic, and improvements in both cognitive test and
performance at school.
        These interventions suggests that iron supplements, if regularly taken, can be effective.
However, Thomas et al. (2006) spent considerable resources insuring consistent take up. In
Chong et al. (2015), without additional information (the control group), few adolescents took
up the supplement which was available free in the local clinic and it took many videos to increase
take up. Even with this encouragement, only 57% of the adolescents in the treatment groups
took a dose considered to be sufficient to affect hemoglobin levels. While systematic supplemen-
tation seems like a feasible strategy in health centers or schools, this method faces issues with
non-compliance, as well as supply, procurement, and distribution, since many countries lack the
public health infrastructure to handle the logistics (Gillespie, 1998). Outside of these settings,
systematic distribution of iron supplements may not be a practical policy in resource-poor set-
tings, where the public health systems do not have the capacity to distribute these supplements
reliably on a large scale.
        Iron supplementation of foods is potentially an attractive alternative, and as such, has
generated considerable policy excitement. It requires no additional effort on the part of the
consumer and can be done relatively cheaply in centralized locations. Foods that can be fortified
with iron include flour, milk products, fish sauce, and salt. In particular, salt seems to be an
ideal product to fortify: it is ubiquitous, cheap, and generally purchased from stores. Adding
iron to packaged iodized salt thus seems to be a promising way to increase iron intake and reduce


                                                3
IDA.
        Double-fortified salt (DFS) was not commercially available in India until recently, due
to technical difficulties in insuring the stability of both the iron and the iodine. In the mid
1990s, India’s National Institute of Nutrition (NIN, Hyderabad) developed DFS, fortified with
iron and iodine. Fortified with 1 mg iron per gram of salt, DFS is estimated to provide about
30% of the RDA of iron (National Institute of Nutrition (India), 2005) when consuming 10 g
salt per day regularly (Ranganathan and Sesikeran, 2008). NIN scientists first demonstrated
the long-term safety of DFS in animal studies (Nair et al., 1998). They also established the
stability and bioavailability of iron in DFS as well as the acceptability and effectiveness of DFS
with school children and with tribal populations through small scale trials (Nair et al., 1998;
Brahmam et al., 2000; Sivakumar et al., 2001).
        In the last five years, NIN and the Indian Government have sought to encourage wider
adoption of DFS. Since 2011, the NIN formulation of DFS can be manufactured by private com-
panies through a license agreement requiring a certain percentage of production to be donated
to charities, such as school meal programs. In 2012, India’s Department of Women and Child
Development directed states to use DFS in the national mid-day meal scheme (school lunches)
and the Human Resource Development Ministry did the same for the Integrated Child Develop-
ment Scheme (Mudur, 2013). Several manufacturers produce and market DFS, including Tata
Chemicals Limited (TCL). TCL is one of the leading manufacturers of salt in India, and we
used their DFS, branded as “Tata Salt Plus” for our study. The maximum retail price of Tata
Salt Plus is |20 (rupees) per kg, making it a relatively low-cost iron source, but around twice
the price of regular iodized salt.2
        The reasoning behind the potential for food fortification is simple: the first premise
is that, contrary to a change in diet or regular consumption of iron supplements, consuming
iron-fortified food does not require an important behavioral change, and therefore should be
easy for individuals. Hence, the take up of fortified food could easily be very high. The second
premise is that regular intake would compensate for the fact that individuals would get less iron
from the fortified foods than from iron pills, leading to reduced anemia, and positive health and
productivity impact. Surprisingly, neither of the two premises has really been tested.
2
    Tata Salt, which is the highest quality iodized salt available, and one of the most expensive, normally sells
    for |15 per kg.




                                                       4
        In particular, the nationwide policy to use DFS in school meals and the approval for retail
sales have happened despite the lack of any large-scale efficacy trials of DFS: there have only been
two rigorous, long-term effectiveness studies of the NIN formula of DFS in India, among women
or children in carefully monitored environments, and the results are mixed. One experiment
with schoolchildren found that hemoglobin was 0.7 g/dL higher when residential schools used
DFS in all of the meals they made for children (versus none). The study, however, suffered
from 79% attrition, which the authors attribute mostly to graduation (Sivakumar et al., 2001).
The other experiment, with a tribal population, found no significant impact on hemoglobin
(Sivakumar et al., 2001). Other experiments using different formulations of DFS are more
encouraging. Rajagopalan and Vinodkumar (2000) conducted an experiment with female tea
pickers in India on remote estate. Hemoglobin increased from 9.27 g/dL to 10.78 g/dL, and
productivity increased when DFS was combined with deworming. Haas et al. (2014) studied
212 female tea pickers in India. Hemoglobin concentration at endline was 11.7 g/dL in treatment
and 11.5 g/dL in control. In all cases, the consumption was carefully monitored, ensuring perfect
compliance with the required dosage.

        To fill this important gap between policy and evidence, this paper reports on two ex-
periments that test each of these premises. For the sales experiment, we partnered with Tata
Chemicals Ltd., a major manufacturer of salt with a well recognized brand name, to make
double fortified salt available at the reduced price of |9 in shops in 200 randomly selected vil-
lages in Bihar.3 In all of these villages, information campaigns were conducted, and in some
of them, additional interventions took place to increase take up (in particular, an edutainment
movie was screened in some villages, and shopkeepers were provided incentives to sell the salt
in other(Banerjee et al., 2016). Take up was reasonably high: on average 42.5% of households
in Sales villages ever tried DFS, and 14.5% were using it at the time of the endline survey,
approximately 23 months after the product had been launched.
        The second experiment was embedded in the sales experiment: in 62 villages where DFS
was available in shops, we distributed a regular supply of DFS for free at home to a subset
of households, randomly selected within each of the villages. Take up was higher among these
3
    In Banerjee et al. (2013) we set up small scale, individual-level, randomized pricing experiment to determine
    the demand curve for DFS. We found that demand falls sharply at a price of |10 per kilogram, the price of
    the cheapest alternative branded salt. Just under a third of the households tried it at just below that price
    (|9).


                                                       5
households, although not 100%: 61% of households were using it at the time of the survey, and
75% of households had been using it just before (many of the others had just recently run out).
This allows us to test the impact of higher DFS availability on hemoglobin and anemia and our
other endpoints. In what is, to our knowledge, the first large-scale efficacy trial of the product
we compare individuals in households that were offered DFS for free at home to individuals in
two control groups: households in the same villages who had the option to buy DFS (and were
subjected to all the information campaigns in those villages), but where not getting for free.
This simulates, for example, the policy of making free DFS available to households eligible for
food rations when it is otherwise available, and households in control villages, who do not have
access to DFS at any price.
       Finally, we combine the two experiments and the entire sample to construct instrumental
variable estimates of actual consumption of DFS. This gives us two instruments, availability of
DFS via sales and free distribution.

       Even focusing on those who were anemic at baseline (Thomas et al. (2006) and Chong
et al. (2015) find no impact of supplementation on those who were not), we find no significant
impact of availability of DFS through sales in the whole sample (the point estimate is 0.077 g/dL,
with a 95% confidence interval of (-0.03; 0.157). For free DFS, the point estimate for previously
anemic when we compare free DFS recipients to households in control villages is 0.018 g/dL, with
a confidence interval of (-0.122; 0.146). In subsamples, we do find a significant positive impact of
availability of the sales treatment for males (significant at 5% even after controlling for multiple
hypothesis testing) and for children below 15 (significant at the 10% level after controlling for
multiple hypothesis testing). But we don’t find the same effect for the free DFS experiment.
Overall, in the IV regressions, we cannot reject zero effect of DFS consumption for the entire
sample or subgroups defined by gender. We find, however, sizable and significantly positive
impact on Hb concentration (and, correspondingly, a reduction in anemia) among adolescents in
the IV regressions, consistent with previous studies (Chong et al., 2015; Sivakumar et al., 2001).
In the adolescent subgroup, hemoglobin is 0.410 g/dL higher and anemia lower by 12 percentage
points. For the anemic at baseline subgroup, the confidence interval is (-0.227; +0.267), and we
also cannot rule out no effect for the anemic at baseline when women and men are considered
separately. The null effect of this formula is also consistent with the previous study of workers



                                                 6
in a tribal area of Andhra Pradesh, India (Sivakumar et al., 2001).

         Although these results are only obtained in one setting and probably would need to
be replicated, they are not encouraging for the prospect of DFS as a way to control anemia
in rural areas. We also briefly discuss the results of another experiment where we attempted
to provide a simple technology to fortify flour at the local level, with equally disappointing
results. This contrasts with the promising impact of direct iron supplementation in the two
recent studies we reviewed, at least when sufficient take up can be achieved. The issue may be
that to make a notable difference for most people (sufficient to perhaps sustain their interest
in the product), the iron dose must be large enough. But to be safe (and avoid poisoning due
to over-consumption of iron) the concentration of iron supplementation in the food must be
limited. With a single source of fortified food, and a diet that continues to be low in iron, the
fortification is perhaps insufficient to make enough of a difference for individuals to be willing
to continue with purchasing the product. This of course further reduces impact, and ultimately
makes the strategy non-viable.

2      Experimental design
This paper reports the results of two experiments conducted concurrently in Bihar. The main
experiment studies sales, while a smaller experiment investigates the impact of distributing free
DFS at home. Our primary outcome measurements are hemoglobin level and whether or not
an individual is classified as being anemic. Physical fitness, cognition and mental health are
important downstream outcomes.

2.1     Double Fortified Salt

The double-fortified salt used in this experiment was manufactured and distributed by TCL.
It follows the formula established by the NIN and provides 40 micrograms of iodine and 1 mg
of iron per gram of salt. Consumption of 10 grams of salt is needed to obtain 10 mg of iron
per day, which is approximately 30% of the recommended daily value for Indian populations,
though the exact recommendation is dependent on age and gender (Indian Council of Medical
Research, 2009).4
4
      The WHO provides recommended iron intakes for populations with very low dietary intake of iron. For adult
      males the WHO recommends 27.4 mg/day. For adult, non-menopausal females, this number is 58.8 mg/day.




                                                       7
         DFS, therefore, is expected to increase hemoglobin among people who eat enough of the
salt consistently; who do not suffer illnesses (parasites, malaria, etc.) or have any complementary
micronutrient deficiencies (such as Vitamin C) severe enough to block iron absorption; and who
are iron deficient. For a person from this population weighing about 60 kgs, hemoglobin is
expected to rise 1 g/dL over a nearly two-year period with a consistent consumption of 10
grams of DFS daily. Iron-deficiency anemia, therefore, would be expected to decrease for DFS
consumers who are within 1 g/dL from the anemia cutoff for their age-sex group at baseline.

2.2     Experimental Design

Sampling frame

We conduct our experiments in the Bhojpur district of Bihar. Our sampling frame is the list
of villages and households compiled by the District Rural Development Agency, while updating
the number of above and below poverty line households in 2010. Across Bhojpur, there were
999 villages on the list. We considered all villages with fewer than 50 households to be ineligible
for inclusion in the experiment. We stratified by Block (an administrative unit smaller than the
District) and then in each of eight blocks randomly selected 29 villages and in each of six blocks
randomly selected 28 villages. This gave us a total of 400 study villages. Within each village, we
randomly selected 15 households to be measurement households, for a total of 6,000 households
in the baseline sample.5

Experiments

Figure 1 summarizes the experimental design in a nutshell. First, we stratified by block and
then randomly assigned half of the villages to treatment and half to control, totaling 200 Sales
and 200 control villages. Control households were therefore not aware of the experiment and
the treatment. In all “Sales” villages, we provided the option to stock Tata Salt Plus to all
kirana shops that operated in the village and the Public Distribution (PDS) shop that served
the village. Packets of DFS were clearly marked with the special research Maximum Retail Price
of |9 per kg.
         Stocking of the salt started in August 2012 and lasted through February 2015. A ded-
icated team took orders from shops and oversaw delivery to shops by TCL stockists. Over 30
5
      Four additional households were surveyed at baseline due to independent, unnecessary replacements. They
      were kept in the studies and the individuals in all 6,004 households were included in the baseline.



                                                      8
months of stocking, there were a few instances in which PDS store operators who served both
treatment and control villages indicated that they wished to also buy the salt for shops in control
villages. They were refused and told that Tata Salt Plus was being sold using a lottery system,
and that those shops had not been selected.
       TCL launched the product in Sales villages using a marketing team of five individuals.
This team put on street plays, played games with children and others in the village, and gave
away prizes. These shows and activities highlighted the symptoms of anemia, the body’s need
for iron, and the benefits of consuming Tata Salt Plus. The shows happened in the most central
location of each village or section of the village to maximize attendance. These information
campaigns took place in all Sales villages within a few days of initial stocking, with each village
receiving between one and three shows or activities depending on the size of the village.
       For our second test, we randomly selected 62 Sales villages to be the locations of the free
DFS experiment. In those Sales villages, we randomly assigned 7 out of the 15 measurement
households to receive free DFS delivered to their homes. Another dedicated team delivered two
kilograms of salt at home every two and a half to three months for nearly two years to 438
households. This amount was set using salt consumption figures for Bihar, which average 8 g
salt per person per day. Households not receiving DFS for free may have known that a few
households in their villages were receiving it for free at home.
       In addition, we performed a number of additional marketing experiments in Sales villages,
which are described in detail in Banerjee et al. (2016).6

Data Collection

We conducted surveys in all 400 villages using teams of surveyors who were trained by a medical
doctor to take a drop of blood and measure hemoglobin using the HemoCue method.7 The team
also directly measured physical health including weight, height, mid-upper arm circumference,
and aerobic capacity and balance (Queens Step Test).
       We used an in-depth survey to assess a range of additional household-level and individual-
level outcomes. At the household level, data was collected on household composition, income,
6
    The additional cross-randomized marketing experiment treatments comprised an edutainment film shown in
    villages, a flyer delivered to households, and a one-time discount to a set of chosen retailers.
7
    This testing method has been found to be comparable to standard laboratory techniques for measuring
    hemoglobin in normal and anemic children (Cohen and Seidl-Friedman, 1988) and to adequately estimate
    population anemia (Neufeld et al., 2002).




                                                    9
assets, consumption, nutritional intakes, socio-economic characteristics, household health service
usage, and DFS adoption.8
        In order to measure impact on productivity and economic outcomes, we collected individual-
level data on level of education, hours worked, earnings, allocation of time to voluntary and
leisure activities and, for children, school attendance. Additionally, we collected information
on self-reported health and mental health status, including ability to perform various Activities
of Daily Living, as well as symptoms and diagnoses of illness (cold, pain, diarrhea; blood loss,
malaria, etc). Women aged 15 years and over were also asked about the outcome of pregnancies
within the intervention period.
        Finally, developmental and cognitive outcomes were captured through four standardized
measures. Our Infant Development Module was based on the Lucknow Development Screen,
which captures developmental delays among infants between the ages of 1 to 30 months and has
been validated for use among children in India (Bhave et al., 2010). Mothers or another close
family member are requested to report on the childs ability to perform a certain age-appropriate
task. The task is considered age-appropriate if 97% of infants at that age are able to perform
the task.
        Child and adult cognition were measured using sections from the National Institute of
Mental Health and Neuro Sciences (NIMHANS) neuropsychological battery and the Post Grad-
uate Institute of Medical Education and Research (PGIMER) battery of memory dysfunction,
which were previously validated in India.9 The Child Cognition Module uses the Digit Span test
from the PGI battery and the Visuospatial Working Memory Span Test from NIMHANS, which
measures memory and retention. The Adult Cognition Module consists of four sub-tests from
the PGI battery, including the Digit Span Test, Word Recall Test, Sentence Recall Test, and
Word Pairs Test. Scores from the sub-tests are aggregated to measure memory and retention.
        Among the elderly, we used the Hindi Mental State Exam, designed to measure basic
cognitive awareness and alertness among a lower-income, Indian population. The Hindi Mental
8
    Given our focus on nutrition, a household in this project is defined as a group of people living together under
    the same roof and eating from the same pot for six out of the past twelve months.
9
    The NIMHANS battery is composed of tests taken from other standardized test batteries, such as the Luria-
    Nebraska Neuropsychological battery. The PGIMER battery of memory dysfunction is comprised of 10
    subtests including forward and backward digit spans, one minute delayed recall of a word list, immediate
    recall of sentences, retention of similar word pairs, retention of dissimilar pairs, visual retention, visual
    recognition, recent memory, remote memory and mental balance test.




                                                       10
State Exam (Ganguli et al., 1995) was developed by researchers from the University of Pittsburgh
and the Centre for Ageing Research, India.10
          Across all the surveys, eligibility to participate in a particular survey was determined
by age. Table 1 describes the age requirements for the outcome measures. The age cutoffs were
defined as shown in order to match the National Family Health Survey (NFHS), which defines
elderly as 50 years or older and adults as between 15 and 49 years of age (International Institute
for Population Sciences (IIPS) and Macro International, 2008).

2.3     Empirical specifications

First, we analyze the sales experiment by comparing households and individuals in Sales villages
to those in control villages.
          In our basic specification, for any outcome yik for individual i in village k, we run the
following regressions:


                               yik = α + βSalesk + Xik γ + δBaseHbik + ik                                       (1)


where Salesk is a dummy equal to 1 if DFS was made available in village shops, BaseHbik is
hemoglobin concentration at baseline and Xik is a vector of control variables (age, age squared,
a dummy which indicates if the individual is anemic at baseline, a dummy for household split,
education above 5th grade, BMI at baseline –all set to zero if we don’t observe the individual
at baseline, household wealth index, a dummy for whether we have baseline measurements, and
a dummy for each block as the randomization was stratified by block). The inclusion of control
variables makes very little difference. The standard errors are clustered by village, the unit of
randomization for the sales experiment.
          We also use this specification to look at pre-defined subgroups (male, female, chil-
dren, adults, and elderly) because of different biological requirements for iron by sex and age.
Specifically, we adjust for the two male/female subgroups and three subgroups by age chil-
dren/adult/elderly. When we do this, we provide both conventional standard errors, and q-value
10
      The research team adapted a battery of tests that were developed to diagnose dementia in an educated
      English-speaking population to be used in Northern India with Hindi speakers who have little or no formal
      education and were largely illiterate. The test includes sections on orientation to time, orientation to place,
      registering and recalling basic objects, attention by subtracting serials threes, naming everyday objects,
      repetition of a phrase, following a visual command, executing a three-step task, saying something about
      one’s houses, and copying a simplified figure.



                                                         11
which adjusts for multiple testing using the false discovery rate (Anderson, 2008).
       We also run this specification separately for anemic individuals, since, consistent with
medical evidence, the literature before us finds effects of iron supplementation on hemoglobin
concentration and anemia only for those who were anemic at baseline.
       When we look at possible “downstream” impacts (on cognition and physical and mental
health), we adjust for the fact that we are looking at multiple outcomes in two ways: first, we
aggregate all the measures for each of these impact cognition in order to make separate cognition,
physical fitness, and mental health indices; second, we provide q-values to account for the fact
that 3 outcomes are tested (in addition to testing the different subgroups).
       In turn, we analyze the free DFS experiment in two ways. First, we compare individuals
in households who received free DFS with those from households in control villages to focus on
the highest expected consumption compared to no introduction of the product at all. We start
with the following specification and exclude all households in Sales villages who did not receive
the free DFS.


                        yik = α + βf reeDF Sk + Xik γ + δBaseHbik + ik                        (2)

Standard errors are still clustered at the village level, and we conduct the same subgroup analysis
(and related adjustment for multiple hypothesis testing).
       Second, we exploit the within-village randomization by restricting the to 930 households
in the 62 villages where the free DFS household-level randomization took place and compar-
ing those who were and were not provided free DFS. This sample restriction still results in a
randomized sample, since households that received the free salt were randomly selected within
a set of villages. This specification allows us to identify the impact of free versus discounted
iron fortification, controlling for village-level information campaigns. The basic specification is
analogous to the basic sales experiment specification, but adds a dummy for each village since
the randomization was stratified by village.


                  yik = αF + βF F reeDF Sik + Xik γF + δF BaseHbik + µk + υik                  (3)

Where µk is treated as a set of fixed effects. In this case the standard errors are not clustered
at the village level, but instead are clustered at the household level.


                                                12
         Equations 2 and 3 are both estimated for the entire sample, males and females separately,
and then by age groups, across multiple outcomes. We also estimate these specifications for the
same subgroups restricted to those individuals who were anemic at baseline.

         Finally, we take an instrumental variables approach, combining two sources of variation;
the dichotomous “free DFS household” and “Sales village” treatment variables are used as in-
struments for recent salt consumption, as indicated by either the household currently consuming
DFS or the household reporting that they used DFS right before their current salt (penultimately
used DFS). The first stage is simply:


             U seDF Sik = π0 + π1 F reeDF Sik + π2 Salesk + Xik π3 + π4 BaseHbik + υik                     (4)


where U seDF Sij is a dummy equal to 1 if household i of village k is currently using DFS or
was using it last time.11 We then estimate the equation:


                        yik = αU + βU U seDF Sik + Xik γU + δU BaseHbik + υik                              (5)


by two stage least squares, using F reeDF Sik and Salesik as instruments for U seDF Sik and the
other variables as instruments for themselves.

2.4     Balance

Table 2 presents summary statistics for both experiments in Panel A (individual level variables)
and Panel B (household-level variables). It demonstrates that the Sales arms were very balanced,
with none of the characteristics showing significant differences between treatment and the control
groups (Column 3). The free DFS sample is quite large, and randomized at the household level
within strata. There are a few significant differences between households who received and did
not receive free DFS (Column 7), but the point estimate of the differences are very small. Most
notably, hemoglobin concentration was a little lower at baseline in the free DFS group (12.07
g/dL versus 12.178 g/dL), but they were actually a little less likely to be anemic (16% vs 18%).
Education is a bit lower in free DFS households (fewer heads of the household finished 5th
standard), and more households split between baseline and endline.12 We do control for all
11
      This will provide smaller and more precise estimate than if we used “currently using DFS” but since there
      could be lingering effect of having used DFS, it seems to be the best intermediate variable to use.
12
      If a household split, we include both resulting households and their members in the endline.


                                                      13
these variables in our regressions.

2.5     Attrition

Table 2, Panel C looks at household and individual level attrition for both experiments. Attrition
would be a threat to the validity of our estimates if it changes the unobserved characteristics of
one treatment group relative to another. For example, if repeat contact with a stranger when
receiving free salt made free DFS households take more trouble to help schedule a follow-up visit
for our surveyor to interview all members at endline, we may have found more of the mobile types
belonging to households receiving free DFS compared to others. If mobile persons (migrants)
have lower (higher) hemoglobin than others, we could under (over)-estimate the impact of free
DFS.
         We did not lose many entire households over the 2.5 years between baseline and endline,
with the fewest percentage-wise lost from the free DFS treatment group. Household attrition
was roughly 4% in the control villages, 5% in Sales villages, 4% among households not receiving
free DFS in the free DFS villages, but only 2% for households receiving free DFS (Row 1).
These figures are slightly imbalanced across both experiments. At the individual level, attrition
is balanced for the sales experiment (though much higher at roughly 19%). For the free DFS
experiment, attrition is again lower among individuals in households receiving free DFS (15%)
compared to the control group (18.5%) within free DFS villages (Panel C, Column 7).
         At the same time, a number of individuals were also added to the sample between the
baseline and the endline (for example, only 81.9% of the control sales sample was present at
the baseline, and this is balanced across group). Some of these individuals are genuinely new to
the household, for example because of marriage, or birth. Furthermore, some individuals were
missed at baseline.13 And finally, we suspect that attrition is actually much lower than what
we think, because some of the “added” individuals might actually be “attrited” individuals who
are mismatched. For this reason, and because we see very little chance of endogenous joining of
households due to the treatment, we keep all the individuals in the analysis sample, although
not including them does not affect the estimates very much.
         Appendix Table 12 shows a comparison of baseline characteristics of non-attritors by
group to check for balance in the endline sample. Columns 1-3 demonstrate that both indi-
13
      No households was added, unless they were a split from a baseline household




                                                      14
vidual (Panel A) and household-level characteristics (Panel B) are balanced across control and
Sales villages. Columns 5-7 demonstrate that balance is still a bit of a concern comparing free
DFS households with non-free households in free DFS villages. However, it is the same – or
marginally less of a – problem than in the full baseline sample. Baseline hemoglobin concen-
tration is balanced across Free and non-Free households in the sample of non-attritors, while
it was slightly imbalanced in the full sample measured at baseline. Therefore, attrition has
not worsened balance on observables across treatment and control conditions. Nonetheless, we
control for baseline characteristics in our basic specification, including hemoglobin, education,
etc. The Online Appendix reproduces our analysis excluding the “new” individuals, and results
are substantively the same.

3    Results
Making double fortified salt available through shops did result in fortified salt consumption.
Panel D in Table 2 shows descriptive statistics on the take up of double fortified salt, averaging
over all subgroups. On average, approximately two years after DFS was launched in local shops,
14.5% of households in sales villages are consuming the product. 21.8% are consuming it at the
time of the survey or the previous time they bought salt. 42.6% of them have ever tried it. This
level of take up is somewhat lower than what the results we had our initial pricing experiment,
where we saw take up of about 30% at a price of |9 (Banerjee et al., 2011), despite the fact
that we had much more intensive interventions to encourage take up in many of these villages
(Banerjee et al., 2016). However, this take up is actually larger than what our partner, TCL,
told us to expect when launching a new product. From this point of view, it seems that the
DFS launch, and the accompanying interventions, were actually as large a success for a social
marketing experiment as what one could hope to see. In Banerjee et al. (2016), we discuss
the impact of various methods to encourage take up: take up was 5 percentage points higher
in villages where a very entertaining edutainment movie on DFS was shown and 5 percentage
points higher in villages where all shopkeepers were given an incentive to sell the salt. What is
a bit worrisome is that the take up does appear to fall over time: many people tried it at least
once but did not continue with the product. Figure 3 shows that at the store level, purchases
also fell over time. This suggests that the product does not have a slow diffusion curve that
would eventually culminate in large adoption. Instead it seems that many people tried it but


                                               15
gave it up after a while. There were some early reports of food turning black as a result of
adding the salt. We tracked this consistently with free DFS households and this seems to occur
very infrequently if ever, but this is clearly something that was of concern to some number of
households at first.

3.1   Main results on Anemia and Hemoglobin: Sales Experiment

Table 3 shows the results of estimating equation (1) for the entire sample (column 1) and women
and men separately. The bottom line is relatively clear for the full sample.
       Overall, there is a small increase on average hemoglobin concentration (0.045 g/dL,
significant at the 10% level (95% CI -0.009;+0.099), and a small and insignificant decline on
anemia rate (-0.9 percentage point, 95% CI -1.7 percentage point;+1.4 percentage point). The
results are small, but also, owing to the large sample size, quite precise, and the confidence
intervals are tight. We can reject even a small decrease in anemia prevalence.
       For women, there seems to be no significant effect of being in a sales village on anemia,
and small and insignificant positive effect on hemoglobin concentration. The 95% CI for anemia
is (-2.2 percentage points; +1.8 percentage point). Thus, we cannot reject that the impact of
being in a sales villages had no effect, and we can reject that it had even a small effect (there
were 59.7% of women anemic at baseline). For men, there is a reduction in anemia rate of
1.6 percentage point, although it is not significant with adjusted q-values, and an increase in
hemoglobin concentration of 0.06 g/dL. But there again, we can reject even moderately sized
impacts: for example, the 95% confidence interval is (-3.5 percentage points; +0.1 percentage
points) for the fraction of men who are anemic (37.5 percent of men are anemic at baseline).
       The effects are larger for individuals who were anemic at baseline. For women, the
estimates suggest a slightly larger effect for those who were anemic at baseline, but the effect is
still insignificant for them. For men, however, the effects are significantly larger for those who
were initially anemic at baseline, and the significance is robust to adjusting the p. The point
estimate suggest a 3.5 percentage point reduction in the proportion of anemic individuals (q
value=0.048), and an increase of 0.145 g/dL in Hb concentration (q value=0.018). Even there,
however, we can reject a large effect. With a 95% confidence interval for Hb (+0.037; +0.25) we
can reject a increase of 2% or higher in Hb concentration for males who were anemic at baseline,
the group that seems to benefit the most.



                                                16
       In sum, despite a reasonable (if not stellar) take up of the DFS when sold at half
the regular market price through regular shops and PDS shops, the impacts on hemoglobin
concentration and anemia were at best very limited, and concentrated on anemic males.

       Our social marketing experiments (reported in detail in Banerjee et al. (2016)) induced
greater take up in some villages than in some others. In particular, DFS take up (measured as
“currrently using DFS”) was about 5 percentage points higher in villages where we showed a
high production value “edutainment” movie, and in villages where shopkeepers were given an
incentive to market DFS. Using our preferred specification (controlling for baseline hemoglobin
level), we examine whether this increased take up was sufficient to generate larger impact on
hemoglobin concentration or anemia by endline. We find no difference in any of these villages
(Appendix Table 11).

3.2   Main results on Anemia and Hemoglobin: Free DFS experiment

The limited impact of the sales experiment could be the product of two things: modest take
up (though probably as high as could be obtained with this kind of product) and the impact
of the product. Our power calculations, based on the results of the small take up experiment,
assumed a somewhat larger take up of about 30%. Although almost half the sample ever tried
the product, the final take up ended up being a bit lower than that.
       As mentioned, the level of fortification of DFS is not very high: if only using DFS and
consuming 10 g of salt per day, an individual would only get 10mg of iron per day, or about 30%
of their RDA of iron from DFS, much less than what is provided by iron supplements (Banerjee
et al., 2013). This is about half the quantity that was provided in the WISE study (Thomas
et al., 2006), although more similar to the overall dose received by adolescents in Peru (Chong
et al., 2015). The hope was that regular DFS availability by households would be sufficient
to complement other sources of iron in an individual’s diet, or that the increase in iron, even
if still insufficient, would be enough to make a difference. Surprisingly, as we noted, there is
no empirical evidence backing that claim. To test this hypothesis, we distributed free DFS to
households, with the aim of increasing the take up of the program. There was, however, no
obligation for them to use it. Our free DFS experiment is the first large-scale efficacy trial of
free DFS fortification to our knowledge.
       Table 2 shows that the take up of free DFS was high when distributed for free. Not all


                                               17
households tried it (only about 75% of the households ever tried DFS for consumption)14 , but
many did. Furthermore, those who did were using it until just before the endline, and some of
them had stopped because their supply had just run out. 75% of them where using it currently
or last time they used a packet of salt (they had recently run out). 61% were using it currently
(which means that they did not buy DFS if the free amount ran out). This suggests a reasonably
good acceptability of the product. Thus, if the impacts were large, free distribution of double
fortified salt to poor households would in fact be a feasible strategy. Meanwhile, the take up for
households in free DFS villages who did not get it for free was 15.6%, and thus this creates a
large difference in take up.
         Tables 4 and 5 show reduced form impacts of being in the free DFS sample on anemia and
hemoglobin concentration, either compared to the control group, as in equation (2) or compared
to other households in the same villages as in equation (3).
         In Table 4, the effect is very similar for the whole sample to the results of the Sales exper-
iment (point estimate of 0.044 g/dL, with larger standard errors). The pattern by subgroups is
a bit surprising however: the effect is not larger in the anemic subsample, and, in contrast to the
Sales experiment, the effects are now smaller for men than for women. With a smaller treated
group (6253 individuals), the standard errors are also larger, which may diminish our ability to
find statistically significant results. Comparing the households who received free DFS to those
in free DFS villages who did not receive the product, we find even smaller point estimates. For
example, for the whole sample, the point estimate on Hb concentration -0.009 (95% CI: -0.097;
+0.079).

3.3     Impact of Sales and Free DFS on Anemia and Hemoglobin: Subsamples

This project was in part funded by the NIA, and our original proposal called for examining
impacts separately for children, prime age adults, and older adults (Banerjee et al., 2010).
         Tables 3 - 5 also present results on hemoglobin concentration and anemia at endline for
these subgroups.15 In the sales experiment, impacts are the strongest for children: there is an
increase in Hb concentration of 0.068, significant at the 5 percent level, weaker for prime-age
adults (not significant), and wrongly signed for elderly (though insignificantly so). All the results
14
      Anecdotally, we know that some households gave it away or gave it to animals
15
      To limit the number of subgroups, we pool the age group by gender, the further disaggregated results are
      available up on request.




                                                      18
are stronger when focusing on individuals who were anemic at baseline, but still significant only
for children (0.134 increase in Hb concentration in this group).
       In the free DFS experiment (Table 4) the ranking is the same when comparing to control,
and we still find effects for children (0.097 g/dL, significant at the 10% level). Surprisingly, we
find a negative point estimates on Hb concentration among the elderly, which is significant at
the 10% level. This may be a chance result, since we are testing different subgroups, but is
nevertheless surprising. The negative impact is even larger when focusing on those who were
anemic at baseline. We find the same result when we testing subgroups by comparing the
free DFS households to other households in the same village (Table 5), though not significant,
suggesting that, even this if this is a chance results, this is driven by something that happens
specifically in the free DFS households.

3.4   Instrumental Variable Estimates

The two experiments can be combined to provide an instrumental variable estimate of the actual
consumption of salt. There are several candidate variables to measure the exposure to DFS:
currently using DFS; used it currently or last time; or ever used it. All this does is scale the
estimates by a different factor. We chose “using DFS now or having penultimately used DFS”
because if households last packet was DFS, they were recently exposed, and we should still see
impacts.
       Table 6 shows a very robust first stage for actual DFS adoption: households in Sales
villages are 16 percentage points more likely to consume free DFS. In addition, households who
got the free DFS treatment are an extra 49 percentage points more likely to consume free DFS.
Interestingly, individuals who were anemic at baseline (who may be expected to benefit more)
are no more likely to consume DFS, most likely because they are not aware of their status.
       Table 7 present the results of the 2SLS estimation for all our outcomes. The presentation
of the table is slightly different from previous tables. Columns (1) to (6) show the effect for all,
females, males, all anemic, female anemic, and male anemic. Not surprisingly, given the reduced
form estimates discussed earlier, none of the estimate are significant, and while some are positive,
some are even negative. For women, the impact is a -0.007 percentage point reduction in the
fraction anemic (95% CI: -0.073; +0.059) and a 0.043 increase in Hb (95% CI: -0.15;+0.23).
So we can reject a 2 percent increase in Hb level. For anemic women, the 95% CI for Hb



                                                19
concentration is (-0.148, + 0.39), so we can still reject a 3.5 percent increase. For men, the point
estimates are both negative (this is because of the negative impact of free DFS, which more
than compensates for the positive effect in the sales sample). For anemic men, the confidence
interval for Hb concentration is (-0.43; 0.21). We discuss how these point estimates compare
with others in the literature in Section 4.1.
       We also estimate the impact of our treatments on adolescents separately as other studies
have found an impact of free DFS distribution on schoolchildren (Sivakumar et al., 2001) or of
iron supplementation on adolescents (Chong et al., 2015). Table 10 presents all comparisons
and models: Panel A shows the sales experiment, Panel B shows the free DFS OLS results
comparing with the control group, Panel C shows the free DFS OLS results comparing to non-free
households, and Panel D presents the second stage IV results. We look first at hemoglobin for all
adolescents and then adolescents who were anemic at baseline, followed by fraction anemic, again
for all adolescents and then adolescents who were anemic at baseline. All of the OLS results are
correctly signed, but small and not statistically significant (Panels A - C). However, the second
stage of the IV strategy reveals an increase of 0.410 g/dL for all adolescents with a corresponding
decrease in anemia of 12 percentage points (Panel D Columns 1 and 3). These results, however,
are not driven by the adolescents who were anemic at baseline (Panel D, Columns 2 and 4),
suggesting DFS may have protected the non-anemic from declines in hemoglobin.

3.5   Impacts of Sales and Free DFS on Cognition, Physical and Mental Health

Tables 8a, 8b and 8c describe results for cognition, physical health, and mental health. For
these tables, we summarize the impact using standardized measures that reflect several indices.
We present conventional standard errors as well as standard errors that adjust for multiple
hypothesis testing both for multiple variables (we have 3 indices we test together) and, as
before, for each outcomes, for our six subgroups. Thus, for example, any q value in the “male”
column adjusts for 6 hypotheses tested together, and any q value in any of the 3 age groups
adjust for 9 outcomes tested together.
       The cognition, mental health, and physical fitness indices were constructed using the
baseline mean and standard deviation from the sales experiment control group for the given
variable of interest. A cognition module was performed on all respondents over the age of 1
month, with one of four module types being given dependent on age, as shown in Table 1. The



                                                20
scores from each of these were modules were standardized by the baseline mean and standard
deviation from the sales experiment control group for that given module. The cognition scores
are standardized such that a positive score indicates a higher level of cognition.
          For our mental health index, only respondents 10 years or older were eligible for these
questions. The set of questions we used to construct this index are modeled after the CES-D
depression index (Radloff, 1977). Children (ages 10-15) and adults (15+) were asked slightly
different questions; therefore, the scores were first summed and then standardized separately.
Since a higher score indicates a greater level of depression, we multiplied the original standardized
variable by negative one so that a positive value could be interpreted as having better mental
health.
          Lastly, for the physical fitness outcomes, only respondents over the age of 10 who were
not pregnant and could stand alone unassisted were eligible for the physical fitness module.
Depending on age and whether the respondent had any arthritis or knee conditions, one of two
batteries of tests were completed. Each of the individual tests were first standardized, and then
the battery of tests was standardized in order to obtain the standardized physical fitness score.
Again, we multiplied the original standardized variable by negative one so that a positive value
could be interpreted as being more physically fit.
          Not surprisingly, given that there is no impact on anemia, we also find little impact on
any of these measures, neither for the sample as a whole, nor for any particular subsample.
Neither physical health, nor mental health, nor cognition, seems to have improved in any group.
The standardized physical fitness scores increase by 0.02 standard deviation overall in the sales
experiment (95% CI: -0.048;-0.088, see Table 8b), so we can reject even a fairly small effect at
the 95% level. The mental health scores increase by 0.005 in the sales experiment (95% CI:
-0.035;+0.045), allowing us to reject an even smaller impact. The 2SLS impact of consuming
free DFS is a bit noisier point estimate, and we cannot rule out moderately sized impact on
physical health (95% CI: -0.09; 0.24) and mental health (95% CI -0.17, 0.145), but we can still
rule out large effects.
          One potentially important exception to a general pattern of lack of effect is the cognition
scores (Table 8a), which actually show a decline in the overall sample in the free DFS experiment,
although the decline is not significant.16 Inspecting the subgroups, it is clear that the decline
16
     It is for men with conventional standard errors, but not with adjusted q value.



                                                       21
is driven by the elderly group, where we had seen the largest (although insignificant) declines
in hemoglobin concentration. For the elderly group, in particular for those who were anemic
at baseline, we find sizable and significant decline in cognition score. The point estimate for
the anemic group is -0.229 standard deviations, with an adjusted q value of 0.03. The medical
literature establishes a clear link between anemia and cognitive function, including dementia
(Andro et al., 2013). Our cognitive test for the elderly is designed to pick up age-related decline.
Conversely, Chong et al. (2015) find large gains in cognition for adolescents whose hemoglobin
levels did improve. Thus, this robust effect suggests that the insignificant but large decline in
hemoglobin concentration (which is perhaps less precisely measured) might in fact be real.

4     Discussion
4.1   Comparison with Decentralized Iron Fortification of Flour

For two of the authors of this paper, this was not the first (failed) attempt at fortifying food
with iron for the poor.
       From 2006 to 2009, we set up and evaluated a community-level iron fortification program
in 134 villages (65 villages were chosen as treatment villages) in Udaipur district, Rajasthan
(Banerjee et al., 2011). In this area, households get their grain (maize or wheat) milled once or
twice a month by a local miller, or chakki. The community level iron program was designed to
increase bio-availability of iron for families who do not buy commercial food, and was designed
and implemented by Seva Mandir, a well-respected local NGO.
       On average, each hamlet has 4 chakkis (this is also the median number). In each vil-
lage, Seva Mandir chose the two chakkis, serving the majority of the households. A fortification
program must meet two objectives: supply a sufficient quantity of iron in the diet, and avoid
supplying too much iron. Safety is also a concern, as the process will not be as tightly moni-
tored as it can be in a factory. It is important that the program is robust to accidental over
fortification. The technology for fortification begins with a pre-mix, a dry powdered mix with
specific concentrations of one or more micronutrients. This pre-mix is diluted into a pre-blend
(because pre-mix is too concentrated to be properly hand-mixed into the flour) and then added
to flour either (1) during the milling process or (2) after the grain has been milled.
       After consultations with micronutrient initiatives and various experts, Seva Mandir chose




                                                22
to use ferrous sulfate (FeSO4) and folic acid (which helps with iron absorption). This pre-mix
was then mixed with flour at Seva Mandir (16.66 gs of pre-mix is added in one kg of flour), to
produce a pre-blend which had 3300 ppm (or milligram per kg) of elemental iron (as ferrous
sulfate). This quantity is sufficiently diluted so that if someone were to eat the pre-blend without
mixing, there would be no health risk. This pre-blend was then mixed with the ground grain
(maize or wheat) in the appropriate quantity, using a measuring scoop, and a simple mixing
machine. The customer were not charged for the fortification.
        The final concentration of iron in the flour thus ranges from about 20 to 33 mg per kg.17
A pilot survey on the kilograms of flour milled showed that the average adult eats .3 kilograms of
flour per day. This implies that the average adult would get an extra 6 to 12 mg of iron from the
fortified flour, spanning the 10 mg of iron that would have been provided by the consumption
of 10 g of DFS.
        Before the program was started in a village, a village meeting took place, in which the
cause and consequences of iron deficiency anemia were discussed, as well as what households
could do to prevent it (changes in diet). The program was then explained to the village, and
the village collectively agreed to participate (all villages agreed).18 At the individual level, a
household had to initially agree to be a participant. Once a household accepted the program,
the chakkis were to consider them to be participating households, unless they explicitly declined
fortification.
        However, in spite of the initial decision to fortify, many households did not regularly
fortify, either because the chakki did not always fortify the grain, or because households switched
to non-participating chakkis. Figure 2 plots the take up of the program as a function of the date
the program started
        and separates the households in 3 groups: those for whom the closest chakki fortifies;
those who do not fortify, but have a fortifying chakki nearby (within 1.5 kilometers); and those
who do not have a fortifying chakki within 1.5 kilometers. Take up initially increases in all three
groups, but does not reach the same peak for those who do not have a chakki nearby. All those
who have a chakki nearby reach the same peak, but take up falls down more quickly for those for
17
     Except for the top of the first bin.
18
     To avoid creating spurious effects due to the information regarding anemia, Seva Mandir held a village
     meeting in control villages as well, where the discussion was the same (except that the program was not
     discussed).




                                                    23
whom the participating chakki is not the closest one, presumably because households switched
back to their normal chakki after a while.
          By the time of the endline survey there was, as in the DFS experiments, no impact
on anemia or hemoglobin (see Table 9, which reproduces Table 4 from Banerjee et al. (2011)).
In the IV specification, the standard errors are a bit larger than in the DFS study, but the
confidence intervals in both studies have large zones of overlap.

          These interventions tried to attack the fortification problem in two ways: by offering
households a technology to fortify their own flour or by making double fortified salt available at
a price below that of regular iodized salt. Both would have provided nearly the same amount
of iron if consistently taken up. Both foundered on the same problem: take up declined over
time, and level of fortification was probably too low to lead to significant improvement for most
people.

4.2   Comparison between Sales Experiment and Free DFS Experiment

Contrary to our expectations, we do not find the free DFS intervention to be more effective than
the simple Sales intervention. The point estimates in the entire sample are comparable, and
if anything, the sales intervention seems to have helped the anemic people (especially anemic
males) more than distributing DFS for free. This is despite the fact that consumption is much
higher among those who get free DFS. This may of course be due to chance: the confidence
intervals do not really allow us to rule out that in fact the sale of DFS was more effective. But
there are some alternative explanations.
          First, the sales intervention was accompanied by social marketing, emphasizing the im-
portance of iron and it is possible that this played a role through diet change. To investigate the
role of social marketing, we screened an edutainment movie about DFS in some control villages
as well. We do not find any effect of this intervention on anemia or Hb (Appendix Table 11).
          Second, those individuals who would benefit from the treatment most may have been
buying it in the sales villages anyway, so that the marginal person receiving free DFS in the free
DFS treatment has a lower impact. One suggestion that this explanation may not be the case
is that anemic individuals are no more likely to consume DFS than non-anemic individuals, and
we do know there is a larger impact in the sales treatment for the anemic at baseline subgroup.
          Third, the consumption of free DFS may have been much less systematic in the free DFS


                                                24
group than for households who bought it, since it was given to households for free and they did
not feel they had invested in it. However, there is growing evidence of this “sunk cost” fallacy
effect in the literature (see Dizon-Ross et al. (2015) for a recent summary).
       Fourth, households may have been overestimating the good that DFS would do them,
and overcompensated by doing less of what they would otherwise do to prevent anemia.

4.3   Comparison with Two Iron Supplementation Interventions

This section compares our results to the WISE experiment in Indonesia (Thomas et al., 2006)
and the encouragement design for the take up of iron supplements in Peru (Chong et al., 2015).
       In Thomas et al. (2006), the treatment individuals received 120 mg per week, and com-
pliance was excellent, due to very active follow up. This was not envisioned as a potential policy,
but as a “mechanism experiment” with rich data to investigate the impact of improving iron
intake. With perfect compliance, and if each individual consumed 10 g of salt per day, our
experiment would only have led to an increase of iron intake of 70 mg per week, or about 60%
what was given in Thomas et al. (2006).
       Thomas et al. (2006) only find results among those who were anemic at baseline. For
anemic males, they find an increase in Hb of 0.4 mg/dL. Our corresponding point estimate for
the IV specification for anemic males is negative, but with a confidence interval of (-0.43; 0.21).
We can thus reject their point estimate, but since we only fortified at about half the level of
what subjects received in Thomas et al. (2006) (assuming that those who consumed DFS did so
regularly) the order of magnitude is reasonable. This would suggest that the level of fortification
of the DFS is simply insufficient. For anemic females they find 0.203 mg/dL in increase in Hb.
Our 95% confidence interval for the IV estimate is (-0.15; +0.23). In this case, we cannot reject
their point estimate.

       In Chong et al. (2015) the treatment group (which was encouraged to take up the pill)
received on average five more pills than the control group, which is 500 mg over three months (the
control group also received about 500 mg over three months, so on average the treatment group
received 1000 mg over three months). This is only a third of what individuals received in Thomas
et al. (2006) and about 55% of what someone who would ate enough DFS regularly would obtain.
Despite this lower dose, they report very high estimates for a sample of adolescents, ages 13-17.
For boys and girls together who were anemic at baseline, the effect on Hb is 0.5 mg /dL. They


                                                25
don’t report a standard error for this difference, but they also find a decrease of 21 percentage
points in anemia among the initially anemic adolescent, with a 95% confidence interval of (-0.42;
+0). This is much larger than the reduction in anemia found by Thomas et al. (2006) (about
3 to 4 percentage points, insignificant), and of course much larger than what we find for the
sample as a whole.
          The contrast between the Chong et al. (2015) and the Thomas et al. (2006) suggests that
the impact of supplementation may be much larger for adolescents than for adults. To investigate
this possibility, we run our main OLS and 2SLS estimates in the sample of adolescents. The
results, presented in Table 10 are indeed more encouraging in this sample. We find a positive
(but insignificant) impact of the sales experiment, but a stronger positive effect of the free DFS
experiment. Compared to the entire sample, adolescents in the free DFS experiments where 5.9
percentage point less likely to be anemic by endline. Looking a the IV estimate hemoglobin is
0.41 g/dL higher with a 95% CI of (+0.038; +0.782) and anemia is 12.1 percentage points lower
(95% CI: -0.219; -0.023). This ranges include the Chong et al. (2015) result for anemic children,
both for anemia and for Hb concentration.19 We also investigated whether we have impacts on
the health, mental health and cognitive outcomes for this sample of adolescents, but do not find
anything, contrary to Chong et al. (2015) .

          To summarize, the comparison with two very well implemented field RCT of fortification
suggests that our estimate are consistent with the literature, given how fortification could be
brought via salt. But it seems that those effects are just too weak for the population at large. The
adolescent results, however, gives some indication that supplementation targeting specifically
adolescents (though pills or through food fortification in school meals) is a promising avenue.

4.4     Comparison with other DFS evaluations

There have been several field trials – seven to our knowledge – with other formulations of iron-
fortified, iodized salt in four low or middle-income countries, in addition to the two experiments
with NIN’s DFS in India.20
19
      One difference is that we find the results when we have all adolescents together, not just who were anemic
      at baseline. Our baseline, however, was taken two years before, as opposed to 3 months before, and it is
      possible that the anemia status for adolescent fluctuates enough to be a bit irrelevant as a baseline measure.
      In their sample, the control group lost 0.78 g/dL of hemoglobin over the few months of the study period and
      the treatment group lost 0.28 g/dL.
20
      There is one additional trial of DFS given for free to the families of 6 to 15-year-olds (Reddy and Nair,
      2014). However, the randomization was clustered, with only two schools randomized into DFS or DFS


                                                         26
        Their results are generally positive, increasing hemoglobin by 0.2 to 1.6 g/dL, though
the samples are often small and the length of the trials vary from six months to three years. The
most obvious difference between our study and most others is the formulation of iron-fortified
salt that was used. Bioavailability of iron in fortified salt is expected to differ along with the
level of fortification (and the stabilizer used). At 1 mg iron per gram of salt with sodium-
hexametaphosphate as a stabilizer, NIN’s DFS contains less iron than some formulas, but the
same amount used in three successful experiments in India (Haas et al., 2014; Rajagopalan and
Vinodkumar, 2000; Sivakumar et al., 2001) and two successful experiments in other countries
(Asibey-Berko et al., 2008; Zimmermann et al., 2003). The salt used in the trial with the largest
statistically significant increase in hemoglobin (+1.6 g/dL among children in Morocco, over a
relatively short 10 months) was fortified at 2 mg of iron per gram of salt (Zimmermann et al.,
2004). However, the trial using salt with the highest level of fortification at 3 mg of iron per
gram of salt (in Cote d’Ivoire, over 6 months) did not lead to a statistically significant change
in hemoglobin (among children) (Wegmüller et al., 2006).
        In addition to formulation variation, often a higher dose than the DFS we tested, there
are three features of the existing literature that make it hard to compare results. First, several
previous field trials included significant monitoring of usage (Zimmermann et al., 2003, 2004;
Wegmüller et al., 2006; Andersson et al., 2008; Asibey-Berko et al., 2008), and consistent and
adequate use of free iron-fortified salt may have been higher with intense monitoring than what
would be possible at scale. After TCL launched Tata Salt Plus using an interactive informa-
tion campaign in the sample villages, we did not continually provide further incentives and
information to reinforce consumption of the salt, in order to mimic what would be a feasible
communication strategy. Instead, we focused on one-time demand-side push interventions, such
as the edutainment experiment. Given consumption of DFS was only reported in about 75%
    plus deworming medication, and the analysis does not take this clustered design into account. Further, the
    average child in the study started with a weight of 20 kg, BMI of 13.5 and hemoglobin level of about 8.5 in
    the DFS plus deworming school and 8.9 in the DFS school. This means the average child was on the low
    end of the moderately anemic range (8 to 10.9 g/dL). Our baseline sample was much better nourished; the
    mean girl had a BMI above 15 and hemoglobin level of 11.8 g/dL while the mean boy had a BMI of 15.9
    and hemoglobin level of 12.2. Another study (Sivakumar et al., 2001) experimented with DFS in India over
    a 3-year period, and, like us, found no impact on hemoglobin across age groups in a tribal area of Andhra
    Pradesh. Like us as well, they found an increase in hemoglobin of 1.3 g/dL more for males age 14-17 in
    the DFS group versus the control, but started with a small sample of 22 control individuals and lost nearly
    two thirds of them by the end of two years. It is therefore unclear if anything can be concluded from these
    results.




                                                     27
of free DFS households – a group visited every ten weeks to be given free DFS (a personal
reminder) – we would expect that only a very intensive campaign could increase consistency to
adequate levels.
        Second, the inclusion of deworming drugs alongside fortified salt in four studies (Ra-
jagopalan and Vinodkumar, 2000; Wegmüller et al., 2006; Andersson et al., 2008; Haas et al.,
2014) leaves inhibited iron absorption as a potential explanation for the results.21 Our interven-
tion was designed for the general population, which would be made much less feasible by the
need to provide anti-parasite medication for the entire population (not just students alongside
selling fortified salt. Given this design, our data cannot address the question of the possible role
of parasites in preventing absorption.
        Third, in several “successful” trials, access to other salt or to foods cooked with other
salt was limited. Haas et al. (2014) studied female tea pickers in India while Rajagopalan and
Vinodkumar (2000) studied male tea pickers, but the subjects’ location on remote tea estates
meant no other packaged salt was available. There were simply no competing brands or lower
quality (less-expensive) salt to use. Sivakumar et al. (2001) reports on experiments with NIN’s
DFS in India, finding an improvement of 0.7 g/dL among schoolchildren over two years. However,
the children studied were in residential schools and had access to non-school meals only during
school vacation. There were also only four schools randomized into treatment and control and
the study suffered from 78.6% attrition.

5     Conclusion
Overall, although these results are only obtained in one setting and probably would need to be
replicated, they are not encouraging for the prospect of DFS as a way to fight anemia in rural
areas. The previous studies on DFS are very weak and hard to interpret. Our own previous work
on decentralized flour fortification had equally disappointing impacts. Overall, the evidence in
favor of food fortification as a scalable method to prevent anemia among the very poor is less
than overwhelming.
21
     Rajagopalan and Vinodkumar (2000) stratified by treatment group and randomized deworming (or not),
     finding that hemoglobin increased by 0.90 g/dL in the dewormed double-fortified salt group and by 0.65
     g/dL in the dewormed unfortified salt group. Andersson et al. (2008) and Haas et al. (2014) dewormed all
     subjects, making it impossible to determine if deworming was required for the hemoglobin increases they
     found. Wegmüller et al. (2006) dewormed all subjects as well, but found no impact of DFS on hemoglobin
     or anemia.




                                                     28
       This contrasts with positive results of iron supplementation in the two major studies we
reviewed. In one study, Thomas et al. (2006), the dose was large and the compliance excellent.
This gives us the upper bound of plausible impact of supplementation (which are consistent with
what we find), but does not really open a path for a policy. In the other study, Chong et al.
(2015), the focus was on adolescents, and adolescents is the one subgroup for which we also find
an impact. There, the focus was to improve the take up for a program that was making the pill
available, and this seems to be a replicable strategy.
       The issue with fortification may be that to make a notable difference for most people
(sufficient to perhaps sustain their interest in the product), the iron dose must be large enough.
But to be safe (and avoid poisoning due to over-consumption of iron), the concentration of iron
supplementation in the food must be limited. With a single source of fortified food, and a diet
that continues to be low in iron, the supplementation is perhaps insufficient to make enough of
a difference for individuals to be willing to continue with the program. This of course further
reduces impact, and ultimately makes the strategy non-viable.
       The one exception to this picture may be children and adolescents, who seem to have
larger effects both in this sample and in other studies, and may also be made to consume
iron, either through fortification of salt or other ingredients through schools. It is worth noting,
however, that adolescents can also be reached through targeted pill distributions in school, which
is a strategy now pursued by several governments (in India and elsewhere).




                                                29
References
Anderson, M. L. (2008). Multiple inference and gender differences in the effects of early in-
  tervention: a reevaluation of the Abecedarian, Perry Preschool, and Early Training projects.
  Journal of the American Statistical Association 103(484), 1481–1495.

Andersson, M., P. Thankachan, S. Muthayya, R. B. Goud, A. V. Kurpad, R. F. Hurrell, and
  M. B. Zimmermann (2008). Dual fortification of salt with iodine and iron: a randomized,
  double-blind, controlled trial of micronized ferric pyrophosphate and encapsulated ferrous
  fumarate in southern India. The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 88(5), 1378–1387.

Andro, M., P. Squere, S. Estivin, and A. Gentric (2013). Anaemia and cognitive performances
  in the elderly: a systematic review. European Journal of Neurology 20(9), 1234–1240.

Asibey-Berko, E., S. Zlotkin, G. Yeung, W. Nti-Nimako, B. Ahunu, S. Kyei-Faried, J. Johnston,
  M. Tondeur, and V. Mannar (2008). Dual fortification of salt with iron and iodine in women
  and children in rural Ghana. East African Medical Journal 84(10), 473–480.

Banerjee, A., S. Barnhardt, and E. Duflo (2010). Intervention to Fight Anemia and Improve
  Well-Being in A Very Low Income Setting. Project 6 of NIH grant proposal funded under
  P01AG005842-28 (David Wise, PI).

Banerjee, A., S. Barnhardt, and E. Duflo (2013). Nutrition, iron deficiency anemia, and the
  demand for iron-fortified salt: Evidence from an experiment in rural Bihar. In Discoveries in
  the Economics of Aging, pp. 343–384. University of Chicago Press.

Banerjee, A., S. Barnhardt, and E. Duflo (2016). Insights in the Economics of Aging, Chapter
  Movies, margins, and marketing: Encouraging the adoption of iron-fortified salt. University
  of Chicago Press.

Banerjee, A., E. Duflo, and R. Glennerster (2011). Is decentralized iron fortification a feasible
  option to fight anemia among the poorest? In Explorations in the Economics of Aging, pp.
  317–344. University of Chicago Press.

Bhave, A., R. Bhargava, and R. Kumar (2010).               Development and validation of a




                                               30
  new Lucknow development screen for Indian children aged 6 months to 2 years.
  Journal of Child Neurology 25(1), 57–60.

Brahmam, G., K. Nair, A. Laxmaiah, C. Gal Reddy, S. Ranganathan, M. Vishnuvardhana Rao,
  A. Naidu, K. Vijayaraghavan, B. Sivakumar, K. Krishanaswamy, et al. (2000). Community
  trials with iron and iodine fortified salt (double fortified salt). In Proceedings of the 8th World
  Salt Symposium, Volume 2, pp. 955–960. Elsevier Amsterdam.

Chong, A., I. Cohen, E. Field, E. Nakasone, and M. Torero (2015). Iron deficiency and schooling
  attainment in Peru.

Cohen, A. and J. Seidl-Friedman (1988). Hemocue system for hemoglobin measurement. evalua-
  tion in anemic and nonanemic children. American journal of clinical pathology 90(3), 302–305.

de Benoist, B., E. McLean, I. Egli, and M. Cogswell (2008). Worldwide Prevalence of Anaemia
  1993-2005: WHO Global Database of Anaemia. Technical report, World Health Organization
  Geneva.

Dizon-Ross, R., P. Dupas, and J. Robinson (2015). Governance and the effectiveness of public
  health subsidies. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Ganguli, M., G. Ratcliff, V. Chandra, S. Sharma, J. Gilby, R. Pandav, S. Belle, C. Ryan,
  C. Baker, E. Seaberg, et al. (1995). A Hindi version of the MMSE: The development of a cogni-
  tive screening instrument for a largely illiterate rural elderly population in India. International
  Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry 10(5), 367–377.

Gillespie, S. (1998). Major issues in the control of iron deficiency. Micronutrient Initiative;
  UNICEF.

Haas, J. D. and T. Brownlie (2001). Iron deficiency and reduced work capacity: a critical
  review of the research to determine a causal relationship. The Journal of Nutrition 131(2),
  676S–690S.

Haas, J. D., M. Rahn, S. Venkatramanan, G. S. Marquis, M. J. Wenger, L. E. Murray-Kolb,
  A. S. Wesley, and G. A. Reinhart (2014). Double-fortified salt is efficacious in improving




                                                 31
  indicators of iron deficiency in female Indian tea pickers. The Journal of Nutrition 144(6),
  957–964.

Indian Council of Medical Research (2009). Nutrient requirements and recommended dietary
  allowances for Indians. Technical report, National Institute of Nutrition (NIN).

International Institute for Population Sciences (IIPS) and Macro International (2008). National
  Family Health Survey (NFHS-3), India, 2005-06: Bihar. Technical report, IIPS, Mumbai.

Lozoff,   B. (2007).      Iron deficiency and child development.            Food & Nutrition
  Bulletin 28(Supplement 4), 560S–571S.

Lozoff, B., J. Beard, J. Connor, B. Felt, M. Georgieff, and T. Schallert (2006). Long-lasting
  neural and behavioral effects of iron deficiency in infancy. Nutrition Reviews 64(s2), S34–S43.

Mudur, G. (2013, June 9). Doubts on fortified midday-meal salt - safe but no clear proof it
  increases haemoglobin: Scientists. The Telegraph.

Nair, K., G. Brahmam, S. Ranganathan, K. Vijayaraghavan, B. Sivakumar, K. Krishnaswamy,
  et al. (1998). Impact evaluation of iron & iodine fortified salt. Indian Journal of Medical
  Research 108, 203.

Nair, K. M., B. Sesikeran, S. Ranganathan, and B. Sivakumar (1998). Bioeffect and safety of
  long-term feeding of common salt fortified with iron and iodine (double fortified salt) in rats.
  Nutrition Research 18(1), 121–129.

National Institute of Nutrition (India) (2005). Double fortified common salt (DFS) as a tool to
  control iodine deficiency disorders and iron deficiency anaemia: a report. National Institute
  of Nutrition.

Neufeld, L., A. Garcı́a-Guerra, D. Sánchez-Francia, O. Newton-Sánchez, M. D. Ramı́rez-
  Villalobos, and J. Rivera-Dommarco (2002). Hemoglobin measured by hemocue and a refer-
  ence method in venous and capillary blood: a validation study. Salud pública de México 44(3),
  219–227.

Penninx, B. W., M. Pahor, M. Cesari, A. M. Corsi, R. C. Woodman, S. Bandinelli, J. M.
  Guralnik, and L. Ferrucci (2004). Anemia is associated with disability and decreased phys-


                                               32
  ical performance and muscle strength in the elderly. Journal of the American Geriatrics
  Society 52(5), 719–724.

Peters, R., L. Burch, J. Warner, N. Beckett, R. Poulter, and C. Bulpitt (2008). Haemoglobin,
  anaemia, dementia and cognitive decline in the elderly, a systematic review.              BMC
  Geriatrics 8(1), 18.

Radloff, L. S. (1977). The CES-D scale: a self-report depression scale for research in the general
  population. Applied Psychological Measurement 1(3), 385–401.

Rajagopalan, S. and M. Vinodkumar (2000). Effects of salt fortified with iron and iodine on the
  haemoglobin levels and productivity of tea pickers. Food & Nutrition Bulletin 21(3), 323–329.

Ranganathan, S. and B. Sesikeran (2008). Development of the double-fortified salt from the
  National Institute of Nutrition. Institute of Food Technologists.

Reddy, K. J. and S. Nair (2014). Double fortified salt and deworming-game changers in the battle
  against iodine and iron malnutrition in Indian school children. Indian Journal of Community
  Health 26(6), 175–182.

Sivakumar, B., G. Brahmam, K. M. Nair, S. Ranganathan, M. V. Rao, K. Vijayaraghavan,
  and K. Krishnaswamy (2001). Prospects of fortification of salt with iron and iodine. British
  Journal of Nutrition 85(S2), S167–S173.

Stoltzfus, R. J. (2001). Defining iron-deficiency anemia in public health terms: a time for
  reflection. The Journal of Nutrition 131(2), 565S–567S.

Thomas, D., E. Frankenberg, J. Friedman, J.-P. Habicht, M. Hakimi, N. Ingwersen, N. Jones,
  C. McKelvey, G. Pelto, B. Sikoki, et al. (2006). Causal effect of health on labor market
  outcomes: Experimental evidence. California Center for Population Research.

Thomas, D., E. Frankenberg, J. Friedman, J.-P. Habicht, M. Hakimi, N. J. Jaswadi, G. Pelto,
  B. Sikoki, T. Seeman, J. P. Smith, et al. (2003). Iron deficiency and the well-being of older
  adults: Early results from a randomized nutrition intervention. In Population Association of
  America Annual Meetings, Minneapolis.




                                               33
Wegmüller, R., F. Camara, M. B. Zimmermann, P. Adou, and R. F. Hurrell (2006). Salt dual-
  fortified with iodine and micronized ground ferric pyrophosphate affects iron status but not
  hemoglobin in children in Cote d’Ivoire. The Journal of Nutrition 136(7), 1814–1820.

World Health Organization (2001). Iron Deficiency Anaemia: Assessment, Prevention, and
  Control. Technical report, UNCDF, UNU and WHO.

Zijp, I. M., O. Korver, and L. B. Tijburg (2000). Effect of tea and other dietary factors on iron
  absorption. Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition 40(5), 371–398.

Zimmermann, M. B., R. Wegmueller, C. Zeder, N. Chaouki, F. Rohner, M. Saı̈ssi,
  T. Torresani, and R. F. Hurrell (2004).             Dual fortification of salt with iodine
  and micronized ferric pyrophosphate:        a randomized, double-blind, controlled trial.
  The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 80(4), 952–959.

Zimmermann, M. B., C. Zeder, N. Chaouki, A. Saad, T. Torresani, and R. F. Hurrell (2003). Dual
  fortification of salt with iodine and microencapsulated iron: a randomized, double-blind, con-
  trolled trial in Moroccan schoolchildren. The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 77(2),
  425–432.




                                               34
6   Figures

              Figure 1: Design of Experiments




                            35
Figure 2: Take-up from Rajasthan




Figure 3: Store Take Up over Time




               36
7   Tables




                     Table 1: Outcome Eligibility

             Topic                Eligible Age
             Hemoglobin           Ages 6 months and above
             Anthropometry        All ages; able to stand
             Physical Fitness     Ages 10 years and older
             Infant Development   Ages 1-30 months
             Child Cognition      Ages 5-14 years
             Adult Cognition      Ages 15-49 years
             Elderly Cognition    Ages 50 and over




                                  37
                                                                       Table 2: Balance Checks

                                               (1)            (2)              (3)              (4)            (5)           (6)            (7)              (8)
                                                             Sales
                                           Control Mean                                                    Control Mean                                 Observations
                                                          Experiment      P-value (Sales   Observations                    Free DFS    P-Value (Free
                                             for Sales                                                     for Free DFS                                  (Free DFS
                                                           (No Free       Experiment)      (Full Sample)                  Experiment      DFS)
                                            Experiment                                                      Experiment                                    Villages)
                                                            DFS)
     Panel A: Individual-Level Variables
     Female                                    0.515         0.513            0.704           39640            0.516         0.505         0.150            6301
                                              (0.500)       (0.500)                                           (0.500)       (0.500)
     Age                                      28.170        27.882            0.262           39070           28.302        26.984         0.008            6225
                                             (20.319)      (20.273)                                          (20.543)      (20.000)
     Elderly Individual (50+ years)            0.182         0.178            0.334           39641            0.186         0.162         0.014            6301
                                              (0.386)       (0.382)                                           (0.389)       (0.368)
     Anemic                                    0.447         0.445            0.963           34251            0.457          0.460        0.603            5404
                                              (0.497)       (0.497)                                           (0.498)       (0.499)
     Severe Anemia                             0.008          0.008           0.724           34251            0.008          0.012        0.158            5404
                                              (0.090)       (0.092)                                           (0.087)       (0.108)
     Hemoglobin Concentration                 12.197        12.187            0.731           34251           12.178        12.070         0.051            5404
                                              (1.856)       (1.837)                                           (1.862)       (1.914)
     Standardized Cognition Score              0.000         -0.021           0.373           32029            0.017         -0.069        0.011            5043
                                              (1.000)       (0.986)                                           (0.980)       (0.979)
38




     Standardized Mental Health Score          -0.000        0.000            0.976           26101            -0.053         0.018        0.145            4100
                                              (1.000)       (1.013)                                           (1.050)       (0.993)
     Standardized Physical Fitness Score       -0.000         0.021           0.369           15165            -0.059        -0.070        0.720            2311
                                              (1.000)       (0.937)                                           (0.955)       (0.998)
     Body Mass Index (BMI)                    18.145        18.106            0.605           34590           18.274        17.907         0.008            5459
                                              (4.221)       (4.202)                                           (4.351)       (4.574)
     Completed 5+ years of schooling            0.530         0.525           0.703           34874             0.528         0.484        0.044            5548
                                              (0.499)       (0.499)                                           (0.499)       (0.500)

                                                                                                                                       Continued on the next page...
         Panel B: Household-Level Variables
         30 day Consumption per Capita                       2351.154     2314.514       0.603           5954          2326.878        2338.572         0.938           923
                                                            (2897.359)   (2395.192)                                   (2804.108)      (2626.661)
         Household Head Completed 5+ Years of Schooling        0.555        0.558        0.904           5001            0.565            0.485         0.012           786
                                                              (0.497)      (0.497)                                      (0.496)         (0.500)
         At least one elderly, anemic person in Household      0.488        0.468        0.190           5906            0.488            0.475         0.708           917
                                                              (0.500)      (0.499)                                      (0.500)         (0.500)
         Number of Household Members                           6.542        6.643        0.339           6004            6.761            6.760         0.949           932
                                                              (3.514)      (3.929)                                      (4.125)         (3.988)
         Only Immediate Family Members in Household            0.356        0.367        0.463           5997            0.341            0.364         0.460           930
                                                              (0.479)      (0.482)                                      (0.474)         (0.482)
         Baseline Wealth Index                                 -0.037       -0.040       0.894           6002            -0.018          -0.016         0.996           931
                                                              (0.653)      (0.625)                                      (0.637)         (0.765)
         Household split since Baseline                         0.146        0.157       0.322           6004             0.177           0.226         0.054           932
                                                              (0.353)      (0.364)                                      (0.382)         (0.419)

         Panel C: Attrition Measurements
         Entire Household Lost to Attrition                   0.039        0.052         0.043           6004            0.044          0.023           0.065           932
                                                             (0.194)      (0.222)                                       (0.206)        (0.150)
         Individual Present in Baseline Sample                0.819        0.819         0.905           48536           0.814          0.794           0.085           7832
                                                             (0.385)      (0.385)                                       (0.389)        (0.405)
         Baseline Respondent Missing Endline Hemoglobin       0.215        0.217         0.905           39646           0.211          0.166           0.003           6302
                                                             (0.411)      (0.412)                                       (0.408)        (0.372)
         Respondent Lost to Attrition since Baseline          0.192        0.191         0.889           39646           0.185          0.150           0.018           6302
39




                                                             (0.394)      (0.393)                                       (0.388)        (0.357)

         Panel D: Take-Up Measurements
         Currently Using DFS                                  0.034        0.145         0.000           6287            0.156          0.611           0.000           1063
                                                             (0.182)      (0.352)                                       (0.363)        (0.488)
         Currently Using or Penultimately Used DFS            0.046        0.218         0.000           4095            0.230          0.753           0.000           725
                                                             (0.209)      (0.413)                                       (0.421)        (0.432)
         Tried DFS in the Past Year                           0.108        0.426         0.000           4434            0.422          0.745           0.000           789
                                                             (0.311)      (0.495)                                       (0.495)        (0.437)
         Times in Past Year Household Purchased DFS           0.779        3.313         0.000           4434            3.684          6.656           0.000           789
                                                             (4.003)      (7.086)                                       (7.864)        (7.378)

     1
       The table presents summary statistics for all those in our sample for whom we have the respective data. The sample used varies by column. Column 1 (“Control Mean
     for Sales Experiment”) includes all respondents and households who were located in villages that did not receive the Sales intervention. Column 2 (“Sales Experiment (No
     Free DFS)”) includes all those located in villages that were part of the Sales Experiment, excluding households that received the Free DFS Intervention. Column 5 (“Control
     Mean for Free DFS Experiment”) includes all respondents who were in villages where the Free DFS treatment occurred, but in households that did not receive the Free DFS
     treatment. Column 6 (“Free DFS Experiment”) includes those located in households that received the Free DFS Intervention.
     2
       The sample for “Individual-Level Variables” (except for “Individual in Baseline Sample”) includes all baseline respondents from within the respective subsets (refer to
     footnote 1) that we observe at endline. “Household-Level Variables” includes all households from baseline that we see at endline.
     3
       Scores were standardized using the mean from the sales experiment control group at baseline. The cognition outcomes were standardized such that a positive score
     indicates a higher level of cognition. The physical fitness scores were standardized such that a positive score indicates being more physically fit. The score for the mental health
     outcomes were standardized such that a positive score indicates a lower level of depression.
     4
         Standard deviations are in parentheses.
                                                    Table 3: Sales Experiment - Hemoglobin & Anemia by Gender and Age

                                                                     (1)            (2)               (3)                   (4)                  (5)                   (6)
         Sample:                                                     All          Female              Male           Child(< 15 years)   Adult (15-49 years)   Elderly (50+ years)
         Panel A: Hemoglobin Concentration
         Sales village                                               0.045         0.031              0.061                0.068                0.055                -0.019
                                                                    [0.027]       [0.029]            [0.033]              [0.034]              [0.035]               [0.044]

         Q-value                                                                  (0.160)            (0.150)              (0.242)              (0.242)               (0.488)
         Control Mean                                               12.056        11.416             12.769               11.492               12.575                11.982

         Panel B: Anemia
         Sales village                                              -0.009        -0.002             -0.016               -0.019               -0.011                 0.017
                                                                    [0.008]       [0.010]            [0.009]              [0.012]              [0.010]               [0.012]

         Q-value                                                                  (0.739)            (0.201)              (0.428)              (0.428)               (0.428)
         Control Mean                                               0.491          0.597              0.375                0.472                0.457                 0.605
         Observations                                               34732          17941              16726                12775                15576                 6295

         Panel C: Hemoglobin Concentration (Baseline Anemic Only)
         Sales village                                               0.077         0.045              0.145                0.134                0.062                 0.048
40




                                                                    [0.040]       [0.042]            [0.055]              [0.054]              [0.054]               [0.064]

         Q-value                                                                  (0.166)            (0.018)              (0.054)              (0.302)               (0.302)
         Control Mean                                               11.364        11.027             11.917               11.248               11.544                11.205

         Panel D: Anemia (Baseline Anemic Only)
         Sales village                                              -0.015        -0.004             -0.035               -0.026               -0.014                -0.009
                                                                    [0.011]       [0.013]            [0.015]              [0.020]              [0.014]               [0.015]

         Q-value                                                                  (0.643)            (0.048)              (1.000)              (1.000)               (1.000)
         Control Mean                                               0.669          0.722              0.581                0.561                0.674                 0.785
         Observations                                               11505          7167               4318                 3535                 4909                  3035

     1
         Standard errors in brackets.
     2
      Regression includes block-fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the village level. The sample includes all respondents present at endline for whom we have the respective
     outcomes data, excluding Free DFS Households.
     3
      Controls include the following variables from endline: Baseline Hemoglobin Concentration, Age, Age-Squared, a dummy for if the household split between baseline and endline, and
     a dummy for not present at baseline. The following baseline variables are also included: Completed 5th Standard or Higher, Body Mass Index (BMI), and Household Wealth Index.
     Note: For children under 10, education is for the head of the household.
     4
         Anemia thresholds are determined by age and gender, therefore, a dummy for each of these age groups is included in the regressions for anemia.
                               Table 4: Free DFS Experiment Compared to Control - Hemoglobin & Anemia by Gender and Age

                                                                     (1)            (2)               (3)                   (4)                  (5)                   (6)
         Sample:                                                     All          Female              Male           Child(< 15 years)   Adult (15-49 years)   Elderly (50+ years)
         Panel A: Hemoglobin Concentration
         Household in Free DFS Treatment                             0.044         0.054             -0.008                0.097                0.041                -0.136
                                                                    [0.049]       [0.055]            [0.058]              [0.057]              [0.057]               [0.082]

         Q-value                                                                  (1.000)            (1.000)              (0.211)              (0.211)               (0.211)
         Control Mean                                               12.056        11.416             12.769               11.492               12.575                11.982

         Panel B: Anemia
         Household in Free DFS Treatment                            -0.015        -0.018             -0.008               -0.027               -0.011                 0.006
                                                                    [0.015]       [0.018]            [0.017]              [0.019]              [0.016]               [0.023]

         Q-value                                                                  (1.000)            (1.000)              (0.321)              (0.528)               (0.639)
         Control Mean                                               0.491          0.597              0.375                0.472                0.457                 0.605
         Observations                                               21623          11163              10412                7960                 9670                  3925

         Panel C: Hemoglobin Concentration (Baseline Anemic Only)
         Household in Free DFS Treatment                             0.018         0.086             -0.119                0.079                0.059                -0.159
41




                                                                    [0.072]       [0.075]            [0.100]              [0.096]              [0.094]               [0.108]

         Q-value                                                                  (0.340)            (0.340)              (1.000)              (1.000)               (1.000)
         Control Mean                                               11.364        11.027             11.917               11.248               11.544                11.205

         Panel D: Anemia (Baseline Anemic Only)
         Household in Free DFS Treatment                            -0.002        -0.017              0.027                0.002               -0.004                -0.012
                                                                    [0.023]       [0.025]            [0.030]              [0.033]              [0.029]               [0.028]

         Q-value                                                                  (0.942)            (0.942)              (1.000)              (1.000)               (1.000)
         Control Mean                                               0.669          0.722              0.581                0.561                0.674                 0.785
         Observations                                               7192           4461               2717                 2202                 3043                  1913
     1
         Standard errors in brackets.
     2
      Standard errors are cluster at the village level. The sample includes all respondents located in the Sales Experiment control group or Free DFS households, who were present at
     endline and for whom we have the respective outcomes data.
     3
      Controls include the following variables from endline: Baseline Hemoglobin Concentration, Age, Age-Squared, a dummy for if the household split between baseline and endline, and
     a dummy for not present at baseline. The following baseline variables are also included: Completed 5th Standard or Higher, Body Mass Index (BMI), and Household Wealth Index.
     Note: For children under 10, education is for the head of the household.
     4
         Anemia thresholds are determined by age and gender, therefore, a dummy for each of these age groups is included in the regressions for anemia.
                               Table 5: Free DFS Experiment in Free DFS Villages - Hemoglobin & Anemia by Gender and Age

                                                                     (1)            (2)               (3)                   (4)                  (5)                   (6)
         Sample:                                                     All          Female              Male           Child(< 15 years)   Adult (15-49 years)   Elderly (50+ years)
         Panel A: Hemoglobin Concentration
         Household in Free DFS Treatment                            -0.009         0.005             -0.076                0.009               -0.023                -0.127
                                                                    [0.044]       [0.053]            [0.059]              [0.055]              [0.061]               [0.102]

         Q-value                                                                  (0.858)            (0.658)              (1.000)              (1.000)               (1.000)
         Control Mean                                               12.120        11.467             12.860               11.577               12.656                12.021

         Panel B: Anemia
         Household in Free DFS Treatment                            -0.002        -0.015              0.012               -0.010                0.003                -0.008
                                                                    [0.014]       [0.018]            [0.017]              [0.021]              [0.017]               [0.028]

         Q-value                                                                  (0.931)            (0.931)              (1.000)              (1.000)               (1.000)
         Control Mean                                               0.476          0.589              0.352                0.451                0.438                 0.604
         Observations                                               6253           3212               3027                 2350                 2797                  1085

         Panel C: Hemoglobin Concentration (Baseline Anemic Only)
         Household in Free DFS Treatment                             0.011         0.094             -0.179               -0.035                0.072                -0.109
42




                                                                    [0.072]       [0.080]            [0.127]              [0.100]              [0.110]               [0.158]

         Q-value                                                                  (0.313)            (0.313)              (1.000)              (1.000)               (1.000)
         Control Mean                                               11.413        11.030             12.087               11.466               11.528                11.165

         Panel D: Anemia (Baseline Anemic Only)
         Household in Free DFS Treatment                            -0.005        -0.032              0.018               -0.004               -0.027                -0.006
                                                                    [0.022]       [0.026]            [0.037]              [0.041]              [0.032]               [0.035]

         Q-value                                                                  (0.739)            (0.739)              (1.000)              (1.000)               (1.000)
         Control Mean                                               0.663          0.734              0.542                0.523                0.698                 0.773
         Observations                                               2059           1290                763                  659                  867                   524
     1
         Standard errors in brackets.
     2
      Regression includes village fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the household level. The sample includes all respondents located in the villages where the Free DFS experiment
     took place, who were present at endline and for whom we have the respective outcomes data.
     3
      Controls include the following variables from endline: Baseline Hemoglobin Concentration, Age, Age-Squared, a dummy for if the household split between baseline and endline, and
     a dummy for not present at baseline. The following baseline variables are also included: Completed 5th Standard or Higher, Body Mass Index (BMI), and Household Wealth Index.
     Note: For children under 10, education is for the head of the household.
     4
         Anemia thresholds are determined by age and gender, therefore, a dummy for each of these age groups is included in the regressions for anemia.
                                  Table 6: First Stage for Salt Consumption - Currently Using or Penultimately Used DFS

                                               (1)               (2)                  (3)                   (4)                (5)                  (6)
         Sample:                               All             Female                Male            All Anemic2        Anemic Female2        Anemic Male2
         Sales village                        0.164             0.166                0.164                 0.165             0.162                 0.171
                                             [0.019]           [0.019]              [0.019]               [0.021]           [0.022]               [0.023]
         Household in Free DFS Treatment      0.494             0.477                0.511                 0.523             0.504                 0.552
                                             [0.045]           [0.049]              [0.042]               [0.049]           [0.053]               [0.047]

         P-value: Sales Experiment +         0.000              0.000               0.000                 0.000               0.000                0.000
         Free DFS Household = 0
         Control Mean                        0.049              0.049               0.049                 0.047               0.050                0.042
         Observations                        28126              14208               13564                 8925                5536                 3374
     1
         Standard errors in brackets.
43




     2
       The Anemic Female and Anemic Male groups refer to females and males (respectively) who were anemic at baseline. All anemic includes both males and
     females who were anemic at baseline.

     3
       Standard errors are clustered at the village level and the regression includes all respondents who were present at endline and for whom we have the
     respective outcomes data.

     4
       Controls include the following variables from endline: Age, Age-Squared, a dummy for if the household split between baseline and endline, and a dummy
     for not present at baseline. The following baseline variables are also included: Baseline Hemoglobin Concentration, Completed 5th Standard or Higher,
     Body Mass Index (BMI), and Household Wealth Index. Note: For children under 10, education is for the head of the household.
                                                               Table 7: All Health Outcomes - 2SLS Estimates

                                                         (1)                 (2)                 (3)                    (4)                  (5)                  (6)
         Sample:                                         All               Female                Male             All Anemic2         Anemic Female2        Anemic Male2
         Panel A: Hemoglobin Concentration
         Currently Using or Penultimately Used DFS       0.032              0.043               -0.016                 0.020                0.122                -0.113
                                                        [0.089]            [0.100]              [0.105]               [0.126]              [0.138]               [0.164]

         Control Mean                                   12.056             11.416               12.769                11.364               11.027                11.917

         Panel B: Anemia
         Currently Using or Penultimately Used DFS      -0.014             -0.007               -0.014                -0.008               -0.007                -0.008
                                                        [0.028]            [0.033]              [0.032]               [0.040]              [0.045]               [0.049]

         Control Mean                                   0.491               0.597                0.375                0.669                 0.722                0.581
         Observations                                   23215               12057                11119                7731                  4840                 2876

         Panel C: Standardized Cognition Score
         Currently Using or Penultimately Used DFS      -0.053             -0.066               -0.065                -0.105               -0.145                -0.061
                                                        [0.058]            [0.074]              [0.065]               [0.077]              [0.089]               [0.108]

         Control Mean                                   -0.015              -0.272               0.247                -0.115               -0.358                0.274
         Observations                                   19932               10090                9619                  6302                 3926                 2364

         Panel D: Standardized Physical Fitness Score
44




         Currently Using or Penultimately Used DFS      -0.059             -0.109               -0.000                -0.079               -0.113                -0.001
                                                        [0.103]            [0.116]              [0.109]               [0.126]              [0.140]               [0.177]

         Control Mean                                   -0.422              -0.537              -0.259                -0.487               -0.558                -0.330
         Observations                                   10278                6082                4189                  3630                 2584                  1043

         Panel E: Standardized Mental Health Score
         Currently Using or Penultimately Used DFS      -0.043              0.004               -0.102                -0.028               -0.020                -0.026
                                                        [0.070]            [0.096]              [0.072]               [0.100]              [0.119]               [0.112]

         Control Mean                                   -0.090              -0.315               0.170                -0.194               -0.361                0.123
         Observations                                   17764                9536                8210                  6164                 4096                 2061
     1
         Standard errors in brackets.
     2
      The Anemic Female and Anemic Male groups refer to females and males (respectively) who were anemic at baseline. All anemic includes both males and females who
     were anemic at baseline.
     3
      Standard errors are clustered at the village level and the regression includes all respondents who were present at endline and for whom we have the respective outcomes
     data. Currently using DFS or Penultimately Used DFS is instrumented by a dummy for Sales Experiment and a dummy for Free DFS Households.
     4
      Controls include the following variables from endline: Age, Age-Squared, a dummy for if the household split between baseline and endline, and a dummy for not present
     at baseline. The following baseline variables are also included: Baseline Hemoglobin Concentration, Completed 5th Standard or Higher, Body Mass Index (BMI), and
     Household Wealth Index. Note: For children under 10, education is for the head of the household.
     5
      Scores were standardized using the mean from the sales experiment control group at baseline. The cognition outcomes were standardized such that a positive score indicates
     a higher level of cognition. The physical fitness scores were standardized such that a positive score indicates being more physically fit. The score for the mental health outcomes
     were standardized such that a positive score indicates a lower level of depression.
     6
         Anemia thresholds are determined by age and gender, therefore, a dummy for each of these age groups is included in the regressions for anemia.
                                                               Table 8a: Health Outcomes - Standardized Cognition Scores

                                                                       (1)           (2)           (3)                   (4)                  (5)                   (6)
         Sample:                                                       All         Female          Male           Child(< 15 years)   Adult (15-49 years)   Elderly (50+ years)
         Panel A: Sales Experiment
         Sales village                                                0.008          0.006         0.006                0.024                0.012                 0.000
                                                                     [0.021]        [0.025]       [0.022]              [0.024]              [0.022]               [0.035]

         Q-value                                                     (1.000)       (1.000)        (0.794)              (0.304)              (1.000)               (0.974)
         Control Mean                                                 -0.015        -0.272         0.247                0.258                -0.442                0.522
         Observations                                                 32471         16292          15774                11716                14643                 5704

         Panel B: Sales Experiment (Baseline Anemic Only)
         Sales village                                                0.014          0.001         0.028                0.024               -0.001                -0.014
                                                                     [0.028]        [0.031]       [0.036]              [0.039]              [0.025]               [0.047]

         Q-value                                                     (1.000)       (1.000)        (1.000)              (1.000)              (1.000)               (1.000)
         Control Mean                                                 -0.115        -0.358         0.274                0.106                -0.549                0.377
         Observations                                                 10240          6318          3902                 2976                  4550                 2689

         Panel C: Free DFS Households
         Household in Free DFS Treatment                             -0.048         -0.052        -0.060                0.033               -0.036                -0.137
45




                                                                     [0.033]        [0.039]       [0.036]              [0.042]              [0.034]               [0.070]

         Q-value                                                     (0.313)       (0.381)        (0.400)              (0.723)              (0.804)               (0.185)
         Control Mean                                                 -0.015        -0.272         0.247                0.258                -0.442                0.522
         Observations                                                 18515          9242          9031                 6621                  8379                 3266

         Panel D: Free DFS Households (Baseline Anemic Only)
         Household in Free DFS Treatment                             -0.073         -0.089        -0.074                0.057               -0.065                -0.229
                                                                     [0.046]        [0.048]       [0.071]              [0.067]              [0.045]               [0.087]

         Q-value                                                     (0.538)       (0.256)        (1.000)              (1.000)              (0.204)               (0.030)
         Control Mean                                                 -0.115        -0.358         0.274                0.106                -0.549                0.377
         Observations                                                  5873          3622          2239                 1679                  2623                 1547
     1
         Standard errors in brackets.
     2
      Panel A & B: Regression includes block-fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the village level. The sample includes all respondents present at endline for whom we have the
     respective outcomes data, excluding Free DFS Households. Panel C & D: Standard errors are cluster at the village level. The sample includes all respondents located in the Sales
     Experiment control group or Free DFS households, who were present at endline and for whom we have the respective outcomes data.
     3
      Controls include the following variables from endline: Baseline Hemoglobin Concentration, Age, Age-Squared, a dummy for if the household split between baseline and endline, and
     a dummy for not present at baseline. The following baseline variables are also included: Completed 5th Standard or Higher, Body Mass Index (BMI), and Household Wealth Index.
     Note: For children under 10, education is for the head of the household.
                                                               Table 8b: Health Outcomes - Standardized Physical Fitness

                                                                      (1)            (2)           (3)                   (4)                  (5)                   (6)
         Sample:                                                      All          Female          Male           Child(< 15 years)   Adult (15-49 years)   Elderly (50+ years)
         Panel A: Sales Experiment
         Sales village                                               -0.021         -0.014        -0.042               -0.048               -0.003                -0.047
                                                                     [0.034]        [0.038]       [0.040]              [0.051]              [0.039]               [0.046]

         Q-value                                                    (1.000)        (1.000)        (0.794)              (0.304)              (1.000)               (0.974)
         Control Mean                                                -0.422         -0.537         -0.259               -0.313               -0.396                -0.566
         Observations                                                16950           9886           7049                 2725                10444                  3777

         Panel B: Sales Experiment (Baseline Anemic Only)
         Sales village                                               -0.033         -0.027        -0.058               -0.057               -0.021                -0.056
                                                                     [0.038]        [0.042]       [0.055]              [0.085]              [0.044]               [0.058]

         Q-value                                                    (1.000)        (1.000)        (1.000)              (1.000)              (1.000)               (1.000)
         Control Mean                                                -0.487         -0.558         -0.330               -0.337               -0.433                -0.661
         Observations                                                 6016           4196           1813                 818                  3509                  1689

         Panel C: Free DFS Households
         Household in Free DFS Treatment                             -0.085         -0.094        -0.088               -0.206               -0.086                 0.051
46




                                                                     [0.060]        [0.066]       [0.067]              [0.089]              [0.064]               [0.090]

         Q-value                                                    (0.313)        (0.381)        (0.400)              (0.069)              (0.804)               (1.000)
         Control Mean                                                -0.422         -0.537         -0.259               -0.313               -0.396                -0.566
         Observations                                                 9724           5698           4017                 1540                 6003                  2180

         Panel D: Free DFS Households (Baseline Anemic Only)
         Household in Free DFS Treatment                             -0.080         -0.096        -0.053                0.013               -0.149                -0.007
                                                                     [0.072]        [0.082]       [0.115]              [0.150]              [0.078]               [0.130]

         Q-value                                                    (0.538)        (0.325)        (1.000)              (1.000)              (0.204)               (1.000)
         Control Mean                                                -0.487         -0.558         -0.330               -0.337               -0.433                -0.661
         Observations                                                 3443           2394           1046                 454                  2008                  981
     1
         Standard errors in brackets.
     2
      Panel A & B: Regression includes block-fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the village level. The sample includes all respondents present at endline for whom we have the
     respective outcomes data, excluding Free DFS Households. Panel C & D: Standard errors are cluster at the village level. The sample includes all respondents located in the Sales
     Experiment control group or Free DFS households, who were present at endline and for whom we have the respective outcomes data.
     3
      Controls include the following variables from endline: Baseline Hemoglobin Concentration, Age, Age-Squared, a dummy for if the household split between baseline and endline, and
     a dummy for not present at baseline. The following baseline variables are also included: Completed 5th Standard or Higher, Body Mass Index (BMI), and Household Wealth Index.
     Note: For children under 10, education is for the head of the household.
                                                               Table 8c: Health Outcomes - Standardized Mental Health

                                                                     (1)            (2)            (3)                   (4)                  (5)                   (6)
         Sample:                                                     All          Female           Male           Child(< 15 years)   Adult (15-49 years)   Elderly (50+ years)
         Panel A: Sales Experiment
         Sales village                                              -0.002         0.013          -0.023               -0.088                0.007                 0.031
                                                                    [0.022]       [0.033]         [0.022]              [0.046]              [0.023]               [0.032]

         Q-value                                                   (1.000)        (1.000)         (0.794)              (0.193)              (1.000)               (0.974)
         Control Mean                                               -0.090         -0.315          0.170                -0.174               0.006                 -0.264
         Observations                                               28657          15347           13275                 4966                16923                  6758

         Panel B: Sales Experiment (Baseline Anemic Only)
         Sales village                                               0.016         0.036          -0.021               -0.084                0.041                 0.014
                                                                    [0.032]       [0.040]         [0.036]              [0.076]              [0.036]               [0.042]

         Q-value                                                   (1.000)        (1.000)         (1.000)              (1.000)              (1.000)               (1.000)
         Control Mean                                               -0.194         -0.361          0.123                -0.176               -0.108                -0.339
         Observations                                                9975           6567           3394                  1431                 5302                  3242

         Panel C: Free DFS Households
         Household in Free DFS Treatment                             0.007         0.029          -0.029               -0.038                0.019                -0.014
47




                                                                    [0.038]       [0.053]         [0.038]              [0.079]              [0.041]               [0.056]

         Q-value                                                   (0.393)        (0.381)         (0.400)              (0.723)              (0.804)               (1.000)
         Control Mean                                               -0.090         -0.315          0.170                -0.174               0.006                 -0.264
         Observations                                               16369           8775           7570                  2848                9632                   3884

         Panel D: Free DFS Households (Baseline Anemic Only)
         Household in Free DFS Treatment                             0.026         0.035          -0.002                0.102                0.012                -0.024
                                                                    [0.057]       [0.068]         [0.066]              [0.115]              [0.068]               [0.075]

         Q-value                                                   (0.681)        (0.581)         (1.000)              (1.000)              (0.401)               (1.000)
         Control Mean                                               -0.194         -0.361          0.123                -0.176               -0.108                -0.339
         Observations                                                5697           3734           1955                  803                  3018                  1876
     1
         Standard errors in brackets.
     2
      Panel A & B: Regression includes block-fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the village level. The sample includes all respondents present at endline for whom we have the
     respective outcomes data, excluding Free DFS Households. Panel C & D: Standard errors are cluster at the village level. The sample includes all respondents located in the Sales
     Experiment control group or Free DFS households, who were present at endline and for whom we have the respective outcomes data.
     3
      Controls include the following variables from endline: Baseline Hemoglobin Concentration, Age, Age-Squared, a dummy for if the household split between baseline and endline, and
     a dummy for not present at baseline. The following baseline variables are also included: Completed 5th Standard or Higher, Body Mass Index (BMI), and Household Wealth Index.
     Note: For children under 10, education is for the head of the household.
                                          Table 9: Effect on Hemoglobin Level and Anemia Indicator (All Blocks) - Rajasthan

                                                                       Adult Female                                                                       Adult Male
                                               Hemoglobin Level                                 Anemia Status                     Hemoglobin Level                               Anemia Status
                                           (1)                 (2)                   (3)                      (4)              (5)                (6)                  (7)                     (8)
                                      Reduced Form       Average: Last 3        Reduced Form            Average: Last 3   Reduced Form      Average: Last 3       Reduced Form           Average: Last 3
                                         (OLS)            Months (IV)              (OLS)                 Months (IV)         (OLS)           Months (IV)             (OLS)                Months (IV)
         Control Group Means              10.888             10.882                   0.732                     0.734        12.805             12.771                 0.507                     0.512

         Panel A: Basic Control
         Iron Treatment/Take-up           -0.031             -0.100                    0.016                     0.050        0.129              0.301                 -0.039                    -0.088
                                          [0.077]            [0.189]                  [0.020]                   [0.049]      [0.086]            [0.207]                [0.024]                   [0.057]

         Observations                      3,890              3,362                   3,890                     3,362        3,527               3,154                 3,527                     3,154
48




         Panel B: Controlling for Baseline Anemia
         Iron Treatment/Take-up            -0.024            -0.087                    0.014                     0.046        0.132              0.309                 -0.040                    -0.091
                                           [0.074]           [0.183]                  [0.020]                   [0.049]      [0.082]            [0.196]                [0.023]                   [0.055]
         Baseline Anemia                   -0.836            -0.817                    0.173                     0.179       -0.861             -0.893                  0.199                     0.215
                                           [0.062]           [0.069]                  [0.019]                   [0.020]      [0.072]            [0.075]                [0.020]                   [0.021]
         Missing Baseline Anemia           -0.627            -0.656                    0.101                     0.121       -0.422             -0.396                  0.071                     0.077
                                           [0.087]           [0.088]                  [0.025]                   [0.027]      [0.090]            [0.095]                [0.027]                   [0.027]

         Observations                      3,890              3,362                   3,890                     3,362        3,527               3,154                 3,527                     3,154
     1
       Standard errors in brackets. Standard errors are clustered at the village level
     2
       The controls in Panel A include Age, Age2 , and block dummies. Panel B includes missing values. All IV regressions in Panels A-B use original treatment status
     as the instrument.
     3
       Average take-up in the last 3 months and during the treatment period is from the monthly CHS survey.
                                                             Table 10: Adolescent (13-17 years) Estimates

                                                                                    Hemoglobin Concentration                                    Anemia
                                                                                  (1)                      (2)                      (3)                      (4)
          Sample:                                                              Adolescents          Anemic Adolescents           Adolescents          Anemic Adolescents
          Panel A: - Sales Experiment (OLS)
          Sales village                                                           0.044                    0.151                    -0.005                   -0.024
                                                                                 [0.052]                  [0.096]                   [0.017]                  [0.028]

          Q-value                                                                (0.360)                  (0.211)                  (0.494)                   (1.000)
          Observations                                                            4015                     1276                     4012                      1276

          Panel B: Free DFS Experiment Compared to Control (OLS)
          Household in Free DFS Treatment                                         0.156                    0.071                    -0.059                   -0.000
                                                                                 [0.103]                  [0.176]                   [0.025]                  [0.040]

          Q-value                                                                (0.211)                  (1.000)                  (0.086)                   (1.000)
          Observations                                                            2485                      792                     2484                       792

          Panel C: Free DFS Experiment within Free DFS Villages (OLS)
          Household in Free DFS Treatment                                         0.050                   -0.096                    -0.050                   -0.001
49




                                                                                 [0.126]                  [0.298]                   [0.038]                  [0.075]

          Q-value                                                                (1.000)                  (1.000)                  (1.000)                   (1.000)
          Observations                                                             704                      238                      704                       238

          Panel D: 2SLS Estimates
          Currently Using or Penultimately Used DFS                               0.410                    0.211                    -0.121                    0.020
                                                                                 [0.186]                  [0.305]                   [0.050]                  [0.069]

          Control Mean                                                           12.386                   11.644                    0.467                     0.636
          Observations                                                            2682                     849                      2680                       849

     1
         Standard errors in brackets.
     2
       Panel A: Regression includes block-fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the village level. The sample includes all respondents present at endline for whom we
     have the respective outcomes data, excluding Free DFS Households. Panel B: Standard errors are cluster at the village level. The sample includes all respondents located
     in the Sales Experiment control group or Free DFS households, who were present at endline and for whom we have the respective outcomes data. Panel C: Regression
     includes village fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the household level. The sample includes all respondents located in the villages where the Free DFS experiment
     took place, who were present at endline and for whom we have the respective outcomes data. Panel D: Standard errors are clustered at the village level and the regression
     includes all respondents who were present at endline and for whom we have the respective outcomes data. Currently using DFS or Penultimately Used DFS is instrumented
     by a dummy for Sales Experiment and a dummy for Free DFS Households
     3
      Controls include the following variables from endline: Baseline Hemoglobin Concentration, Age, Age-Squared, a dummy for if the household split between baseline and endline,
     and a dummy for not present at baseline. The following baseline variables are also included: Completed 5th Standard or Higher, Body Mass Index (BMI), and Household Wealth
     Index. Note: For children under 10, education is for the head of the household.
     4
         Anemia thresholds are determined by age and gender, therefore, a dummy for each of these age groups is included in the regressions for anemia.
     8        Appendix

                                                                   Table 11: Hemoglobin and Anemia

                                                (1)                    (2)                   (3)                    (4)                     (5)                   (6)
                                                                              2                                                                     2
         Sample:                                All              All Anemic                Female                  Male              Anemic Female          Anemic Male2
         Sales village                         0.056                  0.115                 0.034                  0.076                   0.060                 0.173
                                               [0.056]               [0.090]                [0.059]                [0.062]                [0.097]                [0.115]
         Free DFS Village                      0.035                 -0.028                 0.028                  0.054                  -0.043                 0.045
                                               [0.043]               [0.072]                [0.046]                [0.056]                [0.076]                [0.104]
         Movie Experiment                      0.006                  0.064                 0.022                  -0.018                  0.028                 0.130
                                               [0.042]               [0.063]                [0.045]                [0.051]                [0.064]                [0.086]
         Flyer Promotion Experiment            0.003                 -0.039                 -0.022                 0.015                  -0.004                 -0.045
                                               [0.044]               [0.071]                [0.048]                [0.049]                [0.075]                [0.096]
         Store Incentive - All Kiranas         -0.043                -0.062                 0.001                  -0.077                 -0.028                 -0.104
                                               [0.048]               [0.069]                [0.050]                [0.058]                [0.073]                [0.102]
50




         Store Incentive - 1 Kirana            -0.015                -0.002                 0.034                  -0.037                  0.020                 -0.028
                                               [0.045]               [0.071]                [0.048]                [0.056]                [0.073]                [0.097]
         Movie Treatment - Main Control        0.018                  0.004                 0.039                  -0.004                  0.021                 0.018
                                               [0.042]               [0.062]                [0.044]                [0.051]                [0.063]                [0.079]
         Baseline Hemoglobin Concentration     0.536                  0.551                 0.444                  0.396                   0.460                 0.502
                                               [0.007]               [0.015]                [0.010]                [0.011]                [0.019]                [0.025]


         Control Mean                          12.056                11.364                 11.416                 12.769                 11.027                 11.917
         Observations                          35004                 11505                  17941                  16726                   7167                   4318

     1
         Standard errors in brackets.
     2
      Regression includes block-fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the village level. The sample includes all respondents present at endline for whom we have the
     respective outcomes data, except for those in Free DFS households.
     3
         Controls include the following variables from endline: Age, Age-Squared, a dummy for if the household split between baseline and endline, and a dummy for not present
     at baseline. The following baseline variables are also included: Completed 5th Standard or Higher, Body Mass Index (BMI), and Household Wealth Index. Note: For
     children under 10, education is for the head of the household.
     4
       Regression also includes a dummy for if located in a non-sales village that received the movie treatment and a dummy for if located in a village that was eligible for the
     store incentive treatment, but did not receive it.
                                                     Table 12: Balance Table for Those Observed at Endline


                                               (1)             (2)           (3)              (4)            (5)            (6)           (7)              (8)
                                                              Sales
                                           Control Mean                                                  Control Mean                                 Observations
                                                           Experiment   P-value (Sales   Observations                   Free DFS     P-Value (Free
                                             for Sales                                                   for Free DFS                                  (Free DFS
                                                            (No Free    Experiment)      (Full Sample)                  Experiment      DFS)
                                           Experiment                                                    Experiment                                     Villages)
                                                             DFS)

     Panel A: Individual-Level Variables
     Female                                   0.524          0.519          0.213           32174           0.527         0.516          0.292            5239
                                             (0.499)         (0.500)                                       (0.499)        (0.500)
     Age                                      28.117         27.803         0.285           31755           28.166        26.777         0.005            5183
                                             (20.116)       (20.085)                                       (20.392)      (19.718)
     Elderly Individual (50+ years)           0.183          0.179          0.456           32175           0.189         0.160          0.006            5239
                                             (0.387)         (0.384)                                       (0.391)        (0.367)
     Anemic                                   0.447          0.442          0.713           28768           0.455         0.454          0.824            4635
51




                                             (0.497)         (0.497)                                       (0.498)        (0.498)
     Severe Anemia                            0.007          0.008          0.445           28768           0.007         0.011          0.145            4635
                                             (0.082)         (0.086)                                       (0.081)        (0.106)
     Hemoglobin Concentration                 12.191         12.192         0.940           28768           12.172        12.084         0.127            4635
                                             (1.808)         (1.802)                                       (1.808)        (1.876)
     Standardized Cognition Score             -0.008         -0.022         0.560           26818           0.004         -0.088         0.005            4314
                                             (0.991)         (0.971)                                       (0.968)        (0.973)
     Standardized Mental Health Score         -0.006         -0.009         0.913           21547           -0.058        0.011          0.250            3437
                                             (0.997)         (1.011)                                       (1.035)        (0.995)
     Standardized Physical Fitness Score      0.017          0.028          0.692           12947           -0.061        -0.046         0.862            2020
                                             (0.885)         (0.919)                                       (0.924)        (0.955)
     Body Mass Index (BMI)                    18.132         18.092         0.628           29110           18.228        17.917         0.021            4684
                                             (4.283)         (4.290)                                       (4.435)        (4.690)
     Completed 5+ years of schooling          0.523          0.521          0.838           29271           0.518         0.474          0.046            4739
                                             (0.499)         (0.500)                                       (0.500)        (0.499)

                                                                                                                                     Continued on the next page...
     Panel B: Household-Level Variables
     30 day Consumption per Capita                       2340.194       2317.395          0.722           5678          2347.028       2350.476         0.978            891
                                                        (2906.224)      (2408.160)                                     (2853.984)     (2656.458)
     Household Head Completed 5+ Years of Schooling       0.556           0.559           0.869           4993           0.565           0.486          0.014            785
                                                          (0.497)        (0.497)                                        (0.496)         (0.500)
     At least one elderly, anemic person in Household     0.490           0.472           0.256           5665           0.495           0.470          0.502            888
                                                          (0.500)        (0.499)                                        (0.501)         (0.500)
     Number of Household Members                          6.603           6.738           0.213           5720           6.847           6.844          0.906            899
                                                          (3.485)        (3.927)                                        (4.135)         (3.996)
     Only Immediate Family Members in Household           0.350           0.355           0.728           5716           0.328           0.355          0.449            898
                                                          (0.477)        (0.479)                                        (0.470)         (0.479)
     Baseline Wealth Index                                -0.032          -0.028          0.841           5718           -0.006         -0.010          0.949            898
                                                          (0.644)        (0.601)                                        (0.606)         (0.772)
     Household split since Baseline                       0.152           0.166           0.236           5744           0.185           0.231          0.083            900
                                                          (0.359)        (0.372)                                        (0.389)         (0.422)


      1
          The table presents summary statistics for only the people who we observed at endline (non-attritors). The sample used varies by column. Column 1 (“Control Mean
          for Sales Experiment”) includes all respondents and households who were located in villages that did not receive the Sales intervention. Column 2 (“Sales Experiment
          (No Free DFS)”) includes all those located in villages that were part of the Sales Experiment, excluding households that received the Free DFS Intervention. Column
          5 (“Control Mean for Free DFS Experiment”) includes all respondents who were in villages where the Free DFS treatment occurred, but in households that did not
          receive the Free DFS treatment. Column 6 (“Free DFS Experiment”) includes those located in households that received the Free DFS Intervention.
52




      2
          The sample for “Individual-Level Variables” (except for “Individual in Baseline Sample”) includes all baseline respondents from within the respective subsets (refer
          to footnotes 1) that we observe at endline. “Household-Level Variables” includes all households from baseline that we see at endline.

      3
          Scores were standardized using the mean from the sales experiment control group at baseline. The cognition outcomes were standardized such that a positive score
          indicates a higher level of cognition. The physical fitness scores were standardized such that a positive score indicates being more physically fit. The score for the mental
          health outcomes were standardized such that a positive score indicates a higher level of depression.

      4
          Standard deviations are in parentheses.
     9     Online Appendix

                                                     Table A1: Balance Checks (Baseline Respondents Only)

                                               (1)             (2)           (3)              (4)            (5)           (6)            (7)              (8)
                                                              Sales
                                           Control Mean                                                  Control Mean                                 Observations
                                                           Experiment   P-value (Sales   Observations                    Free DFS    P-Value (Free
                                             for Sales                                                   for Free DFS                                  (Free DFS
                                                            (No Free    Experiment)      (Full Sample)                  Experiment      DFS)
                                            Experiment                                                    Experiment                                    Villages)
                                                             DFS)
     Panel A: Individual-Level Variables
     Female                                    0.515          0.513         0.704           39640            0.516         0.505         0.150            6301
                                              (0.500)        (0.500)                                        (0.500)       (0.500)
     Age                                      28.170         27.882         0.262           39070           28.302        26.984         0.008            6225
                                             (20.319)       (20.273)                                       (20.543)      (20.000)
     Elderly Individual (50+ years)            0.182          0.178         0.334           39641            0.186         0.162         0.014            6301
                                              (0.386)        (0.382)                                        (0.389)       (0.368)
     Anemic                                    0.447          0.445         0.963           34251            0.457          0.460        0.603            5404
                                              (0.497)        (0.497)                                        (0.498)       (0.499)
     Severe Anemia                             0.008           0.008        0.724           34251            0.008          0.012        0.158            5404
53




                                              (0.090)        (0.092)                                        (0.087)       (0.108)
     Hemoglobin Concentration                 12.197         12.187         0.731           34251           12.178        12.070         0.051            5404
                                              (1.856)        (1.837)                                        (1.862)       (1.914)
     Standardized Cognition Score              0.000          -0.021        0.373           32029            0.017         -0.069        0.011            5043
                                              (1.000)        (0.986)                                        (0.980)       (0.979)
     Standardized Mental Health Score          -0.000         0.000         0.976           26101            -0.053         0.018        0.145            4100
                                              (1.000)        (1.013)                                        (1.050)       (0.993)
     Standardized Physical Fitness Score       -0.000          0.021        0.369           15165            -0.059        -0.070        0.720            2311
                                              (1.000)        (0.937)                                        (0.955)       (0.998)
     Body Mass Index (BMI)                    18.145         18.106         0.605           34590           18.274        17.907         0.008            5459
                                              (4.221)        (4.202)                                        (4.351)       (4.574)
     Completed 5+ years of schooling            0.530          0.525        0.703           34874             0.528         0.484        0.044            5548
                                              (0.499)        (0.499)                                        (0.499)       (0.500)

                                                                                                                                     Continued on the next page...
         Panel B: Household-Level Variables
         30 day Consumption per Capita                       2351.154     2314.968       0.607           5953          2326.878        2338.572         0.938           923
                                                            (2897.359)   (2395.552)                                   (2804.108)      (2626.661)
         Household Head Completed 5+ Years of Schooling        0.555        0.558        0.904           5001            0.565            0.485         0.012           786
                                                              (0.497)      (0.497)                                      (0.496)         (0.500)
         At least one elderly, anemic person in Household      0.488        0.468        0.190           5906            0.488            0.475         0.708           917
                                                              (0.500)      (0.499)                                      (0.500)         (0.500)
         Number of Household Members                           6.542        6.638        0.362           6003            6.761            6.760         0.949           932
                                                              (3.514)      (3.923)                                      (4.125)         (3.988)
         Only Immediate Family Members in Household            0.356        0.367        0.456           5996            0.341            0.364         0.460           930
                                                              (0.479)      (0.482)                                      (0.474)         (0.482)
         Baseline Wealth Index                                 -0.037       -0.040       0.892           6001            -0.018          -0.016         0.996           931
                                                              (0.653)      (0.625)                                      (0.637)         (0.765)
         Household split since Baseline                         0.146        0.157       0.322           6004             0.177           0.226         0.054           932
                                                              (0.353)      (0.364)                                      (0.382)         (0.419)

         Panel C: Attrition Measurements
         Entire Household Lost to Attrition                   0.039        0.052         0.043           6004            0.044          0.023           0.065           932
                                                             (0.194)      (0.222)                                       (0.206)        (0.150)
         Baseline Respondent Missing Endline Hemoglobin       0.215        0.217         0.905           39646           0.211          0.166           0.003           6302
                                                             (0.411)      (0.412)                                       (0.408)        (0.372)
         Respondent Lost to Attrition since Baseline          0.192        0.191         0.889           39646           0.185          0.150           0.018           6302
                                                             (0.394)      (0.393)                                       (0.388)        (0.357)
54




         Panel D: Take-Up Measurements
         Currently Using DFS                                  0.034        0.145         0.000           6247            0.157          0.614           0.000           1054
                                                             (0.182)      (0.353)                                       (0.364)        (0.487)
         Currently Using or Penultimately Used DFS            0.046        0.219         0.000           4062            0.232          0.760           0.000           716
                                                             (0.210)      (0.414)                                       (0.423)        (0.428)
         Tried DFS in the Past Year                           0.108        0.426         0.000           4400            0.423          0.746           0.000           780
                                                             (0.310)      (0.495)                                       (0.495)        (0.436)
         Times in Past Year Household Purchased DFS           0.781        3.323         0.000           4400            3.682          6.706           0.000           780
                                                             (4.013)      (7.107)                                       (7.878)        (7.409)

     1
       The table presents summary statistics for all those in our sample for whom we have the respective data. The sample used varies by column. Column 1 (“Control Mean
     for Sales Experiment”) includes all respondents and households who were located in villages that did not receive the Sales intervention. Column 2 (“Sales Experiment (No
     Free DFS)”) includes all those located in villages that were part of the Sales Experiment, excluding households that received the Free DFS Intervention. Column 5 (“Control
     Mean for Free DFS Experiment”) includes all respondents who were in villages where the Free DFS treatment occurred, but in households that did not receive the Free DFS
     treatment. Column 6 (“Free DFS Experiment”) includes those located in households that received the Free DFS Intervention.
     2
       The sample for “Individual-Level Variables” (except for “Individual in Baseline Sample”) includes all baseline respondents from within the respective subsets (refer to
     footnote 1) that we observe at endline. “Household-Level Variables” includes all households from baseline that we see at endline.
     3
       Scores were standardized using the mean from the sales experiment control group at baseline. The cognition outcomes were standardized such that a positive score
     indicates a higher level of cognition. The physical fitness scores were standardized such that a positive score indicates being more physically fit. The score for the mental health
     outcomes were standardized such that a positive score indicates a lower level of depression.
     4
         Standard deviations are in parentheses.
                           Table A2: Sales Experiment - Hemoglobin & Anemia by Gender and Age (Baseline Respondents Only)

                                                                     (1)            (2)               (3)                   (4)                  (5)                   (6)
         Sample:                                                     All          Female              Male           Child(< 15 years)   Adult (15-49 years)   Elderly (50+ years)
         Panel A: Hemoglobin Concentration
         Sales village                                               0.045         0.015              0.072                0.058                0.055                -0.004
                                                                    [0.029]       [0.030]            [0.035]              [0.035]              [0.038]               [0.046]

         Q-value                                                                  (0.459)            (0.087)              (0.411)              (0.411)               (0.856)
         Control Mean                                               12.163        11.497             12.891               11.725               12.578                11.977

         Panel B: Anemia
         Sales village                                              -0.004         0.003             -0.010               -0.012               -0.007                 0.017
                                                                    [0.009]       [0.011]            [0.010]              [0.013]              [0.010]               [0.012]

         Q-value                                                                  (1.000)            (1.000)              (1.000)              (1.000)               (1.000)
         Control Mean                                               0.476          0.584              0.358                0.425                0.456                 0.604
         Observations                                               28780          14946              13769                9770                 13065                 5870

         Panel C: Hemoglobin Concentration (Baseline Anemic Only)
         Sales village                                               0.077         0.045              0.145                0.134                0.062                 0.048
55




                                                                    [0.040]       [0.042]            [0.055]              [0.054]              [0.054]               [0.064]

         Q-value                                                                  (0.166)            (0.018)              (0.054)              (0.302)               (0.302)
         Control Mean                                               11.364        11.027             11.917               11.248               11.544                11.205

         Panel D: Anemia (Baseline Anemic Only)
         Sales village                                              -0.015        -0.004             -0.035               -0.026               -0.014                -0.009
                                                                    [0.011]       [0.013]            [0.015]              [0.020]              [0.014]               [0.015]

         Q-value                                                                  (0.643)            (0.048)              (1.000)              (1.000)               (1.000)
         Control Mean                                               0.669          0.722              0.581                0.561                0.674                 0.785
         Observations                                               11505          7167               4318                 3535                 4909                  3035

     1
         Standard errors in brackets.
     2
      Regression includes block-fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the village level. The sample includes all respondents present at endline for whom we have the respective
     outcomes data, excluding Free DFS Households.
     3
      Controls include the following variables from endline: Baseline Hemoglobin Concentration, Age, Age-Squared, a dummy for if the household split between baseline and endline, and
     a dummy for not present at baseline. The following baseline variables are also included: Completed 5th Standard or Higher, Body Mass Index (BMI), and Household Wealth Index.
     Note: For children under 10, education is for the head of the household.
     4
         Anemia thresholds are determined by age and gender, therefore, a dummy for each of these age groups is included in the regressions for anemia.
     Table A3: Free DFS Experiment Compared to Control - Hemoglobin & Anemia by Gender and Age (Baseline Respondents Only)

                                                                     (1)            (2)               (3)                   (4)                  (5)                   (6)
         Sample:                                                     All          Female              Male           Child(< 15 years)   Adult (15-49 years)   Elderly (50+ years)
         Panel A: Hemoglobin Concentration
         Household in Free DFS Treatment                             0.038         0.025              0.011                0.108                0.044                -0.152
                                                                    [0.051]       [0.056]            [0.061]              [0.058]              [0.062]               [0.083]

         Q-value                                                                  (1.000)            (1.000)              (0.159)              (0.241)               (0.159)
         Control Mean                                               12.163        11.497             12.891               11.725               12.578                11.977

         Panel B: Anemia
         Household in Free DFS Treatment                            -0.014        -0.011             -0.011               -0.031               -0.009                 0.008
                                                                    [0.016]       [0.019]            [0.019]              [0.021]              [0.018]               [0.025]

         Q-value                                                                  (1.000)            (1.000)              (0.279)              (0.604)               (0.604)
         Control Mean                                               0.476          0.584              0.358                0.425                0.456                 0.604
         Observations                                               17861          9285               8528                 6089                 8076                  3633

         Panel C: Hemoglobin Concentration (Baseline Anemic Only)
         Household in Free DFS Treatment                             0.018         0.086             -0.119                0.079                0.059                -0.159
56




                                                                    [0.072]       [0.075]            [0.100]              [0.096]              [0.094]               [0.108]

         Q-value                                                                  (0.340)            (0.340)              (1.000)              (1.000)               (1.000)
         Control Mean                                               11.364        11.027             11.917               11.248               11.544                11.205

         Panel D: Anemia (Baseline Anemic Only)
         Household in Free DFS Treatment                            -0.002        -0.017              0.027                0.002               -0.004                -0.012
                                                                    [0.023]       [0.025]            [0.030]              [0.033]              [0.029]               [0.028]

         Q-value                                                                  (0.942)            (0.942)              (1.000)              (1.000)               (1.000)
         Control Mean                                               0.669          0.722              0.581                0.561                0.674                 0.785
         Observations                                               7192           4461               2717                 2202                 3043                  1913
     1
         Standard errors in brackets.
     2
      Standard errors are cluster at the village level. The sample includes all respondents located in the Sales Experiment control group or Free DFS households, who were present at
     endline and for whom we have the respective outcomes data.
     3
      Controls include the following variables from endline: Baseline Hemoglobin Concentration, Age, Age-Squared, a dummy for if the household split between baseline and endline, and
     a dummy for not present at baseline. The following baseline variables are also included: Completed 5th Standard or Higher, Body Mass Index (BMI), and Household Wealth Index.
     Note: For children under 10, education is for the head of the household.
     4
         Anemia thresholds are determined by age and gender, therefore, a dummy for each of these age groups is included in the regressions for anemia.
     Table A4: Free DFS Experiment in Free DFS Villages - Hemoglobin & Anemia by Gender and Age (Baseline Respondents Only)

                                                                     (1)            (2)               (3)                   (4)                  (5)                   (6)
         Sample:                                                     All          Female              Male           Child(< 15 years)   Adult (15-49 years)   Elderly (50+ years)
         Panel A: Hemoglobin Concentration
         Household in Free DFS Treatment                            -0.001         0.009             -0.054                0.033                0.029                -0.155
                                                                    [0.046]       [0.054]            [0.062]              [0.059]              [0.066]               [0.105]

         Q-value                                                                  (1.000)            (1.000)              (1.000)              (1.000)               (1.000)
         Control Mean                                               12.213        11.514             12.992               11.797               12.624                12.028

         Panel B: Anemia
         Household in Free DFS Treatment                            -0.009        -0.013             -0.006               -0.025               -0.008                -0.001
                                                                    [0.015]       [0.020]            [0.018]              [0.025]              [0.019]               [0.029]

         Q-value                                                                  (1.000)            (1.000)              (1.000)              (1.000)               (1.000)
         Control Mean                                               0.468          0.580              0.345                0.414                0.448                 0.599
         Observations                                               5103           2654               2435                 1793                 2296                   996

         Panel C: Hemoglobin Concentration (Baseline Anemic Only)
         Household in Free DFS Treatment                             0.011         0.094             -0.179               -0.035                0.072                -0.109
57




                                                                    [0.072]       [0.080]            [0.127]              [0.100]              [0.110]               [0.158]

         Q-value                                                                  (0.313)            (0.313)              (1.000)              (1.000)               (1.000)
         Control Mean                                               11.413        11.030             12.087               11.466               11.528                11.165

         Panel D: Anemia (Baseline Anemic Only)
         Household in Free DFS Treatment                            -0.005        -0.032              0.018               -0.004               -0.027                -0.006
                                                                    [0.022]       [0.026]            [0.037]              [0.041]              [0.032]               [0.035]

         Q-value                                                                  (0.739)            (0.739)              (1.000)              (1.000)               (1.000)
         Control Mean                                               0.663          0.734              0.542                0.523                0.698                 0.773
         Observations                                               2059           1290                763                  659                  867                   524
     1
         Standard errors in brackets.
     2
      Regression includes village fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the household level. The sample includes all respondents located in the villages where the Free DFS experiment
     took place, who were present at endline and for whom we have the respective outcomes data.
     3
      Controls include the following variables from endline: Baseline Hemoglobin Concentration, Age, Age-Squared, a dummy for if the household split between baseline and endline, and
     a dummy for not present at baseline. The following baseline variables are also included: Completed 5th Standard or Higher, Body Mass Index (BMI), and Household Wealth Index.
     Note: For children under 10, education is for the head of the household.
     4
         Anemia thresholds are determined by age and gender, therefore, a dummy for each of these age groups is included in the regressions for anemia.
             Table A5: First Stage for Salt Consumption - Currently Using or Penultimately Used DFS (Baseline Respondents Only)

                                             (1)                 (2)                  (3)                   (4)                (5)                  (6)
         Sample:                             All               Female                Male            All Anemic2        Anemic Female2        Anemic Male2
         Sales village                      0.170               0.173                0.166                 0.165             0.162                 0.171
                                           [0.020]             [0.020]              [0.020]               [0.021]           [0.022]               [0.023]
         Household in Free DFS Treatment    0.510               0.483                0.538                 0.523             0.504                 0.552
                                           [0.045]             [0.049]              [0.042]               [0.049]           [0.053]               [0.047]

         P-value: Sales Experiment +       0.000                0.000               0.000                 0.000               0.000                0.000
         Free DFS Household = 0
         Control Mean                      0.049                0.049               0.049                 0.047               0.050                0.042
         Observations                      22429                11506               10878                 8925                5536                 3374
     1
         Standard errors in brackets.
58




     2
       The Anemic Female and Anemic Male groups refer to females and males (respectively) who were anemic at baseline. All anemic includes both males and
     females who were anemic at baseline.

     3
       Standard errors are clustered at the village level and the regression includes all respondents who were present at endline and for whom we have the
     respective outcomes data.

     4
       Controls include the following variables from endline: Age, Age-Squared, a dummy for if the household split between baseline and endline, and a dummy
     for not present at baseline. The following baseline variables are also included: Baseline Hemoglobin Concentration, Completed 5th Standard or Higher,
     Body Mass Index (BMI), and Household Wealth Index. Note: For children under 10, education is for the head of the household.
                                            Table A6: All Health Outcomes - 2SLS Estimates (Baseline Respondents Only)

                                                         (1)                 (2)                 (3)                    (4)                  (5)                  (6)
         Sample:                                         All               Female                Male             All Anemic2         Anemic Female2        Anemic Male2
         Panel A: Hemoglobin Concentration
         Currently Using or Penultimately Used DFS       0.035             -0.006                0.010                 0.020                0.122                -0.113
                                                        [0.092]            [0.100]              [0.109]               [0.126]              [0.138]               [0.164]

         Control Mean                                   12.163             11.497               12.891                11.364               11.027                11.917

         Panel B: Anemia
         Currently Using or Penultimately Used DFS      -0.008              0.010               -0.015                -0.008               -0.007                -0.008
                                                        [0.030]            [0.036]              [0.033]               [0.040]              [0.045]               [0.049]

         Control Mean                                   0.476               0.584                0.358                0.669                 0.722                0.581
         Observations                                   18889               9881                 8969                 7731                  4840                 2876

         Panel C: Standardized Cognition Score
         Currently Using or Penultimately Used DFS      -0.065             -0.064               -0.095                -0.105               -0.145                -0.061
                                                        [0.059]            [0.077]              [0.067]               [0.077]              [0.089]               [0.108]

         Control Mean                                   0.005               -0.275               0.297                -0.115               -0.358                0.274
         Observations                                   15865                8162                7669                  6302                 3926                 2364

         Panel D: Standardized Physical Fitness Score
59




         Currently Using or Penultimately Used DFS      -0.085             -0.148               -0.006                -0.079               -0.113                -0.001
                                                        [0.105]            [0.119]              [0.107]               [0.126]              [0.140]               [0.177]

         Control Mean                                   -0.435              -0.555              -0.264                -0.487               -0.558                -0.330
         Observations                                    8871                5260                3604                  3630                 2584                  1043

         Panel E: Standardized Mental Health Score
         Currently Using or Penultimately Used DFS      -0.048              0.004               -0.117                -0.028               -0.020                -0.026
                                                        [0.076]            [0.102]              [0.074]               [0.100]              [0.119]               [0.112]

         Control Mean                                   -0.099              -0.330               0.170                -0.194               -0.361                0.123
         Observations                                   15224                8198                7009                  6164                 4096                 2061
     1
         Standard errors in brackets.
     2
      The Anemic Female and Anemic Male groups refer to females and males (respectively) who were anemic at baseline. All anemic includes both males and females who
     were anemic at baseline.
     3
      Standard errors are clustered at the village level and the regression includes all respondents who were present at endline and for whom we have the respective outcomes
     data. Currently using DFS or Penultimately Used DFS is instrumented by a dummy for Sales Experiment and a dummy for Free DFS Households.
     4
      Controls include the following variables from endline: Age, Age-Squared, a dummy for if the household split between baseline and endline, and a dummy for not present
     at baseline. The following baseline variables are also included: Baseline Hemoglobin Concentration, Completed 5th Standard or Higher, Body Mass Index (BMI), and
     Household Wealth Index. Note: For children under 10, education is for the head of the household.
     5
      Scores were standardized using the mean from the sales experiment control group at baseline. The cognition outcomes were standardized such that a positive score indicates
     a higher level of cognition. The physical fitness scores were standardized such that a positive score indicates being more physically fit. The score for the mental health outcomes
     were standardized such that a positive score indicates a lower level of depression.
     6
         Anemia thresholds are determined by age and gender, therefore, a dummy for each of these age groups is included in the regressions for anemia.
                                     Table A7a: Health Outcomes - Standardized Cognition Scores (Baseline Respondents Only)

                                                                 (1)            (2)                (3)                   (4)                  (5)                   (6)
         Sample:                                                 All          Female               Male           Child(< 15 years)   Adult (15-49 years)   Elderly (50+ years)
         Panel A: Sales Experiment
         Sales village                                          0.000          0.000              -0.004                0.019                0.005                -0.003
                                                               [0.022]        [0.026]             [0.023]              [0.028]              [0.022]               [0.036]

         Q-value                                               (1.000)        (1.000)             (0.470)              (0.514)              (1.000)               (1.000)
         Control Mean                                           0.005          -0.275              0.297                0.319                -0.438                0.525
         Observations                                           26194          13351               12781                8574                 12254                 5307

         Panel B: Sales Experiment (Baseline Anemic Only)
         Sales village                                          0.014          0.001               0.028                0.024               -0.001                -0.014
                                                               [0.028]        [0.031]             [0.036]              [0.039]              [0.025]               [0.047]

         Q-value                                               (1.000)        (1.000)             (1.000)              (1.000)              (1.000)               (1.000)
         Control Mean                                           -0.115         -0.358              0.274                0.106                -0.549                0.377
         Observations                                           10240           6318               3902                 2976                  4550                 2689

         Panel C: Free DFS Households
         Household in Free DFS Treatment                       -0.061         -0.052              -0.089                0.040               -0.049                -0.163
60




                                                               [0.034]        [0.040]             [0.038]              [0.043]              [0.034]               [0.072]

         Q-value                                               (0.234)        (0.320)             (0.066)              (0.548)              (0.512)               (0.082)
         Control Mean                                           0.005          -0.275              0.297                0.319                -0.438                0.525
         Observations                                           14922           7590               7292                 4858                  7005                 3013

         Panel D: Free DFS Households (Baseline Anemic Only)
         Household in Free DFS Treatment                       -0.073         -0.089              -0.074                0.057               -0.065                -0.229
                                                               [0.046]        [0.048]             [0.071]              [0.067]              [0.045]               [0.087]

         Q-value                                               (0.538)        (0.256)             (1.000)              (1.000)              (0.204)               (0.030)
         Control Mean                                           -0.115         -0.358              0.274                0.106                -0.549                0.377
         Observations                                            5873           3622               2239                 1679                  2623                 1547
     1
         Standard errors in brackets.
     2
      Panel A & B: Regression includes block-fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the village level. The sample includes all respondents present at endline for whom we have the
     respective outcomes data, excluding Free DFS Households. Panel C & D: Standard errors are cluster at the village level. The sample includes all respondents located in the Sales
     Experiment control group or Free DFS households, who were present at endline and for whom we have the respective outcomes data.
     3
      Controls include the following variables from endline: Baseline Hemoglobin Concentration, Age, Age-Squared, a dummy for if the household split between baseline and endline, and
     a dummy for not present at baseline. The following baseline variables are also included: Completed 5th Standard or Higher, Body Mass Index (BMI), and Household Wealth Index.
     Note: For children under 10, education is for the head of the household.
                                     Table A7b: Health Outcomes - Standardized Physical Fitness (Baseline Respondents Only)

                                                                 (1)            (2)                (3)                   (4)                  (5)                   (6)
         Sample:                                                 All          Female               Male           Child(< 15 years)   Adult (15-49 years)   Elderly (50+ years)
         Panel A: Sales Experiment
         Sales village                                         -0.016         -0.002              -0.050               -0.046                0.008                -0.058
                                                               [0.034]        [0.039]             [0.040]              [0.054]              [0.040]               [0.046]

         Q-value                                               (1.000)        (1.000)             (0.470)              (0.514)              (1.000)               (1.000)
         Control Mean                                           -0.435         -0.555              -0.264               -0.330               -0.410                -0.564
         Observations                                           14824           8661                6148                 2449                 8847                  3528

         Panel B: Sales Experiment (Baseline Anemic Only)
         Sales village                                         -0.033         -0.027              -0.058               -0.057               -0.021                -0.056
                                                               [0.038]        [0.042]             [0.055]              [0.085]              [0.044]               [0.058]

         Q-value                                               (1.000)        (1.000)             (1.000)              (1.000)              (1.000)               (1.000)
         Control Mean                                           -0.487         -0.558              -0.330               -0.337               -0.433                -0.661
         Observations                                            6016           4196                1813                 818                  3509                  1689

         Panel C: Free DFS Households
         Household in Free DFS Treatment                       -0.096         -0.121              -0.075               -0.220               -0.081                -0.022
61




                                                               [0.062]        [0.069]             [0.070]              [0.095]              [0.067]               [0.089]

         Q-value                                               (0.234)        (0.320)             (0.248)              (0.070)              (0.512)               (1.000)
         Control Mean                                           -0.435         -0.555              -0.264               -0.330               -0.410                -0.564
         Observations                                            8470           4986                3475                 1383                 5064                  2023

         Panel D: Free DFS Households (Baseline Anemic Only)
         Household in Free DFS Treatment                       -0.080         -0.096              -0.053                0.013               -0.149                -0.007
                                                               [0.072]        [0.082]             [0.115]              [0.150]              [0.078]               [0.130]

         Q-value                                               (0.538)        (0.325)             (1.000)              (1.000)              (0.204)               (1.000)
         Control Mean                                           -0.487         -0.558              -0.330               -0.337               -0.433                -0.661
         Observations                                            3443           2394                1046                 454                  2008                  981
     1
         Standard errors in brackets.
     2
      Panel A & B: Regression includes block-fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the village level. The sample includes all respondents present at endline for whom we have the
     respective outcomes data, excluding Free DFS Households. Panel C & D: Standard errors are cluster at the village level. The sample includes all respondents located in the Sales
     Experiment control group or Free DFS households, who were present at endline and for whom we have the respective outcomes data.
     3
      Controls include the following variables from endline: Baseline Hemoglobin Concentration, Age, Age-Squared, a dummy for if the household split between baseline and endline, and
     a dummy for not present at baseline. The following baseline variables are also included: Completed 5th Standard or Higher, Body Mass Index (BMI), and Household Wealth Index.
     Note: For children under 10, education is for the head of the household.
                                      Table A7c: Health Outcomes - Standardized Mental Health (Baseline Respondents Only)

                                                                 (1)            (2)                (3)                   (4)                  (5)                   (6)
         Sample:                                                 All          Female               Male           Child(< 15 years)   Adult (15-49 years)   Elderly (50+ years)
         Panel A: Sales Experiment
         Sales village                                         -0.001          0.019              -0.030               -0.086                0.011                 0.021
                                                               [0.023]        [0.034]             [0.023]              [0.048]              [0.025]               [0.033]

         Q-value                                               (1.000)        (1.000)             (0.470)              (0.287)              (1.000)               (1.000)
         Control Mean                                           -0.099         -0.330              0.170                -0.165               -0.001                -0.268
         Observations                                           24885          13341               11513                 4447                14145                  6292

         Panel B: Sales Experiment (Baseline Anemic Only)
         Sales village                                          0.016          0.036              -0.021               -0.084                0.041                 0.014
                                                               [0.032]        [0.040]             [0.036]              [0.076]              [0.036]               [0.042]

         Q-value                                               (1.000)        (1.000)             (1.000)              (1.000)              (1.000)               (1.000)
         Control Mean                                           -0.194         -0.361              0.123                -0.176               -0.108                -0.339
         Observations                                            9975           6567               3394                  1431                 5302                  3242

         Panel C: Free DFS Households
         Household in Free DFS Treatment                        0.003          0.034              -0.044               -0.023                0.012                -0.018
62




                                                               [0.042]        [0.057]             [0.042]              [0.083]              [0.047]               [0.060]

         Q-value                                               (0.453)        (0.410)             (0.248)              (1.000)              (0.512)               (1.000)
         Control Mean                                           -0.099         -0.330              0.170                -0.165               -0.001                -0.268
         Observations                                           14186           7624               6540                  2555                 8035                  3595

         Panel D: Free DFS Households (Baseline Anemic Only)
         Household in Free DFS Treatment                        0.026          0.035              -0.002                0.102                0.012                -0.024
                                                               [0.057]        [0.068]             [0.066]              [0.115]              [0.068]               [0.075]

         Q-value                                               (0.681)        (0.581)             (1.000)              (1.000)              (0.401)               (1.000)
         Control Mean                                           -0.194         -0.361              0.123                -0.176               -0.108                -0.339
         Observations                                            5697           3734               1955                  803                  3018                  1876
     1
         Standard errors in brackets.
     2
      Panel A & B: Regression includes block-fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the village level. The sample includes all respondents present at endline for whom we have the
     respective outcomes data, excluding Free DFS Households. Panel C & D: Standard errors are cluster at the village level. The sample includes all respondents located in the Sales
     Experiment control group or Free DFS households, who were present at endline and for whom we have the respective outcomes data.
     3
      Controls include the following variables from endline: Baseline Hemoglobin Concentration, Age, Age-Squared, a dummy for if the household split between baseline and endline, and
     a dummy for not present at baseline. The following baseline variables are also included: Completed 5th Standard or Higher, Body Mass Index (BMI), and Household Wealth Index.
     Note: For children under 10, education is for the head of the household.
                                          Table A8: Adolescent (13-17 years) Estimates (Baseline Respondents Only)

                                                                                    Hemoglobin Concentration                                    Anemia
                                                                                  (1)                      (2)                      (3)                      (4)
          Sample:                                                              Adolescents          Anemic Adolescents           Adolescents          Anemic Adolescents
          Panel A: - Sales Experiment (OLS)
          Sales village                                                           0.045                    0.151                     0.004                   -0.024
                                                                                 [0.056]                  [0.096]                   [0.018]                  [0.028]

          Q-value                                                                (0.411)                  (0.211)                  (1.000)                   (1.000)
          Observations                                                            3551                     1276                     3551                      1276

          Panel B: Free DFS Experiment Compared to Control (OLS)
          Household in Free DFS Treatment                                         0.156                    0.071                    -0.053                   -0.000
                                                                                 [0.107]                  [0.176]                   [0.027]                  [0.040]

          Q-value                                                                (0.159)                  (1.000)                  (0.252)                   (1.000)
          Observations                                                            2185                      792                     2185                       792

          Panel C: Free DFS Experiment within Free DFS Villages (OLS)
          Household in Free DFS Treatment                                         0.066                   -0.096                    -0.052                   -0.001
63




                                                                                 [0.135]                  [0.298]                   [0.040]                  [0.075]

          Q-value                                                                (1.000)                  (1.000)                  (1.000)                   (1.000)
          Observations                                                             636                      238                      636                       238

          Panel D: 2SLS Estimates
          Currently Using or Penultimately Used DFS                               0.425                    0.211                    -0.102                    0.020
                                                                                 [0.181]                  [0.305]                   [0.049]                  [0.069]

          Control Mean                                                           12.398                   11.644                    0.461                     0.636
          Observations                                                            2341                     849                      2341                       849

     1
         Standard errors in brackets.
     2
       Panel A: Regression includes block-fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the village level. The sample includes all respondents present at endline for whom we
     have the respective outcomes data, excluding Free DFS Households. Panel B: Standard errors are cluster at the village level. The sample includes all respondents located
     in the Sales Experiment control group or Free DFS households, who were present at endline and for whom we have the respective outcomes data. Panel C: Regression
     includes village fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the household level. The sample includes all respondents located in the villages where the Free DFS experiment
     took place, who were present at endline and for whom we have the respective outcomes data. Panel D: Standard errors are clustered at the village level and the regression
     includes all respondents who were present at endline and for whom we have the respective outcomes data. Currently using DFS or Penultimately Used DFS is instrumented
     by a dummy for Sales Experiment and a dummy for Free DFS Households
     3
      Controls include the following variables from endline: Baseline Hemoglobin Concentration, Age, Age-Squared, a dummy for if the household split between baseline and endline,
     and a dummy for not present at baseline. The following baseline variables are also included: Completed 5th Standard or Higher, Body Mass Index (BMI), and Household Wealth
     Index. Note: For children under 10, education is for the head of the household.
     4
         Anemia thresholds are determined by age and gender, therefore, a dummy for each of these age groups is included in the regressions for anemia.
