                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          ACADEMICS VS. ATHLETICS:
                 CAREER CONCERNS FOR NCAA DIVISION I COACHES

                                       Christopher Avery
                                        Brian Cadman
                                         Gavin Cassar

                                      Working Paper 22120
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22120


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2016




We thank Tommy Amaker, Bill Fitzsimmons, and Rob Jensen for helpful advice, and Kurt
Bullard and Adam Gilfix for excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w22120.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Christopher Avery, Brian Cadman, and Gavin Cassar. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Academics vs. Athletics: Career Concerns for NCAA Division I Coaches
Christopher Avery, Brian Cadman, and Gavin Cassar
NBER Working Paper No. 22120
March 2016
JEL No. I20,I23,J24,M51

                                          ABSTRACT

We analyze the promotions and firings of NCAA Division 1 college basketball and college
football coaches to assess whether these coaches are rewarded for the academic performance of
their players in promotion and retention decisions. We find that an increase in Academic Progress
Rate, as measured by the NCAA, for a college team in either sport significantly reduces the
probability that the coach is fired at the end of the season. We find little to no evidence that an
increase in the Academic Progress Rate enhances the chances of advancement (in the form of
outside job offers) for these coaches.

Christopher Avery                                         Gavin Cassar
Harvard Kennedy School of Government                      INSEAD
79 JFK Street                                             Boulevard de Constance
Cambridge, MA 02138                                       77305 Fontainebleau
and NBER                                                  France
christopher_avery@hks.harvard.edu                         gavin.cassar@insead.edu

Brian Cadman
University of Utah
1645 East Campus Drive Center
Salt Lake City, UT
brian.cadman@eccles.utah.edu
1. Introduction


American college sports has become a big business. Each year, millions of people watch college

football and college basketball on television, and television networks pay whopping fees for the

rights to show these games. “March Madness”, the cultural phenomenon associated with the

NCAA college basketball tournament, has become so pervasive that there is a noticeable

downtick in library research at universities during the first week of the tournament (Clotfelter,

2011). In addition to direct financial gain through ticket sales and payments for television rights,

colleges benefit in many indirect ways from their major sports teams. A successful college team

promotes future applications to the college (Pope and Pope, 2009 and 2014), may increase

alumni donations (Anderson 2012, Meer and Rosen, 2009; Turner, Meserve, and Bowen, 2001

provide mixed evidence on this point) and enhances the political influence of college

administrators (Clotfelter, 2011).



There is an inherent conflict in the dual-role of the student-athletes on college teams, for it is

difficult to pursue academic and athletic excellence simultaneously. This conflict predates

college enrollment: “Division I sports today require longtime full-time commitment. A recruited

football player has most likely attended some coach's summer camp since the ninth grade,

perhaps middle school, and he has worked year-round to make himself impressive to college

recruiters.” 1 Colleges relax their admission standards in reviewing the applications of recruited

athletes, and then upon enrollment, those players tend to have even poorer academic records than


1
 Michael Oriard, “Back Talk; Football Glory and Education Are a Team No More,” New York Times, December
23, 2001.




                                                    3
might be expected given their prior grades and test scores (Bowen and Levin, 2003; Shulman and

Bowen (2001)), and to complete BA degrees at relatively low rates. 2 Yet, as Michael Lewis

observes, this phenomenon is not surprising: “If serious college football players are students

first, why — even after a huge N.C.A.A. push to raise their graduation rates — do they so

alarmingly fail to graduate? … Unlike the other student[s] on campus, they have full-time jobs:

playing football for nothing. Neglect the task at hand, and they may never get a chance to play

football for money.” 3



Division I college coaches can play a critical role in mediating the conflict between sports and

academics. As Harry Edwards summarized in 1973 in The Sociology of Sport, “Because of his

historically unchallenged authority as `father surrogate’, the coach has assumed the burden of

accountability for the total behavior of `his sons’”. The NCAA implicitly endorses the view that

the coach can be held specifically accountable for academic performance by making “Academic

Progress Rate” (APR) searchable by coach as well as by team on its website (LaForge and

Hodge, 2011 emphasize this point). Yet, it seems almost inevitable that coaches will be

evaluated almost solely on the athletic accomplishments of their teams. As long-time college

coach Royce Waltman said when he lost his job at Indiana State in 2007, “if you get fired for

cheating you can get rehired, but if you get fired for losing it’s like you have leprosy. …

Cheating and not graduating players will not get you in trouble, but that damn losing will.” 4

Consistent with this view, the prior academic literature identifies a strong connection between a

2 For example, using publicly available data for 58 colleges with prominent teams, Clotfelter (2011) computed
average graduation rates of 42% for college basketball players and 56% for college football players by comparison
to an average overall graduation rate of 72% at those colleges.
3
  Michael Lewis, “Serfs of the Turf,” New York Times, November 11, 2007. Shulman and Bowen (2001) find
different patterns at highly selective schools, whereby male athletes graduate at relatively high rates and go on to
earn even more on average than their classmates, in part because these athletes tended to pursue jobs in business-
oriented fields.
4
  “Royce Waltman Talks about Being Let Go by ISU”, Tribune Star, March 3, 2007.


                                                          4
team’s athletic performance and the head’s coach’s salary and longevity (see, for example,

Holmes, 2011), but generally does not consider the academic performance of the players. 5



This paper builds on previous work, which studied direct and indirect financial incentives for

NCAA football coaches (Cadman and Cassar, 2016), to assess whether Division I college

basketball and college football coaches are rewarded in retention and promotion decisions for the

academic performance of their players. In other words, do career concerns provide positive

incentives for college coaches to encourage team members to succeed in their classes? To

address this question, we compile ten years of publicly available data from the National

Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) website, including yearly ratings of the academic

records of players on each college team, as well as the job history of all Division I college

basketball and football coaches who were employed during this time period. After controlling

for the records of their teams, we find – perhaps surprisingly – a clear and statistically significant

relationship between academic performance of players and coaching retention: all else equal, a

coach of a team with a lower academic score is significantly more likely to be fired than a coach

of a team with a higher academic score. However, we find no obvious relationship between

academic performance of players and coaching promotion, whereby a coach is recruited away

from his current position to take a different position as head coach. Together, these findings

suggest that there may be a threshold in academic performance that is required for the coach to

retain employment, but that coaches do not receive marginal benefit if their players exceed that

threshold level of academic achievement.




5 Two exceptions are Fogerty, Soebbing and Agyemang (2015) and Grant, Leadley, and Zygmont (2013), which
find little or no connection between a team’s APR score and the head coach’s salary.


                                                     5
The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides institutional history and describes the details

of initiatives used by the NCAA to track and promote academic achievement of athletes. Section

3 describes the data and presents descriptive statistics. Section 4 provides results of our

statistical analysis of the determinants of “Firing” and “Promotion” of head coaches. Section 5

presents alternate hypotheses that can explain these results and provides sensitivity analysis to

test them. Section 6 discusses possible interpretations of the results. Section 7 concludes.



2. Institutional History

In the past three decades, the NCAA has adopted three different approaches to promote the

academic achievement of student-athletes. First, it set minimum academic standards for athletic

eligibility. Proposition 48, which was adopted in 1983, was notable because it extended these

standards to academic performance prior to college, requiring a high school GPA of 2.0 or higher

in combination with a minimum combined (Verbal and Math) score of 700 or higher on the SAT

for eligibility to play as a freshman. Second, it began formally tracking graduation rates, in part

to assess the effect, if any, of Proposition 48 on college graduation rate. Since 1990, colleges

have been required to report graduation rates both to the federal government and to the NCAA

according to a specific formula now known as the “Federal Graduation Rate”. The NCAA

developed an alternative formula (Graduation Success Rate or GSR) in 2002. Third, it

introduced the Academic Progress Rate (APR) in 2003 and subsequently imposed a system of

escalating penalties to be imposed upon colleges (or specific teams) failing to meet minimum

standard APR scores. 6


6
 See http://www.ncaa.org/about/resources/research/ncaa-graduation-rates-quarter-century-tracking-academic-
success and http://www.ncaa.org/about/resources/research/academic-progress-rate-timeline for detailed timelines of
NCAA activity.



                                                        6
While outside commentators and NCAA regulators have long agreed on a goal of improving

college graduation rates for student-athletes, there is considerable difficulty in developing a

scheme to provide incentives that are directly tied to those graduation rates. In addition to

difficulties in defining a formula for “graduation rate” (LaForge and Hodge, 2011 provide

detailed discussion of this point), graduation rates can only be computed with a long lag time,

whatever the formula. The Federal Graduation Rate (FGR) is a “six year rate”, meaning that

results for a cohort of students who enroll in Fall 2008 only become available after the end of the

2013-2014 academic year. But, as we discuss in Section 3 below, head coaching positions are

notoriously unstable: an average of 15% of college basketball coaches and 17% of college

football coaches change jobs each year. So, by the time that it is possible to compute a

graduation rate for a given cohort of players, many teams will have new coaches and regimes,

and so that graduation rate may be obsolete.


With this in mind, the NCAA introduced the “Academic Progress Rate” in 2003. APR tracks

two things - athletic eligibility and continuing enrollment – on a semester-by-semester basis for

each player with an athletic scholarship, assigning up to 2 points each per player-year for

eligibility and for enrollment. APR is simply the proportion of possible points attained by the

players on a team. The NCAA reports APR as an equally weighted, four-year moving average.

This score is scaled from 0 to 1000, so a team that attains 95% of possible points would be given

a score of 950. The APR measure has the virtues of measuring variables that are related to

graduation and of immediately incorporating each year’s academic results in a “real-time

snapshot of a team’s academic success”. 7 While there is no direct means of converting APR into



7
    http://www.ncaa.org/about/resources/research/academic-progress-rate-timeline


                                                          7
a graduation rate, the NCAA initially reported that an APR of 925 was roughly equivalent to a

50% graduation rate (LaForge and Hodge, 2011). A key feature of the APR is that the NCAA

systematically penalizes teams that fail to meet a minimum threshold. Initially, the threshold

was set at 900, then gradually adjusted over time to its current value of 930. Teams with scores

below the threshold have been penalized with losses of athletic scholarships and reductions of

practice time and have also been declared ineligible for postseason play. The penalties

associated with APR are of sufficient importance that it has generated some controversy – with

well-known coaches Jim Boeheim of Syracuse and Bruce Pearl (then) of Tennessee criticizing its

methodology and US Secretary of Education Arne Duncan defending its use. 8



Figures 1a and 1b show that APR scores have systematically increased by an average of

approximately 30 points per team from 2004-2005 to 2013-2014, with similar increases for

college basketball (from 928 in 2004-2005 to 961 in 2013-2014) and college football (from 930

in 2004-2005 to 961 in 2013-2014). 9 (We adopt the convention of referring to the “Year” as the

calendar year corresponding to the end of the academic year in Figures 1a and 1b and throughout

the paper.) These increased APR scores have been accompanied by corresponding reductions in

the number of penalties imposed by the NCAA for low APR scores – even though the NCAA

increased the minimum APR score during this time period. As shown in Figure 1c,

approximately 15% of college basketball and college football teams received penalties associated

with their 2006-2007 APR scores, but in recent years, fewer than 5% of these teams have been

penalized for low APR scores.



8“Education Chief: Low Grad Rate Should Mean No Tourney Invite”, USA Today, March 17, 2011.
9
 The NCAA provides similar results in its May 2015 report “National and Sport-Group APR-Averages and Trends”,
http://www.ncaa.org/sites/default/files/May2015_public-release_FINAL.PDF.


                                                     8
3. Data and Coding for Coaching Histories

We compile data on Academic Progress Rates (and NCAA penalties associated with them),

NCAA violations, and average attendance at college basketball and football home games from

the NCAA website. APR data is available for each sport for the ten years from 2004-2005 to

2013-2014.



The NCAA announces APR scores and penalties each spring, usually in May. These scores are

announced with a one year lag – presumably to allow for validation of results sent by colleges at

the end of the previous academic year. Thus, APR scores announced in May 2015 were based on

the academic progress of recruited athletes from 2010-2011 to 2013-2014. Both because of this

lag and to allow for the possibility that the departure of a coach in the middle of the academic

year could reduce the academic performance of players in the remainder of that academic year,

we only use the APR (and associated penalties) corresponding to year t-1 (though announced in

year t) to predict firing and promotion of coaches in year t. Thus, for this ten year period of

APR scores, our sample period of coaching histories consists of the academic years from 2005-

2006 to 2004-2015, corresponding to the football seasons from (Fall) 2005 to 2014 and to the

basketball seasons from (Spring) 2006 to 2015.



NCAA violations not directly associated with APR score are infrequent and typically result after

long periods of investigation. We find empirically that coaching changes are especially likely in

the year before an NCAA violation is announced. This is consistent with the casual observation

that these violations are often anticipated during the course of the investigation that precedes the




                                                 9
formal announcement of NCAA penalties and sanctions. For this reason, we use dummy

variables of “Violation Next Year” to predict coaching changes in our analysis below. 10



We compile data on coaching histories and team records for these seasons from Sports-

Reference (available at www.sports-reference.com). As described below, we conducted

additional internet searches to classify each change of college coach that occurred during this

time period; we were able to find news stories to pinpoint the reason for essentially every

change. We augment this data with additional data of coach salaries derived from line-by-line

analysis of individual contracts of Division I football coaches in 2006, 2007, 2009, and 2010.

While limited to a subset of the ten years in the sample, this salary data is especially useful for

our analysis because it enables us to identify internal promotions (renegotiated contract) in

addition to external promotions (change of job). Unfortunately, we have no means for

identifying internal promotions of basketball coaches or for identifying internal promotions of

football coaches in any years except 2006, 2007, 2009, and 2010.



In addition to “Wins” and “Losses”, we identify several additional measures of team

performance for each sport. Successful teams in each sport are invited to post-season play: the

“NCAA” and “NIT” tournaments for basketball teams and bowl games for football teams.                            We

create binary variables for college basketball to capture participation in these tournaments and

also to identify bowl game winners in college football. Many different analysts produce

statistical rankings of the teams in all sports. Since the rankings of different analysis are

typically highly correlated with each other, we simply select one prominent statistical ranking for


10
 Our results are robust to changes in timing in the measurement of this variable and also to the exclusion of the
NCAA violation variable in each specification.


                                                         10
each sport: Ken Pomeroy’s ranking for college basketball teams and Football Outsiders’ ranking

for college football teams, where each ranking is computed on a season-by-season basis. In each

case, we convert ordinal team rankings into percentile rankings ranging from 0 (worst) to 100

(best), first on a national basis, then separately by conference, so that that the most positively

rated team in a conference is assigned a Conference Percentile ranking of 100 and the least

positive rated team in a conference is assigned a Conference Percentile ranking of 0. 11



A total of 356 colleges fielded Division I basketball teams and a total of 128 colleges fielded

Division I football teams for at least one season during this time period. We restrict our analysis

to the 327 basketball teams and 119 football teams that were active in Division I for each of the

11 seasons from 2004-2005 to 2014-2015; though we do not include the 2004-2005 season in our

analysis, we do use the APR data for that academic year. Our resulting sample includes 95.3%

(3,270 of 3,432) of the Division I basketball team-seasons and 97.9% (1,190 of 1,215) Division I

football team-seasons from 2005-2006 to 2014-2015. We identify approximately 60 Basketball

and 70 Football teams as belonging to “major conferences” in each year. 12




11
   Conference Percentile scores based on these statistical team ratings need not overlap precisely with “Conference
Standings” based on win and loss records.
12
   We consider the so-called “Power Five” conferences (ACC, Big 10, Big 12, Pac 12, and SEC ) to be major
conferences in both sports and also include the Big East as a major conference in our basketball analysis. A small
number of teams changed conference during the sample period, so the exact number of major conference teams
varies slightly across sample years.


                                                         11
3.1 Coaching Transitions

We identify 476 coaching changes for basketball teams and 211 coaching changes for football

teams in our sample, where a coaching change is defined as any instance where a team has

different coaches at the start of consecutive seasons. 13 Coaching changes are mildly unusual in

each sport: as shown in Table 1a, the coach retains his job from season to season 85% of the time

in college basketball and 82% of the time in college football. We conducted internet searches to

identify the details of each coaching change and classify these changes into six categories.



We first distinguish between coaching changes where (1) the coach left a position and did not

have another coaching position in place (“Loss of Job”), which we broadly classify as a negative

outcome and (2) the coach resigned from a position to take another coaching position (“Change

of Job”), which we broadly classify as a positive outcome. However, there are exceptions

within each broad category, as we describe below.



Within the first category (Possible Firing), we identify three separate cases of extenuating

circumstances that motivated the coach to leave the position. First, some coaches left their

positions due to publicly disclosed “Heath Issues”. Second, a number of long-time coaches

formally “Retired”, though it is not always clear that the retirement decision was entirely a

matter of the coach’s choice. 14 A cynic might suggest that a stated health problem or retirement

might be a convenient label for public consumption, and that some of these coaches were

actually fired. We have no good way to assessing this claim, though there is evidence in some


13
   Although the 2015-2016 college basketball season is not complete at the time of this writing, we were able to
identify the coach of each team at the start of the season and to classify the coaching changes that took place
between 2014-2015 and 2015-2016 for both basketball and football.
14
   We classify (unexpected) mid-season retirements as “Firings”.


                                                        12
cases of genuine health problems that derailed the careers of successful coaches, including three

unexpected off-season deaths. Third, some coaches were only in the temporary position of

“Interim Coach,” either as emergency replacements after an unexpected departure of a coach, or

because (in one case) the college announced in advance that it was disbanding the team at the

end of the season. With the exception of these three types of extenuating circumstances, we

consider all other cases where a coach left a position and had no other job in place as “Firing”,

though some of these changes were formally described as resignations. 15



Within the second category (Change of Job), we distinguish between two types of new job for

the original head coach. We classify each instance where the head coach changed jobs

voluntarily to become a head coach for a different college or professional team as a “Promotion”.

Most of these cases are clear cut promotions - moves to higher profile and/or higher paying

positions – though there are some instances where news stories suggested that the coach moved

in part because he was in danger of losing his original position. We classify each instance where

the head coach changed jobs voluntarily to become a head coach for a different college or

professional team as a “Possible Promotion”. These cases are uncommon and hard to classify as

they sometimes involve a choice by an ambitious young coach to change career trajectory by

becoming an assistant coach at a prominent major conference team and sometimes involve a

choice by an embattled coach to secure a stable long-term position.



As shown in Table 1b, more than 90% of college basketball coaching changes and more than

85% of college football coaching changes fall into our two main categories of “Firing” and



15   We classify six cases where a coach moved to an administrative position as “Firings”.


                                                       13
(unambiguous) “Promotion”. Given the ambiguity associated with the other four categories of

coaching changes (“Health Issues”, “Retirement”, “Interim Coach”, “Possible Promotion”), we

simply exclude these remaining cases from our main analysis below, though we do include them

in sensitivity analysis in Section 5.



Further, as shown in Table 1a, the distribution of year-by-year coaching outcomes is quite

similar for college basketball and college football. Approximately ten percent of the team-

seasons in each sport result in a firing of the head coach. Firing is a bit more than twice as

common as promotion for each sport, though promotion is slightly less common (relative to

firing) for college basketball than for college football, while retirements are more commonly

observed for college football than for college basketball. Given the similar distributions of coach

outcomes across the two sports, we make a conscious effort to develop and apply a single

common analytic framework to apply to the two sports in order to promote comparisons of our

results across the sports.



There is a clear time pattern to the coaching cycle, as shown in Figures 2a and 2b, which graph

the probability of promotion and firing as a function of the tenure of the coach with a given team

in our sample. Coaching transitions are rare for coaches in the first two seasons with a team,

suggesting that new coaches are given time to bring in recruits and establish routines. 16

Coaching transitions are especially common in seasons 4 to 6 of tenure, when approximately

20% of coaches leave their positions (each year) – with much more likelihood of firing than

promotion. Our sample falls off dramatically by coaching year – with more than 450

16 We  exclude three coaches (Tom Asbury – Pepperdine basketball; Paul Cormier – Dartmouth basketball; Bill
Snyder - Kansas State football) who returned late in their careers to teams that they had coached earlier in their
careers from analyses based on coaching tenure.


                                                          14
observations of college basketball coaches in the first or second year on the job, but fewer than

60 observations or less for college basketball coaches in year 13 or beyond. We include fewer

years of tenure in Figure 2b for college football than in Figure 2a for college basketball because

of the smaller number of teams and observations for college football.



3.2 Descriptive Statistics

Tables 2a and 2b provide descriptive statistics for the 3,270 team-seasons for college basketball

and for the 1,190 team-seasons for college football in our sample. The results in Columns 2

through 4 of these tables suggest sharp differences in observable results for coaches depending

on their job outcome at the end of the season. The coaches who were promoted had strikingly

positive records in the previous year, as reflected by winning percentage, post-season

participation, ordinal ranking of their teams, and average attendance. By contrast, coaches who

were fired tended to have teams that finished toward the bottom of their conferences. One

distinction between the two sports is that promotion seems to be associated with higher average

attendance at home games for college basketball, but not for college football. (Retention is

associated with higher average attendance than firing in both sports.) This difference may

suggest that attendance may be more responsive to in-season performance for basketball than for

football given that greater number of games in a basketball season than in a football season.



Of particular interest for this study, average APR scores for coaches in both sports who were

retained are higher than the average APR scores for coaches who were fired. The difference of

nearly ten points in average APR score (943.8 for Retained vs. 934.3 for Fired) for college

basketball coaches is statistically significant, while the smaller difference in average APR scores




                                                15
(946.6 for Retained vs 943.4 for Fired) for football coaches is on the borderline of statistical

significance at the .05 level in a two-sample t-test. Of course, these two-sample t-tests are

merely suggestive, as they do not control for team performance or other explanatory variables.



In addition to the statistical associations suggested by Tables 2a and 2b between APR score and

coaching outcomes, there is also a statistical connection between APR score and team

performance. The correlation coefficient between APR score and winning percentage in the next

season is approximately .25 for college football and approximately .20 for college basketball. In

a simple ordinary least-squares (OLS) regression framework using only the APR score for the

previous academic year as an independent variable, an increase of 1 win per season is predicted

to result from an increase of 40 points in APR score for college football and from an increase of

35 points in APR score for college basketball. 17 We emphasize that all events affecting the APR

score for the previous academic year predate the games for the next season.



In our analysis below, we control for team performance and other variables in separate OLS

regressions to predict “Firing” and “Promotion” for college coaches in each sport. These

regressions are designed to distinguish between the two most likely explanations for the

association between APR score and “Firing” observed in Tables 2a and 2b – first, that there is a

direct causal relationship between the APR score and “Firing” – second, that this association can

be explained by other variables, especially by athletic records of the teams. We consider

alternate explanations for this association in our sensitivity analysis in Section 6.




17
  There are an average of 12.5 games per season for the college football teams and an average of 32.1games per
season for the college basketball teams in our sample.


                                                       16
4. Results


We include two sets of performance variables (and their squares) as explanatory variables in

each analysis: “Wins” and “Conference Percentile Ranking”. 18 We include “Wins” because it is

a standard, widely observed measure of performance. We include “Conference Percentile” to

incorporate a sophisticated statistical measure that is specifically designed to refine win/loss

measures of performance. We have also investigated many other performance measures, but

given the high degree of positive correlation across these measures, there is little variation in the

results so long as at least one measure related to wins and at least one more sophisticated

statistical measure is included as an independent variable in the analysis.



Table 3 report the results of a common set of OLS regression analyses to predict “Firing” of

college basketball and college football coaches. In these regressions, we use a binary dependent

variable with value 1 in cases where the coach is fired at the end of season and value 0 in all

other cases (of either retention or promotion). Tables 4 reports the results using identical OLS

regression specifications to predict “Promotion” of these coaches. In these regressions, we use a

binary dependent variable with value 1 in cases where the coach is (unambiguously) promoted at

the end of the season and value 0 in all other cases (of either retention or firing). As discussed in

Section 3, we exclude observations where the interpretation of the coaching change is

ambiguous (in the categories of “Health Issues”, “Retirement”, “Interim Coach”, and “Possible

Promotion”) from the analyses reported in Tables 3 and 4.




18
  To ease interpretation of the coefficient on the unsquared versions of these variables, we define the squared
versions of them in terms of deviations from the sample mean so that, for example, Wins2 = [Wins – Mean(Wins)]2.


                                                      17
Columns 1 and 4 in Tables 3 and 4 report the results of a baseline specification, including all

team-seasons. 19 The specifications in Columns 2 and 5 match the specifications in Columns 1

and 4 of these tables, with the sole distinction that we include dummy variables for each calendar

year and for each year of coaching tenure in Columns 2 and 4. The coefficients on the coaching

tenure dummy variables are jointly statistically significant in every case with “Firing” as the

dependent variable, suggesting that different standards are used for retention of coaches with

different levels of tenure.



Columns 3 and 6 of Tables 3 and 4 report results for a subsample that excludes coaches in their

first and second year of tenure in the current position. We make this choice for two reasons.

First, as shown in Figures 2a and 2b, coaching transitions are relatively rare (and likely

idiosyncratic) for coaches in their first or second seasons. Second, since the APR score is a

weighted average over four prior seasons, the reported (and lagged) APR score has little

connection to the practices of first- and second-year coaches. Our preferred specification is the

one listed in Columns 3 and 6 of each table – excluding first-year and second-year coaches and

including tenure/year dummy variables as independent variables.



We convert the lagged APR score into units of 100 points in order to ease the interpretation of

the estimated effects of APR score on coaching outcomes. That is, the reported coefficients on

the APR score in Tables 3 and 4 indicate the estimated effect of an increase of 100 points in the

APR score on the dependent variable. For example, the coefficient of -.056 in Column 3 of



19
  A small number of observations are excluded from even this most basic specification, either because we exclude
observations with a coaching change that is explained by extenuating circumstances or because a small number of
APR scores (mostly in 2004-2005) are listed as missing on the NCAA website.


                                                       18
Table 3 indicates that a 100 point increase in (lagged) APR score is predicted to reduce the

probability that the coach is fired after the next season by 5.6 percentage points.



As shown in Columns 1 to 3 of Table 3, the coefficient for APR score is negative in every

specification with firing of basketball coaches as the dependent variable. That is, a higher APR

score predicts a reduction in the probability that the coach is fired at the end of the season.

Further, the coefficient is statistically significant in every specification except for the baseline

specification reported in Column 1. We also find that an impending NCAA violation is a strong

predictor of firing, but interestingly, we find little to no effect of an APR penalty beyond the

direct effect of the APR score itself on the probability that the coach is fired.



As shown in Columns 4 to 6 of Table 3, we find broadly similar results for our analysis with

“Firing” as the dependent variable for college football coaches.      However, since there are fewer

college football than college basketball teams, our sample size is smaller and thus the standard

errors for the APR coefficient are higher for college football than for the comparable

specifications reported for college basketball in Table 3. As a result, the estimated effect of APR

score is only statistically significant for college football coaches in the final column of Table 3.

Since this corresponds to our preferred specification, we are inclined to conclude that APR is a

significant negative predictor of firing of college football coaches. Interestingly, the estimated

effect of APR score on firing is more than twice as large for football than for basketball. From

Columns 3 and 6 of Table 3, a 100 point increase in APR is estimated to reduce the probability

that the coach at the end of the season is fired by 15.6 percentage points for football coaches and

by 5.6 percentage points for basketball coaches.




                                                  19
As shown in Table 4, we find no statistically significant results of the APR when we repeat the

same set of analyses using “Promotion” instead of “Firing” as the dependent variable. The

coefficients on APR in Table 4 are small in magnitude, and are even negative in two of the

specifications. (Note that when “Promotion” is the dependent variable, a positive effect of APR

score on career prospects would correspond to a positive coefficient on the APR variable.) Thus,

it is possible that there is simply no relationship between APR and promotion of college coaches.



Table 5 reports the results of analysis using our salary data for college football coaches, with

change in salary and combinations of internal and external promotion as dependent variables.

By comparison to the specifications for Table 4, these results have the virtue in including both

internal promotion (renegotiation) and external promotion (change to a different college head as

possible positive outcomes for the coach. However, given the restriction of the sample to the

years for which we have detailed salary information for college football coaches, the tests

reported in Table 5 have less statistical power than those reported in Table 4.



Consistent with prior evidence, we find that salary increases, external promotions, and

renegotiations are positively related to the winning percentage. We do not find evidence of a

significant relation between APR and changes in salary, external promotions, or renegotiations,

though the estimated coefficients for the APR are reasonably large (though not precisely

estimated) in some specifications reported in Table 4. We conclude that there is no evidence of

an effect of APR score in predicting promotion of college coaches, though it might be interesting

to revisit this question if/when it is possible to compile more systematic data on the combination

of internal as well as external promotions of these coaches.




                                                 20
5. Sensitivity Analysis

We consider several sources of alternate explanations and critiques of the findings for our

preferred specification in Table 3 with firing as the dependent variable. We divide these

alternate explanations into four categories: (1) alternatives to the OLS model; (2) coding issues

related to the variables included in the preferred specification; (3) the potential importance of

additional explanatory variables; (4) alternative mechanisms that could explain the observed

results. We report the full results for one alternative procedure in a separate table (Table 6), then

show the effect of a series of adjustments to our preferred specification from Columns 3 and 5 in

Table 3 in separate rows of Table 7.



Alternatives to the OLS Model

The OLS framework does not account for the explicit time series nature of the data, whereby the

same coach is evaluated by the same college year after year. We account for the possibility of

serial correlation that is implied by the structure of the data by repeating the analysis from

Columns 3 and 6 of Tables 3 and 4 using Prais-Winsten estimation. As reported in Table 6, we

find similar results for OLS and Prais-Winsten estimation of the effect of APR on both firing and

promotion. Once again, the estimated effect of APR is negative and statistically significant in

predicting “Firing”, but small and insignificant in predicting “Promotion”.



The OLS framework also does not account for the explicitly binary form of the dependent

variable, whether “Firing” or “Promotion”. Row 1 of Table 7 lists the coefficients when we

repeat the analysis for our preferred specification using a Probit model instead of OLS. (To

facilitate comparisons, Row 0 of Table 6 reports the coefficients from Columns 3 and 6 of Table




                                                 21
3.) APR remains negative and statistically significant in predicting “Firing” for both college

basketball and football coaches with the Probit model. 20



Coding Issues

Since APR is a continuous variable with most observations in the range between 900 and 1,000,

it is potentially prone to outliers. There are five instances with APR below 800 in the basketball

sample, including one dramatically low value of 489 for Southern University in 2012-2013. 21

However, the coaches (who were all relatively new) were retained in each of these instances, so

removing them from the sample would only serve to strengthen the existing negative relationship

between APR and “Firing”. In addition, though APR is capped at 1,000, there does not seem to

be a problem with truncation of the right tail of the distribution – for example, basketball teams

with APR’s of 1,000 only fired the coach in 2 of the 69 instances observed in the sample.



On a related point, we also wanted to confirm that our coding decisions for ambiguously

motivated coaching changes does not affect our results. So we constructed an expansive version

of the “Firing” variable, including cases of “Health Issues”, “Possible Promotion” and

“Retirement” as negative outcomes. We report the estimated coefficients for APR with this

expansive version of “Firing” as the dependent variable in Row 2 of Table 7, finding little effect

of this change in coding.




20
   After converting Probit coefficients into marginal effects (i.e. probability units), the predicted effect of APR score
on Firing is slightly smaller in magnitude for the Probit model than for OLS, but the standard errors on these
coefficients are also smaller with Probit than for OLS. Thus, the significance levels for the APR coefficients are
very similar with OLS and Probit for these specifications.
21
   It is not clear that this was a valid score, as the NCAA reported that the university had provided unusable data,
but Southern still received numerous penalties related to its low APR score in that year. When it provided more
appropriate data the following year, Southern’s APR score for its basketball team improved, but only to 727.


                                                           22
Additional Explanatory Variables

We made a conscious decision to exclude two sets of explanatory variables in our earlier

analysis. First, we excluded performance variables based on post-season play and we also

excluded attendance variables, primarily because college football attendance figures are not

readily available for every year of the sample. We repeat the OLS analysis from our preferred

specification with the addition of four variables: (Avg Attendance) for last year and this year (to

capture the possible effect of changes in attendance), plus dummy variables for “Bowl Game”

and “Won Bowl Game” for college football and “NCAA Tournament” and “NIT Tournament”

for college basketball. The estimated effects of the attendance variables are statistically

significant, but the estimated effect of the post-season variables are both small and not

statistically significant for either college basketball or college football. We report the estimated

coefficients for APR given the expansion of the model to include additional performance

variables in Row 3 of Table 7.



Second, we excluded measures of the academic quality of the colleges associated with each of

these teams. To capture the possibility that (say) colleges with unusually high-performing

students may put special weight on APR, we repeat the OLS specification from our preferred

analysis with the addition of four academic variables: Median SAT score of entering students:

four-year graduation rate, and a binary variable to identify public colleges. 22 We report the

estimated coefficients for APR given the expansion of the model to include these college-level

variables in Row 4 of Table 7.


22
  These academic variables are compiled from IPEDS and are available for almost all of the colleges in the sample
with the exception of the three military academies. To maintain comparability of the estimates across specifications,
we define the interaction term between APR and Median SAT as the product of deviations from sample means:
(APR Score – Mean(APR)) * (SAT – Mean(SAT)).


                                                        23
Comparing the coefficients reported in Rows 3 and 4 to the baseline coefficients in Row 0 of

Table 7, each of these two sets of additional explanatory variables yields a coefficient on APR

that is the same or larger in magnitude than the baseline coefficient. That is, these changes only

strengthens the evidence that APR influences firing and retention decisions. In each case, the

estimated effect of APR on “Firing” remains statistically significant and at the same significance

level as in the baseline case (Column 4 of Tables 3a and 3b).



Subsamples and Fixed Effects

As we described in Section 2, it was much more common for the NCAA to impose penalties

associated with below-threshold APR scores in the early years than in the later years of our

sample. This suggests the possibility that any effects of APR on future coaching prospects might

be confined to the first years of our sample – and thus not relevant in current practice. To

account for this possibility, we divide our ten-year sample into two halves, and then repeat the

analysis for our preferred specification with firing as the dependent variable with different

variables for APR for the first-half and second-half of the sample, and report the results in Rows

5a and 5b of Table 7. The estimated effect of APR on “Firing” is very similar in each half of the

sample for college basketball (though given the increase in standard error associated with this

specialized analysis, the coefficient is only significant for the first part of the sample) and is

much larger (i.e. more negative) for the second half of the sample for college football. Neither of

these results provides support for the hypothesis that the effect of the APR on retention/firing has

diminished over time.




                                                  24
We also consider the possibility that the effect of APR is limited to major (or non-major)

conference teams, using separate versions of APR score for major and non-major conference

teams in a single OLS specification. As shown in Rows 6a and 6b of Table 7, we find strongest

effects of APR on “Firing” for major conference teams. The estimated effect of APR on

“Firing” remains negative for non-major conference teams and is significant for college

basketball though not significant for college football.



A more general version of these critiques is that each school may utilize differential criteria in

evaluating its coaches. One, albeit limited, way to allow for this possibility in the analysis is to

add team-level fixed effects to the specification, though this choice clearly reduces the statistical

power of the analysis. As reported in Row 7 of Table 6, the introduction of these team fixed

effects increases the magnitude of the APR coefficient from -6.7% to -9.1%, for basketball and

reduces the magnitude of the APR coefficient from -15.1% to -13.0% for football. Here, the

coefficient on APR score remains significant for college basketball, but (primarily because the

use of fixed effects increases the standard error associated with the APR coefficient) is not

significant for college football, even though the estimated coefficient for APR in predicting

“Firing” remains larger in magnitude for football than for basketball.




                                                 25
6. Discussion of Results

The lack of a significant relation between APR and promotions or salary changes combined with

the significant relation between APR and termination suggests that APR only influences bad

outcomes for coaches of each sporting discipline. That is, there may be a threshold APR that is

required to retain employment, while there is no incremental benefit for incremental APR above

that threshold. These results are consistent with labor economic theories that predict the use of

non-linear performance hurdles in the separate contexts of limited liability (e.g. Innes, 1990) and

subjective performance measurement (e.g. Rajan and Reichelstein, 2009).



Explicit Incentives

Head coaches may be motivated by explicit contractual incentives related to the academic

achievement of their players, whether or not APR is directly associated with coaching retention.

To assess these explicit incentives, we coded all explicit academic performance-based bonuses

from the 2010 employment contracts for 88 college football coaches. Three-quarters of these

contracts contain some explicit bonus for academic performance of players. The most common

performance measures used to determine these bonuses were APR (53.4%), Graduation Success

Rate (GSR) (40.9%), and Grade Point Average (GPA) (20.4%). 23 But even if these coaches

achieved all of these possible bonuses, they would increase their salaries by only an average of

3.7% of total annual salary. By contrast, these contracts typically included much larger possible

bonuses related to measures of the team’s athletic results – totalling an average of 39% of total

annual salary. In sum, though many coaches do have explicit contractual incentives to promote




23   See LaForge and Hodge, 2011 for detailed discussion of the methodology used to compute GSR.


                                                       26
the team’s academic achievement, these explicit incentives pale by comparison to the contractual

incentives to improvement the team’s athletic record, as found by Cadman and Cassar (2016). 24



Alternative Mechanisms to Explain Our Results

In addition to the possibility of a direct causal relationship, several alternative mechanisms could

explain the observed relationship between APR and retention of the current coach. As we discuss

below, however, some of these mechanisms can be (mostly) ruled out by our analysis above.



First, as we discussed in Section 5, teams could be solely motivated by the fear of NCAA

penalties, which are triggered automatically by APR scores below 930. If so, we should expect

to see the APR as particularly influential in the early part of our sample period, when APR scores

were relatively low, many teams were penalized and even more teams were in danger of being

penalized. Yet, we see the opposite, as shown in Table 7, with APR score estimated to have the

same or greater importance in the most recent years of the sample, despite the fact that APR

penalties are now quite rare.



Second, it is possible that some colleges responded to the introduction of the APR by developing

systematic methods of grade inflation - so that their APR scores increased without any change in

the true academic progress of the basketball and football players. But, there were many

incentives for grade inflation for recruited athletes prior to the introduction of the APR. As

Harry Edwards wrote in 1985, “educationally high-risk athletes must be kept academically




24
  Wilson et al. (2011) reach a similar conclusion in the analysis of the contracts of (60 of 65) college basketball
head coaches whose teams were invited to the 2009 NCAA tournament.


                                                          27
eligible, so phony transcripts, fixed grades, Mickey Mouse curriculums and low graduation rates

have become commonplace.” 25



Even if grade inflation practices for recruited athletes increased in response to the penalties

associated with low APR scores, it is not obvious that these practices would influence the results

of our analysis above. Perhaps the most likely way that grade inflation could induce a statistical

link between APR score and retention of the coach is through regulatory capture. If a coach has

unusually strong influence at his college, he might be able to both promote grade inflation for his

players and also to keep his job even after a year with a win-loss record that would put coaches

at other colleges in jeopardy of being fired. But the inclusion of team/college-level fixed effects,

as reported in Row 7 of Table 6 accounts for this possibility. Since the introduction of these

fixed effects does not change our results very much (and yields an increase in magnitude of the

estimated APR coefficient for basketball, which is likely to be more prone to the effects of grade

inflation than football given the smaller number of players on the team), we can discount the

possible influence of unobserved grade inflation in our analysis.



A final alternative explanation for our results goes beyond the observable variables in the data.

In particular, we have no measures of off-court behavior of the coach and the players, positive or

negative, except to the degree that they influence the academic standing of the players (and

ultimately the APR score) and the record of the team on the court. So, for example, “Team

Culture” might be an important omitted variable whereby “Positive Culture” solidifies a coach’s



25
   “A Symposium: What’s Wrong with College Sports?” New York Times, May 9, 1985. Oriard (2009) provides
many specific examples of practices along these lines used by particular colleges and teams prior to the introduction
of the APR.


                                                         28
position and simultaneously promotes academic engagement and the APR. 26 But from a policy

perspective, the distinction between a causal relationship between APR and retention of the

coach vs. an indirect relationship mediated by the link between “Positive Team Culture” and

retention of the coach may not be that important. Either way, coaches who do not promote

academic achievement will tend to be replaced, providing positive career incentives for the

coaches with regard to the academic progress of their players.




26 Florida A&M coach Mike Gillespie made a strong case for the importance of positive team culture in a 2007
National Public Radio interview, saying “If you're a very selfish person in a marriage or in a family, your family is
going to be dysfunctional … If you have that type of atmosphere in a game of basketball, you're going to have a
dysfunctional team. … I know exactly how many hours each guy needs to graduate. I know the curriculum that
they're in. I could tell you how many hours they passed, what their GPA is. (I) make sure they're going to class,
doing all the right things. And (if) I can stay on top of it as the head coach, I think the greater opportunity we have to
graduate our kids” (http://www.npr.org/templates/story/story.php?storyId=7750391). Yet despite leading the team
to the NCAA tournament in 2007, Gillespie was fired before the start of the next season after being charged with a
criminal offense.


                                                           29
7. Conclusion

NCAA Division I head coaching positions are both scarce and lucrative. Further, relatively low-

paying positions usually include a large option value; coaches that succeed at lower paying

institutions often move to higher paying institutions.. Cadman and Cassar (2016) find evidence

that that labor market incentives associated with career concerns for Division I football coaches

are much greater than the explicit incentives present in most contracts.



In this study, we investigate a complimentary measure of performance that is of strong

importance to the NCAA, APR. We find that coaches can solidify their existing positions if their

teams achieve strong APR scores. That is, higher APR scores predict retention but not promotion

of head coaches. The combination of these results is consistent with labor market theories based

on limited liability (Innes, 1990) or subjective performance measurement (Rajan and

Reichelstein, 2009), which predict that a threshold performance level is required to retain

employment but that there no reward for increases in performance beyond that threshold.



We find that coaches face simultaneous career incentives to win games and to improve academic

performance of their players as measured by APR score. In particular, we estimate that an

increase in team APR of 50 points, which would move a team from near the bottom to near the

top in most major conferences, increases the probability of retention by 2-3 percentage points per

year for college basketball coaches and by 7-8 percentage points per year for college football

coaches. These effects seem sufficiently large to motivate coaches to take steps to improve APR

scores in order to solidify their coaching position. Our results in Table 3 indicate that a 50 point

increase in team APR has approximately the same effect on the probability of retention as two




                                                 30
additional wins per season in basketball and one additional win per season in football. To put

this another way, given our estimates, Division I head coaches still stand to enhance their future

career prospects much more by improving the team’s athletic standing from last place to first

place in the conference than by increasing the team’s APR.



Our results suggest that the introduction of the APR and associated penalties may have helped

the NCAA to accomplish some of its goals. There has been a clear and conspicuous increase in

APR scores over the past decade, and we find that labor market incentives for coaches provide

incentives to produce further increases in these scores. Nevertheless, we emphasize that the

APR, which only measures athletic eligibility and continuing college enrollment, is at best a

proxy for long-run outcomes of genuine interest, such as college graduation and career success.

Indeed, some critics argue that these recent trends may represent only cosmetic and not

substantive improvement of academic achievement by recruited athletes (see for example,

Gurney and Southall (2012), Oriard (2009)). For this reason, we do not view this paper as an

evaluation of the effects of introduction of the APR.




                                                31
References

Anderson, Michael L., “The Benefits of College Athletic Success: An Application of the
Propensity Score Design with Instrumental Variables,” NBER Working Paper 18196, 2012 (also
forthcoming, Review of Economics and Statistics).

Bowen, William G. and Sarah E. Levin, Reclaiming the Game: College Sports and Educational
Values, Princeton University Press, 2005.

Cadman, Brian and Gavin Cassar, “Evidence on Explicit Contracting and Ex-Post Settling Up in
Incentive Design ,” working paper, 2016.

Clotfelter, Charles, Big-Time Sports in American Universities, Cambridge University Press,
2011.

Edwards, Harry, The Sociology of Sport, Dorsey Press, 1993.

Fogarty, Kellynn, Brian P. Soebbing, and Kwame J. A. Agyemang, “NCAA Division I-FBS
Salary Determinants: A Look at New and Amended Contracts,” Journal of Issues in
Intercollegiate Athletics, 2015, 8, 123-138.

Grant, Randy R., John C. Leadley, and Zenon X. Zygmont, “Just Win Baby: Determinants of
NCAA Football Bowl Subdivision Coaching Compensation,” International Journal of Sport
Finance, 2013, 8, 61-74.

Gurney, Gerald S., and Richard M. Southall, “Gaming the NCAA’s APR”, August 9, 2012,
retrieved from http://espn.go.com/college-sports/story/_/id/8248046/college-sports-programs-find-multitude-
ways-game-ncaa-apr.

Holmes, Paul, “Win or Go Home: Why College Football Coaches Get Fired,” Journal of Sports
Economics, 2011, 12, 157-178.

Innes, Robert, "Limited Liability and Incentive Contracting with Ex-Ante Action Choices”.
Journal of Economic Theory, 1990, 52:1, 45-67.

LaForge, Larry and Janie Hodge, “NCAA Academic Performance Metrics: Implications for
Institutional Policy,” Journal of Higher Education, 2011, 82(2), 217-235.

Meer, Jonathan and Harvey S. Rosen. The Impact of Athletic Performance on Alumni Giving:
An Analysis of Microdata,” Economics of Education Review, 28(3):287–294, June 2009

Oriard, Michael. Bowled Over, University of North Carolina Press, 2009.

Pope, Devin G. and Jaren C. Pope, “Understanding College Application Decisions: Why College
Sports Success Matters”, Journal of Sports Economics, 2014, 15, 107-131.




                                                      32
Pope, Devin G. and Jaren C. Pope, “The Impact of College Sports Success on the Quantity and
Quality of Student Applications,” Southern Economic Journal, 2009, 75, 3, 750-780.

Rajan, Madhav and Stefan Reichelstein, "Objective versus Subjective Indicators of Managerial
Performance”. 2009, The Accounting Review, 84:1, 209-237.

Shulman, James L. and William G. Bowen, The Game of Life: College Sports and Educational
Values, Princeton University Press, 2002.

Turner, Sarah, Lauren A. Meserve and William G. Bowen, “Winning and Giving: Football
Results and Alumni Giving at Selective Private Colleges and Universities,” Social Science
Quarterly, 2001, 82, 4, 812-826.

Wilson, Matthew J., Matthew Schrager, Kevin Burke, Billy J. Hawkins, and Lane Gauntt,
“NCAA Division I Men’s Basketball Coaching Contracts: A Comparative Analysis of Incentives
for Athletic and Academic Team Performance,” Journal of Issues in Intercollegiate Athletics,
2011, 4, 396-410.




                                              33
Figure 1a: Average APR Score by Academic Year for College Basketball Teams
1000
 990
 980

 970

 960
       APR




 950

 940

 930

 920

 910
                                            Academic Year
 900
    2005       2006     2007       2008      2009       2010       2011      2012      2013   2014
                        All         Major Conference           Not Major Conference
* Source: Authors’ computations using data available from the NCAA website.




Figure 1b: Average APR Score by Academic Year for College Football Teams
1000

 990

 980

 970

 960
        APR




 950

 940

 930

 920

 910
                                           Academic Year
 900
    2005       2006      2007      2008     2009      2010        2011       2012      2013   2014
                          All        Major Conference           Not Major Conference

* Source: Authors’ computations using data available from the NCAA website




                                                       34
                Figure 1c: Proportion of Teams Receiving APR Penalties by Academic Year
          25%


          20%
  Proportion of Teams




          15%

                                                                                                Basketball
          10%                                                                                   Football


            5%


            0%
                        2005   2006   2007   2008    2009   2010    2011   2012   2013   2014
                                                    Academic Year

* Source: Authors’ computations using data available from the NCAA website




                                                               35
                     Figure 2a: Coaching Transitions by Tenure for College Basketball Coaches
                       50%


                       40%
              Proportion of Coaches



                       30%


                       20%                                                                                                      Fired
                                                                                                                                Promoted
                       10%


                           0%
                                      Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Year 6 Year 7 Year 8 Year 9 Year   Year     Year
                                                                                                      10     11       12
                                                          Year of Coaching Tenure with Team


* Source: Authors’ computations based on coding of coaching transitions, as described in Section 3.



                           Figure 2b: Coaching Transitions by Tenure for College Football Coaches
           50%


           40%
   Proportion of Coaches




           30%

                                                                                                                            Fired
           20%
                                                                                                                            Promoted


           10%


               0%
                                Year 1      Year 2     Year 3    Year 4    Year 5     Year 6    Year 7      Year 8
                                                     Year of Coaching Tenure with Team

* Source: Authors’ computations based on coding of coaching transitions, as described in Section 3.




                                                                               36
                         Table 1a: Distribution of Coach Outcomes by Sport
       Coach Outcome                          Basketball                        Football
          Retained                           2,794 (85.4%)                     979 (82.3%)
            Fired                             310 (9.5%)                       124 (10.4%)
          Promoted                            121 (3.7%)                        59 (5.0%)
Left Job Due To Health Issue                    8 (0.2%)                         2 (0.2%)
     Possible Promotion                        15 (0.5%)                         5 (0.4%)
  Took Job as Asst. Coach
           Retired                              18 (0.6%)                        17 (1.4%)
       Interim Coach                             4 (0.1%)                         4 (0.3%)
           TOTAL                                   3,270                            1,190
* Source: Authors’ computations based on coding of coaching transitions, as described in Section 3.




                       Table 1b: Distribution of Coaching Changes by Sport
       Coach Outcome                           Basketball                        Football
            Fired                             310 (65.1%)                      124 (58.7%)
         Promotion                            121 (25.4%)                       59 (27.8%)
Left Job Due To Health Issue                    8 (1.7%)                         2 (0.9%)
     Possible Promotion                        15 (3.2%)                         5 (2.4%)
  Took Job as Asst. Coach
           Retired                              18 (3.8%)                        17 (8.1%)
       Interim Coach                             4 (0.8%)                         4 (1.9%)
          TOTAL                                     476                              211
* Source: Authors’ computations based on coding of coaching transitions, as described in Section 3.




                                                       37
             Table 2a: Descriptive Statistics by Basketball “Coach Outcome”
    Variables         All Teams      “Promoted” “Retained”          “Fired”
     Win Pct              .513             .655          .522          .379
                         (.173)          (.119)         (.169)        (.146)
   NCAA Bid               .201             .405          .209          .055
                         (.401)          (.493)         (.407)        (.228)
NIT Tournament            .099             .215          .101          .042
                         (.299)          (.412)         (.301)        (.201)
Conference Pctile        50.38            75.53         52.14         25.41
                        (31.64)         (23.33)        (31.12)       (23.86)
  National Pctile        51.38            70.20         52.41         35.14
                        (28.65)         (21.36)        (28.41)       (26.17)
 Arena Capacity          8,233            8,921         8,221         8,088
                        (4,822)         (4,614)        (4,805)       (4,388)
 Avg Attendance          4,732            5,798         4,804         3,672
                        (4,415)         (4,513)        (4,483)       (3,557)
Major Conference          .225             .207          .227          .213
                         (.417)          (.407)         (.419)        (.410)
 NCAA Violation           .013               0           .011          .032
    Next Year            (.111)                         (.103)        (.177)
  Penalty Lag 1           .069             .050          .065          .104
                         (.254)          (.218)         (.247)        (.306)
   APR Lag 1            942.82           945.37        943.75        934.33
                        (37.01)         (34.94)        (36.95)       (37.02)
  Coach Tenure            5.76             5.83          5.59          6.71
                         (5.07)          (3.66)         (5.09)        (4.44)
OBSERVATIONS             3,270              121         2,794           310

NOTES: The Data Appendix provides formal definitions and sources of all variables. The number of observations
in Column 1 is greater than the sum of the observations in the other three columns because coaching transitions
where the motivation for the change is ambiguous are not counted at any of “Promoted”, “Retained” or “Fired”. The
Conference and National Percentiles in Column 1 do not average to 50 because we exclude teams that were not in
Division 1 for the entirety of 2004-2005 to 2013-2014.




                                                      38
               Table 2b: Descriptive Statistics by Football “Coach Outcome”
   Variables          All Teams     “Promoted” “Retained”           “Fired”
    Win Pct               .519            .685           .534          .349
                         (.221)          (.169)         (.215)        (.191)
  Bowl Game               .566            .847           .590          .274
                         (.496)          (.363)         (.492)        (.448)
Won Bowl Game             .284            .492           .297          .105
                         (.453)          (.504)         (.460)        (.308)
  Conference             50.16           73.50          51.70         30.39
     Pctile             (31.85)         (23.42)        (31.26)       (26.62)
 National Pctile         50.58           63.33          52.14         34.84
                        (29.01)         (22.42)        (28.95)       (25.83)
   Stadium              53,424          47,572         53,745        53,267
   Capacity            (22,348)        (20,094)       (22,264)      (23,074)
Avg Attendance          44,107          36,665         44,927        41,306
                       (25,625)        (20,722)       (25,656)      (26.244)
     Major                .492            .254           .505          .508
  Conference             (.500)          (.439)         (.500)        (.502)
NCAA Violation            .029              0            .030          .040
  Next Year              (.167)                         (.170)        (.198)
 Penalty Lag 1            .053            .017           .053          .073
                         (.225)          (.130)         (.225)        (.261)
  APR Lag 1             946.41          951.58         946.63        943.40
                        (22.89)         (18.94)        (23.01)       (23.50)
 Coach Tenure             4.98            4.25           4.76          6.19
                         (5.16)          (2.76)         (5.16)        (4.98)
 Observations            1,190             59             979           124

NOTES: The Data Appendix provides formal definitions and sources for all variables. The number of observations
in Column 1 is greater than the sum of the observations in the other three columns because coaching transitions
where the motivation for the change is ambiguous are not counted at any of “Promoted”, “Retained” or “Fired”. The
Conference and National Percentiles in Column 1 do not average to 50 because we exclude teams that were not in
Division 1 for the entirety of 2004-2005 to 2013-2014.




                                                      39
                                                      .
              Table 3: Results of OLS Regressions to Predict “Firing” of Coaches
    Variables                 (1)            (2)           (3)         (4)          (5)          (6)
     Wins                -.009**        -.010**       -.012**       -.032**      -.037**      -.059**
                           (.002)         (.002)        (.002)       (.005)       (.005)       (.007)
     Wins^2             .00024*        .00024*       .00033*        .0027*      .0030**      .0057**
                        (.00011)       (.00011)      (.00014)       (.0010)      (.0010)      (.0014)
   Conf_Pctile         -.0011**       -.0012**      -.0020**         .0001        -.0000       -.0004
                         (.0003)        (.0003)       (.0004)       (.0005)      (.0005)      (.0007)
 Conf_Pctile^2          .00002*       .00002**      .00004**        -.00000      .00001       .00002
                        (.00001)       (.00001)      (.00001)      (.00001)     (.00001)     (.00002)
 Ln(Capacity)             .034**         .042**        .058**        .060*        .067*       .131**
(Arena/Stadum)             (.009)         (.009)        (.012)       (.028)       (.027)       (.040)
    Major                   -.001          -.002         -.001        .014         .010         .010
  Conference               (.016)         (.015)        (.019)       (.024)       (.023)       (.033)
NCAA Violation            .162**         .171**        .145**         .056         .042         .060
   Next Year               (.046)         (.045)        (.055)       (.053)       (.051)       (.067)
  APR Penalty               -.003           .012          .056        .015         -.007        -.003
                           (.023)         (.022)        (.032)       (.045)       (.043)       (.063)
APR (Lag 1) /100            -.015        -.038*       -.056**         .019         -.040       -.146*
                           (.016)         (.017)        (.022)       (.045)       (.048)       (.067)
    Constant                 .099           .258          .390        -.547        -.044        .490
                           (.181)         (.187)        (.236)       (.527)       (.533)       (.767)
     Sport             Basketball     Basketball    Basketball     Football     Football     Football
 Coach Tenure               ALL            ALL       Year 3+          ALL          ALL       Year 3+
    Seasons                 ALL            ALL           ALL          ALL          ALL          ALL
   Included
 Coach Tenure              NO            YES              YES         NO          YES          YES
 Dummy Vars
 Year Dummy                NO            YES              YES         NO          YES          YES
   Variables
  R-Squared                .085          .161              .209       .087         .217        .279
 Observations             3,205         3,198             2,290      1,155        1,149         739

NOTES: * = significant at 5% level; ** = significant at 1% level.
This table reports the results of OLS estimations with “Firing” of the coach as the dependent variable and the
variables listed in Column 1 included as independent variables. The unit of observation is Team*Year. The Data
Appendix provides formal definitions and sources for all variables.




                                                     40
           Table 4: Results of OLS Regressions to Predict “Promotion” of Coaches
    Variables                 (1)           (2)           (3)            (4)            (5)           (6)
     Wins                 .004**         .003*         .004*         .015**         .015**        .016**
                           (.001)        (.001)        (.002)         (.004)         (.004)        (.005)
     Wins^2              -.00013        -.00010       -.00019         -.0005         -.0007        -.0010
                        (.00008)       (.00008)      (.00010)        (.0007)        (.0007)       (.0010)
   Conf_Pctile             .0004         .0004         .0003           .0000          .0001         .0005
                         (.0002)        (.0002)       (.0003)       (.00034)        (.0037)       (.0005)
 Conf_Pctile^2         .00001**       .00001**       .00001*       .00002**       .00003**      .00003**
                        (5x10-6)      (.000005)     (.000006)       (.00001)       (.00001)      (.00001)
  Ln(Capacity)               .005        .0006           .011         -.040*          -.038        -.060*
(Arena/Stadium)            (.007)        (.007)        (.009)         (.020)         (.021)        (.029)
     Major                -.022*          -.020         -.022         -.049*         -.045*         -.045
   Conference              (.010)        (.011)        (.014)         (.017)         (.018)        (.024)
NCAA Violation              -.039         -.042         -.039          -.046          -.054         -.069
   Next Year               (.030)        (.031)        (.039)         (.038)         (.039)        (.049)
  APR Penalty               -.006          .001          .007          -.045          -.040         -.038
                           (.015)        (.016)        (.022)         (.032)         (.033)        (.046)
APR (Lag 1) /100            -.010         -.006          .003           .012           .001          .002
                           (.011)        (.011)        (.015)         (.033)         (.037)        (.049)
    Constant                 .006         -.049         -.173           .268           .353          .567
                           (.121)        (.129)        (.166)         (.379)         (.410)        (.558)
     Sport             Basketball     Basketball    Basketball      Football       Football      Football
 Coach Tenure               ALL           ALL        Year 3+            ALL            ALL       Year 3+
    Seasons                 ALL           ALL           ALL             ALL            ALL           ALL
   Included
 Coach Tenure              NO            YES            YES            NO           YES            YES
 Dummy Vars
 Year Dummy                NO            YES            YES            NO           YES            YES
   Variables
  R-Squared                .031          .040           .038           .069          .094          .122
 Observations             3,205         3,198          2,290          1,155         1,149          739
NOTES: * = significant at 5% level; ** = significant at 1% level.
This table reports results of OLS estimations with “Promotion” of the coach as the dependent variable and the
variables listed in Column 1 included as independent variables. The unit of observation is Team*Year. The Data
Appendix provides formal definitions and sources for all variables.




                                                     41
          Table 5: Results of OLS Regressions using Football Coach Salary Data
    Variables           (1)             (2)           (3)            (4)
      Wins             .019            .022        .034*         .056**
                      (.035)         (.008)        (.011)         (.012)
     Wins^2            -.001           .001          .003           .004
                      (.007)         (.002)        (.002)         (.002)
   Conf_Pctile        .006*           -.000          .000          -.000
                      (.003)         (.001)        (.001)         (.001)
  Conf_Pctile^2      .00007         .00001        -.00000        .00000
                    (.00008)       (.00002)       (.0003)       (.00003)
  Ln(Capacity)       -.497**          -.038         -.115        -.153*
(Arena/Stadium)       (.181)         (.047)        (.068)         (.076)
      Major            .040         -.086*         .112*            .026
   Conference         (.144)         (.038)        (.056)         (.062)
NCAA Violation         -.340          -.063         -.106          -.170
   Next Year          (.348)         (.065)        (.095)         (.104)
  APR Penalty          -.208          -044           .028          -.015
                      (.239)         (.049)        (.072)         (.079)
 APR (Lag 1) /100      .201           -.018          .095           .077
                      (.311)         (.081)        (.118)         (.130)
    Constant           3.32            .490          .216           .706
                      (3.42)         (.853)        (1.24)         (1.37)
   Dependent        % Change      Promoted     Renegotiated Promoted or
    Variable       Total Comp                                 Renegotiated
 Coach Tenure        Year 3+       Year 3+        Year 3+       Year 3+
     Seasons       2007, 2009, 2006, 2007,      2006, 2007,   2006, 2007,
    Included           2010      2009, 2010     2009, 2010     2009, 2010
  Coach Tenure         YES            YES           YES            YES
  Dummy Vars
  Year Dummy           YES            YES           YES            YES
    Variables
   R-Squared           .231            .142          .237           .289
  Observations          169            311           311            311

NOTES: * = significant at 5% level; ** = significant at 1% level.
This table reports results of OLS estimations with the dependent variable as listed in each column and the variables
listed in Column 1 included as independent variables. The unit of observation is Team*Year. The Data Appendix
provides formal definitions and sources for all variables.




                                                        42
                        Table 6: Results using Prais-Winsten Specification
    Variables                (1)           (2)            (3)           (4)
     Wins                -.011**       .004**        -.057**        .013**
                           (.002)       (.001)         (.007)        (.005)
     Wins^2             .00028*       -.0002*        .0057**       -.0021*
                        (.00012)      (.0001)         (.0013)      (.0009)
   Conf_Pctile         -.0018**         .0002          -.0002        .0004
                         (.0004)      (.0002)         (.0006)      (.0004)
 Conf_Pctile^2         .00004**      .00001**           .0002       .00000
                        (.00001)      (5x10-6)        (.0002)     (.00001)
  Ln(Capacity)            .051**          .006        .117**          -.028
(Arena/Stadium)            (.010)       (.007)         (.034)        (.020)
     Major                  .000         -.020           .015       -.035*
   Conference              (.015)       (.010)         (.028)        (.016)
NCAA Violation            .156**         -.037           .055         -.043
                           (.053)       (.036)         (.065)        (.042)
  APR Penalty               .031          .014          -.030         -.007
                           (.029)       (.020)         (.058)        (.036)
 APR Lag 1/100            -.039*         -.002         -.141*         -.002
                           (.018)       (.012)         (.058)        (.035)
    Constant                .145         -.109        1.485*           .229
                           (.368)       (.262)         (.757)        (.490)
      Sport            Basketball    Basketball      Football      Football
    Outcome                Fired     Promoted           Fired     Promoted
    Coaches            Tenure 3+     Tenure 3+        Tenure       Tenure
    Included                                              3+            3+
 Years Included           ALL            ALL             ALL          ALL
 Coach Tenure             YES            YES             YES          YES
  Dummy Vars
       Rho               -.374          -.464         -.266         -.601
   R-Squared              .223          .0450          .287          .127
  Observations           2,290          2,290          739           739

NOTES: * = significant at 5% level; ** = significant at 1% level.
This table reports results of Prais-Winsten estimations with dependent variable as listed in each column, and
the variables listed in Column 1 included as independent variables. The unit of observation is Team*Year. The
Data Appendix provides formal definitions and sources for all variables.




                                                    43
                             Table 7: Results of Sensitivity Analysis:
                Fitted Coefficients for (APR Lag 1)/100 in Various Specifications

Row       Description                                        Basketball              Football
0         Base Model                                          -.056**                 -.146*
          Column 4 in Tables 3a, 3b                            (.022)                 (.067)
1         Base Model                                          -.037**                 -.133*
          With Probit Specification                            (.015)                 (.054)
2         Base Model with                                     -.058**                 -.148*
          Expansive Definition of Firing                       (.022)                 (.069)
3         Base Model plus Additional                          -.060**                 -.175*
          Performance Variables                                (.023)                 (.078)
4         Base Model plus                                      -.059*                 -.166*
          College Academic Variables                           (.025)                 (.080)

5a        Base Model                                           -.055*                   -.078
          APR*(Year 2006 to Year 2010)                         (.027)                  (.086)
5b        Base Model                                            -.057                  -.233*
          APR*(Year 2011 to Year 2015)                         (.029)                  (.097)

6a        Base Model                                           -.086*                  -.223*
          APR*Major Conference Team                            (.044)                  (.093)
6b        Base Model                                           -.049*                   -.086
          APR*Non-Major Conf. Team                             (.023)                  (.083)

7         Base Model plus                                      -.091**                  -.130
          Team Fixed Effects                                    (.031)                 (.110)

NOTES: * = significant at 5% level; ** = significant at 1% level.
This table reports results of OLS estimations (except as indicated) with “Firing” as the dependent variable, the
same specifications as listed in Columns 3 and 6 of Table 3, and additional independent variables according to
the “Description” in each row. The unit of observation is Team*Year. The Data Appendix provides formal
definitions and sources for all variables.




                                                      44
                                          DATA APPENDIX

I. SOURCES

1. NCAA: (www.ncaa.org)

We compiled year-by-year APR scores and penalties associated with them from the NCAA
website: https://web1.ncaa.org/maps/aprRelease.jsp

We compiled the list of NCAA violations by team (and sport) from the NCAA Legislative
Services database of Major Infractions: https://web1.ncaa.org/LSDBi/exec/misearch

We compiled average attendance figures by team and year from the NCAA website:
       http://www.ncaa.org/championships/statistics/ncaa-mens-basketball-attendance
       http://www.ncaa.org/championships/statistics/ncaa-football-attendance

2. Sports-Reference (www.sports-reference.com)

We compiled team records (including bowl game records for college football teams and NCAA
Tournament participation for college basketball teams), conference affiliations, and coaching
histories from Sports-Reference.

3. Wikipedia

We compiled yearly lists of college basketball teams participating in the NIT Tournament as well
as arena/stadium capacities from Wikipedia.

4. Ken Pomeroy (kenpom.com)

We compiled Ken Pomeroy’s yearly statistical rankings for college basketball teams from his
website.

5. Football Outsiders (www.footballoutsiders.com)

We compiled the Football Outsiders yearly statistical rankings for college football teams from
the Football Outsiders website. http://www.footballoutsiders.com/stats/fplus

6. College Football Head Coach Contracts

We compiled details of coaching contracts from the USA Today database.

7. Chronicle of Higher Education (collegecompletion.chronicle.com)

We compiled data (originally from the “Integrated Post-Secondary Education Data System“
(IPEDS), including median SAT scores and graduation rates for Division 1 colleges from the
“College Completion Project” at the Chronicle of Higher Education website.



                                                    45
II. VARIABLE DEFINITIONS

A. Dependent Variables

FIRED = Binary variable with value 1 if the coach at the start of a given season leaves that
position (involuntarily) before the start of the next season, was not reported to be resigning the
position to take a different position as head coach, and there is no ambiguity (“Health Issue”,
“Retirement” or “Possible Promotion”), and 0 otherwise except that this variable is coded as
missing for “Interim Coaches” as well as in cases of “Health Issue”, “Retirement” or “Possible
Promotion”.

FIRED (Expansive Version) = Binary variable with value 1 if the coach at the start of a given
season leaves that position (involuntarily) before the start of the next season and was not
reported to be resigning the position to take a different position as head coach, and 0 otherwise,
except that this variable is coded as missing for “Interim Coaches”.

PROMOTED = Binary variable with value 1 if the coach at the start of a given season leaves that
position before the start of the next season to take a different position as head coach and 0
otherwise, except that this variable is coded as missing for “Interim Coaches” as well as for cases
of “Health Issue”, “Retirement” or “Possible Promotion”.

RENEGOTIATED = Binary variable with value 1 if the football coach at the start of a given
season continues in that position for the next season with a new contract with increased
compensation of more than 10% per year than the previous contract. Given the problem of
missing data for contracts in 2008, we code renegotiation as taking place between 2007 and 2009
if for coaches whose compensation increased by more than 15% per year between these two
years. We code this variable as missing in all cases where we did not have access to the contract
of the coach.

RENEGOTIATED/PROMOTED: Binary variable with value 1 if the football coach for a given
Team*Year is coded as having been PROMOTED or having RENEGOTIATED his contract and
0 otherwise, except that this variable is coded as missing for each case where either
PROMOTED or RENEGOTIATED is coded as missing.

% CHANGE TOTAL COMP: Percentage change in coach’s compensation from the given
season to the next season. This variable is coded as missing in cases where we do not have
access to the coach’s contract in both the current season and the next season.




                                                46
B. Independent Variables Used in Tables 3 and 4

WINS – Count of team wins for the given season, including post-season play.

WINS^2 – Squared deviation of team wins for the given season from the average number of
wins observed in the sample =(WINS – Mean(Wins))2.

CONFERENCE PERCENTILE: Ordinal team ranking within conference, according to the
Pomeroy rankings for basketball and the Football Outsiders rankings for football, converted to a
scale of 0 to 100:
        100 * (Ordinal Conference Ranking – 1) / (Number of Teams in Conference)

CONFERENCE PERCENTILE^2: Squared deviation of CONFERENCE PERCENTILE from
the constructed mean of 50 = (CONFERENCE PERCENTILE – 50)2.

LN(CAPACITY): Natural log of football stadium or basketball arena used for this team’s home
games.

MAJOR CONFERENCE: Binary variable with value 1 for teams affiliated with a major
conference (“Atlantic Coast Conference”, “Big 10”, “Big 12”, “Pac 10/12”, “SEC” for either
sport and also “Big East” for basketball), and 0 otherwise.

VIOLATION NEXT YEAR: Binary variable with value 1 for teams listed as being penalized by
the NCAA for a major infraction in the subsequent academic year (meaning that the NCAA
considers the violation to be associated with this team and coach as well as possibly with other
teams at the same college) and 0 otherwise.

APR PENALTY: Binary variable with value 1 for teams listed as being penalized by the NCAA
for low APR score in the preceding academic year and 0 otherwise.

APR LAG 1 / 100: Lagged APR score (i.e. based on academic results through the prior academic
year) rescaled so that 0 is the minimum value and 10 is the maximum value.

COACH TENURE: Years of continuing experience for the coach as head coach of this team,
where a new coach is coded as 1 and a coach coded as n has completed n-1 prior seasons and is
now in season n as head coach of this team. We code this variable as missing for three coaches
who returned to a former team during the sample period.




                                               47
C. Additional Independent Variables Used in Table 7

ROW 3 of TABLE 7: Additional Performance Variables:

LN(AVG_ATTENDANCE) and LN(AVG_ATTENDANCE LAG 1): Natural logarithm of the
average attendance at this team’s home games for the given season and separately for the past
season. This variable is coded as missing in cases where we cannot compile attendance figures
for both seasons.

NATIONAL PERCENTILE: Ordinal team ranking among all teams, according to the Pomeroy
rankings for basketball and the Football Outsiders rankings for football, converted to a scale of 0
to 100:
        100 * (Ordinal Ranking – 1) / (Number of Division I Teams)

NATIONAL PERCENTILE^2: Squared deviation of NATIONAL PERCENTILE from the
constructed mean of 50 = (NATIONAL PERCENTILE – 50)2.

NCAA BID: Binary variable for college basketball teams with value 1 for teams participating in
the NCAA tournament and 0 otherwise.

NIT TOURNAMENT: Binary variable for college basketball teams with value 1 for teams
participating in the NIT tournament and 0 otherwise.

BOWL GAME: Binary variable for college football teams with value 1 for teams participating in
a post-season bowl game and 0 otherwise.

WON BOWL GAME: Binary variable for college football teams with value 1 for teams that won
a post-season bowl game and 0 otherwise. (In one case, we use a value of 2 for this variable for a
team that won 2 post-season games to win the BCS Championship for the 2014-2015 season.)

ROW 4 of TABLE 7: College Academic Variables:

MEDIAN SAT: Median SAT (combined Verbal plus Math) for full-time first year students at
this college.

4-YEAR GRAD RATE: Proportion of full-time first-year students at this college who complete
BA degrees within four years of initial college enrollment.

PUBLIC COLLEGE: Binary variable with value 1 for public colleges and 0 otherwise.




/




                                                48
