NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

NEOCLASSICAL MODELS IN MACROECONOMICS
Gary D. Hansen
Lee E. Ohanian
Working Paper 22122
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22122

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2016

We thank John Cochrane, Jesus Fernandez-Villaverde, Kyle Herkenhoff, Per Krusell, Ed
Prescott, Valerie Ramey, John Taylor, Harald Uhlig, seminar participants at the Handbook of
Macroeconomics Conference and at the 2015 Federal Reserve Bank of Saint Louis Policy
Conference for comments. Adrien D'Avernas Des Enffans, Eric Bai, Andreas Gulyas, Jinwook
Hur, and Musa Orak provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Gary D. Hansen and Lee E. Ohanian. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Neoclassical Models in Macroeconomics
Gary D. Hansen and Lee E. Ohanian
NBER Working Paper No. 22122
March 2016
JEL No. E13,E2,E6
ABSTRACT
This chapter develops a toolkit of neoclassical macroeconomic models, and applies these models
to the U.S. economy from 1929 through 2014. We first filter macroeconomic time series into
business cycle and long-run components, and show that the long-run component is typically
much larger than the business cycle component. We argue that this empirical feature is naturally
addressed within neoclassical models with long-run changes in technologies and government
policies. We construct two classes of models that we compare to raw data, and also to the filtered
data: simple neoclassical models, which feature standard preferences and technologies, rational
expectations, and a unique, Pareto-optimal equilibrium, and extended neoclassical models, which
build in government policies and market imperfections. We focus on models with multiple
sources of technological change, and models with distortions arising from regulatory, labor, and
fiscal policies. The models account for much of the relatively stable postwar U.S. economy, and
also for the Great Depression and World War II. The models presented in this chapter can be
extended and applied more broadly to other settings. We close by identifying several avenues for
future research in neoclassical macroeconomics.

Gary D. Hansen
UCLA
Department of Economics
8283 Bunche Hall
Box 951477
Los Angeles, CA 90095
and NBER
ghansen@econ.ucla.edu
Lee E. Ohanian
8283 Bunche Hall
UCLA, Department of Economics
Box 951477
Los Angeles, CA 90095
and NBER
ohanian@econ.ucla.edu

1

Introduction

This chapter analyzes the role of neoclassical models in the study of economic growth and
‡uctuations. Our goal is to provide macroeconomists with a toolkit of models that are
of interest in their own right, and that easily can be modi…ed to study a broad variety of
macroeconomic phenomena, including the impact of economic policies on aggregate economic
activity.
Since there is no generally recognized de…nition of neoclassical macroeconomics within
the profession, we organize the development of these models around two principles. One is
based on the exogenous factors driving changes in aggregate time series, and the other is
based on the classes of model economies that we consider.
The primary sources of changes in macroeconomic variables that we study are longrun changes in technologies and government policies. We focus on these factors because
of the observed large changes in productivity and in policies that a¤ect the incentives and
opportunities to produce and trade. Policy factors that we consider include changes a¤ecting
competition and business regulatory policies, labor policies, and …scal policies.
We study two classes of intertemporal models that we call neoclassical macroeconomic
models. The …rst has standard preferences and technologies, competitive markets, rational
expectations, and there is a unique equilibrium that is Pareto-optimal. We call these Simple
Neoclassical Models. This class of models is the foundation of neoclassical macroeconomics,
and provides the most transparent description of how competitive market forces operate
within a dynamic, general equilibrium environment.
In contrast to common perceptions about neoclassical macroeconomics, we acknowledge
that economies are a¤ected by policy distortions and other market imperfection that go
beyond the scope of simple models. The second class of models modi…es simple models as
needed to incorporate changes that require departing from the model assumptions described
above. We call the second class of models Extended Neoclassical Models, which are constructed by building explicit speci…cations of government policies or market imperfections
and distortions into simple models.
This method nests simple models as special cases of the extended models. Developing
complex models in this fashion provides a clear description of how market imperfections and
economic policies a¤ect what otherwise would be a laissez-faire market economy. We modify
the models in very speci…c ways that are tailored to study episodes in U.S. economic history,
and which provide researchers with frameworks that can be applied more broadly. All of the
models presented in this chapter explicitly treat ‡uctuations and growth within the same
framework.
Neoclassical frameworks are a powerful tool for analyzing market economies. An important reason is because the U.S. economy has displayed persistent and reasonably stable
growth over much its history while undergoing enormous resource reallocation through the
competitive market process in response to changes in technologies and government policies.
These large reallocations include the shift out of agriculture into manufacturing and services, the shift of economic activity out of the Northern and Mideastern sections of the
United States to the Southern and Western states, and large changes in government’s share
of output, including changes in tax, social insurance, and regulatory labor policies. This also
2

includes the reallocation of women’s time from home production to market production, and
the increased intensity of employment of highly-skilled labor. Most recently, this has included
the reallocation of resources out of the development of mature, mechanical technologies to
the development of information processing and communication technologies, including the
integrated circuit, …ber optics, microwave technology, laptop computers and tablets, software
applications, cellular technology, and the internet.
Our focus on technologies and policies connects with considerable previous research. This
ranges from Schumpeter (1927, 1942), who argued that changes in entrepreneurship and
the development of new ideas are the primary drivers of a market economy, and Kydland
and Prescott (1982) and Long and Plosser (1983), who focused on technology shocks and
‡uctuations. This also includes Lilien (1982), who argued that sectoral shifts signi…cantly
a¤ect ‡uctuations and resource reallocation, Davis and Haltiwanger (1991), who established
that resource reallocation across U.S. manufacturing establishments is very large and is
continuously evolving, and Greenwood and Yorokoglu (1997) and Manuelli and Seshadri
(2008), who analyze the di¤usion of new technologies and their long-run economic e¤ects.
The analysis also connects with studies of the long-run consequences of government policies,
including research by Ljungqvist and Sargent (1998), Prescott (2004), and Rogerson (2008),
who analyze how public policies such as tax rate changes, and changes in social insurance
programs, have a¤ected long-run labor market outcomes.
Our principle of focusing on long-run movements in data requires a quantitative approach
that di¤ers from standard practice in macroeconomics that involves both the selection of the
data frequencies that are analyzed, and how the model is compared to data. The standard approach removes a trend from the data that is constructed using the Hodrick-Prescott
…lter (1997), hereafter referred to as HP …lter, with a smoothing parameter of 1600, and
then typically compares either model moments to moments from the HP-…ltered data, or
compares model impulse response functions to those from an empirical vector autoregression (VAR).This analysis uses a band pass …lter to quantify movements not only at the
HP-business cycle frequency, but also at the lower frequencies. Our quantitative-theoretic
analysis evaluates model economies by conducting equilibrium path analyses, in which modelgenerated variables that are driven by identi…ed shocks are compared to actual raw data and
to …ltered data at di¤erent frequencies.
We report two sets of …ndings. We …rst document the empirical importance of very longrun movements in aggregate variables relative to traditional business cycle ‡uctuations using
post-Korean War quarterly U.S. data, long-run annual U.S. data, and postwar European
data. We …nd that low frequency movements in aggregate time series are quantitatively
large, and that in some periods, they are much larger than the traditional business cycle
component. Speci…cally, we analyze movements in periodicities ranging from two to 50
years, and we …nd that as much as 80 percent of the ‡uctuations in economic activity at
these frequencies is due to the lower frequency component from 8-50 years.
The dominant low frequency nature of these data indicates that the business cycle literature has missed quantitatively important movements in aggregate activity. Moreover, the
fact that much of the movement in aggregate data is occurring at low frequencies suggests
that models that generate ‡uctuations from transient impediments to trade, such as temporarily in‡exible prices and/or wages, may be of limited interest in understanding U.S. time
3

series.
The importance of low frequency movements also has signi…cant implications for the two
dominant episodes of the last 35 years, the Great Moderation and the Great Recession. The
Great Moderation, the period of stable economic activity that occurred between 1984 and
2008, features a sharp decline in volatility at the traditional business cycle frequency, but
little volatility change at low frequencies. Similarly, the Great Recession and its aftermath
feature a large, low frequency component. These data suggest that the Great Recession was
not just a recession per se. Instead, much of this event appears to be a persistent decline in
aggregate economic activity.
Following the decomposition of data into low and high frequency components, we report
the results of quantitative-theoretic analyses that evaluate how well neoclassical models
account for the U.S. historical macroeconomic record from 1929 through 2014.
Our main …nding is that neoclassical models can account for much of the movement
in aggregate economic activity in the U.S. economic historical record. Neoclassical models
plausibly account for major economic episodes that previously were considered to be far
beyond their reach, including the Great Depression and World War II. We also …nd that
neoclassical models account for much of the post-Korean War history of the U.S.
The chapter is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the U.S. and European data that
we use in this study, and provides a decomposition of the data into low frequency and business
cycle frequency components. Section 3 introduces the basic neoclassical macroeconomic
model that serves as the foundation for all other models developed in the chapter. Section
4 presents one, two, and three sector simple neoclassical model analyses of the post-Korean
War U.S. economy. Section 5 presents extended neoclassical models to study Depressions.
Section 6 presents extended neoclassical models with …scal policies with a focus on the U.S.
economy during World War II. Given the importance of productivity shocks in neoclassical
models, Section 7 discusses di¤erent frameworks for understanding and interpreting TFP
changes. Given the recent interest in economic inequality, Section 8 discusses neoclassical
models of wage inequality. Section 9 presents a critical assessment of neoclassical models,
and suggests future research avenues for neoclassical macroeconomic analysis. Section 10
presents our conclusions.

2

The Importance of Low Frequency Components in
Macroeconomic Data

It is common practice in applied macroeconomics to decompose time series data into speci…c
components that economists often refer to as cyclical components, trend components, and
seasonal components, with the latter component being relevant in the event that data are
not seasonally adjusted. These decompositions are performed to highlight particular features
of data for analysis. The most common decomposition is to extract the cyclical component
from data for the purpose of business cycle analysis, and the Hodrick-Prescott (HP) …lter is
the most common …ltering method that is used.
Band-pass …lters, which feature a number of desirable properties, and which resolve some

4

challenges involved with applying the HP …lter, are increasingly being used to …lter data1 .
Band-pass …ltering allows researchers to choose components that correspond to periodicities
over a speci…c data frequency. An exact band pass …lter requires an in…nite length of data, so
Baxter and King (1999) and Christiano and Fitzgerald (2003) have constructed approximate
band pass …lters. These two approaches are fairly similar. The main di¤erence is that the
Baxter-King …lter is symmetric, and the Christiano-Fitzgerald …lter is asymmetric.
This section presents decompositions of aggregate data into di¤erent frequency components for (i) U.S. post-Korean War quarterly data, (ii) U.S. annual data that extends back
to 1890, and (iii) post-World War II annual European data. We use the Baxter-King …lter,
given its wide use in the literature. The band pass …lter isolates cyclical components in
data by smoothing the data using long moving averages of the data. Baxter and King develop an approximate band pass …lter that produces stationary data when applied to typical
economic time series2 . Since the exact band pass …lter is an in…nite order process, Baxter
and King construct a symmetric approximate band pass …lter. They show that the optimal
approximating …lter for a given maximum lag length truncates the …lter weight at lag K as
follows:
yt =

K
X

ak y t

k

(1)

k= K

In 1, y is the …ltered data, y is the un…ltered data, and the ak denote coe¢ cients that
produce the smoothed time series. The values of the ak coe¢ cients depend on the …ltering
frequency (see Baxter and King (1999)).
Following early work on business cycles by Burns and Mitchell (1946), Baxter and King
study business cycles, which they de…ne as corresponding to periodicities associated with 6
- 32 quarters. In contrast, we use the band-pass …lter to consider a much broader range
of frequencies up to 200 quarters. Our choice to extend the frequency of analysis to 200
quarters is motivated by Comin and Gertler (2006), who studied these lower frequencies in
a model with research and development spending.
We consider much lower frequencies than in the business cycle literature since changes
in technologies and government policies may have a quantitatively important e¤ect on low
frequency movements in aggregate data. Relatively little is known about the nature and size
of these low frequency ‡uctuations, however, or how these low frequency ‡uctuations compare
to business cycle ‡uctuations. We therefore band-pass …lter data between 2-200 quarters,
and we split these …ltered data into two components: a 2-32 quarters component, which
approximates the business cycle results from the standard parameterization of the HP …lter
( = 1600), and a 32-200 quarters component. This allows us to assess the relative size and
characteristics of these ‡uctuations. To our knowledge, these comparative decompositions
have not been constructed in the literature.
1

In terms of the challenges with the HP …lter, It is not clear how to adjust the HP smoothing parameter
to assess data outside of the cyclical window originally studied by Hodrick and Prescott (1997). Moreover,
HP-…ltered data may be di¢ cult to interpret at data endpoints.
2
The Baxter-King …lter yields stationary time series for a variable that is integrated of up to order two.
We are unaware of any macroeconomic time series that is integrated of order three or higher.

5

2.1

Band-Passed Filtered Quarterly U.S. Data

This subsection analyzes U.S. quarterly post-Korean war from 1954 through 2014, which
facilitates comparison with much of the business cycle literature. We then analyze annual
U.S. data extending back to 1890, followed by an analysis of postwar European data.3
Figures 1 through 6 show …ltered real GDP, consumption of nondurables and services,
gross private domestic investment, hours worked, total factor productivity (TFP), and the
relative price of capital equipment. Real GDP, consumption, and investment are from the
NIPA. Hours worked is constructed by updating the hours worked data of Cociuba et al
(2012), who use hours from the Current Population Survey. TFP is constructed by dividing
real GDP by a Cobb-Douglas aggregate of capital, which is the sum of private and public
capital stocks, and which has a share of 0.4, and hours worked, which has a share of 0.6.
We include the relative price of capital equipment in this analysis because there is a
large change in this relative price over time, and because the inverse of this relative price
is a measure of equipment-speci…c technological change in some classes of models, including
Greenwood, Hercowitz and Krusell (1997), and Krusell et al (2000). We construct the relative price of equipment as the ratio of the quality-adjusted de‡ator for producer durable
equipment, to the NIPA nondurable consumption de‡ator. Gordon (1990) initially constructed the quality-adjusted equipment de‡ator, and this time series has been continued in
Cummins and Violante (2002) and in DiCecio (2009)4 .
The …gures show the 2-200 component and the 32-200 component. Since the band pass
…lter is a linear …lter, the di¤erence between these two lines is the 2-32 component. The
most striking feature of all of these …ltered data is that much of the movement in the 2-200
component is due to the 32-200 component. These …ltered data indicate that business cycle
variability, as typically measured, accounts for a relatively small fraction of the overall postKorean war history of U.S. economic variability. The graphs do show that there are some
periods in which the traditional business component is sizeable. This occurs in part of the
1950s, which could be interpreted as the economy readjusting to peacetime policies following
World War II and the Korean War. There is also a signi…cant 2-32 component from the
1970s until the early 1980s.
The 32-200 component of TFP has important implications for the common critique that
TFP ‡uctuations at the standard HP frequency are a¤ected by unmeasured cyclical factor
utilization. Fernald’s (2014) TFP series is a widely used measure of TFP that is adjusted
3

The Baxter-King …lter loses data at the beginning and the end of a dataset. We therefore padded all
the data series at both the starting and ending dates by simulating data from ARMA models …t to each
series. These simulated data extend the series before the starting date and after the end date, which allows
us to construct band-passed data for the entire period length. We conducted a Monte Carlo analysis of this
padding procedure by generating extremely long artici…cal time series, and comparing band-passed …ltered
series using the padded data, to band-passed data that doesn’t use padding. The length of the data padding
is equal to the number of moving average coe¢ cients, k. We use k = 50 for the quarterly data, and k=12
for the annual data. The results were insensitive to choosing higher values of k.
4
We do not use the NIPA equipment de‡ator because of Gordon’s (1990) argument that the NIPA
equipment price de‡ator does not adequately capture quality improvements in capital equipment. We use
DiCeccio’s (2009) updating of the Gordon-Cummins-Violante data. This data is updated by DiCecio on a
real time basis in the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis’s FRED database. The mnemonic for this series is
PERIC.

6

for unmeasured factor utilization. Figure 7 shows the 32-200 component of Fernald’s adjusted and unadjusted measures of business sector TFP. The long-run component of the
adjusted and unadjusted series are very similar, particularly over the last forty years. This
indicates that unmeasured factor utilization is not an issue for measuring TFP at these lower
frequencies.
To quantify the relative contribution of the 32-200 component for these variables, we construct the following ratio, which we denote as zi ;in which xi is the 32-200 …ltered component
of variable i, and yi is the 2-200 …ltered component of variable i :
zi =

X (xit )2
t

(yit )2

(2)

On average, the 32-200 component accounts for about 80 percent of the ‡uctuations in
output, consumption, TFP, and the relative price of equipment and about 64 percent of
hours. It accounts for about 56 percent of ‡uctuations in gross private domestic investment,
which includes the highly volatile category of inventory change.
The 32-200 component is also large during the Great Moderation. Speci…cally, the wellknown volatility decline of the Great Moderation, which is typically dated from 1984-2007, is
primarily due to lower volatility of the 2-32 component. The …gures show that the volatility
of the 32-200 component remains quantitatively large during the Great Moderation. This
latter …nding may re‡ect the large and persistent technological advances in information
processing and communications that occurred throughout this period.
This …nding regarding the nature of these frequency components in the Great Moderation
is consistent with the conclusions of Arias et al (2007), and Stock and Watson (2002),
who report that the traditional business cycles frequency shocks that a¤ected the economy
during this period were smaller than before the Great Moderation. This …nding about
the Great Moderation may also re‡ect more stable government policies that reduced shortrun variability, such as John Taylor’s (2010) argument that improved monetary policy is
important for understanding the Great Moderation.
The 32-200 component is also important for the Great Recession and its aftermath. This
largely re‡ects the fact that there has been limited economic recovery relative to long-run
trend since the Great Recession.

2.2

Band-Pass Filtered Annual U.S. and European Data

This section presents band-pass …ltered annual long-run U.S. data and annual European
data. The output data were constructed by splicing the annual Kuznets-Kendrick data
(Kendrick (1961)) beginning in 1890, with the annual NIPA data that begins in 1929. The
annual Kendrick hours data, which also begins in 1890, is spliced with our update of the
hours worked data from Cociuba et al. (2012). These constructions provide long annual
time series that are particularly useful in measuring the low frequency components.
Figures 8 and 9 show the …ltered annual U.S. data. The low frequency component, which
is measured using the band pass …lter from 8 - 50 years for these annual data, is also very
large. Extending the data back to 1890 allows us to assess the importance of these di¤erent
components around several major events, including the Panic of 1907 and World War I. The
7

data show that both the Depression and World War II were dominated by lower frequency
components, while the traditional business cycle component was signi…cant during World
War I and the Panic of 1907.
The large low frequency component of World War II stands in contrast to World War
I, and also stands in contrast to standard theoretical models of wartime economies. These
models typically specify wars as a highly transient shock to government purchases. The low
frequency component is also large for the Great Depression. Sections …ve and six develop
neoclassical models of Depressions and of wartime economies, in which both of these events
are driven by persistent changes in government policies.
The decomposition ratio presented in 2, and that was used to construct the share of
variation in the 2-200 quarter component due to the 32-200 quarter component, is used in
a similar way to construct the share of variation in the 2-50 year component due to the
8-50 year component. This low frequency component share is also large in the annual data,
ranging between 80-85 percent for real GNP and hours worked.
We also construct the decomposition using annual postwar logged real output data from
several European economies: Germany, France, Italy, Spain, and Sweden. These data are
from the Penn World Tables (Feenstra et al (2015). Figures 10 - 14 present the …ltered
data. Most of the variation in the European output data in the 2-50 year component also is
accounted for by the low frequency (8-50) component. The long-run European components
re‡ect clear patterns in these data. All of the European economies grow more rapidly than
the U.S. during the 1950s and 1960s. All of these economies then experience large declines
relative to trend that begin in the early 1970s and continue to the mid-1980s. The share
of the 2-50 component that is accounted for by the 8 50 component is about 80 percent for
Germany, France, Spain, and Sweden, and is about 71 percent for Italy.

2.3

Alternative to Band-Pass Filtering: Stochastic Trend Decomposition

This subsection presents an alternative decomposition method, known as stochastic trend
decomposition, for assessing the relative importance of low frequency components. One approach to stochastic trend decompositions was developed by Beveridge and Nelson (1981),
and is known as the Beveridge-Nelson decomposition. Watson (1986) describes an alternative
approach, which is known as unobserved components model decomposition. In both frameworks, a time series is decomposed into two latent objects, a stochastic trend component,
and a stationary component, which is often called the cyclical component.
Decomposing the time series into these latent components requires an indentifying restriction. The Beveridge-Nelson identifying restriction is that the two components are perfectly
correlated. This identifying assumption is thematically consistent with our view that permanent changes in technologies and policies generate both stationary and permanent responses
in macroeconomic variables5 .
5

The unobserved components models have traditionally achieved identi…cation of the two latent components by imposing that the trend and stationary components are orthogonal. More recently, Morley et
al (2003) show how to achieve identi…cation in unobserved components models with a non-zero correlation
between the two components. Morley et al …nd that the decomposition for real GDP for their unobserved

8

The Beveridge-Nelson decomposition, which is simple and widely-used, is applied in this
chapter. The Beveridge-Nelson statistical model begins with a variable that is assumed to
have a stochastic trend component. The variable may also have a drift term, which drives
secular growth in the variable. The Beveridge-Nelson decomposition removes the drift term,
and then decomposes the variable, which we denote as yt ; into a stochastic trend component,
xt and a stationary stochastic component, st . The stochastic trend is a random walk, and
the innovation term, which is denoted as "t ; is a white noise process:
yt = xt + st
xt = xt 1 + "t ; E(") = 0; E("2 ) =

2
"

(3)
(4)

This decomposition is applied to the log of U.S. real GDP. The decomposition …rst
requires specifying an ARIMA model for the data. We selected an IMA (0,1,1) model for the
log of real GDP, given that the …rst three autocorrelations of the …rst di¤erence of the logged
data are 0.34, 0.19, and 0.06. Stock and Watson (1988) also use this ARIMA speci…cation for
the log of real GDP. The estimated statistical model for the log of real GDP using quarterly
data between 1954:1 and 2013:4 is given by:
ln(GDPt ) = :0077 + "t + 0:40"t 1 :

(5)

These estimated coe¢ cients are similar to the Stock and Watson estimates that were based
on a shorter dataset. Stock and Watson estimated a slightly higher drift term of about .008,
and a somewhat smaller moving average coe¢ cient of 0.30 rather than 0.40.
Using the Wold decomposition, Beveridge and Nelson show that the permanent component for this estimated statistical model is given by:
1:4

t
X

"j

(6)

j=1

Figure 15 plots the detrended log of real GDP, which is constructed as the log of real GDP less
its accumulated drift component, and the Beveridge-Nelson permanent component of these
detrended data. The …gure shows that almost all of the movement in detrended real GDP
is due to the permanent component, rather than the transitory component. This …nding
is consistent with the band-passed …ltered results regarding the large size of the long-run
component.
The results presented in this section show that the bulk of observed ‡uctuations in
aggregate time series are from longer-run changes than those associated with traditional
business cycle frequencies. This …nding motivates our focus on neoclassical models that are
driven by long-run changes in technologies and policies, as opposed to models that are driven
by very transient shocks, such as monetary shocks that operate in models with temporarily
in‡exible prices and/or wages.
components model is very similar to the Beveridge-Nelson decomposition. They also present evidence that
the zero correlation identifying restriction that traditionally has been used in unobserved components models
is empiricaly rejected.

9

3

Cass-Koopmans: The Foundation of Simple Models

This section summarizes the one-sector Cass-Koopmans optimal growth model with elastically supplied leisure, as it serves as the foundation for the other models that are developed in
this chapter. This model features (1) standard utility maximization problems for households,
and standard pro…t maximization problems for …rms, both of whom behave competitively
and who have rational expectations, (2) complete markets, (3) a unique and Pareto optimal
equilibrium, (4) constant returns to scale technology.
Since the welfare theorems hold in this economy, we express this model as a social planning
problem. For heuristic purposes, we assume perfect foresight. The planner’s maximization
problem is given by:
max

t

1
X

u(ct ; lt ):

(7)

t=0

Maximization is subject to the economy’s resource constraint, a household time constraint, a transition equation for the capital stock, and non-negativity constraints on consumption, hours, and capital:
f (kt ; ht )
c t + it
1
ht + lt
kt+1 = (1
)kt + it
ct
0; ht 0; kt 0; k0 given.

(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)

It is also necessary to impose the transversality condition to rule out explosive paths for the
capital stock:
lim

t!1

t 0

u (ct )kt+1 = 0

(12)

The utility function satis…es the usual restrictions: it is concave in its arguments and twice
continuously di¤erentiable. The technology, f , is constant returns to scale in the two inputs
capital, k; and labor, h, and is also twice continuously di¤erentiable.
We will tailor the construction of di¤erent neoclassical models to focus on policies and
technological change that we highlight for speci…c historical episodes. This should not be
confused with the idea that fundamentally di¤erent models are needed to address di¤erent
time periods in the history of the U.S. economy. Rather this means that the relative importance of di¤erent policies and di¤erent types of technological change has varied over time.
Speci…cally, this includes the importance of biased technological change for understanding
the post-Korean War U.S. history, cartelization and unionization government policies for
understanding the 1930s, and changes in government …scal policies for understanding the
1940s.

10

4

Neoclassical Models of the U.S. Post-Korean War
Economy

In this section we present a series of neoclassical models, driven by permanent changes in
technologies to study the post-Korean War U.S. economy. Our approach, which we describe
in detail below, compares the equilibrium paths of the model economies in response to
identi…ed shocks, to the actual time series data. We will compare model results to un…ltered
data, and also to the three di¤erent …ltering frequencies described in section 2. In addition
to evaluating the …t of the model for the raw data, this will allow us to assess how well the
model matches data at the traditional business cycle frequencies (2-32 quarters), and also at
low frequencies (32-200) quarters.

4.1

Quantitative Methodology

Neutral technological change that a¤ects all sectors identically is the standard speci…cation
of technology in neoclassical macroeconomic models. However, there is a growing body
of evidence that technological change is advancing much more quickly in the information
processing sectors of the economy, particularly in capital equipment. This includes the areas
of computer hardware, computer peripherals, photocopying equipment and telecommunications equipment, among others.
As described earlier in this chapter, Gordon (1990), Cummins and Violante (2002), and
DiCecio (2009) construct capital equipment price data that they argue captures much more of
the quality change that has occurred in these goods than is present in the NIPA equipment
price data. Figure 16 shows the relationship between real GDP and the relative price of
equipment at the three sets of frequencies that we consider. These …gures show that the
relative price of equipment is strongly countercyclical at all frequencies.
{Figure 16 goes here.}
These strong countercyclical patterns are interesting as a growing number of neoclassical studies are using these data to identify capital-equipment speci…c technological change.
The following sections develop multisector growth models that include both neutral and
equipment-speci…c technological change to study the evolution of the post-Korean War U.S.
economy. This is a particularly interesting period for applying multisector models with biased
technological change since this period features a number of major advances in information
processing and telecommunications technologies, including the integrated circuit, personal
computers and tablet technologies, …ber optics, software applications, cellular technologies,
and the internet.
Focusing on this period also allows us to connect this analysis with the large business
cycle literature, including Kydland and Prescott (1982), Hansen (1985), and the studies in
Cooley (1995), which have analyzed the post-Korean War U.S. economy. Note that the
post-Korean War period also includes a number of interesting sub-periods: the Vietnam
War (1957-1971), the oil shock years (1974-1981), the Great Moderation (1984-2007), and
the Great Recession and its aftermath (2008-present).
11

Our quantitative approach di¤ers from the standard approach used in the real business
cycle literature. The real business cycle approach speci…es a dynamic stochastic general
equilibrium model, which includes a speci…cation of the stochastic process for the exogenous
shocks that generate ‡uctuations in the model economy. The equilibrium decision rules and
laws of motion are computed using numerical methods, and these equations plus a random
number generator is used to simulate time series for the arti…cial economy. Summary
statistics are then computed and compared with the same summary statistics computed
from actual U.S. time series.
The approach we follow is similar to that employed in Hansen and Prescott (1993). We
begin with a two-sector growth model in which movements in aggregate time series are the
result of two factors we identify from U.S. data that we take to be the exogenous forcing
processes in the model. These include technology shocks that are identi…ed with total factor
productivity and equipment speci…c technological change, which we identify from the relative
price of equipment. We then calibrate and solve the model in manner consistent with the
real business cycle literature. But, rather than drawing random realizations of the exogenous
shock processes, we identify time paths for our two technology shocks from U.S. time series
data. We then compute the equilibrium time paths for the endogenous variables (output,
consumption, investment and hours worked) using the actual time path of the exogenous
shocks. As noted above, we compare model variables to quarterly real variables for the
un…ltered data over 1954-2014, as well as for frequency bands corresponding to 2-200, 2-32,
and 32-200 quarters.
After comparing the time paths from the two-sector model with the corresponding time
paths from U.S. data, we then compare these time paths with those of a standard onesector neoclassical model in which neutral technology shocks are the only exogenous process
hitting the economy. We then consider a three-sector model that adds a non-market home
production sector to our baseline two-sector model. This extension allows us to study how
equipment biased technological change may have induced movements in labor from the home
production sector to the market sector.
We omit the details of numerically solving these models. Instead, we focus on the speci…cs
of the model economies, the construction of U.S. data counterparts to the model variables,
and the calibration that we use in our computational analyses.
In terms of assessing model …t, our approach di¤ers considerably from the recent approach
that is used in the New Keynesian literature. In New Keynesian models, such as Smets and
Wouters (2007), as many shocks are added to the model as needed so that the model …ts all of
the data very closely. While this approach delivers a very good model …t, some of the shocks
in the model are often di¢ cult to interpret. Our approach to model …t follows from our
theme that permanent changes in technologies are key drivers of the economy. The models
analyzed in the following sections have very few shocks, which allows us to transparently
evaluate the models’successes and deviations.

12

4.2

A Two Sector Model with Aggregate and Investment-Biased
Technological Change

This section develops a model with investment-speci…c technological change, as well as aggregate technological change that impacts all sectors equally. This approach was …rst developed
in Greenwood, Hercowitz, and Krusell (1997), who document and discuss investment-speci…c
technological change and its impact on long-run growth. Biased technological change has
also been used to study wage inequality (Krusell et al (2000)) and business cycles (Fisher
(2006), Justiniano et al (2010)).
The two-sector stochastic growth model we study consists of a primary sector, i = 1,
producing CM t , which is the sum of consumer services, nondurable consumption and government consumption, and Ist , which is investment in structures.6 The second sector, i = 2,
produces equipment Iet and consumer durables Idt . The technologies associated with each
sector are as follows:
1
1
2
CM t + Ist = Y1t = zt AKe1t
Ks1t
H1t

1

2

(13)

1
1
2
Idt + Iet = Y2t = qt zt AKe2t
Ks2t
H2t

1

2

(14)

All variables are measured in per capita terms with a population growth factor : Here
Keit ; Ksit and Hit are equipment, structures and hours worked, each in sector i. The variables
zt and qt are technology shocks that impact these sectors. The laws of motion for the stocks
of equipment, structures, and durables is given by the following, where Ke;t = Ke1t + Ke2t
and Ks;t = Ks1t + Ks2t :
Ke;t+1 = (1
Dt+1 = (1
Ks;t+1 = (1

e )Ket

+ Iet
d )Dt + Idt
s )Kst + Ist

(15)
(16)
(17)

The logarithms of the two shocks, z and q; follow random walks with drift.
log zt+1 = log zt + "1;t+1 ; "1
log qt+1 = log qt + "2;t+1 ; "2

N ( 1 ; 21 )
N ( 2 ; 22 )

(18)
(19)

The random variables "1 and "2 are i.i.d across time and are contemporaneously uncorrelated.
There is a stand-in household who maximizes the expected discounted sum of utility
de…ned over consumption of non-durables and services, the stock of durables, and leisure:
(1
)
X
max E0
( )t [ log CM t + (1
) log Dt + log(1 H1t H2t )]
(20)
t=0

6

We will also lump investment in intellectural property with investment in structures.

13

Optimality implies that the value marginal product of each input will be equalized across
sectors. Given that identical Cobb-Douglas production functions are assumed, this implies
the fraction of the total quantity of each input assigned to each sector is the same across
= KKsit
= HHMitt for i = 1; 2. Given
inputs. Letting HM t = H1t + H2t , this implies that KKeit
et
st
this result, and the fact that the technology is constant returns to scale, it is possible to
aggregate over sectors to obtain the aggregate resource constraint:
CM t + Ist +

1
1
(Idt + Iet ) = zt AKet1 Kst2 HM
t
qt

1

2

Yt

(21)

Note that in this aggregate resource constraint, the outputs Id and Ie are divided by q:
In the decentralized version of this economy, 1q is the price of equipment goods relative to
output from sector 1. This result shows that data on the relative price of equipment can be
used to measure equipment-speci…c technological change.
Given values for Ke0 , Ks0 and D0 , the equilibrium stochastic process for this economy
can be found by solving the planner’s problem maximizing (20) subject to (15) through (19)
and (21).
4.2.1

Balanced Growth Path

Due to the positive drift in the random walks (18) and (19), this model exhibits stochastic
growth. In a certainty version of the model in which 1 = 2 = 0, there is a balanced growth
C
s;t+1
= CM;t+1
= Is;t+1
= KKst
=
path where the asymptotic growth factors are given by gc = YYt+1
Ist
t
Mt
1+ 1 2

I

e;t+1
= KKet
= DDt+1
e 1 1 2 and ge = Ie;t+1
= d;t+1
= gc e 2 . Given these growth factors, the
Iet
Idt
t
asymptotic growth path can be written Yt = gct Y ; HM t = H M , CM t = gct C M ; Ist = gct I s ,
Kst = gct K s , Iet = get I e . Idt = get I d , Ket = get K e and Dt = get D, where the steady state values
are the solutions to the following equations (given q and z):

gc
ge
ge

1

HM
Y
CM
Is
Ie
Id

Y
+1
s
Ks
Y q
= 1
+1
e
Ke
(1
)C M q
=
+1
D
=

=

(22)

2

(1

2)

1
1

2

1

(23)
d

(24)

Y
HM CM

(25)

1

2

= AK e K s H M
1
= Y Is
Ie + Id
q
= ( s + gc 1)K s
= ( e + ge 1)K e
= ( d + ge 1)D
14

(26)
(27)
(28)
(29)
(30)

We use this nonstochastic asymptotic growth path to help us calibrate the model and to
construct capital stock series that are consistent with the model’s balanced growth properties.
4.2.2

Calibrating the Model with U.S. Data

We proceed by connecting each endogenous variable of this model with a counterpart taken
from the U.S. National Income and Product Accounts. The data we use runs from 1954Q1 to
2014Q4. On the product side, the model has one nondurable consumption good (CM t ) which
we take to be the sum of nondurable consumption, services and government consumption.
There are three forms of investment: Ie is the sum of private and government investment in
equipment; Is is the sum of private investment in structures, intellectual property, residential
structures, and government investment in structures and intellectual property; and Id is
purchases of consumer durables. Given that we have not allocated every component of
Gross Domestic Product to one of these expenditure components, we take total output to
be Yt = CM + Is + 1q (Id + Ie ). The relative price of equipment in our model is equal to q1t ,
so we identify qt from the relative price of equipment calculated by Riccardo DiCecio (see
DiCecio (2009)).7
The capital stocks, which are the sum of both private and government …xed assets,
are computed from annual quantity indexes of …xed assets obtained from the Bureau of
Economic Analysis and is the stock associated with each investment series. In particular,
Ks is nonresidential and residential structures along with intellectual property, Ke .is the
stock of equipment, and D is the stock of consumer durables. To obtain quarterly real
stocks of capital, the annual quantity indexes are multiplied by the corresponding 2009
nominal value and quarterly series are obtained by iterating on the laws of motion (15)-(17)
using the corresponding quarterly investment series.8 Per capita capital stocks and output
are obtained by dividing by the civilian population (16-64) plus military personnel. Finally,
the hours series we use is average weekly hours per person (including military hours) based
on data from the Current Population Survey. In particular, we have updated the series
created by Cociuba, Prescott and Ueberfeldt (2012).
Given these empirical counterparts, the growth factor for population is = 1:003 and
the growth factor for per capita output is gc = 1:0036. The parameter 2 = 0:0104, which
7

This data series is available on the FRED database mantained by the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis.
Given that the model assumes constant depreciation rates, which does not hold in our data sample,
we allow the depreciation rate to vary across 10 year periods when constructing the quarterly capital stock
series. That is, an inital value for the annual series in year t and a terminal value in year t + 10, we …nd
the depreciation rate such that iterations on the law of motion of the capital stock hits the terminal value
in 40 quarters using the corresponding quarterly investment series.
P40
40
In particular we …nd the depreciation rate i for decade i such that Ki+10 = (1
i ) Ki +
j=1 (1
40 j
)
I
,
where
K
is
the
capital
stock
at
the
beginning
of
year
i,
K
is
capital
at
the
beginning
of year
i
j
i
i+10
40
i + 10, and fIj gj=1 is investment for each quarter between those dates. Once we know i for each subperiod
in our sample, it is straight forward to construct quarterly capital stocks for each quarter of year i.
The capital stock obtained, however, is inconsistent with the trend introduced by our empirical measure
of q, which is based on di¤erent price de‡ators than those used in producing the NIPA capital stocks. As a
result, we also adjust the trend growth of the capital stocks so that these stocks are consistent with long run
growth properties of the model. That is, a trend is added to our quarterly series for Ks so that it has an
average growth rate equal to gc and D and Ke are similarly adjusted to have an average growth factor ge .
8

15

is the average of log qt+1 log qt . This implies that ge = gc e 2 = 1:014.
We calibrate the model by setting = 0:99, labor’s share, 1
1
2 , equal to 0:6 and
the depreciation rates equal to the average of the depreciation rates obtained when forming
the quarterly capital stock series. This gives us e = 0:021, s = 0:008, and d = 0:05.
The individual capital shares are based on estimates in Valentinyi and Herrendorf (2008)
renormalized so they sum to 0:4. In particular we set 1 = 0:21 and 2 = 0:19. The
parameter is computed from a version of equation (24) where the term C MD q is replaced
C
qt
from the empirical counterparts to these variables. This
with the average value of M;t
Dt
gives = 0:817.
Next, we set Y ; H M , and q equal to the initial observation in the time series for each
of these variables. The seven remaining steady states (K s , K e , D; I s , I e ; I d ; and C M )
are obtained by solving seven equations (22) - (24) and (27) - (30). So that the steady
state capital stocks are equal to the …rst observations for these variables, we multiply all
s
e
, all observations of Ke by KKe;0
and all observations of D by DD0 .
observations of Ks by KKs;0
These are the capital stocks used to construct the empirical counterpart to zt .
We construct a quarterly time series for the exogenous shock, zt ; from 1954Q1 to 2014Q4
Yt
where the parameter A is chosen so that the …rst observation
by setting zt =
1
2 1
1
2
AKet Kst HM t

of z is equal to one. This implies A = 6:21. Somewhat surprisingly, the growth rate of zt
when computed in this way turns out to be zero ( 1 = 0). That is, when measured through
the lens of this model, the average rate of growth in per capita income during the postwar
period is accounted for entirely by equipment speci…c technological improvement.
We summarize the calibration of the model in Table 1.in the column labeled "TwoSector." This table reports the calibrated parameter values for all models considered, so we
will refer back to this table as we discuss these alternatives.
{Table 1 goes here}

4.2.3

Comparison of Model with Data

Given our time series for zt and qt , times series for the endogenous variables of the model
are computed for the sample period 1954Q1 to 2014Q4. This is done using log-linear
approximations of the decision rules that solve the planner’s problem obtained using standard
numerical methods [see, for example, Uhlig (1999)]. Figure 17 shows our measures of output
and hours from U.S. data along with the time series for these variables implied by our model.
{Figure 17 goes here}
Output from the data and model are quite close to each other until the mid 1980’s
when model output becomes lower than in the data. By 2002, however, model output has
recovered. Model hours tend to be higher than in the data during the 1960’s and 70’s, and
lower from the mid 1980’s until the Great Recession. Following the Great Recession, the
data shows some recovery in hours worked that the model does not.
Figure 18 consists of four panels showing output, hours, consumption and investment–
from both the model and the data–that has been …ltered to show only ‡uctuations between 2
16

and 32 quarters. The real business cycle literature has demonstrated that neoclassical models
of this sort generate ‡uctuations similar to those in postwar U.S. data at this frequency. As
the …gure illustrates, this is particularly true for output and investment.
{Figure 18 goes here}
Less studied, however, are the low frequency ‡uctuations exhibited by models of this
sort. Figure 19 is a plot of model and U.S. data for the same four variables that has been
…ltered to show ‡uctuations between 32 and 200 quarters. The model seems to do a pretty
good job in tracking ‡uctuations in output, consumption and investment in this frequency
band. For hours worked, the model captures some of the low frequency movements, but not
others. In the late 1950’s, the model shows hours falling sooner than it does in the data,
while the model and data track pretty closely during the 1960’s and early 1970’s. In the
late 1970’s, the data shows an increase in hours worked that the model does not capture,
but the model and data follow each other throughout the 1980’s and 90’s. At the time of
the Great Recession, the decline in hours–as well as other macro aggregates–is less in the
model than in the data.
{Figure 19 goes here}
Figure 20 plots the same data as the previous …gure for …ltered output and hours for both
the 2-32 quarter frequency and the 32-200 quarter frequency. The di¤erence is that we have
included a third time series in each plot that shows simulated data under the assumption
that there were no ‡uctuations in zt and only ‡uctuations in qt . That is, when computing
the simulation, the time series for zt is replaced by the nonstochastic growth path for z.
That is, zt = et 1 for all t.
{Figure 20 goes here}
This …gure shows that much of the high and low frequency ‡uctuations in hours worked
are due to movements in qt , but this is not as true for ‡uctuations in output. It is also less
true for business cycle ‡uctuations in hours worked in more recent decades.

4.3

One-sector model

We now proceed to compare the ‡uctuations exhibited by the two-sector model with a standard one-sector neoclassical stochastic growth model. This one-sector economy consists of
a single production sector that produces output from capital and labor that can be consumed or invested. It di¤ers from the two-sector model in that there is only one type of
capital stock, no separate role for consumer durables. and one type of technology shock. In
particular, the resource constraint, which replaces equation (21), is
Ct + It = Yt = zt AKt Ht1 :
The law of motion for capital next period is given by

17

(31)

Kt+1 = (1

(32)

)Kt + It

1
where the depreciation rate is 0 <
1 and 1
is the population growth factor.
The logarithm of the technology shock, zt , is assumed to follow a random walk with drift
(
0). We assume that the period t realization of z is observed at the beginning of the
period.

log zt+1 = log zt + "t+1 ; "

N( ;

2

)

(33)

The preferences of the representative in…nitely-lived household are given by
E

1
X

(

)t [log Ct + log Lt ]

(34)

t=0

where 0 <

< 1 and

> 0. The variable Lt is leisure, where
Lt + Ht = 1:

(35)

Given K0 , we compute an equilibrium sequence for fCt ; It ; Yt ; Ht ; Lt ; Kt+1 g by maximizing
(34) subject to (31) - (33) and (35).
4.3.1

Calibrating the one-sector model with U.S. Data

For comparison purposes, we begin by keeping the de…nition of output the same as in the
two sector model, Y = C + Is + 1q (Id + Ie ): Given that there is no separate role for consumer
durables in this model, we de…ne investment in the one-sector model to be I = Is + Iqe
and consumption to be the sum of nondurable consumption plus services and Iqd . That is,
Ct = CM t + Iqd , where CM is consumption from the two-sector model. The capital stock is
the sum K = Ke + Ks . The quarterly capital stock series for this sum is formed using the
same method as for the two-sector model and the quarterly depreciation rate turns out to
be = 0:013. As in the two-sector model, = 0:99 and labor’s share is taken to be 0:6,
so = 0:4. Given this, a quarterly time series for the exogenous shock zt , from 1954Q1
to 2014Q4, is constructed by setting zt = AK YHt 1 , where the parameter A is set so that
t t
z0 = 1. This implies that A = 2:7. In addition, the drift parameter, , turns out to be
0:0021.
As in the two-sector model, we set the steady state values for K, H and Y equal to the
…rst observation in our data sample (for 1954Q1). Steady state consumption is then obtained
from the steady state version of the resource constraint (31). We can then calibrate the
(1 H)
parameter from the steady state condition for hours worked. That is, = (1 C)Y H
=
2:37.
To facilitate comparison across models, the parameter values are also reported Table 1.

18

4.3.2

Comparing the one and two-sector models with U.S. Data

Table 2 provides two metrics for comparing the closeness of the one and two-sector model
simulations with …ltered data. These measures include the ratio of the standard deviations
of the model series with the standard deviation of the data series. This provides a measure
of how well the model is capturing the volatility in the data. The second measure is the
correlation between the model simulations and the data. We report these measures for data
…ltered to extract ‡uctuations of 2-32 quarters, 32-200 quarters and 2-200 quarters. In all
cases, a number closer to one implies a better …t.9
{Table 2 goes here}
The table shows that the correlation between model and data for business cycle ‡uctuations are higher for the two-sector model, with the exception of consumption. For low
frequency ‡uctuations, the one-sector model does slightly better, although the correlation
between hours worked from the model and data is slightly higher for the two-sector model.
The volatility of the various series is generally better accounted for by the two-sector model
Hence, the main conclusion we draw from this table is that the two-sector model …ts the
data better than the one-sector model, with the exception of consumption ‡uctuations. We
…nd it interesting that the two-sector model is able to account for volatility in spite of the
fact that we have assumed random walk technology shocks and divisible labor. These are
both assumptions that tend to reduce the size of ‡uctuations.10
Figure 21 provides the same information as Figure 20 except that the comparison is now
with the one-sector simulation for output and hours rather the "q-shock" only simulation.
The …gure illustrates that much of the low frequency movements in output can be accounted
for by the one-sector model almost as well as the two-sector. The low frequency volatility
of hours, however, is better explained by the two-sector model than the one-sector.
{Figure 21 goes here}

4.4

A three-sector model

This section studies a model constructed by adding a non-market home production sector
to the two sector model. We develop the three sector model with two alternative home
production speci…cations. One is the standard home production speci…cation of Benhabib,
Rogerson and Wright (1991) and much of the literature that follows from this. This formulation provides an additional margin of substitution for the household in which time can be
allocated to market production, home production, or leisure. In the Benhabib, Rogerson
and Wright model, there is a relatively high substitution elasticity between home-produced
goods and market-produced goods, and this high elasticity generates signi…cant movement
9

In this table and subsequent tables, we only use data starting from 1955Q1. The reason is that there
is an unusual hours observation in 1954 that can be seen in Figure 17, and we don’t want that observation
distorting the statistics reported in these tables.
10
See Hansen (1985) concerning the impact of divisible labor on ‡uctuations and Hansen (1997) for the
impact of random walk technology shocks.

19

of labor between the home sector and market sector in response to shocks. Home goods are
produced using a Cobb-Douglas technology with labor and consumer durables.
The alternative home production formulation is motivated by Greenwood et al (2005),
which argues that rapid technological change in labor-saving consumer durables has secularly
reallocated time from home production to market production, mainly by women moving into
the labor force. In this speci…cation, consumer durables are more substitutable with labor
than in the Benhabib, Rogerson and Wright (1991) speci…cation that assumes a CobbDouglas technology for the home sector.
The model presented here nests both of these speci…cations. In particular, we assume
that a non-market consumption good, CN t , is produced using labor (HN t ) and the stock of
consumer durables. As in Greenwood et al (2005), we allow for the possibility that durables
and labor are more substitutable than implied by the standard Cobb-Douglas production
function. In particular, we assume the following functional form for the home production
function with > 0:
C N t = AN '

Dt
e 2t

1

+ (1

')(gct HN t )

(36)

The standard version of the model can be recovered by making close to zero. Note
that the terms e 2 t and gct are included here to guarantee that CN t grows at the same rate
as total output along the balanced growth path.
The second modi…cation relative to the two-sector model is to replace the objective
function (20) with the following:
(1
)
X
max E0
( )t [log Ct + log(1 HM t HN t )] ;
(37)
t=0

where consumption, Ct , is a composite consumption good, standard in the home production
literature, derived from market and non-market consumption goods
!
Ct = [ C M
t + (1

1

)CN! t ] !

(38)

Given values for Ke0 , Ks0 and D0 , the equilibrium stochastic process for this economy
can be found by solving the planner’s problem maximizing (37) subject to (15) through (19),
(21), (36), and (38).
4.4.1

Calibrating the three-sector model to U.S. data

The calibration strategy is exactly the same as for the two-sector case, although the model
introduces four new parameters (AN , ', !, and ) and two other parameters ( and ) have
di¤erent interpretations in this model. In addition, two new variables are introduced that
are not directly observable in the U.S. data. These are non-market consumption (CN ) and
non-market hours worked (HN ). In the absence of measured counterparts to these variables,
we assume that in steady state CC N = 0:25 and H N = 16 , which are values consistent with
M
the home production literature. The mapping between all other model variables and U.S.
time series is the same as in the two-sector model.
20

The steady states values for K s , K e , Y , C M , I s . I e , I d , D, H M , H N , C N , and C are
determined by equations (22), (23), (26)-(30), and the following …ve equations:
gE

=

1 !

(1

)AN 'qC M
!

CN D
1
1

HM
HM

HN
HN

= (1
=

+1

1

Y

2)

1

D

!

1 !

HM C CM
)AN (1 ')

(1
1

!

HN C CN

!

(39)
(40)
(41)

1

C N = AN 'D + (1
C=

!

C M + (1

')H N
!

)C N

1
!

:

(42)
(43)

We experiment with two di¤erent sets of values for the parameters and ! to di¤erentiate
between our two home production speci…cations. Given values for these parameters, values
for , , ' and AN can be obtained from equations (39) through (42) subject to CC N =
M
0:25; H N = 16 and C is given by equation (43).11
The …rst calibration we consider is referred to as the "standard home production" model.
In this case, ! = 0:6 and = 0, which corresponds to values common in the home production
literature. In this case, the utility function (38) allows for more substitutability between
home consumption and market consumption than implied by a Cobb-Douglas speci…cation
while the home production function (36) is assumed to be Cobb-Douglas. The second
calibration, which we refer to as the "alternative home production" model, is motivated by
Greenwood et al (2005) and sets ! = 0 and = 0:4. Here (38) is assumed to be CobbDouglas and we allow for an elasticity of substitution between durables and hours that is
greater than 1 in the home production function (36). The parameter values associated with
both calibrations are given in Table 1.
4.4.2

Fluctuations in the three-sector model

We begin by comparing the simulations produced by the two versions of the three-sector
model that we consider. Figure 22 shows un…ltered output and hours from the two models
as well as from U.S. time series. Both models account for output movements quite well,
although the alternative calibration does a somewhat better job in the 1960’s and 70’s while
the standard home production calibration …ts the data better in the 1980’s and 90’s. Both
models imply similar paths during the Great Recession period. The same is also true for
hours worked–the alternative calibration does better during the early periods and less well
during the 80’s and 90’s. Both calibrations give essentially identical results during the
2000’s.
{Figure 22 goes here}
11

We also use the fact that, as in the two-sector case, we choose parameters so that q, H M and Y are the
…rst observation in our data sample.

21

An interesting di¤erence between hours worked from the two models can be seen from
examining the period from about 1982 to 2000. The rise in hours worked predicted by the
alternative calibration during this period is signi…cantly larger than that predicted by the
standard home production model. In the spirit of Greenwood et al (2005), this calibration
does a better job of capturing the secular increase in hours worked that occurs over this
period, mainly due to women entering the labor force. As one can see from Figure 23, this
di¤erence does not appear in the low frequency ‡uctuations that we report.
{Figure 23 goes here}
The two calibrations, however, give essentially the same results once the data is …ltered.
Figure 23 illustrates this by plotting …ltered data for output and hours from the two versions of the model. The data for both business cycle ‡uctuations as well as low frequency
‡uctuations essentially lay on top of each other. In particular, the alternative home production model does not exhibit the signi…cantly larger increase in hours worked relative to
the standard home production model during the 1980’s and 90’s as was observed in Figure
22.
The closeness of the …ltered data from these models with …ltered data from U.S. time
series is illustrated in Figure 24 and Table 3. Figure 24 shows …ltered data from the
standard home production calibration and the U.S. economy for output and hours. When
one compares the panels in Figure 24 with the corresponding panels in Figures 18 and 19,
the results from the home production model appear very similar to the two-sector model
with slightly more volatility in hours worked at both sets of frequencies.
{Figure 24 goes here}
The same sorts of conclusions that can be drawn from Figure 24 are also apparent in
Table 3. This table provides the same set of statistics as in Table 2 for comparing model
data with actual data. Here we compare both calibrations of our three-sector model with
the U.S. time series.
{Table 3 goes here}
The …nal set of tables we present in this section report the statistics for comparing model
simulation and actual data for three subperiods of the postwar period. Table 4 looks only at
the early post war period from 1955Q1 to 1983Q4 and Table 5 reports statistics for the Great
Moderation period from 1984Q1 to 2007Q3. Finally, statistics for the Great Recession and
after are reported in Table 6.
{Tables 4 - 6 go here}
Which model best explains postwar ‡uctuations in output, consumption, investment and
hours worked? These tables show that it depends on the sample period and the frequency
band of interest.
In the early postwar period (Table 4), all three models do a similar job …tting the data,
but di¤erent models are better at accounting for ‡uctuations in di¤erent frequency bands.
22

Hours is explained the least well by all of the models, but the correlation between model and
data hours is highest for the two-sector model at business cycle frequencies and the home
production model for lower frequencies. Output ‡uctuations are best explained by the twosector model in all frequency bands considered. Consumption ‡uctuations are best explained
by the one-sector model and investment ‡uctuations are almost equally well explained by
the two and three-sector models.
A feature seen in all three of these tables is that the volatility of model data relative
to actual data rises as the number of sectors is increased. This is due to the increased
substitution opportunities o¤ered by multisector economies.
During the Great Moderation (Table 5), the one-sector model provides the highest correlations between model and actual data for output, consumption and investment, which is
di¤erent from what is observed in the earlier period. Hours, however, are slightly better
explained by the three-sector model. At lower frequencies, the three sector model shows the
highest correlation for all variables except consumption.
In the most recent period (Table 6), which covers the Great Recession and aftermath, a
striking …nding emerges regarding hours ‡uctuations. All three models show negative correlations between model and data hours worked at business cycle frequencies. However, this
correlation is quite high, especially for the two and three-sector models, at lower frequencies. At business cycle frequencies, all three models do similarly poor job in accounting for
‡uctuations in output and investment. Again, the one-sector model does best in explaining
consumption. But, at lower frequencies, all three neoclassical models show high correlations
between model and data for these three variables as wells as hours worked.
It is interesting and important that the …t of the two and three sector models for the
32-200 component is no di¤erent during the Great Moderation than during the 1955-1983
period. This is important because some economists have argued that neoclassical models
cannot …t data from this speci…c period because the business cycle correlation between labor
productivity and hours worked becomes negative during the Great Moderation (see Gali
and van Rens (2014)). We …nd that the change in this higher frequency statistic has no
bearing on the ability of these models to …t the large, longer-run component in the data. We
also note that these models also …t the 32-200 component of the data well during the Great
Recession and its aftermath. However, it should be noted that this is a short data interval
for measuring the long-run component.

5

Neoclassical Models of Depressions

This section describes neoclassical models of depressions, which are prolonged periods in
which aggregate economic activity is far below trend. Kehoe and Prescott (2007) de…ne a
Great Depression as an event in which per capita real output is at least 20 percent below
trend, in which trend is constructed using a 2 percent annual growth rate. They also require
that real output is at least 15 percent below this trend within a decade, and that real output
always grows at less than two percent per year during the episode.
Neoclassical modelling of depressions has become a very active research …eld in the last
15 years and is providing new insights into several episodes that have long been considered

23

economic pathologies12 . Some of the models presented here are tailored to capture features of
speci…c episodes, but all of these models can be modi…ed to study other episodes of depressed
economic activity.
This subsection focuses on the U.S. Great Depression, which is the most widely-studied
depression in the literature, and is perhaps the most striking and anomalous period of macroeconomic activity in the economic history of the U.S. The Great Depression began in the Fall
of 1929, and the economy did not recover to its pre-depression trend until the early 1940s.
Lucas and Rapping (1969) developed the …rst modern model of the U.S. Great Depression. This model represented a breakthrough by analyzing the Depression within an
equilibrium framework. Previous studies of the Depression noted the coincidence of de‡ation and depression in the early 1930s, and viewed de‡ation as causing the Depression.
The Lucas-Rapping model provided a very di¤erent interpretation of this relationship. In
the Lucas-Rapping model, de‡ation depresses output through imperfect information about
nominal price changes. Speci…cally, workers misinterpret falling nominal wages as re‡ecting
a lower relative price for their labor services. This mistaken perception of the real wage leads
to lower employment and lower output. This change in employment and production re‡ects
intertemporal substitution, in which employment and output expand during periods in which
workers perceive high real wages, and contracts during periods of perceived low real wages.
The mechanism of imperfect information and nominal price changes was developed further
in Lucas’s (1972) seminal contribution that rationalized Phillips Curve-type relationships
within an optimizing model.
Lucas and Rapping’s study spawned a large neoclassical literature on ‡uctuations that
focused on intertemporal substitution as the principal channel for understanding business
cycle ‡uctuations. This literature includes contributions by Barro (1981), Barro and King
(1984), Lucas (1973), Sargent (1973), Sargent and Wallace (1975), among others.
But many economists were skeptical of these early neoclassical interpretations of ‡uctuations, particularly for deep and prolonged crises such as the U.S. Great Depression.
Modigliani (1977), argued that neoclassical models of the Depression implausibly portrayed
individuals as exhibiting a "contagious attack of laziness". Modigliani, Rees (1970), and
many other economists interpreted the substantial job loss of the Depression as involuntary
unemployment, which stands in sharp contrast to the market-clearing equilibrium interpretation of Lucas and Rapping. The Modigliani quip has been repeated frequently over time, and
is viewed widely as a fundamental critique of neoclassical macroeconomic modeling. This
subsection presents neoclassical models of the Depression that directly confront Modigliani’s
criticism. The analysis shows how simple neoclassical models can be extended to assess
economies with market distortions that create substantial and persistent involuntary job
loss.
12

Recent models of the Great Depression analyze a number of policies and mechanisms in order to understand this episode. This includes the wage …xing and work-sharing policies of Herbert Hoover (Ohanian
(2009), Ebel and Ritschl, (2011) and Amaral and Mcgree (2012)), the worker-industry cartels of the National
Industrial Recovery Act and the National Labor Relations Act (Cole and Ohanian (1999), (2004)), changes
in capital income tax rates (McGrattan (2012)), the cartel policies of Mussolini in Italy, and Hitler in Germany (Cole and Ohanian (2016)), the impact of tari¤s on resource allocation and productivity (Bond et al
(2013)), the impact of …nancial market imperfections and misallocation in the Depression (Ziebarth (2014)),
and the impact of contractionary monetary policy on labor markets (Bordo, Erceg and Evans (2000)).

24

5.1

The Depth, Duration and Sectoral Di¤erences of the U.S.
Great Depression

The depth, duration, and sectoral di¤erences in severity of the Depression represent a signi…cant challenge for neoclassical models, or for any quantitative theoretic model. Tables
7 through 9 summarize these features by presenting data on output, consumption, investment, hours worked, and productivity. The data in these tables are divided by the
population. In addition, all of the data except for hours worked are detrended at two percent per year. Thus, the value of 100 means that a variable is equal to its steady state growth
path value.
Table 7 shows that real GDP declines by more about 35 percent between 1929 and the
Depression’s trough in 1933, and remains far below trend after that. Consumption also falls
considerably, and remains near its trough level after 1933. Investment declines by about 75
percent, and remains 50 percent below trend by the late 1930s. Hours worked declined about
27 percent between 1929 and 1933, and remain more than 20 percent below trend after that.
Total factor productivity (TFP) declines by about 14 percent below trend by 1933. Such
a large drop in productivity raises questions about measurement, and whether this decline
re‡ects factors other than changes in e¢ ciency. Ohanian (2001) found that this TFP decline
was not easily reconciled with capacity utilization, labor hoarding, or compositional shifts
in inputs, which suggests signi…cant e¢ ciency loss during this period. TFP recovers quickly
and ultimately rises above trend by the late 1930s. This rapid productivity growth after
1932 led Field (2013) to describe the 1930s as "the most technologically progressive decade
of the 20th century."
The severity of the Depression di¤ered considerably across sectors. Table 8 shows that
manufacturing hours declined enormously, but agricultural hours remained close to trend
through the mid-1930s. These two sectors account for roughly 50 percent of employment at
that time.
The data summarized here challenge long-standing views of the Depression. Traditional
studies omit productivity, and focus instead on monetary contraction and banking crises as
the key determinants of the Depression (see Friedman and Schwartz (1963) and of Bernanke
(1983)).
However, these factors cannot account for the early stages of the Depression, nor can they
account for the post-1933 continuation of the Depression. In terms of the early stages of
the Depression, industrial production declined by about 35 percent between the Fall of 1929
through November of 1930, but there were neither banking crises nor signi…cant monetary
contraction during this time.13
After 1933, the money stock expanded rapidly and banking crises were quickly eliminated by the introduction of bank deposit insurance. The Lucas-Rapping model and New
Keynesian models, such as Eggertsson (2012), counterfactually predict a very rapid recovery
to trend as a consequence of rapid monetary expansion and the end of banking crises. In
the Lucas-Rapping model, monetary expansion stops de‡ation, and employment expands as
workers perceive that the relative price of their labor services has recovered. In New Key13

Ohanian (2010) discusses the immediate severity of the Great Depression that occurred before monetary
contraction and before banking crises.

25

nesian models, such as Eggertsson (2012), in‡ation moves the economy away from the zero
lower interest rate bound, and hours worked increase substantially. These models cannot
account for the failure of hours to remain signi…cantly depressed after 1933. Rees (1970) and
Lucas and Rapping (1970) discuss the failure of the Lucas and Rapping model to account for
hours worked after 1933, and Ohanian (2011) discusses the failure of the Eggertsson model
to account for hours worked after 1933.
Moreover, the traditional view of the Depression counterfactually implies that the agricultural sector and the manufacturing were identically depressed. The large di¤erences between
these two sectors means that any successful model of the Depression must account for the
enormous manufacturing depression, but only a modest agricultural decline.

5.2

Diagnosing Depressions with Simple Neoclassical Models

Cole and Ohanian (1999) advocate using simple neoclassical models to diagnose depressions.
Their idea is that both the successes and the deviations between model and data, are informative for developing theories of speci…c episodes. Cole and Ohanian (1999) focused on
the contribution of TFP for the Depression within a standard one-sector stochastic growth
model for the 1930s14 . They fed TFP shocks from 1930-39 into the model and found that
TFP drop accounts for about 60 percent of the drop in output between 1929-33, and about
half of the drop in labor. However, the model generates a completely counterfactual path for
the economy after 1933. The rapid recovery of TFP generates a rapid recovery in the model,
with labor input recovering to trend by the mid-1930s. In contrast, the actual economy
appears to have shifted onto a lower steady state growth path after 1933, with consumption
and hours worked remaining near their 1932 trend-adjusted levels.
The post-1933 deviation between model and data provide valuable information about
this episode. The results indicate that understanding the post-1933 data requires a large
and persistent change in a state variable that substantially depressed and/or restricted the
opportunities to produce and trade. The impact of the missing factor must be su¢ ciently
large, such that it prevents recovery in hours worked, despite rapid productivity recovery
and despite the low capital stock.
Business cycle accounting (BCA) is another neoclassical diagnostic tool, and its application provides insight regarding this state variable. Cole and Ohanian (1999, 2002), Mulligan
(2005), and Chari, Kehoe, and McGrattan (2007, 2016), use a standard one-sector neoclassical model to measure which of the decision margins in that model deviate from theory when
actual data is substituted into the …rst order conditions of the model. For the Great Depression, the condition that equates the marginal rate of substitution between consumption and
leisure to the marginal product of labor is signi…cantly distorted. Speci…cally, the marginal
product of labor is higher than the marginal rate of substitution throughout the decade. The
deviation in this condition, which is typically called a labor wedge, grows further after 1933,
and suggests a major factor that distorted the opportunities and/or the incentives to trade
14

The idea of large productivity declines during depressions was initially met with skepticism by some
economists. This skepticism is based on the narrow interpretation that lower TFP implies that society
lost substantial knowledge over a short period of time. More recently, however, economists are interpreting
aggregate productivity changes from alternative perspectives. Section 7 discusses this in detail.

26

labor services.
Ohanian (2009) identi…ed economic policies that signi…cantly distorted the opportunities
to trade labor services by depressing labor market competition and by preventing wages
from adjusting. Simon (2001) analyzed "situation wanted" advertisements from the late
1920s and the early 1930s. These situation wanted advertisements are analogous to help
wanted advertisements, but from the supply side of the labor market. In these ads, workers
would describe their experience and quali…cations, and the wage that they were seeking.
Simon shows that the supply price of labor - the desired wage posted in the situation wanted
ads - was much lower than the wages that were actually paid in the 1930s. This large gap
between the supply price of labor and the wage was not present in the late 1920s, however,
when the supply price and actual wages paid were very similar. This evidence suggests the
wages were above their market-clearing level, which in turn created an excess supply of labor.
Table 9 provides further evidence of a signi…cantly distorted labor market. The table
presents wages from manufacturing and from the farm sector. These data are measured
relative to trend, which is the average growth rate of productivity in these sectors (see Cole
and Ohanian (1999)). These data show that wages in manufacturing are well above trend,
which suggests that they are also above their market clearing level. In contrast, real wages
in the farm sector are well below trend.
Given this backdrop, a new neoclassical literature on the Depression has emerged that
studies how government policy changes distorted labor markets. Ohanian (2009) studied the
downturn phase of the U.S. Great Depression, and Cole and Ohanian (2004) studied the
delayed recovery from the Depression. Both papers use neoclassical frameworks that build
on the facts described above. Given the large di¤erences in hours worked and wages in the
manufacturing and agricultural sectors, these models begin by modifying the standard onesector growth model to incorporate multiple sectors, and then build in government policies.

5.3

A Neoclassical Model with Wage Fixing and Work-Sharing
Policies

There were large shifts in government policies throughout the 1930s that distorted labor
and product markets by signi…cantly restricting competition in industrial labor and product
markets, but not in agricultural markets. Ohanian (2009) describes how these policies began
in November, 1929, following the October stock market decline. President Herbert Hoover
met with the leaders of the largest industrial …rms, including General Motors, Ford, General
Electric, U.S. Steel, and Dupont. Hoover lobbied these …rms to either raise wages, or at a
minimum, to keep wages at their current levels. He also asked industry to share work among
employees, rather than follow the typical practice of laying o¤ workers and keeping retained
workers on a full-time shift.
In return for maintaining nominal wages and sharing work, organized labor pledged to
maintain industrial peace by not striking or engaging in any e¤orts that would disrupt
production. The Hoover bargain was perceived by …rms to be in their interest. Speci…cally,
it is widely acknowledged that the major manufacturing …rms had substantial market power
at this time, with considerable industry rents. Kovavich and Shapiro (2000) note that this
period represents the zenith of collusion and cartels among major industry, and capital’s
27

share of income was at an all time high. Industry agreed to keep wages …xed, and Ford
Motor in fact raised wages following the meeting with Hoover. However, as the price level
declined, and as productivity declined, these …xed nominal industrial wages led to rising real
wages and rising unit labor costs. Ohanian (2010) documents that industry asked Hoover
several times for permission to reduce nominal wages, but Hoover declined these requests.
Nominal wages among the biggest employers did not begin to fall until late 1931, after hours
worked in industry had decline by almost 50 percent.
Ohanian (2009) develops a neoclassical model with a policy of nominal wage …xing and
work-sharing that a¤ected the industrial sector. This requires a model with multiple sectors,
and also requires a distinction between hours per worker and employment in order to model
work-sharing.
There is a representative family, and family members work in many industries. The
population grows at rate n: Preferences over consumption and leisure, and the disutility of
joining the workforce, are given by:

max

1
X
t=0

t

fln(ct ) + eat ln(1

hat ) + emt ln(1

hmt )

(eat + emt )g(1 + n)t :

(44)

Preferences are scaled by the population, which grows at rate n: Consumption is denoted
as c; ea denotes the number of workers in the agricultural sector, em denotes the number
of workers in the manufacturing sector, ha and hm denote the length of the workweek in
agriculture, and manufacturing, respectively. The function (ea + em ) is increasing and
weakly convex, and speci…es the utility cost of sending di¤erent household members to work
in the market. Rank-ordering family members by their position in the distribution of this
utility cost, and assuming that these costs rise linearly across family members, yields :
Z et
( 0 + 2 1 x)dx = 0 et + 1 e2t :
(eat + emt ) =
(45)
i=0

Note that there will be an optimal number of family members working, as well as an optimal
number of hours per worker.
There are two production sectors, agriculture and manufacturing, and there is a continuum of industries within each sector. Industry output is given by:
yi = hi es (i) ks (i)1 ;

(46)

in which the length of the workweek is given by h; employment is given by e; and capital
is given by k: Kydland and Prescott (1988), Cole and Ohanian (2002), Hayashi and Prescott
(2002), Osuna and Rios-Rull (2003), and McGrattan and Ohanian (2010) use similar production technologies to study problems that require di¤erentiating between employment and
hours per worker.
The industry-level outputs are aggregated to produce sectoral output:
Z 1
1
(47)
Ys = (
ys (i) di)
0

28

Final output, which is divided between consumption and investment, is a CES aggregate
over the two sectoral outputs:
Y = [ Ym + (1

1

)Ya ]

(48)

The production of …nal goods is competitive, and the maximization problem is given by:
(49)

maxfY

Z

pm ym (i)di

Z

(50)

pa ya (i)dig

(51)

subject to:
Z
Y = (

1

1

ym (i) di) )) + (1

Z
)(

1

1

1

ya (i) di) )) ] :

(52)

0

0

The solution to the the …nal good producer’s pro…t maximization problem is standard, and
is characterized by equating the marginal product of each intermediate input to the input
price.
The parameter values for the household discount factor, the depreciation rate, and the
capital and labor production share parameters are standard, with = :95, = :06; and
= :67: The values for the three parameters that govern the disutility of hours per worker
(the length of the workweek), and the utility cost of employment, are jointly set to target
an average employment to population ratio of 0.7, (ii) the average workweek length at that
time, which was about 45 hours per week, and (iii) that employment change accounts for
about 80 percent of cyclical ‡uctuations in hours worked.
Ohanian (2009) discusses the fraction of the economy a¤ected by the Hoover program,
and sets the production share parameter so that about 40 percent of employment was
produced in industries impacted by this program. The parameter governs the substitution
elasticity between agriculture and manufacturing, This elasticity is set to 1/2, which is
consistent with the fact that both the manufacturing share of value added and its relative
price have declined over time.
To analyze the impact of the Hoover nominal wage-…xing and work-sharing policy, the
observed real manufacturing wage sequence is exogenously fed into the model. This sequence
of wages is interpreted as the result of Hoover’s …xed nominal wage program in conjunction
with exogenous de‡ation. Note that the analysis is simpli…ed considerably by abstracting
from an explicit role of money in the model, such as a cash-in-advance constraint. It is unlikely that the inclusion of explicit monetary exchange in the model would change the results
in any signi…cant way, provided that a more complicated model with monetary exchange
generated the same real wage path for manufacturing.
We now discuss modeling the workweek for analyzing the Hoover program. First, recall
that almost all of the cyclical change in labor input prior to the Depression was due to
29

employment, rather than changes in hours per worker. However, about 40 percent of the
decline in labor input between 1929 and 1931 was due to a shorter workweek. This suggests
that the large decline in the workweek length was due to the Hoover work-sharing policy,
rather than re‡ecting an optimizing choice.
The Hoover workweek is also exogenously fed into the model. The evidence that indicates
that the workweek was not optimally chosen suggests that the Hoover work-sharing policy
was ine¢ cient. In this model, the ine¢ ciency of forced work-sharing results in lower productivity, since reducing the length of the workweek operates just like a negative productivity
shock. To see this, note that the Cobb-Douglas composite of employment and the capital
stock in the production function is scaled by the length of the workweek.
The analysis is conducted between 1929:4 and 1931:4. The wage-…xing and work-sharing
policies signi…cantly depress economic activity by raising the cost of labor, which re‡ects both
a rising real wage and declining labor productivity. The in‡exible manufacturing wage means
that the manufacturing labor market does not clear, and that the amount of labor hired is
solely determined by labor demand. Table 10 shows the perfect foresight model predictions
and data15 .The model generates about a 16 percent output decline, which accounts for over
60 percent of the actual decline16 . The model also is consistent with the fact that there is a
much larger decline in manufacturing than in agriculture. Manufacturing hours fall by about
30 percent in the model and by about 44 percent in the data, and agricultural hours fall by
about 12 percent in the model and by about 4 percent in the data.
The agricultural sector declines much less because it is not subject to the Hoover wage
and work-sharing policies. However, the agricultural sector declines because of the general
equilibrium e¤ects of the Hoover policy. This re‡ects the fact that manufacturing output is a
complement to agricultural output in …nal goods production. Thus, depressed manufacturing
output depresses the agricultural wage, which in turn depresses agricultural hours.
Note that the model is consistent with Simon’s (2001) …nding of excess labor supply in
manufacturing, and that job seekers in manufacturing were willing to work for much less that
the manufacturing wage. The model also provides a theory for why de‡ation was particularly
depressing in the 1930s compared to the early 1920s, when a very similar de‡ation coincided
with a much milder downturn.
While this model was tailored to study the U.S. Great Depression, it can be used more
broadly to study nominal wage maintenance policies and/or work-sharing policies.

5.4

A Neoclassical Model with Cartels and Insider-Outsider Unions

The model economy with nominal wage-…xing, de‡ation, and work sharing accounts for a
considerable fraction of the early years of the Depression. After 1933, however, de‡ation
ended. Moreover, productivity grew rapidly, and real interest rates declined. These factors
should have promoted a strong recovery, but the economy remained far below trend for
the balance of the decade. The failure of the economy to return to trend is puzzling from
15

The annual NIPA data are linearly interpolated to a quarterly frequency.
The deterministic path solution is the reason for the immediate increse in economic activity. This
re‡ects the fact that producers see higher future labor costs, and thus produce before these costs rise.
Future research should assess the impact of these policies in a stochastic environment.
16

30

a neoclassical perspective, given productivity growth, and it is puzzling from a Keynesian
perspective, given the end of de‡ation and banking crises, and given much lower real interest
rates.
The empirical key to understanding the post-1933 depression is a growing labor wedge,
as the marginal product of labor was far above the marginal rate of substitution between
consumption and leisure. Cole and Ohanian (2004) develop a theory of the labor wedge that
is based on changes in government competition and labor market policies. One policy was the
1933 National Industrial Recovery Act, which allowed a number of non-agricultural industries
to explicitly cartelize by limiting production and raising prices. The government typically
approved these cartels provided that industry raised wages of their workers. Another policy
was the 1935 National Labor Relations Act (NLRA), which provided for unionization and
collective bargaining. The use of the "sit-down" strike under the NLRA, in which striking
workers forcibly prevented production by taking over factories, gave workers considerable
bargaining power. Cole and Ohanian describe how both of these policies created an insideroutsider friction, in which insiders received higher wages than workers in sectors that were
not covered by these policies.
Cole and Ohanian present industrial wage and relative price data from individual industries covered by these policies. Industry relative prices and wages jumped around the time
that the industry codes were passed, and continued to rise after that. Table 9 shows that
real wages rise and that ultimately are about 17 percent above trend by the late 1930s.
Cole and Ohanian (2004) develop a multisector growth model in which the industries in
the manufacturing sectors are able to cartelize provided that they reach a wage agreement
with their workers. They begin with a simple neoclassical environment, and then add in
cartelization policies and a dynamic, insider-outsider model of a union, in which incumbent
workers (insiders) choose the size of the insider group, and bargain over the wage. The
objective of the insiders is to maximize the per-worker expected, present discounted value of
the union wage premium.
While this model was developed to capture speci…c features of U.S. policy, it easily can
be modi…ed to analyze a variety of dynamic bargaining games in which a …rm and a union
repeatedly negotiate over wages, and in which the insiders choose their size by maximizing
the expected, discounted payo¤ to union membership. The choice of the size of the union
is central in any insider-outsider environment, but is typically missing from earlier insideroutsider models.
We begin with a neoclassical, multisector growth model, and then build in these policies.
Preferences are given by:
max

1
X
t=0

t

fln(ct ) + ln(1

nt )g:

(53)

Consumption is denoted as c; and the size of the household is normalized to 1. The model
is simpli…ed by assuming that work is full-time. The term 1 n is the number of household
members who are engaged in non-market activities (leisure). The household faces a present
value budget constraint:

31

1
X

Qt [wf t nf t + wmt nmt +

ct

0

t=0

X

rst kst

xst ]

0;

(54)

s

in which Qt is the date-t price of output, wf is the competitive (non-cartel) wage, nf is the
number of workers in the competitive sector, wm is the cartel wage, nm is the number of
workers in the cartel sector, 0 are date zero pro…ts, rs is the rental price of sector s capital,
which in turn is denoted as ks ; and xs is investment in sector s capital. Time allocated to
market activities is given by:
nt = nf t + nmt + nut :

(55)

This indicates that total non-market time, n; is the sum of household time spent working in
the agricultural (non-cartel) sector, nf ; the time spent working in the manufacturing (cartel)
sector, nm ; and the time spent searching for a job in the manufacturing sector, nu :
There is also a law of motion for the number of workers in the cartel sector. This transition
equation is given by:
nmt

nmt

1

+

t 1 nut 1

(56)

The transition equation for the number of workers in the manufacturing sector indicates
that the number of these manufacturing workers at date t consists of two components. One
is the number who worked last period, less exogenous worker attrition, in which (1
) is the
probability of a manufacturing worker exogenously losing their manufacturing job. The other
component is t 1 nut 1 ; and this is the number of new workers hired into manufacturing jobs.
This is equal to the number of family members who searched for a manufacturing job in the
previous period, nut 1 ; multiplied by the probability of …nding a manufacturing job, which
is denoted as t 1 :
Note that job search is required for an outsider to be newly hired into manufacturing.
This search process captures competition by the outsiders in the model for the scarce insider
jobs. The insider attrition probability, 1
captures features that generate job loss, but
that are not explicitly modelled, such as retirement, disability, and relocation. Note that if
= 1; then there is no insider attrition, and there will be no hiring (or job loss) in the cartel
sector in the steady state of the model.
The law of motion for industry capital stocks is standard, and is given by:
kst+1 = (1

)kst + xst

(57)

Industry output in sector i is given by:
y(i)t = zt kt (i)n1t (i)

(58)

Sector output is given by:
Ys = [

Z's

's

1

y(i) di] ; s = ff; mg

1

32

(59)

Final output is given as a CES aggregate of the two sectoral outputs:
Y = [ Yf + (1

)Ym ]

1

(60)

Producers in the cartel sector have a pro…t maximization problem that features their
market power, and which depends on the elasticity parameters and : Using the fact that
industry price is given by p = Y 1 Ym ; the industry pro…t function is given by :
= maxfY 1
n;k

Ym ((zt nt )1 kt )

wn

rkg

(61)

In the insider-outsider union model, the objective for an incumbent worker (insider) is
to maximize the expected present discounted value of industry wage premia. The value of
being an insider, in which there are currently n insiders, is given by:
n
Vt (n) = maxfmin[1; ]([wt
wt ;nt
n

wf t ) +

Qt+1
Qt

Vt+1 ( n)]g

(62)

The insiders propose to the …rm to hire n number of workers at the wage rate wt : If
the o¤er is accepted, the current period payo¤ to each insider is the wage premium, which
is the cartel wage less the competitive wage: (wt wf ): The insider’s continuation value is
Qt+1
Vt+1 ( n):
the expected discounted value of being an insider next period, which is
Qt
Note that the number of insiders at the start of period t + 1 is given by n:Note that the
attrition probability, ; a¤ects the continuation value of union membership in two di¤erent
ways. First, the probability that any individual insider at date t will remain in the cartel at
date t + 1 is ;which scales the the date t + 1 value function. Second, the total number of
date t insiders who will remain in the cartel in date t + 1 is n:
The insiders bargain with the …rm at the start of each period. If a wage agreement is
reached, then the …rm hires n number of workers at wage w. Note that the union’s o¤er is
e¢ cient in the sense that given the wage o¤er, the number of workers hired, n; is consistent
with the …rm’s labor demand schedule. The bargaining protocol is that the union makes a
take-it-or-leave-it o¤er to the …rm.
In equilibrium, the union makes an o¤er that the …rm weakly prefers to its outside option
of declining the o¤er. The …rm’s outside option is given as follows. If the o¤er is declined,
then the …rm can hire labor at the competitive wage, wf . With probability ! the …rm will
be able to continue to act as a monopolist. With probability 1 !, the government will
discover that the …rm did not bargain in good faith with the union, and the government will
force the …rm to behave competitively and thus the …rm earns no monopoly pro…ts.
This feature of the model empirically captures the fact that some …rms did fail to reach
wage agreements, or violated wage agreements, and that government did enforce the wage
bargaining provisions of the policy. The …rm’s outside option therefore is the expected level
of monopoly pro…ts earned by declining the insider’s o¤er, and the …rm will only accept the
insider’s o¤er of (n; w) if it delivers at least that level of pro…t. It is therefore optimal for
the union to make an o¤er that does provide the …rm with its outside option.
A key parameter in this model is the share of employment in the cartelized sector. While
the cartel policy was intended to cover about 80 percent of the non-farm economy, there is

33

debate regarding how much of the economy was e¤ectively cartelized. Therefore, the model
conservatively speci…es that only manufacturing and mining were cartelized, which is about
1/3 of the economy. Another key parameter is !; which governs the probability that the
government will identify a …rm that breaks their wage agreement. This value was chosen so
that the steady state cartel wage premium is about 20 percent above trend. This implies
that ! is around 0.10. The attrition parameter, ; is set to 0.95, which yields an average job
tenure in the cartel of 20 years.
Other parameters include the substitution elasticity across industries and across sectors.
For these parameters, the industry substitution elasticity is picked so that the industry
markup would be 10 percent in the absence of wage bargaining. The sectoral substitution
elasticity, which refers to the substitution possibility between manufacturing and the farm
sector, is picked to be 1/2. Other parameter values, including the household discount factor,
the household leisure parameter, the income shares of capital and labor, and depreciation
rates, are standard, and are described in Cole and Ohanian (2004).
The quantitative analysis begins in 1934. To generate model variables, the 1933 capital
stocks from the manufacturing and farm sectors from this are speci…ed, and the sequence
of TFP from 1934 - 1939 is fed into the model. The model variables then transit to their
steady state values. For comparative purposes, we show the results from the cartel model
to those from the perfectly competitive version of this model. Table 11, which is taken from
Cole and Ohanian (2004), shows the response of the competitive version of this model. Note
that the rapid return of productivity to trend fosters a rapid recovery under competition,
with hours worked rising above trend. to rebuild the capital stock to its steady state level.
Moreover, the wage is well below trend in 1933, and then recovers quickly after that, as both
productivity and the capital stocks rise.
Table 12 shows the transition of the cartel model. This transition stands in sharp contrast
to the transition in the competitive economy from Table 11. The cartel economy transits
to a steady state that is well below the competitive economy. Despite rising productivity,
the cartel economy remains depressed through the 1930s, as cartel policies create rents that
raise wage rates far above trend, despite the fact that both consumption and time allocated
to market activities are below trend. These results indicate that the cartel policy accounts
for about 60 percent of the post-1933 depression in output, consumption, and hours worked.

5.5

Neoclassical Models of Taxes and Depressions

This subsection describes how tax rate changes contributed to the U.S. Great Depression
and also for more recent episodes of depressed economic activity.
Tax rates rose in the United States during the Great Depression. McGrattan (2012)
studies how changes in tax rates on dividends and corporate pro…ts a¤ected economic activity
after 1933. Speci…cally, a new tax rate was applied to undistributed corporate pro…ts in 1936.
The goal of this new tax was to increase corporate payments to shareholders, which in turn
was expected to stimulate spending.
McGrattan analyzes a representative household economy with log preferences over consumption and leisure, and with a standard constant returns to scale Cobb-Douglas production function with capital and labor inputs. She considers two formulation for taxes. In the
34

traditional formulation, tax rates are applied to labor income ( h ) and to capital income net
of depreciation ( k ): Tax revenue is the sum of labor income tax revenue and capital income
tax revenue:
h wh

+

k (r

(63)

)k

The alternative formulation includes a …ner decomposition of taxes across revenue sources,
and distinguishes between business and non-business capital. Tax revenue in this alternative
formulation is given by:
h wh+ p (r

)kb + c c+ k kb + u (kb0 kb )+ d f(rkr xb )

(1 + ut )(1
(1 + ct )ct

dt )

= Et [

(1
(1 +

dt+1 )
ct+1 )ct+1

f(1

pt+1 )(rt+1

p (r

kt+1

k

)kb

k kb

0
u (kb

kb )g
(64)
In 64, p is the tax rate on pro…ts, k is now the tax rate on business property, c is the
consumption tax rate, u is the tax rate on undistributed pro…ts, d is the dividend tax rate,
and primed variables refer to period t + 1 values.
The intertemporal …rst order condition that governs e¢ cient investment shows how
changes in expected taxation a¤ects investment:
k

)+1+

ut+1 )g]

(65)

Note that dividend taxes and consumption taxes in 65 do not distort investment incentives
at the margin in the deterministic version of this model when these tax rates are constant
over time. However, expected changes in tax rates will a¤ect investment decisions. An
expected increase in these tax rates reduce the expected returns to investment, and leads
…rms to increase current distributions. Tax rates rose considerably in the mid-1930s, with
the dividend tax rate rising from about 14 percent to about 25 percent, the corporate pro…t
tax rate rising from about 14 percent to about 19 percent, and the newly implemented
undistributed tax rate of …ve percent. McGrattan shows that plausible expectations of these
tax rate changes can help account for the fact that business investment remained 50 percent
or more below trend after 1933.
McGrattan’s analysis of the U.S. Great Depression focused on changes in capital income
tax rates. Prescott (2004), and Ohanian, Ra¤o, and Rogerson (2008) analyze how long-run
changes in labor income tax rates have e¤ected hours worked more recently. Ohanian et al
(2008) document that hours worked per adult in the OECD vary enormously over time and
across countries. Hours worked in many Northern and Western European countries declined
by about 1/3 between the 1950s and 2000, including a nearly 40 percent decline in Germany.
Ohanian et al use a standard neoclassical growth model with log preferences over consumption, log preferences over leisure, a ‡at rate labor income tax, and a ‡at rate consumption tax rate. The economy’s technology is a constant returns to scale Cobb-Douglas
production function that uses capital and labor, which is given by Yt = At Kt Ht1 . Preferences for the representative family are given by:
X
t
max
f ln(ct c + gt ) + (1
) ln(h ht )g:
(66)
35

Households value private consumption, c; and public consumption, g: The term c is a subsistence consumption term to account for possible non-homotheticities in preferences that may
a¤ect trend changes in hours worked. The parameter ; 0 <
1; governs the relative value
that households place on public spending. The speci…cation that government consumption
(scaled by the parameter ) is a perfect substitute for private consumption follows from the
fact that much government spending (net of military spending) is on close substitutes for
private spending, such as health care.
The …rst order condition governing time allocation in this economy is standard, and
equates the marginal rate of substitution between consumption and leisure to the wage rate,
adjusted for consumption and labor income taxes. This …rst order condition is presented
below. Note that the marginal product of labor, (1
) HYtt is substituted into the equation
for the wage rate in 67
(1
h

)
ht

=

(1
(1 +

ht )
ct )

(ct + gt )

(1

)

Yt
:
Ht

(67)

In the …rst order condition, h is the labor income tax rate, and c is the consumption tax
rate. Ohanian et al feed McDaniel’s (2011) panel data construction of consumption and
income tax rates into this …rst order condition, along with actual labor productivity and
consumption data. They choose the value of by country so that model hours in the …rst
year of the dataset are equal to actual hours for each country. They set = 1; and labor’s
share of income is set to 0.67. The subsistence consumption term is set to …ve percent of
U.S. consumption in 1956, which represents a small departure from the standard model of
homothetic preferences. Ohanian et al describe the sensitivity of results to alternative values
for these parameters.
With these parameter values and data, Ohanian et al use this equation to construct a
predicted measure of hours worked from the model economy, and compare it to actual hours
worked by country and over time. Figure 25 shows actual hours worked and predicted hours
worked from the model for 21 OECD countries17 . Panel (a) of the graph shows results for
countries which experienced at least a 25 percent decline in hours worked per capita. Panel
(b) shows results for countries which experienced a decline in hours per capita that range
between 10 percent to 25 percent. Panel (c) shows results for countries that experienced a
decline in hours per capita of less than 10 percent, or alternatively experienced higher hours.
The …gures show that the model economy accounts for much of the secular decline in hours
worked, particularly for the countries which experienced the largest hours declines. Ohanian
et al also report that the contribution of tax rate changes to changes in hours worked is
not sensitive to other labor market factors that may have a¤ected hours, such as changes
in employment protection policies, changes in union density, and changes in unemployment
bene…ts.
These …ndings indicate that the observed increases in labor and consumption tax rates
can account for the large observed declines in hours worked per adult across these countries.
17

Ohanian et al (2008) describe the data sources and data construction in detail. The Group 1 countries
are Austria, Belgium, Denmark, France, Finland, Germany, Italy, and Ireland. The Group 2 countries are
Japan, the Netherland, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, and the U.K. The Group 3 countries
are Australia, Canada, Greece, New Zealand, and the U.S.

36

These neoclassical …ndings regarding the impact of tax rates on hours worked stand in
contrast to other explanations of the decline in European hours. Other explanations include
a preference shift for more leisure, or a preference shift in conjunction with policies that
restrict work, and that may have been chosen in order for society to coordinate on a lowwork equilibrium (see Blanchard (2004) and Alesina et al (2005)) 18 .

5.6

Summary

Depressions, which are protracted periods of substantial economic decline relative to trend,
have been di¢ cult to understand and are often presumed to extend beyond the scope of
neoclassical economics. The models developed here show that government policies that
depress competition can account for a considerable amount of the Great Depression, and
can also account for much of the failure of economic activity to return to trend. More
broadly, these models of the U.S. Great Depression successfully confront the frequently cited
view of Modigliani (1977) that neoclassical models cannot plausibly account for the behavior
of labor markets during Depressions.
Modigliani interpreted the Great Depression as the failure of the market economy to
right itself. This view, and associated Keynesian views of the Depression, are based on the
idea that business organizations did not expand investment in the 1930s, which in turn kept
employment low. The studies discussed here turn that interpretation on its head. Speci…cally,
these new neoclassical studies indicate that the depth and persistence of the Depression was
the consequence of government policies that depressed the steady state allocation of time
to market work. A lower steady state level of market hours reduced the return to capital,
which in turn depressed capital accumulation.
Neoclassical models can also account for more recent periods of depressed economic activity. This includes not only the secular decline in market hours worked in much of Northern
and Western Europe through higher tax rates, but also the Finish Depression of the early
1990s that re‡ects the trade impact of the breakup of the U.S.S.R. (Gordnichenk et al
(2012)), and tax changes and productivity changes (Conesa et al (2007)). Other studies of
recent Depressions include the Korean Crisis of 1998 (Ohtsu (2008)), and several case studies
in Kehoe and Prescott (2007).
The Depression methodology presented in this section has also been used to study the
‡ip side of Depression, which are Growth Miracles. This includes studies of Ireland’s Growth
Miracle (see Ahearne et al (2016), who analyze a standard growth model with TFP, and Klein
and Ventura, who study a small open economy model with taxes, labor wedges, and TFP),
and Lu (2012) who analyzes the development of some East Asian countries in a neoclassical
framework.

18

Other neoclassical studies of taxes and labor supply include Erosa, Fuster, Kambourov (2012) Rogerson,
2009, Ragan (2013), Meza, 2008, Samaniego 2008, Dalton, 2013, and Davis and Henreksson (2005).

37

6

Neoclassical Modeling of Large Fiscal Shocks: The
U.S. World War II Economy

Wartime economies are interesting and important macroeconomic episodes because they
feature very large, exogenous changes in government policies, particular …scal policies, as
well as large changes in macroeconomic activity. The World War II economy in the United
States represents perhaps the largest …scal policy shift of any advanced economy. This
includes a nearly 400 percent increased in federal government spending, large increases in
income tax rates, and a large increase in the number of men drafted into military service.
Moreover, there was a very large resource reallocation from private use to military use that
occurred in a very short period of time.
This striking period of policy changes provides information on how large aggregate and
sectoral disruptions quantitatively a¤ect a market economy, which provides a powerful test of
neoclassical theory. These episodes are also informative about what a number of economists
call the government spending multiplier, which refers to the change in output as a consequence
of a change in government spending. This research area has received considerable attention
since the Great Recession, when the U.S. and other countries increased government spending
to expand economic activity (see Barro and Redlick (2011), Mountford and Uhlig (2009),
Ramey (2011), and Taylor (2011)).
Neoclassical analysis of …scal policies and wars has become an active research area19 .
These studies analyze a range of issues, including the welfare costs of di¤erent wartime
…scal policies (Ohanian (1997)), the impact of the draft on economic activity (Siu (2008)),
the behavior of labor productivity and investment (Braun and McGrattan (1993)), and the
extent that a neoclassical model can account for aggregate time series, particularly the impact
of wars on the incentives to work (Mulligan (2005) and McGrattan and Ohanian (2010)).
This section develops a neoclassical model of the World War II U.S. economy to study
how well a neoclassical model can …t the wartime U.S. data. The model easily can be applied
to other episodes with changes in government spending, transfers, and tax rates. The model
is from McGrattan and Ohanian (2010), which in turn draws on Braun and McGrattan
(1993), Ohanian (1997), and Siu (2008).
There is a representative family, with two types of family members, civilians and draftees.
The size of the family is denoted as N: Both types of family members have identical preferences. At date t, at is the number of family members in the military, and (1 at ) is the
number who are civilians. The family optimally chooses consumption of both types, which
is denoted as cct for civilians, and cdt ; for draftees. The family also optimally chooses investment in physical capital, ipt ; civilian labor input, lct ; and the accumulation of government
bonds, bt+1 : The inclusion of public debt follows from the fact that there was considerable
debt issue during the war. The labor input of draftees is not a choice variable for the family,
but rather is set exogenously by the government, and is denoted by ld :
The maximization problem for the representative family is:
19

Studies include Ohanian (1993, 1997), Braun and McGrattan (1993), Siu (2008), Mulligan (2005), McGrattan and Ohanian (2010), Burnside, Eichenbaum, and Fisher (2005), Baxter and King (1993) Christiano
and Eichenbaum (1992), Doepke, Hazan, and Maoz (2015), and Monacelli and Perotti (2008).

38

max E0

1
X
t=0

f(1

(68)

at )U (cct ; lct ) + at U (cdt ; ld )gNt

Maximization is subject to the following constraints:
Et = (1

kt )(rpt

)kpt + (1
Et = (1

lt )wt (1

at )lct + Rt bt + (1

+ Tt

(69)
(70)

at )cct + at cdt + ipt + bt+1

kpt+1 = [(1
)kpt + ipt ]=(1 +
Nt = (1 + n )t
cc ; cd ; ip
0

lt )wt at l d

n)

(71)
(72)
(73)

Note that kp is the beginning-of-period capital stock, rp is the rental price of capital,
w is the wage rate, k and l are ‡at rate tax rates on capital income and labor income,
respectively, Rb is the value of matured government debt, and T is government transfers.
The depreciation rate is . The population grows at the constant rate n :
The production technology is given by:
Yt = F (Kpt ; Kgt ; Zt Lt ):

(74)

The production inputs include private capital, labor, and public capital, Kg : Labor-augmenting
productivity is denoted as Z; and is given by:
Zt = zt (1 +

t
z) ;

(75)

Note that zt is a transient productivity term and z is the long-run growth rate of technology.
Government purchases consist of 3 components. This is a richer speci…cation of government spending than is typically modeled in …scal policy studies. Government consumption,
Cg is the …rst component, and this is the standard approach to modeling government purchases. It is common to assume that these wartime purchases of goods do not a¤ect marginal
utility or private production possibilities. The second component is government investment,
Ig which enhances production possibilities by expanding the capital stock that can be used to
produce output. This is typically not modeled in the …scal policy literature, but is modeled
here because of the very large government-funded investments in plant and equipment that
occurred in World War II. The government made large investments in the aircraft, automotive, and aluminum industries that raised the manufacturing capital stock by 30 percent
between 1940 and 1945. The third component of government purchases is wage payments to
military personnel. Government spending is therefore given by:
Gt = Cgt + +Igt + Nt wt at l

(76)

The evolution of the stock of government capital, which is assumed to have the same
depreciation rate as physical capital, is given by:
39

Kgt+1 = (1

(77)

)Kgt + Igt

The period government budget constraint is given by:
Bt+1 = Gt + Rt Bt

lt Nt wt ((1

at )lct + at ld )

kt (rpt

)Kpt

rgt Kgt + Tt ;

(78)

in which T is a residual lump-sum tax.
A competitive …rm maximizes pro…ts, which implies that the rental prices for the factors
of production are equal to their marginal productivities. Government debt that is accumulated during the war is retired gradually after the war. The exogenous variables are
the tax rates on factor incomes, government consumption and government investment, and
the productivity shock: The equilibrium de…nition of this perfectly competitive economy is
standard.
The functional form for preferences is given by:
(1

ln(c) +

l)

(79)

This speci…cation yields a compensated labor supply elasticity of (l(11 l )) . McGrattan and
Ohanian choose = 0 (log preferences) as the benchmark speci…cation. The parameter
governs the steady state allocation of time for the household, and is chosen so that model
steady state hours is equal to the average time devoted to market work between 1946 and
1960. For military time allocation, they choose l such that it matches 50 hours per week,
which is the average hours for soldiers in basic training (see Siu (2008)). Population growth
is 1.5 percent per year, and the growth-rate of technological progress is 2 percent per year.
Government capital and private capital are modeled as perfect substitutes. This re‡ects
the fact that much of government investment at this time was in the area of manufacturing
plant and equipment:
Yt = F (Kpt ; Kgt ; Zt Lt ) = (Kpt + Kgt ) (Zt Lt )1

(80)

It is straightforward, however, to modify the aggregator between government and private
capital to accommodate government capital that is not a perfect substitute for private capital.
There are six exogenous variables in the model: conscription (the draft) (at ), the tax
rate on capital income ( kt ), the tax rate on labor income ( lt ), government consumption
(Cgt ), government investment(Igt ), and productivity (zt ). The evolution of the six exogenous
variables is governed by a state vector, St , which speci…es a particular set of values for these
exogenous variables. For 1939-1946, these exogenous variables are equal to their data counterparts. The model is solved under di¤erent assumptions regarding household expectations
about the post-1946 evolution of the exogenous variables. The discussion here focuses on
the perfect foresight solution to the model that begins in 1939, and McGrattan and Ohanian
discuss the other cases in detail.
While the model described here is based on the World War II U.S. economy, it can be
tailored to study other episodes, as it includes a number of features that are relevant for
wartime economies, including changes in tax rates on factor incomes, changes in conscripted
40

labor, changes in productivity, government debt issue to help pay for the war, government
payments to military personnel, and government investment.
Figure 26 shows the model’s exogenous variables. Government consumption, which includes state and local spending, as well as federal spending, rises from about 14 percent
of steady state output in 1940 to 50 percent of steady state output by 1944. Government
investment rises from about 4 percent of steady state output in 1940 to about 9 percent
by 1942. The tax rates on labor and capital income, which are average marginal tax rates
taken from Joines (1981), also rise considerably, with the labor income tax rate rise from
about 8 percent to about 20 percent, and with the capital income tax rates rising from about
43 percent to about 63 percent. The draft reduces potential labor supply signi…cantly, as
almost 12 percent of the working age population is in the military by 1944.
There is a considerable increase in TFP, and there are a number of good reasons why this
change actually re‡ects higher e¢ ciency. This includes the development of federally-funded
scienti…c teams, the development of management science and operations research practices,
and a number of technological advances during the 1940s including innovations directly or
indirectly fostered by federal R & D expenditures. These include the development of modern
airframes, radar, microwave technology, fertilizer, oxygen steel, synthetic rubber, nylon, sulfa
drugs and chemotherapy, insecticides, and Te‡on and related industrial coatings. Moreover,
Herman (2012) describes how business leaders worked together in World War II to mobilize
resources and to raise military output through signi…cantly higher e¢ ciency.
These size and diversity of these changes will a¤ect economic activity in a variety of
ways. Higher TFP will promote high labor input and output, as will public investment. In
contrast, since public investment substitutes for private investment, higher public investment
in plant and equipment will tend to reduce private investment. Moreover, rising tax rates
and conscription of labor will tend to reduce the incentive to work.
Figure 27 shows real GNP, real consumption, and real investment, all measured as a
percent of trend output. The model output series is very close to actual output, as both
increase by more than 50 percent over the course of the war, and then decline after the
war back to near trend. Model consumption is very ‡at during the war, and is close to
actual consumption. Model investment has a very similar pattern as actual investment. The
model investment is somewhat higher than actual investment through 1942, which re‡ects
the perfect foresight solution. Speci…cally, investment rises considerably in order to build
the capital stock by the time that government consumption is high. By 1944, the high
level of government investment in plant and equipment, coupled with the enormous resource
drain of the war, leads to investment declining signi…cantly. Figure 28 show the behavior of
total hours worked, and nonmilitary hours, which is the choice variable for the family. Both
hours series rise signi…cantly in the data and in the model. The nonmilitary hours in the
model rises earlier than in the data, and this again partially re‡ects the perfect foresight
assumption. Figure 29 shows the after-tax returns to private capital and labor. These are
also quite similar to the data.
The dominant factor in driving these results is the enormous expansion of government
consumption that occurred during the War. This resource drain of wartime government
consumption creates a sizeable wealth a¤ect within the model that leads to higher labor
input and output, and this e¤ect is much larger than that of any of the other shocks.
41

McGrattan and Ohanian (2010) analyzed the impact of each of the six shocks in the model
on hours worked. The impact of just government consumption in the absence of any other
shocks raises non-military labor input by about 27 percent on average between 1943-45.
Adding productivity shocks raises this to about a 29 percent increase. Adding in the draft
to these two preceding shocks results in about a 25 percent increase. Adding in the labor
and capital income tax increases has a sizeable depressing e¤ect, and results in an increase
in non-military hours of about 10 percent. Overall, the negative wealth e¤ect arising from
government consumption is the dominant factor, followed by the impact of tax increases.
These results shed light on a number of issues that are analyzed in the literature on the
macroeconomics of …scal policy. One issue is regarding the government spending multiplier.
A di¢ culty facing many studies of government spending multipliers is that they are primarily
based on peacetime episodes, and episodes even with relatively large peace-time shifts in …scal
policy still involve small changes in …scal policy compared to policy changes during wartime
episodes. Moreover, many of these studies require exogenous changes in …scal policy, and
this can be problematic during peacetime. Consequently, it is challenging to draw sharp
conclusions about the size of the multiplier based on peacetime policy changes.
The results from this World War II analysis indicate a multiplier that is considerably less
than one. This is informative, not only because the wartime …scal policy shock is so large,
but also because the model explicitly distinguishes between di¤erent types of government
spending. The analysis conducted here makes it possible to isolate the impacts of di¤erent
types of spending and taxes on economic activity.
To see that the multiplier from this episode is fairly small, consider the following case
in which we account for the impact of all government expenditures, but omit the negative
impact of the tax increases and the draft. By omitting these latter two items, we construct
the maximum possible e¤ect of …scal policy, even though tax increases, which depress labor
supply, are certainly part of …scal policy. In this experiment, the World War II episode
shows that the multiplier would be about 0.6, re‡ecting a hypothetical 30 percent increase
in output resulting from government purchases of goods. This multiplier is very similar to
Barro and Redlick’s (2011) estimates and Mountford and Uhlig’s (2009) short-run estimates
and is in the lower end of the range of estimates discussed in Ramey (2011).
The results have broader implications regarding neoclassical analyses of large shocks.
They indicate that the U.S. economy responded to the enormous wartime economic dislocations, as well as the peacetime reversal of these dislocations, very much along the lines of a
simple neoclassical growth model augmented with several large policy changes. These policy
shifts include the massive reallocation of economic activity from peacetime to wartime production, the enormous drain of resources resulting from government purchases, the reduction
of the labor endowment through the draft, higher taxes, and government-funded investment.
This also includes the rapid unwinding of these unique factors after the war. While this
represents just a single episode, this analysis provides a strong test of the neoclassical model
in response to large …scal policy changes.

42

7

Neoclassical Models of Productivity Shocks

Productivity change is an important feature of the models and that data that we have used
to analyze the U.S. historical macroeconomic record in this chapter. This includes a large
TFP decline in the Great Depression, a large TFP increase in World War II, and large TFP
and equipment-speci…c productivity ‡uctuations in the post-Korean War U.S. economy.
There are long-standing questions about the nature and sources of these productivity
changes. Much of the profession has viewed TFP declines during downturns, and particularly
during depressions, with skepticism, and naturally so. But economists are now analyzing
TFP deviations during short-run and longer-run episodes from alternative perspectives than
the narrow interpretation that TFP declines re‡ect a loss of technological know-how and
knowledge.

7.1

Resource Misallocation and TFP

Restuccia and Rogerson (2008) analyze the impact of resource misallocation on TFP in a
competitive economy. The idea is to assess how the misallocation of production inputs across
locations a¤ects measured TFP. Their model is related to Hopenhayn and Rogerson (1993),
in which there is a representative family and there are di¤erent producers, or alternatively,
di¤erent production locations, each with a decreasing returns to scale technology with potentially di¤erent TFP levels, and which are indexed by i. The simplest case of production
heterogeneity is the case of a single …nal good produced at multiple locations, yi ; that is
produced with a single production input, labor (hi ):The production relationship at location
i is given by:
yi = zi f (hi )

(81)

In this economy, the technology f is twice continuously di¤erentiable, with f 0 > 0; f 00 <
0: The term zi denotes exogenous productivity. Assume that zi is drawn from the set
fz1 ; z2 ; :::zI g; and let (i) be the distribution of productivity across these locations.
The e¢ cient allocation of labor requires equating the marginal product of labor across
production locations. For the isoelastic technology, zi hi ; 0 < < 1; the e¢ cient allocation
of labor between any two locations depends on the di¤erences in productivities. at those
locations, and the amount of curvature in the production technology:
1

hi
zi 1
=
:
(82)
hj
zj
We construct an economy-wide measure of TFP by aggregating TFP across all locations.
Aggregate TFP in this economy is given by:
z=

X

1

zi1

(i)1 :

(83)

i

The e¢ cient allocation of labor at any speci…c location depends on the location’s productivity
relative to aggregate productivity, as well as the amount of curvature in the technology, and
is given by:
43

zi 1 1
:
(84)
z
Note that as ! 1; even small di¤erences in productivity generate very large di¤erences in
the e¢ cient allocation of production inputs across locations.
Atkeson, Khan, and Ohanian (1996) use data on di¤erences in worker …ring costs and
job reallocation rates between the U.S. and Europe to argue that is around 0.85. Restuccia
and Rogerson use this value for specifying the level of decreasing returns in their economy,
and they study how misallocation of production inputs across locations a¤ects aggregate
productivity, z: Resource misallocation means that the marginal product of labor is not
equated across production locations, which implies that 82 and ?? are not satis…ed.
Restuccia and Rogerson (2008) analyze various government policies that tax the output
of some producers, and that subsidize the output of other producers, and they calculate the
aggregate productivity and welfare losses from these policies. There is a large literature that
has built on Restuccia and Rogerson along many dimensions. This includes the application of misallocation to speci…c Depressions and Crises (see Oberfeld (2013) and Chen and
Irarrazabal (2013) on the Chilean Depression of the early 1980s, and Sandleris and Wright
(2014) on the Argentinian Depression of 2001), the connection between …nancial market imperfections and misallocation (see Moll (2014), Buera and Moll (2015), and Midrigan and
Xu (2014), the connection between trade barriers and productivity during the U.S. Great
Depression (see Bond et al (2013)). Other studies of misallocation focus on longer-run issues, including studies of the role of misallocation in the development experiences of China
and India (Hsieh and Klenow (2009)), entry regulation and productivity (Poschke (2010)),
size-dependent policies and productivity (Guner et al (2008)), imperfect information and
productivity (David et al (2016)), the misallocation of managerial talent and productivity
(Alder (2016)), and the magni…cation of misallocation on productivity in economies with
production chains (Jones (2013)).
hi =

7.2

Intangible Investments and TFP

Neoclassical models with intangible capital are being developed to construct new measures of
TFP. These studies focus on intangible investments that traditionally have not been counted
as part of national product. Prior to 2013, the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) counted
only software as investment among the intangible categories In 2013, the BEA implemented a
comprehensive revision of the National Income and Product Accounts to include other business purchases that previously were counted as business expenses as investment, including
research and development, artistic products, mineral exploration, and intellectual property.
The shift of these purchases from an expensed item to business investment increases output.
This BEA revision improves the measurement of real output, but the BEA does not currently
count other intangible investments in the national accounts, such as marketing, advertising,
and organization capital investments. These investment omissions indicate that output is
mismeasured, which implies that productivity is also mismeasured.
McGrattan and Prescott (2012, 2014), and McGrattan (2016), go beyond the new NIPA
measures of GDP by constructing real output measures that include other expensed items,
44

including advertising, marketing, computer design, management consulting, public relations,
and engineering expenses as intangible investment. McGrattan (2016) develops a model of
the U.S. economy that includes both tangible and intangible production, with a focus on
intersectoral linkages.
McGrattan develops a model with tangible output and intangible output. Intangibles
are a non-rival good. There are s sectors that use both tangibles and intangibles. There
is a Cobb-Douglas aggregate over consumption goods from the S sectors. The technologies
di¤er in terms of a sector-speci…c technology shock, and technology share parameters. The
outputs for tangibles and intangibles is given by:
1
Yst = (KT1 st ) S (KIst ) S ( l (Mlst
)

lS

1
1 1
)(Zt Zst
Hst
)

S

S

S

(85)

2
)
Ist = (KT2 st ) S (KIst ) S ( l (Mlst

lS

1 1
1
)
Hst
)(Zt Zst

S

S

S

(86)

Ys denotes the output of the tangible sector, KT1 s is tangible capital that is used to produce
tangible output in sector S; KT2 s is tangible capital used to produce intangible output in sector
S; KIst is intangible capital, which is assumed to be non-rival, Mls1 and Mls2 are intermediate
inputs used to produce tangibles in sector S; and intangibles in sector S;respectively. Z is
the aggregate productivity shock and Zs is a sector-speci…c productivity shocks. Hs1 and Hs2
are labor input for tangibles in sector S; and intangibles in sector S; respectively.
McGrattan (2016) uses maximum likelihood to estimate the parameters of the stochastic
processes for Zt and for Zst ; and compares two economies, one with intangibles, and another
without intangibles. The mismeasurement of productivity in the economy without intangibles generates a large labor wedge, and McGrattan argues that this may account for the
empirical labor wedge measured from NIPA data. McGrattan also shows that the economy
with intangibles closely accounts for the 2008-2014 U.S. economy, despite the fact that the
standard measure of TFP based on NIPA data is not highly correlated with hours worked
during this period.
Another literature that relates intangible investments to productivity is in the area of
organization capital. As noted above, these investments are not counted in the NIPA. Atkeson and Kehoe (2005) study a neoclassical model in which an organization stochastically
accumulates intangible knowledge over time. They …nd that the payments from these intangibles are about one-third as large as the payment from tangible capital, which suggests
that organization capital is very large.

7.3

Neoclassical Models of Network Linkages and TFP

The impact of industry and/or sectoral shocks on the aggregate economy motivates a signi…cant component of the real business cycle literature, including the seminal contribution
of Long and Plosser (1983), and subsequent research by Dupor (1999) and Horvath (2000).
One theme of this research is to provide a theory for aggregate productivity shocks that hit
the economy.
This idea is now being developed further in network models, which focus on the idea that
production is organized through networks of supply chains, and that small disruptions in
45

networks can have signi…cant aggregate consequences, particularly if there are only a small
number of suppliers of a particular input, and if there are no particularly close substitutes
for that input. Carvalho (2014) describes much of the recent literature on networks and
macroeconomics.
Carvalho describes a simple model of production networks in which individual sectors
produce a specialized output. This output is produced using homogeneous labor and intermediate inputs from other sectors. The output of sector i is given by:
n

yi = (zi hi )1

i=1

!

yijij

:

(87)

In this technology, yi denotes sectoral output, zi is a sectoral productivity shock, hi is labor
employed in sector i, and the exponents ! ij denote the share of intermediate input j used in
producing good i: Note that labor is supplied inelastically by a representative household, so
aggregate labor is in …xed supply. For simplicity, preferences are symmetric over the i goods
in the household utility function.
The empirical importance of network linkages can be identi…ed from a standard inputouput matrix. Since aggregate labor is in …xed supply, aggregate output is a weighted average
of the sectoral productivity shocks:
ln(y) =

n
X

i

ln(zi ):

(88)

i=1

In this expression, y is aggregate output and the i are weights that are constructed from
the input-output table. Note that measured aggregate productivity in this economy, which
is hy ;will ‡uctuate even though there is no aggregate productivity shock. This simple model
shows how a single shock to an important sector can have signi…cant aggregate a¤ects that
will be observationally equivalent to a one-sector model with an aggregate productivity shock.

8

Neoclassical Models of Inequality

Neoclassical modeling is also making considerable progress in characterizing and quantifying
how technological change has a¤ected income distribution and wage inequality. Neoclassical
studies of inequality analyze how biased technological change di¤erentially a¤ects the demand
for di¤erent types of workers.
Early empirical studies by Katz and Murphy (1992), among others, concluded that skillbiased technological change was responsible for the widening wage gap between highlyeducated workers and workers with less education. This conclusion re‡ects the fact that
the relative supply of highly-skilled workers rose considerably, and the relative wage of these
workers also rose.
Krusell et al (2000) develop a neoclassical model to analyze how technological change has
a¤ected the relative wage of skilled to less-skilled workers. This relative wage is often called
the skill premium. Krusell et al provide an explicit theory of skilled biased technological
change, they show how to measure this change, and they develop a neoclassical model to
quantify its e¤ect on inequality through observable variables.
46

The model features two di¤erent types of labor: high-skilled labor, who are workers
with 16 or more years of education, and unskilled labor, who have fewer than 16 years of
education20 . Skill-biased technological change in this model is the combination of capital
equipment-speci…c technological change, coupled with di¤erent substitution elasticities between the two types of labor. Krusell et al construct a four factor production function that
allows for di¤erent types of labor, and for di¤erent types of capital goods. There are two
technology is given by:
yt = At kst [ ut + (1

)( ket + (1

)st ) ]

1

(89)

The term At is a neutral technology parameter. The inputs are capital structures (kst ),
unskilled labor input (ut ); which is the product of unskilled hours and unskilled labor e¢ ciency ( ut hut ), capital equipment (ket ); and skilled labor input (st ); which is the product of
skilled labor hours and skilled labor e¢ ciency ( st hst ). These inputs are speci…ed within a
nested CES technology in which the curvature parameters and govern the substitution
elasticities among the inputs. In this technology, rapid growth of capital equipment raises
the wage of skilled workers relative to the wage of unskilled workers only if capital equipment is more complementary with skilled labor than with unskilled labor. This requires that
> ; which Krusell et al call capital-skill complementarity.
It is straightforward to see this requirement of > by assuming that st and ut are
constant, log-linearizing the ratio of the marginal productivities. of the two types of labor,
and expressing variables in terms of growth rates between periods t and t + 1 :
g

t

' (1

)(ghut

ghst ) + (

)

ket
st

(gket

ghst )

(90)

In ??, g is the growth rate of the skill premium, ghu and ghs are the growth rates
of unskilled and skilled hours, and gke is the growth rate of capital equipment. Since the
parameter is less than one, the …rst term on the right hand side of ?? shows that the skill
premium declines if the growth rate of skilled hours exceeds the growth rate of unskilled
hours. Krusell et al call this …rst term the relative quantity e¤ect. The second term is called
the capital-skill complementarity e¤ect. This second term shows that the skill premium rises
if the growth rate of capital equipment exceeds the growth rate of skilled hours, and if there
is relatively more complementarity between skilled labor and equipment ( > ):
Krusell et al construct a dataset of skilled and unskilled labor input using data from
the Current Population Survey. They use Gordon’s (1990) data on equipment prices to
construct a measure of the stock of capital equipment, and they use the NIPA measure of
capital structures.
They estimate the parameters of the nonlinear production function with data from 19631992 using two-step simulated pseudo-maximum likelihood. They …t the model using the
equations that measure the deviation between model and data for total labor’s share of
income, and the ratio of skilled labor income to unskilled labor income. The third equation
in the criterion function measures the deviation between the rate of return to investment
20

Note that the term unskilled is used here not as a literal description of worker skill, but rather to clearly
di¤erentiate the two types of labor from each other.

47

in structures to equipment. They estimate substitution elasticities of about 1.67 between
unskilled labor and equipment, and of about 0.67 between skilled labor and equipment,
which provides strong support for capital-skill complementarity. They …nd that the model
accounts for much of the movements in the skill premium over the 1963-1992 period.
Given that the Krusell et al data end in 1992, Ohanian and Orak (2016) analyze this
same model, but extend the dataset through 2013 to assess the contribution of capital-skill
complementarity to wage inequality for the last 20 years. Figure 30 shows the skill premium
in the model and in the data from 1963 through 2013. To compare the analysis to Krusell et
al, Ohanian and Orak also estimate the model from 1963 to 1992. The dashed line in Figure
30 corresponds to the end of the estimation period for the parameters (1992). Although
Ohanian and Orak use the same sample period to estimate the parameters, they use revised
data in the estimation. They …nd very similar elasticities to those in Krusell et al. Ohanian
and Orak estimate an elasticity of about 1.78 between unskilled labor and equipment, and
about 0.69 between skilled labor and equipment. The …gure shows that the model accounts
for the major changes in the skill premium, including the very large rise that has occurred
in the last 30 years21 .
The Krusell et al model also …ts aggregate labor share very well up until the mid-2000s.
After that, the model overpredicts labor’s share. This …nding led Orak (2016) to analyze
the same type of production function with di¤erent substitution possibilities between capital
equipment and di¤erent types of skills, but with three types of labor, as opposed to two
types of labor. The labor types in Orak are classi…ed based on occupational tasks, as in
Autor et al (2003), rather than on education levels, as in Krusell et al.
Orak speci…es the three types of labor based on whether an occupation primarily performs cognitive tasks, manual tasks, or routine tasks. He estimates a relatively high elasticity
of substitution between capital equipment and workers who perform routine tasks, and he
estimates lower substitution elasticities between equipment and cognitive workers, and between equipment and manual workers. He …nds that this augmented neoclassical model can
account for much of the recent and signi…cant decline in labor’s share of income.

9

Neoclassical Macroeconomics: Critical Assessments
and Future Directions

This section discusses the open questions in the area of neoclassical macroeconomics, and
presents our views on interesting future avenues for research that will address these questions. Perhaps the major open question for neoclassical models - and which is also a major
question for other classes of macroeconomic models - is accounting for ‡uctuations in hours
worked. The multisector models developed in this chapter account for considerably more of
the ‡uctuations in hours worked than the standard one sector neoclassical model, but there
are also changes in hours that these models do not capture. Below, we describe the research
areas that we view as important and promising in addressing this issue and others.
21

Krusell et al normalize the skill premium to 1 in 1963, and report ‡uctuations relative to the normalized
value. To show the actual level of the skill premium, Ohanian and Orak estimate the model with normalized
data as in Krusell et al, and then reconstruct the levels data. See Ohanian and Orak for details.

48

9.1

Biased Technological Change and the Labor Market

Analysis of biased technological change, and its impact on both aggregate variables and on
labor market outcomes of workers with di¤erent skill levels, is an interesting avenue for future
research. The home production results from the model motivated by Greenwood et al (2005)
indicate interesting trend changes in hours worked from the early 1980s through the 1990s,
which coincide with the increase in women’s hours worked. Important future research will
further connect this demographic increase in hours worked with general equilibrium models
of home production.
More broadly, it will be important to further develop models in the area of directed
technological change and the shape of the production function, as in Acemoglu (2002) and
Jones (2005), the relationship between technologies and secular sectoral shifts, as in Lee
and Wolpin (2005), human capital accumulation and technological change, as in Heckman
et al (1998), and demographic shifts, technological change, and wage shifts as in Jeong et al
(2015). A related area is studying movements in factor income shares, as in Karabarbounis
and Nieman (2014), and Orak (2016), and the impact of factor endowments on how societies
choose among biased technologies, as in Caselli and Coleman (2006).
All of these research areas are in relatively early stages of development, and merit additional analysis. Research in this area can also be combined with broader empirical studies
of time allocation, including the analysis and documentation of home and market time allocation, as in Aguiar and Hurst (1997), and Aguiar, Hurst, and Karabarbounis (2013), and
studies of the allocation of time across rich and poor countries, as in Bick et al (2015).

9.2

Neoclassical Analyses of the Great Recession and its Aftermath

Several open questions remain about the Great Recession and its aftermath. This includes
accounting for macroeconomic aggregates from 2008 and onwards, particularly for hours
worked. The results presented in this chapter indicate that neoclassical models with standard measures of equipment-speci…c productivity shocks, and TFP shocks, and without any
policy components, miss some features of the Great Recession. McGrattan (2016) argues
that output mismeasurement resulting from the omission of intangible investments in GDP
has important implications for measured TFP and labor wedge measures during the Great
Recession. Further research in this important area is needed.
There are also interesting aspects of economic policies during this period that merit
additional analysis. Mulligan (2012, 2013) argues that changes in social insurance programs
and the A¤ordable Care Act depressed labor by implicitly raising tax rates on labor. Kydland
and Zarazaga (2016) study how expectations of di¤erent types of tax policies may have
contributed to the weak recovery from the Great Recession. Baker, Bloom and Davis (2014)
measure the evolution of economic policy uncertainty during the Great Recession. These
uncertainty measures can be used in models in which uncertainty can depress an economy, as
in Bloom (2009) and Fernandez-Villaverde et al (2011). These factors may have implications
for understanding changes in hours worked in recent years.

49

9.3

The E¤ect of Policy Changes and Institutions on Macroeconomic Performance

An important area for future research is quantifying the impact of observed departures
from competitive markets on economies. Cole and Ohanian (2004) developed and applied
a particular methodology in their study of cartelization and unionization in the U.S. Great
Depression. This approach was also applied by Lahiri and Yi (2009) in evaluating the
a¤ect of non-competitive policies in West Bengal Indian development. A similar approach
has been used by Cheremuhkin et al (2013, 2015 ) to study the impact of Lenin’s policies
and institutions on economic development in the U.S.S.R at that time., and to study the
impact of Mao’s policies and institutions on Chinese development in the 1940s and 1950s.
Alder et al (2016) use a related approach to analyze the contribution of labor union holdup and imperfect competition on the decline of America’s Rust Belt region in the postwar
U.S. Similar methods also can be used to study the recent evolution of the post-Soviet
Union economies, to study recent Indian and Chinese development patterns (see Dekle and
Vandenbroucke (2012) for a neoclassical study of recent trends in China’s economy), and to
study long-run Latin American development (see Cole et al (2005) for a long-run analysis
of Latin America). As better data becomes available, these methods can also be used to
study how policies and institutions have a¤ected the stagnation and development of very
poor countries. Future research along these lines will allow us to understanding the relative
importance of various non-competitive policies across countries, and will be an important
input in developing growth-enhancing policies in poor countries.

9.4

Analyses of TFP

Since productivity is central in neoclassical growth models, advancing our understanding
of changes in TFP is another important area for future research. In the last 10 years,
progress in evaluating TFP has been made along three di¤erent research lines: resource misallocation, intangible investments, and network economies. Advancements in misallocation
analysis of TFP will be facilitated by the assessment of how actual economic policies have
a¤ected resource allocation and productivity loss. Continued advances in computing power
will facilitate the analysis of network economies and intersectoral linkages in the study of
TFP. The continued expansion of intangible investments into NIPA data will advance our
understanding of intangibles investment and TFP.
An area that to our knowledge that has not been studied in detail is to link changes in
what Decker et al (2013) call "business dynamism" to aggregate measures of TFP. Specifically, Decker et al document lower rates of resource reallocation in the U.S., and also a
lower rate of successful start-ups that have occurred over time. This decline has coincided
with a secular decline in productivity growth. Analyzing theoretical and empirical connections between these observations has the potential to advance our understanding of secular
movements in productivity.

50

9.5

Taxes and Macroeconomic Activity

The impact of tax and …scal policies on economic activity in neoclassical models is another
interesting area for future work, and may advance our understanding of changes in hours
worked. Research in this area has been constrained by the availability of data on tax rates and
hours worked. Constructing tax rates along the lines of McDaniel’s (2011) tax measurements
for the OECD can in principal be extended to other countries. In terms of hours worked,
Ohanian and Ra¤o (2011) construct panel data on hours in the OECD, and similar data
constructions can be made for other countries.

10

Conclusions

This chapter presented aggregate data and a series of neoclassical models to show how the
historical evolution of the U.S. economy re‡ects much longer-run changes in economic activity
than previously recognized, and that much of this evolution is plausibly interpreted as the
consequences of long-run shifts in technologies and government policies.
This chapter shows that neoclassical models can shed light on relatively stable periods
of aggregate economic activity, such as the post-Korean War U.S. economy, but also on very
turbulent periods that are typically considered to be far beyond the purview of neoclassical economics, including the Great Depression and World War II. Moreover, neoclassical
analysis provides insights into not only purely aggregate issues, but also sheds light on how
technological change has a¤ected individual labor market outcomes.
Future macroeconomic analyses of ‡uctuations should shift from the standard practice
of narrowly studying business cycle frequencies, and to include the quantitatively important lower frequency component of ‡uctuations that dominates much of the U.S. historical
economic record. We anticipate that neoclassical research along these lines will continue to
advance the profession’s knowledge in a number of areas re‡ecting both longer-run events, as
well as business cycle ‡uctuations. This includes Depressions, Growth Miracles, the macroeconomic e¤ects of various types of government regulatory and …scal policies, the sources and
nature of productivity shocks, the e¤ects of biased technological change on the macroeconomy and on individual labor market outcomes, and understanding cyclical and longer-run
‡uctuations in hours worked.

References
[1] Acemoglu, Daron. (2002). "Directed Technical Change." The Review of Economic
Studies, 69(4), 781-809.
[2] Aguiar, Mark, and Erik Hurst. (1997). "Life-cycle Prices and Production." American
Economic Review, 5(3), 1533-1599.
[3] Aguiar, Mark, Erik Hurst, and Loukas Karabarbounis. (2013). "Time Use During the
Great Recession." American Economic Review, 103(5), 1664-1696.

51

[4] Ahearne, Alan, Finn Kydland, and Mark A. Wynne. (2006). “Ireland’s Great Depression.”Economic and Social Review, 37(2), 215-243.
[5] Aiyagari, S. Rao, Lawrence J. Christiano, and Martin Eichenbaum. (1992). “The Output, Employment, and Interest Rate E¤ects of Government Consumption.”Journal of
Monetary Economics, 30(1), 73-86.
[6] Alder, S. D. (2016). “In the Wrong Hands: Complementarities, Resource Allocation,
and TFP.”American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 8(1), 199-241.
[7] Alesina, Alberto F., Edward L. Glaeser, and Bruce Sacerdote. (2006). “Work and
Leisure in the US and Europe: Why so Di¤erent?” NBER Macroeconomics Annual
2005 , (20) 1-100. MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
[8] Amaral, Pedro S., and James C. MacGee. (2015). "Re-Examining the Role of Sticky
Wages in the U.S. Great Depression: A Multi-sector Approach." Discussion paper,
University of Western Ontario
[9] Arias, Andres, Gary Hansen, and Lee E. Ohanian. (2007). "Why Have Business Cycle
Fluctuations Become Less Volatile?" Economic Theory, 32(1), 43-58.
[10] Atkeson, Andrew, Aubhik Khan, and Lee E. Ohanian. (1996). "Are Data on Industry
Evolution and Gross Job Turnover Relevant for Macroeconomics?" Carnegie-Rochester
Conference Series on Public Policy, 44 (2), 215-250.
[11] Atkeson, Andrew, and Patrick J. Kehoe. (2005). “Modeling and Measuring Organization Capital.”Journal of Political Economy, 113(5), 1026-1053.
[12] Autor, David H., Frank Levy, and Richard J. Murnane (2003). “The Skill Content of
Recent Technological Change: An Empirical Exploration.” The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 118(4), 1279-1333.
[13] Baker, Scott R., Nicholas Bloom, and Steven J. Davis. (2015). “Measuring Economic
Policy Uncertainty.”National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 21633.
[14] Barro, Robert J. (1981). “Intertemporal Substitution and the Business Cycle.”
Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 14(1), 237-268.
[15] Barro, Robert J. and Robert G. King. (1984) "Time-Separable Preferences and
Intertemporal-Substitution Models of Business Cycles." The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 99(4), 817-839.
[16] Baxter, Marianne, and Robert G. King. (1999). “Measuring Business Cycles: Approximate Band-Pass Filters for Economic Time Series.” Review of Economics and
Statistics, 81(4), 575-593.
[17] Benhabib, Jess, Richard Rogerson, and Randall Wright. (1991). “Homework in Macroeconomics: Household Production and Aggregate Fluctuations.” Journal of Political
Economy, 99(6), 1166-1187.
52

[18] Bernanke, Ben S.(1983). “Nonmonetary E¤ects of the Financial Crisis in the Propagation of the Great Depression.”American Economic Review, 73(3), 257-276.
[19] Beveridge, Stephen, and Charles R. Nelson. (1981). “A New Approach to Decomposition of Economic Time Series into Permanent and Transitory Components with
Particular Attention to Measurement of the ‘Business Cycle.” Journal of Monetary
Economics, 7(2), 151-174.
[20] Bick, Alex, David Lagakos, and Nicola Fuchs-Schundeln. "How Do Average Hours
Worked Vary with Development: Cross-Country Evidence and Implications", Unpublished Paper.
[21] Blanchard, Olivier. (2004). “The Economic Future of Europe.” The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 18(4), 3-26.
[22] Bloom, Nick. (2009). "The Impact of Uncertainty Shocks." Econometrica, 77(3), 623685.
[23] Bond, Eric W., Mario J. Crucini, Tristan Potter, and Joel Rodrigue. (2013) "Misallocation and Productivity E¤ects of the Smoot-Hawley Tari¤." Review of Economic
Dynamics, 16(1), 120-134.
[24] Bordo, Michael D., Christopher J. Erceg, and Charles L. Evans. (2000). "Money, Sticky
Wages, and the Great Depression." American Economic Review 90(5), 1447-1463.
[25] Burns, Arthur F., and Wesley C. Mitchell (1946). Measuring Business Cycles, New
York, New
[26] York, National Bureau of Economic Research.
[27] Carvalho, Vasco M. (2014). “From Micro to Macro via Production Networks.” The
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 28(4), 23-47.
[28] Caselli, Francesco, I. I. Coleman, and Wilbur John. (2006). “The World Technology
Frontier.”American Economic Review, 96(3), 499-522.
[29] Chang, Yongsung, and Frank Schorfheide. (2003). “Labor-supply Shifts and Economic
Fluctuations.”Journal of Monetary Economics, 50(8), 1751-1768.
[30] Chari, Varadarajan V., Patrick J. Kehoe, and Ellen R. McGrattan. (2007). "Business
Cycle Accounting." Econometrica, 75(3), 781-836.
[31] Chari, Varadarajan, Patrick Kehoe, and Ellen R. McGrattan. (Forthcoming). “Business Cycle Accounting." Handbook of Macroeconomics, edited by John Taylor and
Harald Uhlig, Elsevier, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
[32] Chen, Kaiji, and Alfonso Irarrazabal. (2013). "Misallocation and the Recovery of Manufacturing TFP After a Financial Crisis." Norges Bank Working Paper 2013-01.

53

[33] Cheremukhin, Anton, Mikhail Golosov, Sergei Guriev, and Aleh Tsyvinski. (2013).
“Was Stalin Necessary for Russia’s Economic Development?”National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 19425.
[34] Cheremukhin, Anton, Mikhail Golosov, Sergei Guriev, and Aleh Tsyvinski. (2015).
“The Economy of People’s Republic of China from 1953.”National Bureau of Economic
Research Working Paper No. 21397.
[35] Christiano, Lawrence J., and Martin Eichenbaum. (1992). “Current Real-BusinessCycle Theories and Aggregate Labor-market Fluctuations.” American Economic Review, 82(3), 430-450.
[36] Christiano, Lawrence J., and Terry J. Fitzgerald. (2003). “The Band Pass Filter.”
International Economic Review, 44(2), 435-465.
[37] Cociuba, Simona, Edward Prescott, and Alexander Ueberfeldt. (2012). "U.S. Hours
and Productivity Behavior Using CPS Hours Worked Data: 1947-III to 2011-IV."
Discussion Paper, Bank of Canada.
[38] Cole, Harold L., and Lee E. Ohanian. (1999). "The Great Depression in the United
States from a Neoclassical Perspective." Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly
Review, 23(1), 2-24.
[39] Cole, Harold L., and Lee E. Ohanian. (2002). "The US and UK Great Depressions
Through the Lens of Neoclassical Growth Theory." American Economic Review, 92(2),
28-32.
[40] Cole, Harold L., and Lee E. Ohanian. (2002). “The Great UK Depression: A Puzzle
and Possible Resolution.”Review of Economic Dynamics, 5(1), 19-44.
[41] Cole, Harold L, and Lee E. Ohanian. (2004) “New Deal Policies and the Persistence
of the Great Depression.”Journal of Political Economy, 112(4), 779-816.
[42] Cole, Harold L. and Lee E. Ohanian. (2016). “The Impact of Cartelization, Money,
and Productivity Shocks on the International Great Depression.”Unpublished.
[43] Cole, Harold L., Lee E. Ohanian, Alvaro Riascos, and James A. Schmitz. (2005). “Latin
America in the Rearview Mirror.”Journal of Monetary Economics, 52(1), 69-107.
[44] Comin, Diego, and Mark Gertler. (2006). “Medium-Term Business Cycles.” American
Economic Review, 96(3), 523-551.
[45] Cooley, Thomas F., and Lee E. Ohanian. (1997). “Postwar British Economic Growth
and the Legacy of Keynes.”Journal of Political Economy, 105(3), 439-472.
[46] Cummins, Jason G., and Giovanni L. Violante. (2002). “Investment-speci…c Technical
Change in the United States (1947–2000): Measurement and Macroeconomic Consequences.”Review of Economic Dynamics, 5(2), 243-284.
54

[47] Dalton, John T. (2015). “The Evolution Of Taxes And Hours Worked In Austria,
1970–2005.” Macroeconomic Dynamics, 19(8), 1800-1815.
[48] David, Joel M, Hugo Hopenhayn and Venky Venkateswaran. "Information, Misallocation and Aggregate Productivity", The Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming.
[49] Davis, Steven J., and John Haltiwanger. (1992). “Gross Job Creation, Gross Job
Destruction, and Employment Reallocation.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
107(3), 819-863.
[50] Davis, Steven J., and Magnus Henrekson. (2005). "Tax E¤ects on Work Activity, Industry Mix, and Shadow Economy Size: Evidence from Rich Country Comparisons",
in R. Gómez-Salvador et al. eds. (2005), Labour Supply and Incentives to Work in
Europe. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.
[51] DiCecio, Riccardo. (2009). "Sticky Wages and Sectoral Labor Comovement." Journal
of Economic Dynamics and Control, 33(3), 538-53.
[52] Doepke, Matthias, Moshe Hazan, and Yishay D. Maoz. (2015). “The Baby Boom and
World War II: A Macroeconomic Analysis.” The Review of Economic Studies, 82(3),
1031-1073.
[53] Ebell, Monique and Albrecht Ritschl. (2008). "Real Origins of the Great Depression:
Monopoly Power, Unions and the American Business Cycle in the 1920s," CEP Discussion Paper No. 876
[54] Eggertsson, Gauti B. (2012). "Was the New Deal Contractionary?" American Economic Review 102(1), 524-555.
[55] Federal
Reserve
Bank
of
St.
Louis,
https://research.stlouisfed.org/fred2/series/PERIC

FRED

Economic

Data,

[56] Feenstra, Robert C., Robert Inklaar, and Marcel P. Timmer (2015). The Next Generation of the Penn World Table. American Economic Review, Forthcoming.
[57] Fernández-Villaverde, Jesús, Pablo Guerrón-Quintana, Keith Kuester, and Juan
Rubio-Ramírez. (2015). “Fiscal Volatility Shocks and Economic Activity.” American
Economic Review, 105(11), 3352-3384.
[58] Fernald, John. (2014). "A Quarterly, Utilization-Adjusted Series on Total Factor Productivity." Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper 2012-19.
[59] Field, Alexander J. (2003). "The Most Technologically Progressive Decade of the Century." American Economic Review, 93(4), 1399-1413.
[60] Fisher, Jonas D.M. (2006). “The Dynamic E¤ects of Neutral and Investment-speci…c
Technology Shocks.”Journal of Political Economy, 114(3), 413-451.

55

[61] Friedman, Milton, and Schwartz, Anna J. (1963). Monetary History of the United
States, 1867-1960. Princeton University Press: Princeton, N.J.
[62] Gali, Jordi, and van Rens, Thijs. (2014) "The Vanishing Procyclicality of Labor Productivity", Unpublished Paper.
[63] Gordon, Robert J. (1990). The Measurement of Durable Goods Prices. University of
Chicago Press, Chicago, Illinois.
[64] Gorodnichenko, Yuriy, Enrique G. Mendoza, and Linda L. Tesar. (2012). “The Finnish
Great Depression: From Russia with Love.”American Economic Review, 102(4), 16191643.
[65] Greenwood, Jeremy, and Zvi Hercowitz. (1991). “The Allocation of Capital and Time
over the Business Cycle.”Journal of Political Economy, 99(6), 1188-1214.
[66] Greenwood, Jeremy, Zvi Hercowitz, and Per Krusell. (1997). “Long-run Implications
of Investment-speci…c Technological Change.”American Economic Review, 87(3), 342362.
[67] Greenwood, Jeremy, Ananth Seshadri, and Mehmet Yorukoglu. (2005). “Engines of
Liberation.”The Review of Economic Studies, 72(1), 109-133.
[68] Guner, Nezih, Gustavo Ventura, and Yi Xu. (2008). “Macroeconomic Implications of
Size-Dependent Policies.”Review of Economic Dynamics, 11(4), 721-744.
[69] Hansen, Gary D. (1985). “Indivisible Labor and the Business Cycle.”Journal of Monetary Economics, 16(3), 309-327.
[70] Hansen, Gary D. (1997). “Technical Progress and Aggregate Fluctuations,”Journal of
Economic Dynamics and Control 21(6), 1005-1023.
[71] Hansen, Gary D., and Edward C. Prescott. (1993). “Did Technology Shocks Cause the
1990-1991 Recession?”American Economic Review, 83(2), 280-286.
[72] Hayashi, Fumio, and Edward C. Prescott. (2002). “The 1990s in Japan: A Lost
Decade.”Review of Economic Dynamics, 5(1), 206-235.
[73] Heckman, James J., Lance Lochner, and Christopher Taber. (1998). “Explaining Rising
Wage Inequality: Explorations with a Dynamic General Equilibrium Model of Labor
Earnings with Heterogeneous Agents.”Review of Economic Dynamics, 1(1), 1-58.
[74] Heok, Jeong, Yong Kim and Iourii Manovskii. (2015). “The Price of Experience.”
American Economic Review, 105(2): 784-815.
[75] Herrendorf, Berthold, and Akos Valentinyi. (2008). "Measuring Factor Income Shares
at the Sector Level." Review of Economic Dynamics, 11(4), 820-835.
[76] Herman, Arthur. (2012). Freedom’s Forge: How American Business Produced Victory
in World War II. Random House, New York City, New York.
56

[77] Hodrick, Robert and Edward C. Prescott. (1997). "Postwar U.S. Business Cycles: An
Empirical Investigation." Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 29(1), 1-16.
[78] Hopenhayn, Hugo A. (2014). “Firms, Misallocation, and Aggregate Productivity: A
Review.”Annual Review of Economics, 6(1), 735-770.
[79] Hopenhayn, Hugo, and Richard Rogerson. (1993). “Job Turnover and Policy Evaluation: A General Equilibrium Analysis.”Journal of Political Economy, 101(5), 915-38.
[80] Hsieh, Chang-Tai, and Peter J. Klenow. (2009). “Misallocation and Manufacturing
TFP in China and India.”The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(4), 1403-1448.
[81] Joines, Douglas H. (1981). “Estimates of E¤ective Marginal Tax Rates on Factor Incomes.”Journal of Business, 54(2), 191-226.
[82] Jones, Charles I. (2005). “The Shape of Production Functions and the Direction of
Technical Change.”The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(2), 517-549.
[83] Jones, Charles I. (2013). "Misallocation, Economic Growth, and Input-Output Economics" in D. Acemoglu, M. Arellano, and E. Dekel, Advances in Economics and
Econometrics, Tenth World Congress, Volume II, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
[84] Justiniano, Alejandro, Giorgio E. Primiceri, and Andrea Tambalotti. (2010). “Investment Shocks and Business Cycles.”Journal of Monetary Economics, 57(2), 132-145.
[85] Karabarbounis, Loukas, and Brent Neiman. (2014). “The Global Decline of the Labor
Share.”The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(1), 61-103.
[86] Katz, Lawrence F., and Kevin M. Murphy. (1992). “Changes in Relative Wages, 19631987: Supply and Demand Factors.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107(1),
35-78.
[87] Kendrick, John. (1961). Productivity Trends in the United States, Princeton University
Press, Princeton, New Jersey.
[88] Kehoe, Timothy J., and Edward C. Prescott. (2007). Great Depressions of the Twentieth Century. Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, Minneapolis, Minnesota.
[89] Klein, Paul and Gustavo Ventura. (2015). Making a Miracle: Ireland 1980-2005. Unpublished Paper.
[90] Kovacic, William E., and Carl Shapiro. (2000). “Antitrust Policy: A Century of Economic and Legal Thinking.”The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 14(1), 43-60.
[91] Krusell, Per, Lee E. Ohanian, José-Víctor Ríos-Rull, and Giovanni L. Violante. (2000).
“Capital-skill Complementarity and Inequality: A Macroeconomic Analysis.” Econometrica, 68(5), 1029-1053.

57

[92] Kydland, Finn E., and Edward C. Prescott. (1982). “Time to Build and Aggregate
Fluctuations.”Econometrica, 50(6), 1345-70.
[93] Kydland, Finn E., and Edward C. Prescott. (1988). “The Workweek of Capital and its
Cyclical Implications.”Journal of Monetary Economics, 21(2), 343-360.
[94] Kydland, Finn E., and Carlos E. J. M. Zarazaga. (2016). “Fiscal Sentiment and the
Weak Recovery from the Great Recession: A Quantitative Exploration.”Forthcoming,
Journal of Monetary Economics.
[95] Lahiri, Amartya, and Kei-Mu Yi. (2009). “A Tale of Two States: Maharashtra and
West Bengal.”Review of Economic Dynamics, 12(3), 523-542.
[96] Lee, Donghoon, and Kenneth I. Wolpin. (2006). “Intersectoral Labor Mobility and the
Growth of the Service Sector.”Econometrica, 74(1), 1-46.
[97] Lilien, David M. (1982). “Sectoral Shifts and Cyclical Unemployment.” Journal of
Political Economy, 90(4), 777-93.
[98] Ljungqvist, Lars, and Thomas J. Sargent. (1998). “The European Unemployment
Dilemma.”Journal of Political Economy, 106(3), 514-550.
[99] Long Jr, John B., and Charles I. Plosser. (1983). “Real Business Cycles.” Journal of
Political Economy, 91(1), 39-69.
[100] Lucas, Robert E., Jr. (1973). “Expectations and the Neutrality of Money.”Journal of
Economic Theory, 4(2), 103-124.
[101] Lucas, Robert E., Jr. (1973). “Some International Evidence on Output-In‡ation Tradeo¤s”, 63(3), 326-334.
[102] Lucas, Robert E., and Leonard A. Rapping. (1969). “Real Wages, Employment, and
In‡ation.”Journal of Political Economy, 77(5), 721-754.
[103] Lucas, Robert E., and Leonard A. Rapping. (1972). “Unemployment in the Great
Depression: Is There a Full Explanation?” Journal of Political Economy, 80(1), 186191.
[104] Lu, Shu-Shiuan. (2012). "East Asian Growth Experience Revisited from the Perspective of a Neoclassical Model," Review of Economic Dynamics, 15(3), 359-376.
[105] McDaniel, Cara. (2011). “Forces Shaping Hours Worked in the OECD, 1960-2004.”
American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 3(4), 27-52.
[106] McGrattan, Ellen R. (2012). “Capital Taxation During the US Great Depression.”The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(3), 1515-1550.
[107] McGrattan, Ellen R., and Lee E. Ohanian. (2010). “Does Neoclassical Theory Account
For The E¤ects of Big Fiscal Shocks? Evidence From World War II.” International
Economic Review, 51(2), 509-532.
58

[108] McGrattan, Ellen R., and Edward C. Prescott. (2012) "The Great Recession and
Delayed Economic Recovery: A Labor Productivity Puzzle?" in Ohanian, Lee E., John
B. Taylor, and Ian Wright, (Eds.) Government Policies and the Delayed Economic
Recovery. Hoover Press, Stanford, California.
[109] Modigliani, Franco. (1977). “The Monetarist Controversy or, Should We Forsake Stabilization Policies?”American Economic Review, 67(2), 1-19.
[110] Moll, Benjamin. (2014). "Productivity Losses from Financial Frictions: Can SelfFinancing Undo Capital Misallocation?." American Economic Review 104(10), 31863221.
[111] Morley, James, Charles R. Nelson and Eric Zivot. (2003). “Why Are Unobserved Component and Beveridge–Nelson Trend-cycle Decompositions of GDP so Di¤erent?”Review of Economics and Statistics, 85(2), 235-243.
[112] Mountford, Andrew, and Harald Uhlig (2009). "What are the E¤ects of Fiscal Policy
Shocks?" Journal of Applied Econometrics, 24(6), 960-992
[113] Mulligan, Casey B. (1998). “Pecuniary Incentives to Work in the United States During
World War II.”Journal of Political Economy, 106(5), 1033-1077.
[114] Mulligan, Casey B. (2005). “Public Policies as Speci…cation Errors.” Review of Economic Dynamics, 8(4), 902-926.
[115] Mulligan, C. B. (2012). The Redistribution Recession: How Labor Market Distortions
Contracted the Economy. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
[116] Mulligan, Casey. (2013). “Average Marginal Labor Income Tax Rates Under the Affordable Care Act.”National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 19365.
[117] Nevo, Aviv, and Arlene Wong. (2015). “The Elasticity of Substitution Between Time
and Market Goods: Evidence from the Great Recession.”National Bureau of Economic
Research Working Paper No. 213180.
[118] Ober…eld, Ezra. (2013). "Productivity and Misallocation During a Crisis: Evidence
from the Chilean Crisis of 1982." Review of Economic Dynamics, 16(1), 100-119.
[119] Ohanian, Lee E. (1997). “The Macroeconomic E¤ects of War Finance in the United
States: World War II and the Korean War.”American Economic Review 87(1), 23-40.
[120] Ohanian, Lee E. (2001). "Why Did Productivity Fall so Much During the Great Depression?" American Economic Review, 91(2), 34-38.
[121] Ohanian, Lee E. (2009). "What–or Who Started the Great Depression?" Journal of
Economic Theory, 144(6), 2310-2335.
[122] Ohanian, Lee E. 2010. "The Economic Crisis from a Neoclassical Perspective." Journal
of Economic Perspectives, 24(4), 45-66.
59

[123] Ohanian, Lee E. (2011). "Comment on ’What Fiscal Policy is E¤ective at Zero Interest Rates’?" NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2010, Volume 25, 125-137. University of
Chicago Press, Chicago, Illinois.
[124] Ohanian, Lee E. and Musa Orak. (2016). "Capital-Skill Complementarity, Inequality,
and Labor’s Share of Income, 1963-2013." UCLA Discussion Paper.
[125] Osuna, Victoria, and Jose-Victor Rios-Rull. (2003). “Implementing the 35 Hour Workweek by Means of Overtime Taxation.”Review of Economic Dynamics, 6(1), 179-206.
[126] Otsu, Keisuke. (2008). “A Neoclassical Analysis of the Korean Crisis.”Review of Economic Dynamics, 11(2), 449-471.
[127] Poschke, Markus. (2010). “The Regulation of Entry and Aggregate Productivity.”The
Economic Journal, 120(549), 1175-1200.
[128] Ragan, Kelly S. (2013). "Taxes and Time Use: Fiscal Policy in a Household Production
Model." American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 5(1): 168-92.
[129] Ramey, Valerie A. (2011). "Can Government Purchases Stimulate the Economy?" Journal of Economic Literature, 49(3), 673-685.
[130] Rees, Albert. (1970). “On Equilibrium in Labor Markets.” Journal of Political Economy, 78(2), 306-310.
[131] Restuccia, Diego, and Richard Rogerson. (2008). “Policy Distortions and Aggregate
Productivity with Heterogeneous Establishments.” Review of Economic Dynamics,
11(4), 707-720.
[132] Rogerson, Richard. (2008). “Structural Transformation and the Deterioration of European Labor Market Outcomes.”Journal of Political Economy, 116(2), 235-259.
[133] Rogerson, Richard. (2009). “Market Work, Home Work, and Taxes: A Cross-Country
Analysis.”Review of International Economics, 17(3), 588-601.
[134] Samaniego, Roberto M. (2008). “Can Technical Change Exacerbate the E¤ects of
Labor Market Sclerosis?”Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 32(2), 497-528.
[135] Sandleris, Guido, and Mark L. J. Wright. (2014). "The Costs of Financial Crises:
Resource Misallocation, Productivity, and Welfare in the 2001 Argentine Crisis." The
Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 116(1), 87-127.
[136] Sargent, Thomas J. (1973). “Rational Expectations, the Real Rate of Interest, and the
Natural Rate of Unemployment.”Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2, 429-480.
[137] Sargent, Thomas & Neil Wallace Neil (1975). "’Rational’Expectations, the Optimal
Monetary Instrument, and the Optimal Money Supply Rule." Journal of Political
Economy 83 (2): 241–254.

60

[138] Schumpeter, Joseph. (1927). The Explanation of the Business Cycle. Economica, 21,
286-311.
[139] Schumpeter, Joseph. (1942). Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy. Harper and Brothers, New York City, New York.
[140] Marimon, Ramon. and A. Scott (1999). Computational Methods for Study of Dynamic
Economies. Oxford University Press, New York.
[141] Simon, Curtis J. (2001). “The Supply Price of Labor During the Great Depression.”
The Journal of Economic History, 61(4), 877-903.
[142] Siu, Henry E. (2008). “The Fiscal Role of Conscription in the US World War II E¤ort.”
Journal of Monetary Economics, 55(6), 1094-1112.
[143] Stock, James H., and Mark W. Watson. (1988). “Variable Trends in Economic Time
Series.” The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2(3), 147-174.
[144] Stock, James H., and Mark W. Watson. (2003). “Has the Business Cycle Changed and
Why?” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2002, 17, 159-230. MIT Press, Cambridge,
Massachusetts.
[145] Taylor, John B. (2010). “Getting Back on Track: Macroeconomic Policy Lessons from
the Financial Crisis.”Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, 92(3), 165-176.
[146] Taylor, John B. (2011). "An Empirical Analysis of the Revival of Fiscal Activism in
the 2000s." Journal of Economic Literature, 49(3), 686-702.
[147] Watson, Mark W. (1986). “Univariate Detrending Methods with Stochastic Trends.”
Journal of Monetary Economics, 18(1), 49-75.
[148] Ziebarth, Nicolas L. (2014). "Misallocation and Productivity in the Great Depression."
Unpublished.

61

Figure 1: Log of Real GDP
0.08
2-200 quarters
32-200 quarters

0.06
0.04
0.02
0
-0.02
-0.04
-0.06
-0.08
1954

1961

1969

1976

1984

1992

1999

2007

2014

Figure 2: Log of Consumption of Nondurables and Services
0.06
2-200 quarters
32-200 quarters

0.04

0.02

0

-0.02

-0.04

-0.06
1954

1961

1969

1976

1984

62

1992

1999

2007

2014

Figure 3: Log of Fixed Investment
0.3
2-200 quarters
32-200 quarters

0.2

0.1

0

-0.1

-0.2

-0.3

-0.4
1954

1961

1969

1976

1984

1992

1999

2007

2014

2007

2014

Figure 4: Log of Total Hours Worked
0.06
0.04
0.02
0
-0.02
-0.04
-0.06
-0.08
-0.1
1954

2-200 quarters
32-200 quarters

1961

1969

1976

1984

63

1992

1999

Figure 5: Log of Total Factor Productivity
0.08
2-200 quarters
32-200 quarters

0.06

0.04

0.02

0

-0.02

-0.04

-0.06
1954

1961

1969

1976

1984

1992

1999

2007

2014

Figure 6: Log of Relative Price of Equipment
0.2
2-200 quarters
32-200 quarters

0.15

0.1

0.05

0

-0.05

-0.1

-0.15
1954

1961

1969

1976

1984

64

1992

1999

2007

2014

Figure 7: Fernald TFP (filtered 32-200 quarters)
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
0
-0.01
-0.02
-0.03
-0.04
-0.05
1947

utilization-adjusted TFP
non-adjusted TFP

1955

1964

1972

1981

1990

1998

2007

2015

Figure 8: Annual Log of Real GDP
0.3
2-50 years
8-50 years

0.2

0.1

0

-0.1

-0.2

-0.3

-0.4
1890

1905

1921

1936

1952

65

1968

1983

1999

2014

Figure 9: Annual Log of Hours Worked
0.15

0.1

0.05

0

-0.05

-0.1

-0.15
2-50 years
8-50 years

-0.2
1890

1905

1920

1935

1950

1965

1980

1995

2010

Figure 10: Log of Real GDP - France
0.15
2-50 years
8-50 years

0.1

0.05

0

-0.05

-0.1
1954

1961

1969

1976

66

1984

1992

1999

2007

Figure 11: Log of Real GDP - Germany
0.15
2-50 years
8-50 years

0.1

0.05

0

-0.05

-0.1

-0.15
1954

1961

1969

1976

1984

1992

1999

2007

Figure 12: Log of Real GDP - Italy
0.15
2-50 years
8-50 years

0.1

0.05

0

-0.05

-0.1
1954

1961

1969

1976

67

1984

1992

1999

2007

Figure 13: Log of Real GDP - Spain
0.1
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0
-0.02
-0.04
-0.06
-0.08

2-50 years
8-50 years

-0.1
1954

1961

1969

1976

1984

1992

1999

2007

Figure 14: Log of Real GDP - Sweden
0.15

0.1

0.05

0

-0.05
2-50 years
8-50 years

-0.1

-0.15

-0.2
1954

1961

1969

1976

68

1984

1992

1999

2007

Figure 15: Beveridge-Nelson Decomposition of Real GDP
0.2

0.15

0.1

0.05

Beveridge-Nelson Long-Run Component
Detrended Log Real GDP

0

-0.05
1954

1961

1969

1976

1984

69

1992

1999

2007

Figure 16: Filtered GDP and the Relative Price of Equipment
0.2
LN(GDP)
LN(PE)

0.15

0.1

0.05

0

-0.05

-0.1

-0.15
1954

1961

1969

1976

1984

1992

1999

2007

2014

(a) 2-200 Quarters
0.1
LN(GDP)
LN(PE)

0.05

0

-0.05

-0.1

-0.15
1954

1961

1969

1976

1984

1992

1999

2007

2014

(b) 2-32 Quarters
0.15
LN(GDP)
LN(PE)

0.1

0.05

0

-0.05

-0.1
1954

1961

1969

1976

1984

1992

(c) 32-200 Quarters

70

1999

2007

2014

Figure 17: Output and Hours Worked, Data and Two-Sector Model
3
2.9
2.8
2.7
2.6
2.5
2.4
2.3
2.2
2.1
1954

Output, Data
Output, Model

1960

1966

1972

1978

1984

1990

1996

2002

2008

2014

-1.2

-1.25

-1.3

-1.35

Hours, Data
Hours, Model

-1.4

-1.45
1954

1960

1966

1972

1978

1984

71

1990

1996

2002

2008

2014

Figure 18: Filtered Actual and Two-Sector Model Data (2-32 quarters)
0.08

0.04
Output, Data
Output, Model

0.02

0.06

0
0.04
-0.02
0.02
-0.04
0
-0.06
-0.02

-0.08
Hours, Data
Hours, Model

-0.04
1954

1960

1966

1972

1978

1984

1990

1996

2002

2008

-0.1
1954

2014

1960

1966

1972

1978

1984

1990

1996

2002

2008

2014

0.15

0.03
Consumption, Data
Consumption, Model

0.025

Investment, Data
Investment, Model

0.1

0.02
0.015

0.05

0.01
0

0.005
0

-0.05

-0.005
-0.01

-0.1

-0.015
-0.02
1954

1960

1966

1972

1978

1984

1990

1996

2002

2008

-0.15
1954

2014

72

1960

1966

1972

1978

1984

1990

1996

2002

2008

2014

Figure 19: Filtered Actual and Two-Sector Model Data (32-200 quarters)
0.04

0.08

0.03

0.06

0.02
0.04
0.01
0.02

0

0

-0.01
-0.02

-0.02

-0.03
-0.04
-0.04
-0.06
-0.08
1954

-0.05

Output, Data
Output, Model

1960

1966

1972

1978

1984

1990

1996

2002

2008

-0.06
1954

2014

0.06

Hours, Data
Hours, Model

1960

1966

1972

1978

1990

1996

2002

2008

2014

1996

2002

2008

2014

0.15
Consumption, Data
Consumption, Model

Investment, Data
Investment, Model

0.04

0.1

0.02

0.05

0

0

-0.02

-0.05

-0.04

-0.1

-0.06
1954

1984

1960

1966

1972

1978

1984

1990

1996

2002

2008

-0.15
1954

2014

73

1960

1966

1972

1978

1984

1990

Figure 20: Contribution of Equipment Specific Technology Fluctuations
0.08

0.04
Output, Data
Output, Model
Output, Model q shock only

0.06

0.02

0
0.04
-0.02
0.02
-0.04
0
-0.06
-0.02

-0.04
1954

Hours, Data
Hours, Model
Hours, Model q shock only

-0.08

1960

1966

1972

1978

1984

1990

1996

2002

2008

-0.1
1954

2014

1960

1966

1972

1978

1984

1990

1996

2002

2008

2014

1984

1990

1996

2002

2008

2014

0.04

0.08
Output, Data
Output, Model
Output, Model q shock only

0.06

0.03
0.02

0.04
0.01
0.02

0

0

-0.01
-0.02

-0.02

-0.03
-0.04
-0.04
-0.06
-0.08
1954

Hours, Data
Hours, Model
Hours, Model q shock only

-0.05

1960

1966

1972

1978

1984

1990

1996

2002

2008

-0.06
1954

2014

74

1960

1966

1972

1978

Figure 21: Comparison of Two-Sector and One-Sector Models
0.08

0.04
Output, Data
Output, Two-sector model
Output, One-sector model

0.06

0.02

0
0.04
-0.02
0.02
-0.04
0
-0.06
-0.02

-0.04
1954

Hours, Data
Hours, Two-sector model
Hours, One-sector model

-0.08

1960

1966

1972

1978

1984

1990

1996

2002

2008

-0.1
1954

2014

1960

1966

1972

1978

1984

1990

1996

2002

2008

2014

1984

1990

1996

2002

2008

2014

0.04

0.08
Output, Data
Output, Two-sector model
Output, One-sector model

0.06

0.03
0.02

0.04
0.01
0.02

0

0

-0.01
-0.02

-0.02

-0.03
-0.04
-0.04
-0.06
-0.08
1954

Hours, Data
Hours, Two-sector model
Hours, One-sector model

-0.05

1960

1966

1972

1978

1984

1990

1996

2002

2008

-0.06
1954

2014

75

1960

1966

1972

1978

Figure 22: Standard Home Production and Alternative – Output and Hours
-1.2

3
2.9

-1.25

2.8
2.7

-1.3
2.6

Output, Data
Output, Std. Home Production

2.5

-1.35
2.4
2.3

Hours, Data
Hours, Std. Home Productionr

-1.4

2.2
2.1
1954

1960

1966

1972

1978

1984

1990

1996

2002

2008

-1.45
1954

2014

1960

1966

1972

1978

1984

1990

1996

2002

2008

2014

-1.2

3
2.9

-1.25

2.8
2.7

-1.3
2.6
2.5
-1.35

Output, Data
Output, Alt. Home Production

2.4
2.3

-1.4

2.2
2.1
1954

Hours, Data
Hours, Alt. Home Production

1960

1966

1972

1978

1984

1990

1996

2002

2008

-1.45
1954

2014

76

1960

1966

1972

1978

1984

1990

1996

2002

2008

2014

Figure 23: Standard Home Production and Alternative – Filtered Output and Hours
0.05

0.08
Output, Std. Home Production
Output, Alt. Home Production

Hours, Std. Home Production
Hours, Alt. Home Production

0.04

0.06
0.03
0.04

0.02
0.01

0.02

0
0

-0.01
-0.02

-0.02

-0.03
-0.04
-0.04
-0.06
1954

1960

1966

1972

1978

1984

1990

1996

2002

2008

-0.05
1954

2014

1960

1966

1972

1978

1984

1990

1996

2002

2008

2014

0.05

0.1
Output, Std. Home Production
Output, Alt. Home Production

0.08

0.04
0.03

0.06

0.02

0.04

0.01
0.02
0
0
-0.01
-0.02

-0.02

-0.04

-0.03

-0.06

-0.04

-0.08
1954

-0.05
1954

1960

1966

1972

1978

1984

1990

1996

2002

2008

2014

77

Hours, Std. Home Production
Hours, Alt. Home Production

1960

1966

1972

1978

1984

1990

1996

2002

2008

2014

Figure 24: Standard Home Production and Data – Filtered Output and Hours
0.08

0.05
Output, Data
Output, Std. Home Production

Hours, Data
Hours, Std. Home Production

0.06

0.04

0

0.02

0

-0.05

-0.02

-0.04
1954

1960

1966

1972

1978

1984

1990

1996

2002

2008

2014

-0.1
1954

1960

1966

1972

1978

1984

1990

1996

2002

2008

2014

0.06

0.1
Output, Data
Output, Std. Home Production

0.08

Hours, Data
Hours, Std. Home Production

0.04
0.06
0.02

0.04
0.02

0
0
-0.02

-0.02
-0.04

-0.04
-0.06
-0.08
1954

1960

1966

1972

1978

1984

1990

1996

2002

2008

2014

-0.06
1954

1960

1966

1972

1978

1984

1990

1996

2002

2008

2014

Figure 25: Comparing OECD Hours Worked, Model and Data

Hours Worked

1600
1400
1200
1000
800
600
1955

Data
Model
1960

1965

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

1990

1995

2000

2005

1990

1995

2000

2005

(a) Group 1 Countries

Hours Worked

1600
1400
1200
1000
800
600
1955

Data
Model
1960

1965

1970

1975

1980

1985

(b) Group 2 Countries

Hours Worked

1600
1400
1200
1000
800
600
1955

Data
Model
1960

1965

1970

1975

1980

1985

(c) Group 3 Countries

79

Figure 26: U.S. Government Spending, Tax Rates, Draft, & TFP, 1939-46

0.6

0.5

0.12

Government
Consumption

0.10

Government
Investment

0.08
0.4
0.06
0.3
0.04
0.2

0.1
1939

%

22
20

0.02

1940

1941

1942

1943

1944

1945

0.00
1939

1946

%

Tax Rate
on Labor

65

60

18
16

1940

1941

1942

1943

1944

1945

1946

1942

1943

1944

1945

1946

1942

1943

1944

1945

1946

Tax Rate
on Capital

55

14
50

12
10

45

8
6
1939

%

12
10

1940

1941

1942

1943

1944

1945

40
1939

1946

1.7

Military Employment
to 16+ Population

1940

1941

Total Factor
Productivity

1.6
8
1.5

6
4

1.4
2
0
1939

1940

1941

1942

1943

1944

1945

1.3
1939

1946

1940

1941

Notes:
(1) Government spending series are real and detrended by dividing by the population over 16 and by the growth
trend in technology (scaled so the 1946 real detrended level of GNP less military compensation equals 1).
(2) Total factor productivity is defined to be Y/(KθL1-θ
p ), where Y is real, detrended GNP less military compensation,
K is real detrended nonmilitary capital stock, Lp is nonmilitary hours worked, and θ = .38.

80

Figure 27: Real Detrended GNP, Private Consumption, and Private Investment

1.5

0.7

0.3

0.6

0.2

1.4
1.3
1.2

GNP

1.1
Consumption

0.5

1.0

0.1

Investment

0.9
0.8

1940

1942

1944

1946

0.4

1940

1942

1944

1946

0.0

1940

Legend
U.S. Data
Model
Note: Data series are divided by the 1946 real detrended level of GNP less military compensation.

81

194

Figure 28: Per Capita Total and Nonmilitary Hours of Work, 1939-1946

1.4

1.3

1.2
Total
Hours

1.1
1.2

1.1
1.0

Nonmilitary
Hours

1.0

0.9
1939 1940 1941 1942 1943 1944 1945 1946

0.9
1939 1940 1941 1942 1943 1944 1945 1946

Legend
U.S. Data
Model
Note: Hours series are divided by the 1946−1960 U.S. averages.

82

Figure 29: After-tax Returns to Capital and Nonmilitary Labor, 1939-1946

4.25

1.05

1.02
3.75
0.99
3.25

Return to
Labor

Return to
Capital

0.96

2.75
1939 1940 1941 1942 1943 1944 1945 1946

0.93
1939 1940 1941 1942 1943 1944 1945 1946

Legend
U.S. Data
Model
Note: Return to capital is equal to 100(1-τk)(θY/K-δ) .
Return to labor is after-tax nonmilitary labor productivity normalized by the 1946−1960 U.S. averages.

83

Figure 30: Comparing College Skill Premium, Model and Data
2.1

2

1.9

1.8

1.7

1.6

1.5
data
model

1.4
1963

1969

1975

1981

1987

84

1994

2000

2006

2012

Table 1 - Calibrated Parameter Values
Parameter Description

85

Equipment Share
Structures Share
Capital Share
Depreciation Rate - Equipment
Depreciation Rate - Structures
Depreciation Rate - Durables
Depreciation Rate - Capital
Growth Rate - z
Growth Rate - q
Growth Rate - z
Population Growth Factor
Discount Factor
Utility Share for Mkt. Consumption
Utility Parameter for Leisure
Scale Parameter - Market Production
Elasticity Parameter - Home Production
Elasticity Parameter - Mkt./Non-mkt. Cons.
Durable Share - Home Production
Scale Parameter - Home Production

Two-Sector
θ1
θ2
θ
δE
δS
δD
δ
µ1
µ2
µ
η
β
α
φ
A
σ
ω
ϕ
AN

One-Sector

0.21
0.19

Three-Sector (1)

Three-Sector (2)

0.21
0.19

0.21
0.19

0.021
0.008
0.05

0.021
0.008
0.05

0
0.0104

0
0.0104

1.003
0.99
0.33
1.19
6.21
0
0.6
0.25
4.19

1.003
0.99
0.53
1.19
6.21
0.4
0
0.13
4.87

0.4
0.021
0.008
0.05
0.013
0
0.0104
1.003
0.99
0.82
2.37
6.21

Three-Sector (1) - Standard Home Production
Three-Sector (2) - Calibration inspired by Greenwood et al (2005)

0.0021
1.003
0.99
2.37
2.7

Table 2 - Comparing Models with Data (1955Q1 - 2014Q4)
One Sector Model

Two Sector Model

Standard Deviation
Correlation
Model/Data
Model and Data

Standard Deviation
Correlation
Model/Data
Model and Data

2-32 Quarters
Y
C
I
H

0.86
0.73
0.71
0.30

0.80
0.82
0.64
0.18

1.09
1.00
0.86
0.63

0.84
0.56
0.79
0.48

1.21
1.07
1.08
0.81

0.86
0.64
0.81
0.53

1.21
1.09
1.05
0.74

0.84
0.62
0.79
0.50

32-200 Quarters
Y
C
I
H

0.85
0.70
0.81
0.35

0.88
0.78
0.82
0.51
2-200 Quarters

Y
C
I
H

0.86
0.72
0.80
0.33

0.86
0.77
0.77
0.40

Table 3 - Comparing Models with Data (1955Q1 - 2014Q4)
Standard Home Production
(ω = 0.6 and σ = 0)

Alternative
(ω = 0 and σ = 0.4)

Standard Deviation
Correlation
Model/Data
Model and Data

Standard Deviation
Correlation
Model/Data
Model and Data

2-32 Quarters
Y
C
I
H

1.23
1.52
0.95
0.76

0.84
0.50
0.80
0.39

1.23
1.02
1.09
0.89

0.84
0.39
0.78
0.50

1.41
1.03
1.38
1.16

0.84
0.51
0.77
0.48

1.41
1.05
1.32
1.07

0.83
0.49
0.75
0.45

32-200 Quarters
Y
C
I
H

1.43
1.42
1.20
1.02

0.84
0.58
0.80
0.50
2-200 Quarters

Y
C
I
H

1.43
1.45
1.15
0.95

0.86
0.56
0.78
0.44

Table 4 - Comparing Models with Data (1955Q1 - 1983Q4)
One Sector Model
Standard Deviation
Correlation
Model/Data
Model and Data

Two Sector Model

Standard Home Production

Standard Deviation
Correlation
Standard Deviation
Correlation
Model/Data
Model and Data
Model/Data
Model and Data
2-32 Quarters

Y
C
I
H

0.88
0.74
0.73
0.33

0.83
0.84
0.68
0.24

1.13
0.92
0.93
0.74

0.91
0.55
0.87
0.66

1.25
1.46
1.02
0.86

0.90
0.45
0.88
0.53

0.95
0.74
0.92
0.44

1.69
1.44
2.14
1.45

0.92
0.67
0.90
0.45

0.94
0.72
0.87
0.49

1.63
1.45
1.66
1.22

0.91
0.66
0.84
0.44

32-200 Quarters
Y
C
I
H

0.97
0.70
1.24
0.46

0.91
0.80
0.76
0.41

1.47
1.10
1.87
1.09
2-200 Quarters

Y
C
I
H

0.96
0.72
1.09
0.41

0.89
0.79
0.72
0.33

1.42
1.10
1.52
0.93

Table 5 - Comparing Models with Data (1984Q1 - 2007Q3)
One Sector Model
Standard Deviation
Correlation
Model/Data
Model and Data

Two Sector Model

Standard Home Production

Standard Deviation
Correlation
Standard Deviation
Correlation
Model/Data
Model and Data
Model/Data
Model and Data
2-32 Quarters

Y
C
I
H

0.88
0.71
0.74
0.33

0.84
0.81
0.76
0.24

1.06
1.10
0.80
0.53

0.79
0.70
0.71
0.20

1.23
1.55
0.88
0.73

0.81
0.68
0.73
0.26

0.93
0.74
0.95
0.47

1.60
1.73
1.04
1.29

0.94
0.73
0.96
0.49

0.91
0.74
0.91
0.22

1.71
1.94
1.06
1.33

0.92
0.73
0.92
0.28

32-200 Quarters
Y
C
I
H

1.02
0.98
0.77
0.46

0.92
0.81
0.95
0.43

1.43
1.41
0.96
0.97
2-200 Quarters

Y
C
I
H

1.09
1.05
0.79
0.49

0.91
0.79
0.91
0.26

1.52
1.55
0.98
0.98

Table 6 - Comparing Models with Data (2007Q4 - 2014Q4)
One Sector Model
Standard Deviation
Correlation
Model/Data
Model and Data

Two Sector Model

Standard Home Production

Standard Deviation
Correlation
Standard Deviation
Correlation
Model/Data
Model and Data
Model/Data
Model and Data
2-32 Quarters

Y
C
I
H

0.77
0.77
0.52
0.17

0.42
0.64
0.14
-0.34

0.99
1.42
0.57
0.26

0.43
0.43
0.30
-0.21

1.20
2.03
0.63
0.41

0.40
0.40
0.26
-0.24

0.95
0.99
0.80
0.90

0.89
1.11
0.47
0.36

0.91
0.99
0.80
0.87

0.66
0.91
0.28
0.10

0.76
0.94
0.37
0.23

0.55
0.88
0.22
-0.01

32-200 Quarters
Y
C
I
H

0.63
0.73
0.40
0.14

0.97
0.99
0.95
0.82

0.72
0.79
0.52
0.22
2-200 Quarters

Y
C
I
H

0.55
0.67
0.28
0.10

0.75
0.93
0.33
0.02

0.66
0.68
0.42
0.16

Table 7 - U.S. Great Depression Levels of Real Output and its Components (Index, 1929=100)
Consumption

Foreign Trade

Year

Real
Output

Nondurables
and Services

Consumer
Durables

Business
Investment

Government
Purchases

Exports

Imports

1930

87.4

90.9

76.2

79.2

105.1

85.3

84.9

1931

78.1

85.4

63.4

49.4

105.4

70.6

72.4

1932

65.2

76.0

46.7

27.9

97.3

54.5

58.1

1933

61.9

72.2

44.4

24.6

91.7

52.8

60.8

1934

64.6

72.1

49.0

28.4

101.1

52.8

58.3

1935

68.1

73.1

58.9

34.4

100.1

53.8

69.3

1936

74.9

77.0

70.8

45.9

113.9

55.1

71.9

1937

76.0

77.2

72.2

53.6

106.3

64.3

78.3

1938

70.6

74.3

56.3

37.8

112.0

62.8

58.6

1939

73.5

75.0

64.3

40.5

112.9

61.7

61.6

Data are measured in per capita terms and detrended.

Table 8 - Five Measures of Labor Input During U.S. Great Depression (Index, 1929=100)

Aggregate Measures

Sectoral Measures

Year

Total
Employment

Total Hours

Private Hours

Farm Hours

Manufacturing
Hours

1930

93.8

92.0

91.5

99.0

83.5

1931

86.7

83.6

82.8

101.6

67.2

1932

78.9

73.5

72.4

98.6

53.0

1933

78.6

72.7

70.8

98.8

56.1

1934

83.7

71.8

68.7

89.1

58.4

1935

85.4

74.8

71.4

93.1

64.8

1936

89.8

80.7

75.8

90.9

74.2

1937

90.8

83.1

79.5

98.8

79.3

1938

86.1

76.4

71.7

92.4

62.3

1939

87.5

78.8

74.4

93.2

71.2

Data are measured in per capita terms.

Table 9 - Productivity and Real Wage Rates During U.S. Great Depression
(Index, 1929=100)
Total Factor Productivity

Real Wage Rates

Year

Labor
Productivity∗

Private
Domestic

Private
Nonfarm

Total

Manufacturing

1930

95.3

94.8

94.8

99.3

101.9

98.2

1931

95.2

93.4

92.0

98.9

106.0

96.1

1932

89.4

87.6

85.8

95.8

105.3

92.3

1933

84.8

85.7

82.7

91.3

102.5

87.2

1934

90.3

93.1

92.7

95.7

108.8

91.1

1935

94.8

96.3

95.3

95.1

108.3

90.4

1936

93.7

99.5

99.5

97.6

107.2

94.1

1937

95.1

100.1

99.3

97.8

113.0

92.5

1938

94.6

99.9

98.1

99.1

117.4

92.8

1939

95.2

102.6

100.1

100.1

116.4

94.3

Data are detrended.
∗Labor Productivity is defined as output per hour.

NonManufacturing

Table 10 - U.S. Great Depression - Data & Model with Wage Fixing and Work Sharing Policies
(Index, 1929:3 = 100)
Output

Manufacturing Hours

Agricultural Hours

Data

Model

Data

Model

Data

Model

1929:4

97

101

91

96

99

104

1930:1

93

98

84

92

98

102

1930:2

90

96

76

89

99

99

1930:3

87

94

69

85

99

97

1930:4

84

91

67

80

99

94

1931:1

82

87

65

76

98

92

1931:2

78

86

59

71

97

90

1931:3

75

84

56

69

96

88

Table 11 - Equilibrium Path of Recovery from Depression in Competitive Model

Output

Consumption

Investment

Employment

Wage

1934

.87

.90

.73

.98

.89

1935

.92

.91

.97

1.01

.91

1936

.97

.93

1.18

1.03

.94

1937

.98

.94

1.14

1.03

.95

1938

.98

.95

1.12

1.02

.96

1939

.99

.96

1.09

1.02

.97

Table 12 - Equilibrium Path of Recovery from Depression in Cartel Policy Model
Employment
Output

Consumption Investment

Employment

Searchers

Cartel
Sector

Competitive
Sector

Wage
Cartel
Sector

Competitive
Sector

1934

.77

.85

.40

.82

.07

.68

.89

1.16

.81

1935

.81

.85

.62

.84

.11

.69

.92

1.19

.83

1936

.86

.85

.87

.89

.06

.72

.97

1.20

.83

1937

.87

.86

.90

.90

.04

.73

.98

1.20

.83

1938

.86

.86

.86

.89

.06

.72

.97

1.20

.84

1939

.87

.86

.88

.89

.04

.73

.97

1.20

.84

