                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               GOVERNMENT OLD-AGE SUPPORT AND LABOR SUPPLY:
               EVIDENCE FROM THE OLD AGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM

                                       Daniel K. Fetter
                                      Lee M. Lockwood

                                      Working Paper 22132
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22132


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                         March 2016, Revised December 2017




We thank Courtney Coile, Joe Ferrie, Andrew Goodman-Bacon, Jon Guryan, Eric Hilt, Lorenz
Kueng, Phil Levine, Matt Notowidigdo, Gal Wettstein, Heidi Williams, and seminar participants
at Berkeley, Boston College, Calgary, Clemson, Davis, Harvard, Queen's, McGill, Montréal, the
Minneapolis Fed, Nebraska, Northwestern, NYU-Stern, Rutgers, Stanford, SUNY-Buffalo, UBC,
UCLA, UVA, Wellesley, Williams, UW-Madison, the NBER DAE and PE program meetings,
and the annual meetings of the AEA, EHA, and NTA for helpful comments. We thank Rose
Burnam, Angelina Li, Paul Mohnen, and Jordan Norris for excellent research assistance. We both
gratefully acknowledge financial support from National Science Foundation (NSF) Grant
SES-1628860. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Daniel K. Fetter and Lee M. Lockwood. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Government Old-Age Support and Labor Supply: Evidence from the Old Age Assistance
Program
Daniel K. Fetter and Lee M. Lockwood
NBER Working Paper No. 22132
March 2016, Revised December 2017
JEL No. H53,H55,I38,J26,N32,N42

                                          ABSTRACT

Many major government programs transfer resources to older people and implicitly or explicitly
tax their labor. In this paper, we shed new light on the labor supply and welfare effects of such
programs by investigating the Old Age Assistance Program (OAA), a means-tested and state-
administered pension program created by the Social Security Act of 1935. Using Census data on
the entire US population in 1940, we exploit the large differences in OAA programs across states
to estimate the labor supply effects of OAA. Our estimates imply that OAA reduced the labor
force participation rate among men aged 65-74 by 8.5 percentage points, more than half of its
1930-40 decline. But both reduced-form evidence and an estimated structural model of labor
supply suggest that the welfare cost to recipients of the high tax rates implicit in OAA's earnings
test were small. The evidence also suggests that Social Security could account for at least half of
the large decline in late-life work from 1940 to 1960.


Daniel K. Fetter
Department of Economics
Wellesley College
106 Central Street
Wellesley, MA 02481
and NBER
dfetter@wellesley.edu

Lee M. Lockwood
Department of Economics
University of Virginia
Monroe Hall, Room 237
248 McCormick Rd
Charlottesville, VA 22903
and NBER
lockwood@nber.org
1       Introduction

Many of the most important government programs, including Social Security and Medicare,
transfer resources to older people and tax their labor relative to that of younger people.1
Standard economic theory predicts that such programs reduce late-life labor supply and that
the implicit taxation reduces the ex-post value of the programs to recipients. Understanding
the size and nature of such effects on labor supply and welfare is an increasingly important
issue, as demographic trends have increased both the potential labor supply of the elderly and
its aggregate importance, while simultaneously increasing the need for reforms to government
old-age support programs. This raises three important questions. What are the effects
of government old-age support programs on late-life labor supply? What is the relative
importance of the two key features of these programs—the transfers to older people and the
taxation of their labor—in determining these effects? And to the extent that taxation of
labor is important, how large are the associated welfare costs to recipients?

We address these questions by investigating Old Age Assistance (OAA), a means-tested pro-
gram introduced in the 1930s alongside Social Security that later became the Supplemental
Security Income (SSI) program. OAA was large both in absolute terms—22 percent of people
65 and older received OAA in 1940—and relative to Social Security, which made no regular
payments until 1940 and remained smaller than OAA until 1950. OAA transferred resources
to older people and, through an earnings test, implicitly taxed their labor relative to that of
younger people. Unlike Social Security and other social insurance programs that are national
in scope and near-universal in coverage, OAA was state-administered and exhibited consid-
erable variation across states in eligibility and benefit levels, from very small to substantial
programs. The combination of wide variation across states and, compared to more recent
periods, the relative paucity of private pensions and other government programs targeting
the elderly provides a promising opportunity to learn about the effects of these programs.

The particular setting we study is of special interest because it marked the beginning of
a large expansion of government old-age support through OAA and Social Security that
coincided with large declines in labor force participation among older men. Figure 1(a)
illustrates these trends during the early expansions of these programs, from 1920 through
1970. The striking time-series correlation between the expansion of the Social Security
program after 1950 and declining labor force participation is often noted in discussions of
Social Security and retirement (e.g., Feldstein and Liebman, 2002; Krueger and Meyer,
2002; Gruber, 2013; Coile, 2015). But, as the same authors note, there is still significant
uncertainty about the causal relationship between the two trends. Moreover, during this
    1
    See, for example, Goda, Shoven and Slavov (2009) and Gelber, Jones and Sacks (2017) on Social Security
and Goda, Shoven and Slavov (2007) on Medicare.


                                                    1
period both OAA and Social Security implicitly taxed late-life earnings in a highly salient
way. OAA payments were typically reduced dollar for dollar with earnings, and the Social
Security earnings test withheld benefits from people earning more than a small amount,
without any compensating increase in future benefits.2 The extent to which the earnings
tests reduced the value of OAA and Social Security is an unaddressed yet critical determinant
of the welfare effects of the mid-century growth in government old-age support.

Our analysis combines large policy variation with recently-released data on the entire US
population from the 1940 US Census. The large sample size of this dataset and its precise
geographic information enable a wide range of empirical tests that would have been difficult
or impossible with previously available data. Our main empirical tests make use of two
sources of variation. The first is age eligibility requirements, which almost always limited
eligibility for OAA to people 65 and older. Importantly, other modern-day programs that use
age 65 as a cutoff, including Social Security, were either small or non-existent at the time,
and private pensions were still relatively uncommon. Figure 1(b) shows that while labor
force participation declined fairly continuously around age 65 in 1930, by 1940 the decline at
age 65 was slightly sharper than at other ages and by 1960 the decline at age 65 was quite
pronounced. The second source of variation is cross-state variation in payment and eligibility
levels of OAA programs. The empirical analysis tests whether there is a greater reduction in
labor force participation after age 65 in states with larger OAA programs relative to states
with smaller programs.

Our estimates indicate that OAA significantly reduced labor force participation among older
individuals. The basic patterns that we explore in the data are evident in Figure 2, which
plots male labor force participation by age, separately for states with above- and below-
median OAA payments per person 65 and older. Up to age 65, the age pattern of labor force
participation was extremely similar in states with larger and smaller OAA programs. At age
65, however, there was a sharp divergence in labor force participation between states with
larger OAA programs relative to those with smaller programs, and this divergence continued
at older ages. Our regression results, which isolate variation in OAA program size due to
state policy differences, imply that OAA can explain more than half of the large 1930–40
drop in labor force participation of men aged 65–74.

Although we find large effects of OAA on labor force participation, both reduced-form and
structural results suggest that the welfare cost to recipients of OAA’s implicit taxation of
work was small. Combining our reduced-form results with an estimate of overall OAA recip-
iency for men aged 65–74 implies that 52 percent of OAA recipients in this group changed
  2
    For example, between 1939 and 1950 Social Security withheld benefits from people earning more than
$15 per month. In 2010 dollars, this amount corresponded to about $230 in 1939 and about $135 in 1950.



                                                  2
their labor force participation status in response to OAA. Assuming that the remaining 48
percent of recipients valued their benefits fully, a dollar of OAA benefits was worth at least
$0.48 of unconditional late-life income to the average recipient. Moreover, the effects of OAA
were concentrated among men with low potential earnings. Labor force exit in response to
OAA was greater for men with lower levels of education, and nearly half of the reduction in
labor force participation from OAA was due to exit from unemployment or from employment
in work relief programs that were targeted at individuals with poor labor market prospects.

In order to better understand the effects of OAA on labor supply and the value of OAA to
recipients, we go beyond our reduced-form results by estimating a model of lifetime labor
supply and retirement. Identification of the model comes from the pattern of bunching of
retirements at the OAA eligibility age, at which OAA’s earnings test creates a convex kink
in the lifetime budget constraint, across different earnings groups. By comparing the extent
of bunching among different earnings groups, we can jointly estimate eligibility, which we do
not observe in the data, and preferences. The estimates suggest that 22 percent of the male
population was eligible for OAA in 1940, and simulations indicate that, had all men aged 65–
74 in 1940 been eligible for OAA, OAA would have reduced their labor force participation
rate by 21 percentage points. Further simulations of the model indicate that, although
OAA’s earnings test explained close to half of its labor supply effects, recipients valued their
benefits highly. The average dollar of OAA benefits was worth about $0.95 of unconditional
late-life income. The average value of OAA benefits is high for two reasons. First, the effects
of OAA were concentrated among people with low potential earnings, for whom the cost of
meeting an earnings test is smaller. Second, many people were inframarginal in the sense
that they would have retired either before or relatively soon after the OAA eligibility age
even without OAA, or even if OAA did not impose an earnings test.

In the final section of the paper, we ask what both the reduced-form results and the estimated
model suggest about the role of government old-age support—and of Social Security in
particular—in the growth of retirement over the mid-20th century. Although OAA was
targeted at the poor elderly and had very different eligibility and payment determination
rules from those of Social Security, OAA and Social Security shared the core features of
transferring resources to older people while taxing their labor relative to that of younger
people. Our results suggest that Social Security had the potential to drive at least half—and
likely more—of the mid-century decline in late-life labor supply for men.

This paper relates to literatures on the labor supply and welfare effects of government old-
age support and means-tested transfer programs. A large body of work has investigated the
effects of Social Security and other government old-age support programs on labor supply
and retirement (for reviews, see Diamond and Gruber, 1999; Feldstein and Liebman, 2002;


                                               3
Krueger and Meyer, 2002; Coile, 2015). Our paper is especially related to a branch of this
literature on the labor supply effects of OAA (Parsons, 1991; Friedberg, 1999) and to work on
the role of government old-age support programs in the mid-20th century rise in retirement
(Boskin, 1977; Moffitt, 1987; Parsons, 1991; Friedberg, 1999; Gelber, Isen and Song, 2016).3
It is also especially related to a branch of this literature that has sought to decompose the
labor supply effects into those due to income transfers and those due to changes in marginal
incentives to work associated with the tax and benefit rules (e.g., Burtless and Moffitt, 1985;
Friedberg, 2000; French, 2005; Gelber, Isen and Song, 2016; Gelber, Jones and Sacks, 2017).
Our work on OAA, a means-tested program, also relates to other work on the labor supply
effects of means-tested transfers. A large literature, reviewed by Moffitt (2003) and Ziliak
(2015), has investigated the labor supply effects of Aid to Families with Dependent Children
(AFDC) and Temporary Assistance to Needy Families (TANF). A much smaller literature
(Neumark and Powers, 2000, 2006) has investigated the labor supply effects of Supplemental
Security Income (SSI) for the aged, the successor program to OAA and the modern program
that OAA most closely resembles.

Relative to the earlier literature, one important contribution of this paper is that the com-
bination of our setting and approach allows us to credibly estimate the full labor supply
effects of OAA programs, from essentially no program to the largest of those observed in
1940. Although the full labor supply effects of government old-age support and means-tested
programs are crucial determinants of the welfare effects of such programs, most research on
both old-age support programs and welfare programs is limited to the more modest aim of
estimating effects of marginal changes in program parameters.4 The existing literature has
provided substantial evidence on the effects of marginal changes in Social Security benefits on
retirement, for example by examining changes in retirement timing associated with changes
in eligibility ages (e.g. Atalay and Barrett, 2015), by exploiting different treatment under
program rules of otherwise similar people (e.g., Coile and Gruber, 2007; Liebman, Luttmer
and Seif, 2009), and—less often—by using within-country differences in pension programs
(Baker and Benjamin, 1999). But this literature has focused on data from the last several
decades, a period in which benefit levels are high, multiple programs affect incentives to
retire at specific ages, and there is significant bunching of retirements at certain ages. Any
one of these factors alone would make extrapolations to zero inherently speculative.
   3
     Although the time series relationship over the mid-20th century is striking, Costa (1998) and Lee (1998)
note that attachment to the labor force among men 65 and older had already declined significantly between
1880 and 1910, before OAA and Social Security were established. Studying Union Army pensions and
retirement in the first decade of the 20th century, Costa (1995) suggests that rising incomes could account
for much of the rise in retirement over the 20th century.
   4
     For example, in his review of research on the TANF program and its predecessor the AFDC program,
Moffitt (2003) writes, “Probably the major methodological problem with these estimates is the obvious one
that they are not based on any data in which AFDC was literally absent, but rather are extrapolations from
estimated effects of the existing, positive level of AFDC benefits down to a benefit level of zero.”


                                                     4
Another key contribution of this paper is to shed light on the welfare effects of government
old-age support programs by using transparent sources of identification, and a variety of
empirical methods, to estimate the cost to recipients of OAA’s earnings test. Although the
cost to recipients of earnings tests is a crucial determinant of the welfare effects of means-
tested programs, relatively little work has sought to estimate this cost directly. To the best
of our knowledge, the cost of the earnings test is completely unaddressed by papers on the
early years of OAA and Social Security and is rarely addressed even in the vast literatures
on government old-age support and means-tested programs, including Temporary Assistance
to Needy Families and SSI. Those papers that do address this issue rely almost entirely on
calibrated structural models, whereas our setting enables us to implement approaches based
on both reduced-form methods and an estimated structural model.5 Our finding that the
cost to recipients of OAA’s earnings test is small is notable in light of OAA’s large effects
on labor supply and its high implicit taxation of earnings.



2       Background on the Old Age Assistance Program

Old Age Assistance (OAA) was introduced alongside Old Age Insurance (OAI), which came
to be known as Social Security, in the Social Security Act of 1935. OAA provided federal
matching grants for state-administered, means-tested old age support programs for the low-
income elderly. Social Security was initially small—it made no payments until 1940, and
even then to less than two percent of the elderly. But the introduction of OAA led to a
major and rapid expansion in government old-age support. In 1929, just seven states had
laws providing for assistance to the elderly. By 1940, every state had an OAA program, and
about 22 percent of people aged 65 and older received OAA payments. The average annual
OAA payment was $232 ($3,615 in 2010 dollars), about 25 percent of 1939 median wage
and salary earnings for 60–64-year-olds earning a wage, and slightly over half of the 25th
percentile of wage earnings. OAA was by far the largest source of old-age support at this
time, greatly exceeding both Social Security and employer pensions. Only in the 1950s did
Social Security become the larger program, as cohorts “aged in” and legislation expanded
eligibility and benefits.
    5
    Friedberg (2000), using an estimated structural model, estimates the deadweight loss of the Social
Security earnings test on the intensive margin for working beneficiaries during the period spanning the late
1970s and early 1990s. During this period, the taxation implicit in the earnings test was smaller than it was
during the middle of the 20th century, the period on which we focus. Laitner and Silverman (2012) is another
rare example of a welfare analysis of Social Security policies in an estimated model. Large literatures analyze
the welfare effects of Social Security in calibrated computable general equilibrium models (e.g., Auerbach
and Kotlikoff, 1987) and estimate the income and substitution effects of means-tested programs on labor
supply using structural models (for a recent review of the literatures on several means-tested programs, see
Moffitt, 2016).



                                                      5
States had a great deal of discretion in the design and administration of their OAA programs,
and both the share of the elderly receiving OAA and average payments varied widely. Figure
3 shows county-level data from U.S. Social Security Board (1940c) on total OAA payments
in the month of December 1939, scaled by the population 65 and older in the 1940 Census.
Many state borders exhibit stark differences in payments per elderly person, which suggests
that different state policies led to large differences in payments for individuals in similar
circumstances.

In general, OAA programs were set up as either an income floor or a consumption floor (the
latter of which takes into account all resources when determining payments), both of which
implicitly tax recipients’ income at a 100 percent rate, as benefits are phased out dollar-for-
dollar with income. In practice, state or local OAA administrators evaluated the “needs”
and “resources” of each applicant. The excess, if any, of needs over resources determined
the size of the payment, up to a maximum level. In some states the level of “needs” could
vary across people, while in others a common dollar amount was used.6 In the analysis, we
use measures of maximum payments to approximate variation across states in the level of
the income or consumption floor. The statutory maximum monthly payment was $30 in
most states ($470 in 2010 dollars), which was the federal matching cap, but ranged from $15
to $45, with eight states having no statutory maximum. The states that had no statutory
maximum had a small number of very high payments, but the 99th percentile of payments
were well in line with other states’ legal maxima.7

State OAA laws specified a variety of eligibility criteria. All states required that an applicant
have little income and be of at least a certain age, nearly always 65. Nearly all states had
residency requirements. Many states also imposed asset tests and restricted eligibility to
US citizens or long-term residents. Some states required that an applicant have no legally
responsible relatives able to provide support. As was common in public assistance programs
of the time, relief officials retained a significant amount of discretion in determining eligibility.
For example, Lansdale et al. (1939) note some moralistic provisions in OAA laws (e.g.,
limiting eligibility to the “deserving”) and emphasize the significant variation in how strictly
certain eligibility requirements, such as relatives’ responsibility laws, were enforced.8 As a
result, features of OAA other than statutory eligibility criteria affected recipiency rates (see,
e.g., Fetter, 2017). These potential influences on recipiency will be relevant in the structural
estimation in Section 6, in that they are a reason we estimate eligibility from behavior rather
   6
     See Appendix Section A.2.1 for more detail. Appendix Figure A1, discussed in more detail there, shows
distributions of payments in selected states to illustrate the differences across states in whether “needs” were
set at a common level or varied across people.
   7
     See Appendix Table A1, which reports basic features of each state’s payments; also see Appendix Figures
A2 and A3, which show maps of legal maximum payments and 99th percentile payments, respectively.
   8
     Although not the focus of this paper, the discretion of OAA administrators left significant scope for
discrimination (see, e.g., Quadagno, 1988, on racial discrimination in the South).


                                                       6
than observing it directly.

Table 1 shows summary statistics at the state level on recipiency and payments in December
1939. Variation in recipiency rates and benefits per recipient, which were not strongly
correlated across states, generated wide variation in average OAA benefits: Payments per
person 65 and older varied more than 13-fold across states.



3       Theoretical Predictions

The simplest model for understanding how OAA might affect the labor supply and welfare of
recipients is a model of the lifetime budget constraint relating total lifetime consumption to
the length of retirement, as illustrated in Figure 4.9 OAA expands the set of consumption-
leisure opportunities available to potential OAA recipients by paying recipients ȳ for each
period they do not work after the OAA eligibility age. OAA has an income effect that
tends to hasten retirement and, for people who would retire after the OAA eligibility age
if OAA benefits did not depend on earnings, a substitution effect that also tends to hasten
retirement.

By reducing the private return to work after the OAA eligibility age but not before, OAA
introduces a convex kink in the lifetime budget constraint at that age. For retirement ages
younger than the OAA eligibility age, working an additional year increases total lifetime
consumption by the full amount of earnings, w. For retirement ages older than the OAA
eligibility age, working an additional year increases total lifetime consumption by the excess,
if any, of earnings over the OAA benefit level, max{0, w − ȳ}. OAA therefore imposes
an implicit marginal tax on earnings after the OAA eligibility age, with implicit tax rate
τ = min{1, ȳ/w}. With a smooth distribution of preferences for consumption versus leisure
in the population, such a convex kink attracts more people than nearby allocations on the
budget constraint. This prediction of a “bunching” of retirements at the eligibility age
underlies both our reduced-form and structural estimation strategies.

The extent to which the earnings test affects labor supply and the value of the program
to recipients depends critically on the distribution of people along the budget set. People
who retire earlier are less affected by the earnings test. As long as leisure is non-inferior,
someone who would retire before the OAA eligibility age even without OAA is unaffected
    9
    This framework is better-suited to analyzing those OAA programs that provide income floors than those
programs that provide consumption floors, since the latter might distort the timing of consumption. We
assume throughout that OAA recipients do not bear any of the burden from the taxes necessary to finance
the program. This is likely a good approximation for the cohorts we study, who finished most of their
working years before OAA was introduced.



                                                   7
by the earnings test; his optimal retirement age with OAA, which is weakly earlier than it is
without OAA, is before the earnings test reduces benefits. Someone who would work only a
short time after the eligibility age without OAA is at most slightly affected by the earnings
test.



4      Data and Empirical Approach

4.1     Data

The key data source that enables many of our empirical tests is the full-population microdata
from the 1940 Census. In addition to the large size of the sample, an advantage relative to
previously available datasets is precise geographic location, which enables empirical tests
that would not otherwise be possible. We focus on men aged 55 to 74 in states in which
the OAA eligibility age was 65 in 1939.10 We restrict the sample to men with non-missing
information on basic demographics (birthplace, race, citizenship status, marital status, and
years of education). Our main analysis focuses on work behavior at the time of the 1940
Census. Some additional analyses use information on work and income outcomes in 1939.
For each set of outcomes, we exclude from the sample those men with missing information
on work (or income) outcomes in the relevant year.11

Table 2 describes the characteristics of the men in our sample. About 71 percent were
in the labor force, and 65 percent were employed. An important component of overall
employment in the late 1930s was “public emergency” employment—employment through
one of the federal programs that provided work-based relief to the unemployed, such as
the Work Projects Administration (WPA) (see, e.g., Fishback, 2007). About 62 percent of
men in our sample were employed in either private or non-emergency government work and
about 4 percent were employed in public emergency work. About half reported receiving
any wage or salary income in 1939. (Those with no wage or salary income would include
both those who did not work and those who worked but were self-employed.) Including
those who reported zero wage and salary income in 1939, the average reported income was
  10
      Three states—Missouri, New Hampshire, and Pennsylvania—had an OAA eligibility age of 70 in 1939
but reduced the eligibility age to 65 on January 1, 1940 to meet a requirement to continue receiving federal
matching funds. The fact that the age requirement was changed just a few months before the 1940 Census
complicates including them in the sample. We also exclude Colorado, in which long-term residents became
eligible at age 60.
   11
      The share of individuals missing data varies across states, but the variation in OAA policies that we
use in the main specifications is not significantly associated with the probability of being dropped from the
sample for 1940 outcomes; nor is it significantly associated with the probability of being dropped from the
sample for 1939 outcomes, with the possible exception of older ages (70 and higher). These results are shown
in Appendix Figure A4.


                                                     8
$557 (corresponding to about $8,672 in 2010 dollars). The only information on income from
sources other than wages and salaries is whether such income totaled $50 or more (about
$780 in 2010 dollars). Just over half of our sample reported receiving at least $50 of such
income. It may be helpful to note that vital statistics data suggest that in 1940, remaining
life expectancy of men reaching age 65 was about 12 years (Grove and Hetzel, 1968).

As discussed in more detail below, our primary specifications limit comparisons to counties
on either side of a state boundary. The “border county” sample excludes counties that did
not border at least one other state in our sample. As shown in Table 2, a comparison of
means across the full and border county samples indicates only small differences between
the two, which suggests that inferences drawn from the border county sample likely apply
to the population as a whole.

We use data on OAA payments and recipients from a variety of sources. We do not have
individual-level data that includes OAA recipiency, although we show some results using the
measure of non-wage income in the 1940 Census data, which includes OAA. As a summary
policy measure, we use state OAA payments in December 1939 per person in the state aged
65 and older. The OAA data for this measure come from U.S. Social Security Board (1940b),
which reports monthly data on total OAA dollar payments and the number of recipients at
the state level. Geographically, the finest data we have on recipiency and payments is at the
county level, from December 1939, as used in Figure 3. Neither of these sources contains
detail on recipients’ characteristics. We do, however, have state-level tabulations on new
OAA recipients and the payments approved for these recipients for each fiscal year from 1936
through 1940, from research memoranda of the Social Security Board (U.S. Social Security
Board, 1939a,b, 1941). We use this information for two purposes: first, to determine how
high payments tended to be in states without statutory maximum payments, and second, to
estimate an OAA recipiency rate for the demographic group we study (men aged 65–74) as
opposed to the whole population 65 and older.



4.2     Empirical approach

We use two key sources of variation to investigate the effects of OAA. The first is the
age-eligibility requirement, nearly always limiting assistance to people 65 and older.12 The
second key source of variation is the heterogeneity in state policy discussed in Section 2.
  12
    Most states did not have mandatory birth certificates for the cohorts in our sample, so in addition to
birth certificates a range of other records, such as marriage records and school records, were used to determine
age-eligibility (Lansdale et al., 1939). Although misreporting or inaccurate knowledge of age is a potential
concern (Ransom and Sutch, 1986; Elo and Preston, 1994), in Appendix Table A3, we find no evidence that
our OAA variation is associated with the share of the population reporting they are 65 or older.



                                                       9
Combining variation in age-based eligibility and state policy, we test for differential changes
in the age profile of labor force participation after the eligibility age, controlling flexibly for
any age-specific effects common across states and for the possibility that state OAA policies
were correlated with unobserved determinants of the level of labor force participation-age
profiles.

A useful aspect of our context is that OAA was by far the largest source of old-age support
for which 65 was a cutoff age in 1940. In more recent periods, changes in behavior at or
around age 65 could be associated with any of a number of factors, such as eligibility for
Social Security or Medicare. However, Medicare did not exist until 1965, and as noted in
Section 2, Social Security made no monthly payments until 1940, and even then to a very
small share of the elderly. Other public or private pensions at the time made payments to a
significantly smaller share of the elderly than OAA did and were primarily relevant for people
higher in the income distribution than OAA recipients. Appendix Section A.3.2 offers more
detail.

Because our main specifications use age eligibility for identification, we do not directly iden-
tify any anticipatory effects of OAA on labor supply before the eligibility age; our estimates
are net of any such effects. Differential trends across states in the age profile of labor force
participation will provide some indication of the likely size of such anticipatory effects, how-
ever, and will also speak to the relative size of the net-of-anticipatory effects between the
young elderly (those just turning 65) and older individuals.

We follow a simulated instruments strategy, in the spirit of Currie and Gruber (1996), to
capture variation in observed levels of OAA driven by policy rather than by population
characteristics. Using the earnings distribution for a national population of men aged 60–64,
the oldest ineligible age group, we simulate payments per person 65 and older treating a
state’s maximum payment as an income floor and incorporating any earnings disregards.13
The basic idea is that a state’s maximum payment is correlated with its typical income floor
and is not itself affected by labor market conditions or population characteristics. For the
eight states with no legal maximum payment, we measure variation in income floors using
the 99th percentile payment among recipients accepted in fiscal year 1938–39 in each state
(based on information in U.S. Social Security Board, 1939b).14 In all but a few cases, the
  13
     The national population we use for each state omits the state itself, although in practice this makes little
difference. Earnings disregards existed in only a few states and were always at low levels. For the purposes
of the simulated instrument, we impute earnings for the self-employed by drawing from the distribution of
earnings for wage earners with the same level of education and the same number of weeks worked.
  14
     The idea is that with payments equal to the gap between “needs” and “resources,” payments near the
top of the distribution tend to reflect payments to individuals with virtually no resources—present in every
state—and therefore likely reflect administrative norms or rules. We use the 99th percentile payment rather
than the observed maximum payment because the latter could be driven by quite exceptional situations.



                                                       10
99th percentile payment is the same as the legal maximum in those states that had legal
maxima (see Appendix Table A1). Appendix Figure A5 illustrates some of the variation used
in the simulated instrument, showing the distribution of monthly earnings for the national
population against the minimum, median, and maximum levels of the maximum payment
(plus any earnings disregards) across states. Despite using only some of the eligibility and
payment criteria, the resulting instrument is clearly predictive of realized payments per
person 65 and older at the state level, as can be seen in Appendix Figure A6.15 Appendix
Section A.2.3 provides full details of the construction of the instrument.

The potential endogeneity of OAA policy is a concern if differences in policy were correlated
with other, unobserved determinants of the shape of labor force participation-age profiles
(any correlation between policies and the level of labor force participation-age profiles is
differenced out by the estimation). We investigate the relationship between realized OAA
payments and state-level demographics and income in Appendix Table A2. OAA payments
per person 65 and older tended to be greater in higher-income states, suggesting that these
states tended to have more generous policies. Greater elderly population shares, greater
foreign-born shares, and lower non-white population shares also correlated with higher OAA
levels. We discuss these results in more detail in Appendix Section A.3.1. To address
potential policy endogeneity, in all of our main specifications we restrict comparisons to
counties lying on either side of the same state border. The idea is to compare individuals
who have similar characteristics and who are in the same labor market (and hence subject to
similar shocks), but who face different OAA policies. Appendix Table A3 indicates that in
unconditional comparisons using county-level data, similar correlations are evident between
population characteristics and both realized and simulated payments. But when comparisons
are limited to state boundaries by adding a fixed effect for the set of counties that touch each
state border, these correlations disappear. This result supports the identification assumption
that in the absence of OAA, the shape of labor force participation-age profiles would be
similar in counties on either side of a state boundary.16

In our main specifications, for individual i living in state s and county c, we estimate equa-
  15
     Appendix Figure A6 also shows, in some cases, considerable variation in observed payments for states
with the same simulated payment. This is partly because assessed “needs,” and hence the income floor, could
vary across people in some states. Consistent with this, payments per recipient also exhibit some dispersion
across states with the same maximum payment (see Appendix Figure A7). The variation is also partly
due to important determinants of eligibility for OAA, such as those discussed in Section 2, that cannot be
mapped into characteristics we observe in Census data. We discuss these issues at greater length in Appendix
Sections A.2.2 and A.2.3.
  16
     In principle, these comparisons could be refined further, for example by comparing only adjacent counties
on either side of a state border. Because specifications using the entire state border pass covariate balance
checks and placebo tests, we focus on these less computationally costly specifications. For all of the core
results of the paper, however, using county pairs yields very similar results.




                                                     11
tions of the form
                               X
         yiacsb = βc + δba +           γa ∗ log(payments per person 65+)s + Λ0 xiacs + εiacsb ,     (1)
                               a6=ā


where a indexes age (either in single years or groups of years), ā is a reference age, and xiacs
is a vector of controls. The variable of interest, log(payments per person 65+)s , is the log
of the December 1939 OAA payments per person 65 and older in state s. We instrument
for this variable using the log simulated payment per person 65 and older. Appendix Table
A4 reports first stage regressions.17 We limit the sample to counties lying on state borders
and define a border segment between two states (indexed by b) as the set of all counties in
either state that touch the boundary between the two. Since some counties border two or
more different states, a county, and hence all the individuals in it, will appear in the data
as many times as there are states that it borders. The border segment-by-age fixed effects
then limit comparisons of age profiles to men living on either side of the same border. Since
our policy of interest varies at the state level, we cluster standard errors at the state level.
This level of clustering also accounts for the duplication of observations in counties lying on
multiple state boundaries.



5      The Effect of OAA on Labor Supply

5.1     Baseline results

Estimates of equation (1) indicate that larger OAA payments led to sharper declines in labor
force participation after age 65. For our primary results we group ages into 5-year age bins,
with ages 60–64 as a reference age. Table 3 reports both OLS and IV estimates. We focus
our discussion on the (preferred) IV specifications; the OLS results follow similar patterns.
All specifications indicate that states with larger OAA programs featured larger reductions
in labor force participation after the OAA eligibility age. To demonstrate the importance
of the border-by-age fixed effects, columns (1) and (2) show estimates from a variant on
equation (1) replacing these with age fixed effects, in the full and border county samples.
Interpreted at face value, these specifications suggest that larger OAA programs led to a
greater reduction in labor force participation from ages 55–59 to ages 60–64. In principle,
these reductions prior to eligibility could reflect anticipatory effects of OAA. But the fact
that they disappear after including border-by-age fixed effects in column (3) suggests both
  17
   All models are just-identified, so bias from weak instruments is unlikely to be a problem (see, e.g.,
Angrist and Pischke, 2009).



                                                      12
that these controls are important and that they are effective in controlling for underlying
differences in age trends in labor force participation between states with larger and smaller
OAA programs.18 Our preferred specification, column (4), further controls for interactions of
education and race with age. The coefficients suggest that a one standard deviation increase
in log payments per person 65 and older (about 0.62 log points) was associated with a 3.9
percentage point reduction in labor force participation at ages 65–69, and a 4.7 percentage
point reduction in labor force participation at ages 70–74. These results are broadly similar
to those of Friedberg (1999) and Parsons (1991) (see Appendix Section A.5).

Panel (a) of Figure 5 plots the coefficients on the age-payment interactions when we estimate
(1) using interactions with single years of age. There is little evidence of large differential
age trends prior to age 65, but at age 65 states with larger OAA programs exhibit a sharp,
differential decline in male labor force participation that levels out around age 69. Panel
(b) shows estimates from the same specification using the closest measure to a “first stage”
outcome available in the 1940 Census, an indicator for receipt of at least $50 (about $780
in 2010 dollars) of income from sources other than wages and salaries in 1939. Receipt of
non-wage income follows a pattern analogous to that of labor force participation. It does not
appear to trend differently prior to age 65 in states with greater expected OAA payments
but shows a sharp, differential increase at age 65. Appendix Table A5 shows results for
receipt of non-wage income analogous to those in Table 3.

To illustrate the relationship between exit from the labor force at age 65 and receipt of non-
wage income, and the degree to which these outcomes varied across states, we take a simple
approach to estimating “excess” exit from the labor force and receipt of non-wage income
at age 65. We estimate the following model, separately by state:

           yi = β0 + β1 1(agei ≥ 65) + β2 (agei − 65) + β3 (agei − 65)1(agei ≥ 65) + εi                       (2)

where the outcome is either labor force participation or receipt of non-wage income.19 In
Figure 6 we plot the estimated breaks at age 65 from equation (2) for receipt of non-wage
income against the estimated breaks in labor force participation. Declines in labor force
participation line up strikingly well with increases in receipt of non-wage income. The
results also illustrate the substantial variation across states in the overall drop in labor force
  18
     It is also noteworthy that the first stage F-statistics indicate that our simulated instrument has a stronger
relationship with observed payments when comparisons are restricted to state borders. This likely reflects
greater predictive power of policy for observed outcomes when examining more similar populations.
  19
     The 1940 Census has information only on age in completed years at the time of the Census, meaning
that individuals who were 65 at the time of the Census may or may not have been eligible for OAA during
1939, the time period covered in the non-wage income question. Hence, in estimating the break in non-wage
income we omit 65-year-olds. Note that for the primary outcomes in our analysis—work behavior during
the week preceding the 1940 Census—age will be correctly observed for nearly all people.



                                                       13
participation at age 65, from nearly zero in Arkansas to 15 percentage points in Oklahoma.

In order to assess OAA’s contribution to the large decline in labor force participation of the
elderly over the 1930s, we re-estimate the state-border specification using the level rather
than the log of OAA payments per person 65 and older. The results, reported in Appendix
Table A6, are comparable to our main estimates at the mean level of OAA payments. The
results imply that were it not for OAA, labor force participation among men aged 65–74
would have been 8.5 percentage points greater, about 17 percent of this group’s observed
labor force participation rate in 1940 of 51 percent. As another point of comparison, between
1930 and 1940 the labor force participation of men aged 65–74 fell from about 65 to 51
percent (see Appendix A.1 for details on comparability of labor force participation rates
between these years). Our estimates suggest that OAA can explain about 60 percent of this
14 percentage-point decline.

Under slightly stronger assumptions, we can estimate what the age profile of labor force
participation would have been in the absence of OAA in a way that allows for potential an-
ticipatory effects. We compare labor force participation profiles across state boundaries, and
assume that if OAA levels were the same in two states, the levels of labor force participation
would be the same on either side of the boundary, rather than the weaker assumption in our
main analysis of parallel age trends. Formally, we estimate
                                  X
                 yiacsb = αba +       γa ∗ (payments per person 65+)s + εiacsb            (3)
                                  a


with no age omitted from the summation. The counterfactual age profile of labor force
participation with payments per person set to zero is shown in Figure 7. It is noteworthy
that using this approach, we find reductions in labor force participation after age 65 similar
to our main estimates, and any anticipatory effects of OAA on labor supply before age 65
appear to be quite small. As we discuss further in Section 6, counterfactual labor force
participation in the absence of OAA is an important determinant of the cost of the implicit
taxation of earnings by OAA’s earnings test.



5.2    Heterogeneity by potential earnings

Also important for understanding the cost of OAA earnings tests are the potential earnings
of the people OAA induced to exit the labor force, since people with lower potential earnings
have lower costs from the earnings test. Panel (a) of Figure 8 shows the age 65–69 estimates
from equation (1) separately by grouped years of education. The effects of OAA tended to
be greater for men with less education, who tend to have lower potential earnings. Panel (b)


                                                14
shows the results of a similar exercise that uses a broader range of characteristics to predict
earnings. In a sample of 45–54 year old men who were not self-employed, we regress wage
and salary earnings on indicators for each number of years of education; for being non-white;
for state of birth and for foreign birth; and for each of the 1,000 most common first names,
exploiting the fact that first names contain information about socioeconomic status (Olivetti
and Paserman, 2015). We then use the coefficients to predict earnings for men aged 55–74
and estimate equation (1) separately by decile of predicted earnings. The results line up well
with those based on education alone, showing greater effects for lower deciles of predicted
earnings.

Separating the effect of OAA on labor force participation into effects for employed and
unemployed individuals provides further evidence that the effect of OAA on labor force par-
ticipation was concentrated among people with poor labor market prospects. To the extent
that the effects of OAA on labor force participation were driven by exit from unemploy-
ment or work-based relief programs such as the WPA, the costs of OAA work disincentives
would be smaller. Table 4 shows estimates of equation (1) using overall employment (includ-
ing work-based relief) as an outcome variable, as well as employment in private or public
non-emergency work. (Results by single years of age are shown in Appendix Figure A8.)
Comparison of the point estimates for different outcome variables suggests that at ages 65–
69, about 21 percent of the reduction in labor force participation was associated with exit
from unemployment and about 29 percent with exit from public emergency work. These
results also suggest that the implicit taxation of work by OAA’s earnings test may not have
significantly reduced the value of OAA benefits to recipients.



5.3    Responses by local labor market conditions

An important question for assessing the generalizability of the results is whether the effect
of OAA on labor force participation was larger in 1940 than it would have been in a context
of lower unemployment. By the late 1930s unemployment had fallen significantly from its
peak in the early 1930s, but it remained fairly high (Margo, 1993). In theory, the effects of
a program like OAA on labor force participation could be larger or smaller in a context of
high unemployment. On one hand, people might be more likely to exit the labor force in
response to OAA if they are unemployed than if they are employed. On the other hand, high
unemployment means that many people with weak attachments to the labor force might be
out of the labor force regardless of OAA. To shed light on this question, we leverage the
substantial geographic variation in labor market conditions during this time period (Wallis,
1989; Rosenbloom and Sundstrom, 1999). We calculate county unemployment rates for
men aged 45–54 and estimate equation (1) separately for counties in the bottom quartile

                                              15
(which had an average of 5 percent unemployment) and the top quartile (an average of
20 percent unemployment). As shown in Appendix Figure A9, we find that reductions in
labor force participation immediately after the eligibility age were somewhat greater in high-
unemployment counties, and there are small reductions slightly before the eligibility age,
around age 63, in these counties as well. The latter finding may reflect a greater propensity of
men in high-unemployment counties to lose jobs shortly before reaching OAA eligibility and
then to remain out of the labor force in anticipation of receiving OAA. Overall, however, it is
striking how similar the effects of OAA are across widely varying labor market conditions.20



5.4     Further robustness checks

Given that relatively few states had OAA programs in 1930, a natural further check on the
validity of our estimates is to test whether, conditional on comparisons across state borders,
OAA policies in 1940 were systematically related to differential age patterns of labor force
participation in 1930. If differential age trends in the underlying propensity to exit the labor
force were driving our results, it is likely that we should see similar patterns in 1930. We
estimate equation (1) using the 1930 complete-count Census data to test whether observed
payments in 1940 predict labor force outcomes in 1930. We omit the nine states in our 1940
sample that had laws providing for old-age payments in 1930. Panel (a) of Figure 9 shows
that there was no systematic difference in work behavior in 1930 after age 65 in states that
had larger OAA programs in 1940. For comparison, Panel (b) shows estimates from 1940
using the same sample of states. The results are very similar to our main estimates, so the
absence of differences in 1930 is not an artifact of using a different set of states.

We address various additional potential concerns in robustness checks reported in the ap-
pendix. Our main simulated IV estimates use the 99th percentile of observed payments in
1938–39 as a measure of “maximum” payments in states without legal maxima, based on the
notion that these payments reflect typical standards of need. The typical concern with an
observed-payments measure is that it could be contaminated by reverse causation. In prac-
tice, while population and labor market characteristics likely affect average OAA payments
in a state, they are unlikely to affect payments as high up in the distribution as the 99th
percentile, since it is extremely likely that there will be some people with no “resources” in
every state. But as an alternative that does not use any information on observed payments,
we have also tried assigning these eight states the highest legal maximum across states (45
dollars per month, in Colorado), based on the idea that the absence of a maximum payment
  20
    Appendix Table A7 reports specifications with linear interactions between OAA benefits and the unem-
ployment rate. The coefficients on the interaction terms are positive, which interpreted at face value suggest
smaller effects in places with higher unemployment, and mostly statistically insignificant at standard levels.



                                                     16
means that payments in these states could have been as high as those in any other state.
The results, reported in Appendix Table A8, are also in line with our main estimates. Given
that there was significant variation across these eight states in the highest (and typical) pay-
ments actually granted, the first stage is weaker, with an F -statistic of 2.6 for the regressions
describing labor market outcomes.

In principle, the comparison across state borders does not address concerns about differences
in state policies other than OAA that relate to either old-age pensions or public assistance.
In practice, introducing controls for other major types of pensions—railroad pensions or
state and local government employee pensions—leads to very little change in the results, as
documented in Appendix Table A9. Differences in state general assistance do not explain the
results either, as shown in Appendix Table A10. These results are discussed in significantly
more detail in Appendix Section A.3.3.

Finally, in Appendix Table A11 we test whether more generous OAA policies were associated
with greater probability of having migrated between 1935 and 1940. As we discuss in more
detail in Appendix Section A.6, the confidence intervals suggest that endogenous migration
is at most an order of magnitude smaller than our labor force participation results. This
result is unsurprising given the residency requirements for OAA in nearly all states.



6      The Cost to Recipients of OAA’s Earnings Test

The overall welfare effect of OAA depends critically on the extent to which the large reduc-
tions in labor supply we have documented entail a social cost.21 A key dimension of this
question is the degree to which OAA’s earnings test reduced its value to recipients. To the
extent that a recipient “earned” his OAA benefit by reducing his earnings in response to the
earnings test, his valuation of the benefit would be less than its full amount. This section
presents evidence on the cost to recipients of OAA’s earnings test based on our regression
results and an estimated structural life cycle model.



6.1     Bounding the cost of the earnings test

Our regression results suggest a natural upper bound on the cost of the earnings test. Eco-
nomic logic suggests that OAA benefits that would have been received even in the absence of
  21
    Other important factors include the deadweight loss from raising taxes to finance the program, risk and
the insurance benefits of OAA, and fiscal externalities (e.g., from people substituting to OAA from other
government programs such as unemployment insurance and the WPA).



                                                    17
a behavioral response should be valued fully. The estimates reported in Section 5.1 suggest
that about 8.5 percent of men aged 65–74 were out of the labor force because of OAA in
1940. No data directly measure the recipiency rate specifically for this group, but as detailed
in Appendix Section A.4, a conservative estimate is about 16.5 percent. Hence, about 48
percent of recipients in this group were inframarginal, in the sense that they would have
received OAA even without leaving the labor force in response to OAA. Under the assump-
tion that these inframarginal recipients valued their OAA payments fully, this calculation
suggests that the average recipient valued his OAA benefits at between 48 and 100 percent
of their dollar amount.

Several considerations suggest that the average recipient valued his OAA payments signif-
icantly more than this lower bound. As shown in Section 5.2, a large fraction of marginal
recipients were people who had low potential earnings or who had been unemployed or re-
ceiving work-based public assistance. The earnings test is not very costly to people with
poor labor market prospects, in part because someone with lower potential earnings forgoes
less consumption by not working.

Obtaining a point estimate requires making several assumptions, and in the next section we
do so by estimating a life cycle model. To develop further intuition for the results, however,
it is useful to consider an alternative approach to constructing a bound, in the spirit of
Afriat (1967) and Varian (1982). This bound is based largely on the extent to which benefits
are inframarginal over the life cycle for any particular individual. As an extreme example,
someone who would have retired before the OAA eligibility age even in the absence of OAA
is not affected by the earnings test as long as leisure is non-inferior, since he would retire
before the eligibility age even if OAA did not have an earnings test. More generally, the
earlier someone would leave the labor force in the absence of OAA, the lower the maximum
possible cost of the earnings test. Furthermore, to the extent that income effects of OAA
pull retirement forward, meaning that recipients would retire earlier even if OAA did not
impose an earnings test, they tend to diminish the cost of the earnings test.

To construct the bound we use consumer theory to derive the minimum equivalent variation
of OAA for someone with a given level of potential earnings, OAA benefit level, and retire-
ment age in the absence of OAA. We introduce the assumptions that falling levels of labor
force participation at older ages reflect retirement—that is, that exit from the labor force
is an absorbing state—and that the counterfactual age profile of labor force participation
shown in Figure 7 can be interpreted as reflecting the distribution of retirement ages that
would arise in the absence of OAA. We combine this latent retirement age distribution with
the observed joint distribution of state OAA benefit levels and earnings for men aged 48–52.
Calculations making conservative assumptions about rates of take up across the earnings-


                                              18
benefit distribution suggest that within the class of preferences in which utility is quasilinear
in retirement—the usual case in many applications of the life cycle model—the average $1 of
OAA was worth at least $0.72 of unconditional late-life income. Details of this and related
calculations are in Appendix Section A.7. Intuitively, a large fraction of OAA recipients
would have retired either before or soon after the OAA eligibility age even without OAA,
which limits the degree to which the earnings test can reduce the average value of OAA
benefits to recipients.



6.2     Estimating the cost of the earnings test

In this section, we estimate the cost to recipients of the earnings test using an estimated life
cycle model. The estimation targets empirical moments that provide transparent identifi-
cation of the key parameters that govern the model’s predictions about the counterfactuals
of interest; in this sense, our general approach is broadly similar to that of, for example,
Laitner and Silverman (2012). We adopt a standard model that is widely-used in diverse
settings. This enables us to assess the extent to which the key determinants of behavior in
other settings have similar effects in our setting as well.


6.2.1   Model


Consider a standard model of lifetime labor supply in which people choose how much to
consume at each date and when to retire. Individual i at age t chooses whether to retire, if
he has not already, and how much to consume in order to maximize the discounted sum of
utility from age t forward,

                               T
                                                   c1+η
                               X                                       
                                         s−t        is
                       Uit =         β                  − δi 1(his = h̄) , η ≤ 0,
                               s=t
                                                   1+η

subject to a constraint on hours of work, his ∈ {0, h̄} (so there is only an extensive-margin
labor supply decision), and a dynamic budget constraint,

                       ait+1 = (1 + r)(ait + Nit + ŵit hit + bit − cit ) ≥ 0.

β ∈ (0, 1] is the discount factor. The absolute value of η is the coefficient of relative risk
aversion. δi is the disutility of work, which is allowed to vary across individuals, with
cumulative density function F (δ). cit ≥ 0 is consumption, and hit ∈ {0, h̄} is hours of
work. ait is assets, Nit is non-labor income, ŵit is the wage, ŵit hit is labor earnings, and
bit represents OAA payments. The requirement that assets must be non-negative rules out

                                                        19
borrowing.

We consider an OAA program that provides an income floor of ȳit to individual i at age t:

                                       bit = max{0, ȳit − ŵit hit },

where ȳit is the OAA benefit available to individual i in the period in which i is t years old.
If individual i is not eligible for OAA at age t for any reason—due to being too young, to
not meeting an asset test, or to having relatives who are able to support him—then ȳit = 0.
This is a simplified version of a typical OAA program in 1940.22

Potential earnings, wit ≡ ŵit h̄, are constant in real terms over the life cycle. Everyone is
assumed to have positive potential earnings, which tends to work against our main results.
OAA benefits are fixed at their real values in 1940. People learn about OAA in 1936, a year
in which many state OAA programs were introduced. Because assets and non-labor income
are measured only coarsely in the data, we make the simplifying assumptions that initial
assets when the individual enters the labor market at age 21 are zero and that OAA is the
only source of non-labor income. Individuals live to age 75 with certainty (T = 75). Any
assets the individual accumulates earn a constant real return of 3 percent per year, r = 0.03.
                                                                 1      1
The individual discounts future utility at this same rate, β = 1+r  = 1.03  ≈ 0.97.

A challenge we face is that an individual’s eligibility for OAA depended on many charac-
teristics that are not available in the Census or alternative sources of data, which means we
have to infer eligibility rather than measure it directly. In our baseline case, we assume that
the probability that a randomly-chosen individual with potential earnings wi is “eligible” for
OAA—by which we mean that he would receive a positive OAA benefit if he met the age
requirement and had low enough earnings—is a piecewise-linear function in the individual’s
potential earnings,

                          P r(eligiblei |wi ) = max{0, min {1, αe + βe wi }}.

This measure of eligibility—which is exclusive of the minimum age restriction and the earn-
ings test—is meant in part to approximate the many other restrictions that individuals must
have met in order to qualify for OAA, including any requirements related to citizenship,
residency, housing wealth, and relatives’ characteristics. In addition to being exclusive of
the age and earnings tests, this notion of eligibility further departs from the standard one
in that it bundles together many things that are conceptually distinct and not necessarily
  22
     The key simplification here is the assumption that there is a common income floor across people. As
described in more detail in Appendix Section A.2.1, in many states there was significant variation in benefits
even for people with no other source of earnings. This fact suggests that these states either had consumption
floors rather than income floors or had income floors with heterogeneous income levels.


                                                     20
related to the usual meaning of the word “eligibility.” For example, it includes un-modeled
factors, such as incomplete information and stigma, that limit take up of OAA benefits.
By definition, in the simulations take up is universal among people who are “eligible,” old
enough, and have low enough earnings.

Additional details about the model and estimation beyond those described in the text are
in Appendix Section A.8.


6.2.2   Estimation strategy


The key tradeoff in the model is between consumption and the length of retirement. By
retiring later, the individual can enjoy more consumption over his lifetime at the expense
of less leisure (a shorter retirement). The marginal cost of retiring later is the disutility of
work, δi , which is allowed to differ across individuals. The marginal benefit of retiring later
is the extra consumption that retiring later buys, max{0, wit − ȳit }, valued at the marginal
utility of consumption, cηit , which depends on the curvature of the utility function, η. OAA
potentially affects both elements of the marginal benefit of retiring later. OAA reduces the
consumption benefit of work after the eligibility age through its earnings test, and OAA
reduces the marginal utility of consumption at any given retirement age through its income
transfers. Both of these factors tend to lead people to retire earlier as a result of OAA.

These considerations guide our estimation strategy. We estimate the model using the Method
of Simulated Moments, with the target moments measuring the extent of “bunching” of
retirements at the OAA eligibility age. Intuitively, the estimation is based on comparing
the extent of “bunching” of choices (retirement ages) at convex kinks in the budget set (the
OAA eligibility age) that differ in their sharpness (due to different people facing different
replacement rates from OAA, ȳ/w). As discussed in Section 3, OAA creates a convex kink
in the lifetime budget constraint relating lifetime consumption to retirement length, and
this kink is sharper for people who face higher replacement rates from OAA, ȳ/w. With a
smooth distribution of disutility of work in the population, F (δ), such convex kinks lead to
bunching of retirements at the OAA eligibility age, as some of the people who would have
retired somewhat after the OAA eligibility age in the absence of the earnings test choose
to hasten their retirements due to the substitution effects of the earnings test. The amount
of bunching is informative about the level of eligibility for OAA. The greater the observed
bunching, the greater the inferred eligibility. The speed with which the bunching “fades out”
as the replacement rate declines is informative about the curvature of utility, η. The faster
the fade out, the greater the curvature of utility, |η|.

This estimation strategy is related to the bunching strategy of Saez (2010). The most

                                              21
important difference is that some of the bunching in our context could be due to binding
borrowing constraints, since the kink is in the intertemporal, not intratemporal, budget
constraint. This complication prevents us from identifying structural parameters without
estimating a full structural model. Although estimating a full structural model requires us
to make stronger assumptions than must be made in simpler contexts, it has the advantage of
enabling us to analyze a larger set of counterfactuals. Incomplete eligibility in our approach
serves the same conceptual role as optimization frictions in the recent bunching literature
(e.g., Chetty et al., 2011; Chetty, 2012; Kleven and Waseem, 2013; Gelber, Jones and Sacks,
2017). Although in general those who bunch may not be representative of the broader
population of interest, in our context much of the labor supply response to OAA is driven by
people who retire at the eligibility age, making them unusually representative of the broader
set of people whose labor supply is affected by the program. Other research that analyzes
the bunching of retirement ages includes Burtless and Moffitt (1984), Brown (2013), and
Manoli and Weber (2016).

In principle, all of the key parameters of the model can be identified from the bunching of
retirements at the OAA eligibility age. But intuition suggests and estimations confirm that
the slope of the eligibility-potential earnings relationship, βe , is not well identified using this
information alone. Intuitively, the estimation has a hard time distinguishing between two
potential sources of fadeout in the bunching of retirements in potential earnings: curvature in
the utility function (η) and declining eligibility with potential earnings (βe ). This motivates
a two-stage estimation procedure. In the first stage, we estimate the slope of the eligibility-
potential earnings relationship, βe , using the empirical relationship between earnings and
housing wealth; we use housing wealth because it was the key non-income determinant of
eligibility in many states that is measured in Census data. In the second stage, we estimate
the key preference parameters, η and F (δ), and the level of the eligibility-potential earnings
relationship, αe , taking as given the first-stage estimate of βe . The key results are robust
to estimating all of the key parameters of the model in a single step, as shown in Appendix
Table A12, but the two-stage procedure yields a more reasonable estimate of the relationship
between eligibility and potential earnings.

The second stage of the estimation is based on the Method of Simulated Moments. The
target moments are the proportional breaks at the OAA eligibility age in the labor force
participation-age profile for each of 15 different earnings groups. We weight each moment
by the inverse of its variance; more-precisely estimated moments receive greater weight in
the estimation. Specifically, we estimate η and αe by attempting to match the pattern
of bunching of retirements at the OAA eligibility age, while requiring that the model also
match the counterfactual distribution of retirement ages in the absence of OAA, which non-
parametrically identifies F (δ). The key assumptions are that any heterogeneity in retirement


                                                22
behavior among people who face the same budget constraint is due to heterogeneity in
the disutility of labor and that all earnings groups have the same counterfactual no-OAA
retirement distribution.


6.2.3    Empirical inputs


“Bunching” of retirements by potential earnings level.— The main target moments in the
estimation are measures of the bunching of retirements at the OAA eligibility age of 15
different earnings groups. Potential earnings, w, are not observed for those out of the labor
force, so we approximate the bunching of retirements of different earnings groups using
changes in the distribution of earnings at the OAA eligibility age. We continue to make
the assumption, introduced in the second bound described in Section 6.1, that exit from the
labor force at these ages is an absorbing state. We create separate indicator variables for
reporting 1939 wage and salary income of $1–100, of $101–200, and so on in multiples of $100
($1550 in 2010 dollars) for a total of 15 groups. We then estimate equation (2), reproduced
below, with an indicator for each level of earnings as a separate dependent variable.23 In
order to focus on situations as similar as possible to the model, we estimate these regressions
using data from Massachusetts only, a state whose OAA program appears to have closely
approximated an income floor with a common level for all individuals. Our key results, as
we discuss in Appendix Section A.8.1, are robust to estimating the model using data from
other states or the full US.

          yi = β0 + β1 1(agei ≥ 65) + β2 (agei − 65) + β3 (agei − 65)1(agei ≥ 65) + εi                 (2)

Under two assumptions, the share of men of a given potential earnings level who retire upon
reaching 65, conditional on working up until age 65, equals β1 /β0 . First, we assume that
for someone who worked in 1939, his actual earnings are his potential earnings, so that
someone either earns his potential earnings or zero. Second, because the available measure
of earnings does not include self-employment earnings, we also assume that self-employment
is independent of earnings and responds in the same way to OAA as does wage and salaried
employment. Note that this approach does not difference out factors other than OAA that
may have induced retirement at age 65, but since these other sources were significantly
smaller than OAA and relevant primarily for individuals higher in the income distribution
(see Appendix Section A.3.2), this is likely of modest importance and would tend to work
against our key findings.
  23
    We use a uniform kernel and the Imbens and Kalyanaraman (2012) approach to select a bandwidth
separately for each dependent variable. The results are robust to alternative choices on these dimensions.
We omit 65 year olds from the regression since, observing a person’s age only at the time of the Census (in
April 1940), we cannot determine whether a given 65-year-old would have been eligible for OAA in 1939.


                                                    23
Estimation of equation (2) provides further evidence that the effects of OAA on labor supply
were concentrated among those with low potential earnings. Appendix Figure A10 shows
estimates of β1 /β0 at each earnings level along with estimates of β1 . The point estimates
suggest that at levels of potential earnings up to $800 per year, about 20 percent more men
left the labor force at age 65 than would have been expected based on general trends in
labor force participation by age. Appendix Figure A11 shows underlying shares by age for
amounts up to $1,000. There are clear breaks in the underlying shares at age 65, and these
breaks diminish at higher earnings levels.

Counterfactual retirement ages in the absence of OAA.— To identify F (δ), we require the
estimated model to match the counterfactual distribution of retirement ages in the absence of
OAA. We use the counterfactual age profile of labor force participation estimated in Section
5.1 together with the assumption that the observed cross-sectional relationship between
labor force participation and age is a good proxy for the unobserved life-cycle relationship.
Because the distribution of people along a non-linear budget constraint plays a key role in
determining how policy changes affect behavior (e.g., Moffitt, 1986), the ability to identify
the counterfactual distribution of people along the lifetime budget constraint on the eve of the
major mid-20th-century expansions in Social Security greatly facilitates an understanding of
the role of government old-age support programs in reducing late-life work at this time.

The relationship between earnings and housing wealth.— We use the relationship between
earnings and housing wealth, the main determinant of eligibility other than income and
age available in the Census data, to estimate the slope of the eligibility-potential earnings
relationship in the first stage of the estimation. The estimate of the slope of the eligibility-
potential earnings relationship, β̂e , is the slope of the empirical relationship between earnings
and the fraction of people in Massachusetts with house values below the Massachusetts OAA
eligibility threshold of $3,000. The underlying assumption is that the slope of the relationship
between potential earnings and eligibility for OAA based on house value alone equals the
slope of the relationship between potential earnings and eligibility for OAA based on all
determinants of eligibility. Appendix Figure A12 shows the share of Massachusetts men
aged 60–64 with less than $3,000 of house value as a function of wage and salary earnings.
In addition to limiting OAA eligibility to people with less than $3,000 of equity in real
property, Massachusetts imposed additional eligibility requirements as well, so the actual
share eligible was less than the share that would be eligible based on the property test alone.




                                               24
6.2.4    Estimation results and validation


The estimation is well-behaved and yields plausible results. Appendix Figure A13, the objec-
tive function, shows that the parameters are well-identified (see Appendix Section A.8.2 for
details). The coefficient of relative risk aversion is 1.3 (η̂ = −1.3), indicating slightly greater
risk aversion than the log utility benchmark (η = −1) at which income and substitution
effects of wage changes exactly offset one another. This is within the usual range reported in
the labor supply literature, despite the particular characteristics of our setting. Roughly 22
percent of the male population is estimated to be eligible for OAA, with eligibility declining
from about 36 percent among those with the lowest potential earnings to about 13 percent
among people with potential earnings of $2,000. Fitting a linear relationship suggests that
no one with potential earnings greater than about $3,163 would have been eligible. Both the
level of eligibility and its slope with potential earnings seem reasonable based on OAA eligi-
bility rules and recipiency rates. The relatively low eligibility rate suggests that the effects
of OAA would have been significantly larger had everyone been eligible for the program. If
everyone had been eligible for OAA, the model predicts that OAA would have reduced the
labor force participation rate in 1940 of men aged 65–74 by 21.5 percentage points, whereas
our main reduced-form estimates imply a reduction of 8.5 percentage points. The results of
this estimation and several robustness tests appear in Appendix Table A12.

The estimated model matches key features of the data well. Figure 10 compares the empirical
and simulated moments, proportional breaks in labor force participation-age profiles at the
OAA eligibility age for people with different potential earnings levels. The model matches
the empirical pattern that increases in the probability of retiring at the OAA eligibility age
are concentrated among groups with low potential earnings—primarily those between $0
and about $900 (about $14,000 in 2010 dollars), about 2.5 times the Massachusetts OAA
benefit of $360.24 The probabilities of retiring at the OAA eligibility age, especially the
probabilities among groups with low potential earnings, pin down the level of the eligibility-
potential earnings relationship. If everyone were eligible for OAA, nobody whose potential
earnings were less than the OAA benefit level would work past the OAA eligibility age, since
doing so would give up leisure for no gain in consumption. In this case, the probability
of retiring at the OAA eligibility age conditional on not retiring before that age would be
one—about four times the observed probabilities among groups with low potential earnings.
The model infers from this pattern that even among groups with low potential earnings,
  24
    The one wage group where the simulated and empirical moments match poorly is the lowest, those with
potential earnings between $1 and $100 per year (about $1550 in 2010 dollars). Although we treat this as
a valid wage group, it likely reflects incorrectly reported income or people with other sources of income in
addition to a small amount of wage income. Given its large standard error, this moment has little effect
on the results, and in any case works against the key finding of large responses at low earnings levels. The
results are robust to dropping all of the low-earnings moments up to the OAA benefit of $360.


                                                    25
no more than about one-third of individuals were eligible for OAA in the sense we defined
above.

As a validation exercise, we simulate labor force participation in 1940 of everyone aged 55–
74. This requires an additional empirical input: the joint distribution of potential earnings
and OAA benefits. In each state, we use the observed distribution of earnings in 1940
among people aged 48–52 with positive earnings together with the OAA benefit level in
1940. (Details are in Appendix Section A.9.) We find, in Figure A14, that the simulated
labor force participation-age profile matches its empirical counterpart closely. Simulations
of the model predict that OAA should have reduced labor force participation among 65–
74-year-olds by 6.3 percentage points in 1940, not far from the main reduced-form estimate
of 8.5 percentage points.25 Overall, the results suggest that the model can provide a useful
benchmark for understanding the value and labor supply effects of OAA in 1940 and for
predicting the effects of Social Security during the middle of the twentieth century.


6.2.5    Effects of the earnings test on the labor supply and welfare of recipients


What was the role of OAA’s earnings test in reducing labor supply, and how much did it
reduce the value of the program to recipients? We address these questions by using the
estimated model to simulate the behavior and outcomes of a particular cohort of the US
population—that aged 55 in 1940—under a variety of budget constraints based on state
OAA programs in existence in 1940. Details are in Appendix Section A.10.

Simulations of the model suggest that about half of the overall effect of OAA on labor force
participation was due to its earnings test. Figure 11 shows the simulated age profile of
labor force participation under three scenarios: no OAA, actual OAA, and a counterfactual
unconditional OAA program, i.e., a program that pays the same fixed benefit regardless of
the individual’s current earnings. The results indicate that about 46 percent of the reduction
in labor supply among men aged 65–74 was due to OAA’s earnings test.

Despite the importance of the earnings test in reducing labor supply, further results suggest
that the earnings test had little effect on the value of OAA benefits to recipients. Simulations
of the model indicate that the average $1 of benefits was worth about $0.95 of unconditional
late-life income, on the upper end of the bounds calculated using our regression results. The
  25
     We also estimate an alternative version of the model with perfect capital markets and find that it is
highly inconsistent with the pattern of bunching of retirements at the OAA eligibility age. With perfect
capital markets, the simulated breaks in the earnings distribution at the OAA eligibility age among groups
with very low potential earnings are zero, since everybody in these groups who is eligible for OAA retires
strictly before age 64. The much better fit of the model with borrowing constraints is additional validation
of the model given the poor functioning of household credit markets at the time (see, e.g., Rose, 2014).



                                                    26
average cost to recipients of the earnings test was small for two main reasons. First, as
discussed in Section 6.1, a large fraction of OAA benefits were inframarginal; they would
have been received even if recipients did not adjust their labor supply in response to OAA.
The model implies that 49 percent of benefit-years were inframarginal without any behav-
ioral response and 72 percent were inframarginal after income effects. Second, labor supply
responses to OAA were highly concentrated among people with poor earnings prospects,
mainly because they faced the highest replacement rates.

The conclusion that the cost to recipients of the earnings test is small is extremely robust to
a wide range of alternative empirical inputs and assumptions. Appendix Table A12 reports
results based on several alternative specifications, and Appendix Section A.8.1 discusses
these and other results at length. For example, the results are highly robust to targeting
the bunching of retirements observed in populations other than that of Massachusetts alone,
including that of California, which also had a clear income floor with a common level for
everyone, and of the United States as a whole.26 Our main conclusions are also robust
to making a wide range of alternative assumptions about non-labor income, lifespan, dis-
counting, asset returns, and eligibility for OAA. The key role of inframarginal benefits in
limiting the cost of the earnings test means that the main effect of many possible changes in
the model would come through any effects on the counterfactual distribution of retirement
ages in the absence of OAA. But because we force the estimation to match this distribution
directly, the analysis is not very sensitive to changes in assumptions about the underlying
determinants of retirement ages in the absence of OAA. Furthermore, our key conclusions
are robust to larger-than-plausible changes in the distributions of counterfactual retirement
ages and potential earnings, the primary determinants of the cost of the earnings test.

This robustness also speaks to the external validity of our conclusions. For example, while
the earnings test was likely less costly because of the poor labor market conditions around
1940, using the (higher) 1950 earnings distribution and the (also higher) 1930 age profile of
labor force participation increases the average cost only slightly, to $0.07.



7      Social Security and the Rise in Retirement

Government old-age support expanded dramatically from 1940 to 1960 in both recipiency
rates and benefit levels. Combined OAA and Social Security payments per person 65 and
  26
    Appendix Figure A15 shows empirical and simulated moments using the entire US (instead of only
Massachusetts), and Appendix Figure A16 shows the underlying shares of men with earnings in each range.
Appendix Figures A17 and A18 show the analogous results for California. Both the US and California
exhibit the same basic patterns as Massachusetts.



                                                  27
older grew by a factor of more than six, from about $850 to more than $5,300 in 2010 dollars.
This was partly due to an expansion of OAA in the late 1940s but was mainly due to the
much greater growth of Social Security, which grew from $41 per person 65 and older in
1940 to $677 in 1950 and $4,644 in 1960 (all in 2010 dollars). Social Security differed from
OAA in many ways, but over this period Social Security imposed an earnings test not unlike
those of OAA, only gradually liberalized over the 1950s. Although providing a definitive
point estimate is beyond the scope of this paper, our results can provide some indication of
the probable importance of this expansion.

The simplest approach to answering this question is an extrapolation based on our main
regression results. This extrapolation suggests that the large growth in combined OAA and
Social Security between 1940 and 1960 would be expected to decrease labor force participa-
tion among men aged 65–74 by 12.4 percentage points, or about 90 percent of the observed
reduction of 13.5 percentage points. An obvious limitation of this approach is that it fails to
account for other major changes over this period, perhaps most importantly rising wages and
falling unemployment. It also fails to account for non-linearities in the relationship between
log benefits per person and labor force participation, and for differences in the effects of
changes in recipiency rates and changes in benefits per recipient.27

To overcome these limitations, we use our estimated life cycle model to try to obtain a lower-
bound estimate of the effect of the growth in government old-age support from 1940 to 1960.
To do so, we attempt to make consistently conservative assumptions that reduce the magni-
tude of the implied effect. Most important, we significantly understate mid-century Social
Security. We simulate the effect of a Social Security program fixed at its 1939 characteristics,
ignoring the large expansions in Social Security eligibility and benefits that occurred from
1950 onward. We also make assumptions that tend to reduce the implied effect of Social Se-
curity along several other key dimensions, including wage levels and growth rates, inflation,
eligibility for Social Security supplemental benefits, and counterfactual labor supply in the
absence of Social Security. The simulation compares the predicted behavior of a single co-
hort of early recipients—men aged 50 in 1940—under this relatively modest version of Social
Security to its predicted behavior in the absence of government old-age support. Details are
in Appendix Section A.10.2.

The results indicate that even this conservative representation of Social Security would reduce
labor force participation among members of this cohort from age 65 to 74 by 7.3 percentage
points, 54 percent of the 13.5 percentage point reduction observed from 1940 to 1960. As
  27
    Simulations of our estimated model suggest that labor-supply effects are concave in the replacement
rate, due to income effects shifting retirements earlier and thereby reducing exposure to the earnings test.
This is a potential explanation for the sometimes weak relationship between Social Security benefits and
labor supply in the aggregate time series (e.g., Moffitt, 1987).



                                                    28
shown in Appendix Table A12 and Appendix Section A.8.1, the prediction that Social Se-
curity significantly reduced labor supply from 1940 to 1960 is highly robust to a wide range
of alternative assumptions and holds even in models that under-predict the effects of OAA
in 1940. Within the standard lifecycle model framework, it is hard to imagine a model in
which the rapid growth in government old age support from 1940 to 1960 would not reduce
labor supply significantly.

We cannot provide a direct estimate of the cost to recipients of Social Security’s earnings test
over this period because the assumptions we make to be conservative in terms of labor supply
generate bias of ambiguous sign. We can, however, offer speculation informed by our analysis
in Section 6.2.5. The key determinants of the cost of the earnings test are replacement rates
and counterfactual retirement ages. Rising replacement rates tend to decrease the cost of
the earnings test, since greater income effects lead people to retire earlier and therefore have
less “exposure” to the earnings test. Falling “latent” retirement ages also tend to decrease
the cost of the earnings test by reducing “exposure” to the earnings test. Replacement rates
increased significantly between 1940 and 1960 (Clingman, Burkhalter and Chaplain, 2014).
It is less straightforward to know how latent retirement ages changed over this period, but it
is notable that Figure 1(b) shows little apparent change in the labor force participation-age
profile at ages below 65 from 1940 to 1960. Together with the small cost to recipients of
OAA’s earnings test, these considerations suggest that mid-century Social Security’s earnings
test was also unlikely to be very costly.



8    Conclusion

Many of the most important government programs transfer resources to older people and
explicitly or implicitly tax their labor. In this paper, we investigate the labor-supply and
welfare effects of the Old Age Assistance program in 1940. OAA was a large source of
government old-age support at the time—nearly one quarter of all individuals 65 and older
received OAA in 1940—and it helped pave the way for many of the important social insurance
programs of the present day. Even independent of its historical importance, OAA presents a
valuable opportunity for learning about the effects of government old-age support programs.
Like many modern programs, it had both a transfer component and a high implicit tax on
labor. But unlike many modern programs, it varied significantly across states and across
otherwise-similar groups of people within states. The recent availability of Census data on
the full US population in 1940 makes studying OAA a particularly fruitful way to shed light
on the effects of these programs.

Our results suggest that OAA caused large reductions in labor supply in 1940, explaining

                                              29
more than half of the observed decline in labor force participation among men aged 65–74
over the 1930s. Yet both reduced-form regressions and an estimated life cycle model indicate
that, while a significant share of this reduction in labor supply was due to substitution effects
from the high implicit tax rates of OAA’s earnings test, the reduction in the value of benefits
to recipients associated with the earnings test was quite small. Predictions based on our
regression estimates and our estimated life cycle model both suggest that Social Security
accounted for at least half of the large mid-century decline in late-life labor supply. Taken as
a whole, our results suggest that government old-age support programs can have large effects
on labor supply, through both their transfer and taxation components, but that in the case
of OAA circa 1940, the costs to recipients of the implicit taxation of work were quite small.




                                               30
References
Afriat, Sydney N. 1967. “The construction of utility functions from expenditure data.”
 International Economic Review, 8(1): 67–77.

Angrist, Joshua D., and Jörn-Steffen Pischke. 2009. Mostly Harmless Econometrics:
 An Empiricist’s Companion. Vol. 1 of Economics Books, Princeton University Press.

Atalay, Kadir, and Garry F. Barrett. 2015. “The Impact of Age Pension Eligibility Age
 on Retirement and Program Dependence: Evidence from an Australian Experiment.” The
 Review of Economics and Statistics, 97(1): 71–87.

Auerbach, Alan J, and Laurence J Kotlikoff. 1987. Dynamic fiscal policy. Vol. 11,
 Cambridge University Press Cambridge.

Baker, Michael, and Dwayne Benjamin. 1999. “Early Retirement Provisions and the
 Labor Force Behavior of Older Men: Evidence from Canada.” Journal of Labor Economics,
 17(4): 724–56.

Boskin, Michael J. 1977. “Social Security and Retirement Decisions.” Economic Inquiry,
 15(1): 1–25.

Brown, Kristine M. 2013. “The link between pensions and retirement timing: Lessons
 from California teachers.” Journal of Public Economics, 98(C): 1–14.

Burtless, Gary, and Robert A Moffitt. 1985. “The joint choice of retirement age and
 postretirement hours of work.” Journal of Labor Economics, 3(2): 209–36.

Burtless, Gary, and Robert Moffitt. 1984. “The effect of social security benefits on the
 labor supply of the aged.” Retirement and economic behavior, 135–171.

Carter, Susan B., Scott Sigmund Gartner, Michael R. Haines, Alan L. Olmstead,
 Richard Sutch, Gavin Wright, Price V. Fishback, and Melissa A. Thomas-
 son. 2006. Historical Statistics of the United States Millennial Edition Online. New
 York:Cambridge University Press.

Chetty, Raj. 2012. “Bounds on Elasticities With Optimization Frictions: A Synthesis of
 Micro and Macro Evidence on Labor Supply.” Econometrica, 80(3): 969–1018.

Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman, Tore Olsen, and Luigi Pistaferri. 2011. “Adjust-
 ment Costs, Firm Responses, and Micro vs. Macro Labor Supply Elasticities: Evidence
 from Danish Tax Records.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(2): 749–804.

Clingman, Michael, Kyle Burkhalter, and Chris Chaplain. 2014. “Replacement
  Rates for Hypothetical Retired Workers.” Social Security Administration, Office of the
  Chief Actuary, Actuarial Note Number 2014.9.

Coile, Courtney, and Jonathan Gruber. 2007. “Future Social Security Entitlements
 and the Retirement Decision.” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 89(2): 234–246.

Coile, Courtney C. 2015. “Economic Determinants of Workers’ Retirement Decisions.”
 Journal of Economic Surveys, 29(4): 830–853.

                                          31
Costa, Dora L. 1995. “Pensions and Retirement: Evidence from Union Army Veterans.”
 The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 110(2): 297–319.

Costa, Dora L. 1998. The evolution of retirement. National Bureau of Economic Research
 Books, University of Chicago Press.

Currie, Janet, and Jonathan Gruber. 1996. “Health Insurance Eligibility, Utilization of
 Medical Care, and Child Health.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111(2): 431–66.

Diamond, Peter, and Jonathan Gruber. 1999. “Social security and retirement in the
 United States.” In Social security and retirement around the world. 437–473. University of
 Chicago Press.

Duffie, Darrell, and Kenneth J. Singleton. 1993. “Simulated moments estimation of
 Markov models of asset prices.” Econometrica, 929–952.

Durand, John Dana. 1948. The Labor Force in the United States, 1890-1960. Social Science
 Research Council.

Elo, Irma T, and Samuel H Preston. 1994. “Estimating African-American mortality
  from inaccurate data.” Demography, 31(3): 427–458.

Feldstein, Martin, and Jeffrey B. Liebman. 2002. “Social security.” In Handbook of
  Public Economics. Vol. 4 of Handbook of Public Economics, , ed. A. J. Auerbach and M.
  Feldstein, Chapter 32, 2245–2324. Elsevier.

Fetter, Daniel K. 2017. “Local Government and Old-Age Support in the New Deal.”
  Explorations in Economic History. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.eeh.2017.02.
  003.

Fishback, Price V. 2007. “The New Deal.” In Government and the American Economy:
  A New History. University of Chicago Press.

French, Eric. 2005. “The Effects of Health, Wealth, and Wages on Labour Supply and
  Retirement Behaviour.” Review of Economic Studies, 72(2): 395–427.

Friedberg, Leora. 1999. “The effect of old age assistance on retirement.” Journal of Public
  Economics, 71(2): 213–232.

Friedberg, Leora. 2000. “The Labor Supply Effects of the Social Security Earnings Test.”
  The Review of Economics and Statistics, 82(1): 48–63.

Gelber, Alexander, Adam Isen, and Jae Song. 2016. “The Effect of Pension Income
 on Elderly Earnings: Evidence from Social Security and Full Population Data.”

Gelber, Alexander M., Damon Jones, and Daniel W. Sacks. 2017. “Estimating
 Earnings Adjustment Frictions: Method and Evidence from the Social Security Earnings
 Test.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 19491.

Goda, Gopi Shah, John B. Shoven, and Sita Nataraj Slavov. 2007. “A Tax on Work
 for the Elderly: Medicare as a Secondary Payer.” National Bureau of Economic Research
 Working Paper 13383.

                                            32
Goda, Gopi Shah, John B Shoven, and Sita Nataraj Slavov. 2009. “Removing the
 Disincentives in Social Security for Long Careers.” In Social Security Policy in a Changing
 Environment. 21–38. University of Chicago Press.

Goldin, Claudia, and Robert A. Margo. 1992. “The Great Compression: The Wage
 Structure in the United States at Mid-Century.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
 107(1): 1–34.

Grove, Robert D., and Alice M. Hetzel. 1968. “Vital Statistics Rates in the United
 States 1940-1960.” Public Health Service, National Center for Health Statistics.

Gruber, Jonathan. 2013. Public finance and public policy. . 4th ed., Macmillan.

Haines, Michael R. 2010. “Historical, Demographic, Economic, and Social Data: The
 United States, 1790-2002.” Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university Consortium for Political and
 Social Research, doi:10.3886/ICPSR02896.

Imbens, Guido, and Karthik Kalyanaraman. 2012. “Optimal Bandwidth Choice for
  the Regression Discontinuity Estimator.” Review of Economic Studies, 79(3): 933–959.

Kleven, Henrik J., and Mazhar Waseem. 2013. “Using Notches to Uncover Opti-
 mization Frictions and Structural Elasticities: Theory and Evidence from Pakistan.” The
 Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128(2): 669–723.

Krueger, Alan B., and Bruce D. Meyer. 2002. “Labor supply effects of social insurance.”
 In Handbook of Public Economics. Vol. 4 of Handbook of Public Economics, , ed. A. J.
 Auerbach and M. Feldstein, Chapter 33, 2327–2392. Elsevier.

Laitner, John, and Dan Silverman. 2012. “Consumption, retirement and social security:
  Evaluating the efficiency of reform that encourages longer careers.” Journal of Public
  Economics, 96(7–8): 615–634.

Lansdale, Robert T., Elizabeth Long, Agnes Leisy, and Byron T. Hipple. 1939.
  The Administration of Old Age Assistance. Vol. 6, Committee on Public Administration
  of the Social Science Research Council.

Latimer, Murray Webb. 1932. Industrial Pension Systems in the United States and
  Canada. New York:Industrial Relations Counselors, Inc.

Latimer, Murray Webb, and Karl Tufel. 1940. Trends in Industrial Pensions. New
  York:Industrial Relations Counselors, Inc.

Lee, Chulhee. 1998. “The Rise of the Welfare State and Labor-Force Participation of Older
  Males: Evidence from the Pre-Social Security Era.” American Economic Review Papers
  and Proceedings, 88(2): 222–26.

Liebman, Jeffrey, Erzo Luttmer, and David G. Seif. 2009. “Labor supply responses
  to marginal Social Security benefits: Evidence from discontinuities.” Journal of Public
  Economics, 93(11-12): 1208–1223.




                                            33
Manoli, Day, and Andrea Weber. 2016. “Nonparametric Evidence on the Effects of
 Financial Incentives on Retirement Decisions.” American Economic Journal: Economic
 Policy, 8(4): 160–182.

Margo, Robert. 1993. “Employment and Unemployment in the 1930s.” Journal of Eco-
 nomic Perspectives, 7(2): 41–59.

McCamman, Dorothy. 1943. “State and Local Employees Covered by Government Re-
 tirement Systems.” Social Security Bulletin, 6(7): 31–41.

Moen, Jon R. 1988. “From Gainful Employment to Labor Force: Definitions and a New
 Estimate of Work Rates of American Males, 1860 to 1980.” Historical Methods, 21(4): 149–
 159.

Moffitt, Robert. 1986. “The econometrics of piecewise-linear budget constraints: A survey
 and exposition of the maximum likelihood method.” Journal of Business & Economic
 Statistics, 4(3): 317–328.

Moffitt, Robert A. 1987. “Life Cycle Labor Supply and Social Security: A Time Series
 Analysis.” Work, Health, and Income among the Elderly, Burtless, Gary, ed., Brookings:
 Washington, DC.

Moffitt, Robert A. 2003. “The Temporary Assistance for Needy Families Program.” In
 Means-Tested Transfer Programs in the United States. NBER Chapters, 291–364. National
 Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Moffitt, Robert A. 2016. Economics of Means-Tested Transfer Programs in the United
 States, volume 1. University of Chicago Press.

Neumark, David, and Elizabeth Powers. 2000. “Welfare for the elderly: the effects of
 SSI on pre-retirement labor supply.” Journal of Public Economics, 78(1–2): 51–80.

Neumark, David, and Elizabeth Powers. 2006. “Supplemental security income, labor
 supply, and migration.” Journal of Population Economics, 19(3): 447–479.

Olivetti, Claudia, and M. Daniele Paserman. 2015. “In the Name of the Son (and
 the Daughter): Intergenerational Mobility in the United States, 1850-1940.” American
 Economic Review, 105(8): 2695–2724.

Pakes, Ariel, and David Pollard. 1989. “Simulation and the Asymptotics of Optimization
 Estimators.” Econometrica, 57(5): 1027–1057.

Parker, Florence E. 1936. “Experience Under State Old-Age Pension Acts in 1935.”
 Monthly Labor Review, 34(4): 811–837.

Parsons, Donald O. 1991. “Male Retirement Behavior in the United States, 1930-1950.”
 The Journal of Economic History, 51(03): 657–674.

Pischke, Jorn-Steffen. 1995. “Measurement Error and Earnings Dynamics: Some Es-
  timates from the PSID Validation Study.” Journal of Business & Economic Statistics,
  13(3): 305–14.


                                           34
Quadagno, Jill. 1988. The transformation of old age security: Class and politics in the
 American welfare state. University of Chicago Press.

Railroad Retirement Board. 1941. Annual Report of the Railroad Retirement Board for
 the Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 1940. U.S. Government Printing Office.

Ransom, Roger L., and Richard Sutch. 1986. “The Labor of Older Americans: Re-
 tirement of Men On and Off the Job, 1870-1937.” The Journal of Economic History,
 46(01): 1–30.

Reticker, Ruth. 1941. “Benefits and Beneficiaries Under the Civil Service Retirement Act.”
 Social Security Bulletin, 4(4): 29–42.

Rose, Jonathan D. 2014. “The Prolonged Resolution of Troubled Real Estate Lenders
 during the 1930s.” In Housing and Mortgage Markets in Historical Perspective. 245–284.
 National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Rosenbloom, Joshua L., and William A. Sundstrom. 1999. “The Sources of Regional
 Variation in the Severity of the Great Depression: Evidence from U.S. Manufacturing,
 1919-1937.” The Journal of Economic History, 59: 714–747.

Saez, Emmanuel. 2010. “Do Taxpayers Bunch at Kink Points?” American Economic
  Journal: Economic Policy, 2(3): 180–212.

Samwick, Andrew A. 1998. “New evidence on pensions, Social Security, and the timing
  of retirement.” Journal of Public Economics, 70(2): 207–236.

Sass, Steven A. 1997. The Promise of Private Pensions: The First Hundred Years. Harvard
  University Press.

Social Security Administration. 1960. “Social Security Bulletin, Annual Statistical Sup-
  plement 1959.” U.S. Government Printing Office.

Stock, James H, and David A Wise. 1990. “Pensions, the Option Value of Work, and
  Retirement.” Econometrica, 58(5): 1151–80.

U.S. Bureau of the Census. 1943. “Retirement systems for state and local government
 employees: 1941.” State and local government special study no. 17.

U.S. Bureau of the Census. 1975. Historical Statistics of the United States, Colonial
 Times to 1970. Washington, D.C.:Government Printing Office.

U.S. Department of Labor. 1940. “Recent Progress in State Labor Legislation.” U.S.
 Goverment Printing Office, Department of Labor Bulletin No. 42.

U.S. Social Security Board. 1937a. “First Annual Report of the Social Security Board
 for the Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 1936.” U.S. Government Printing Office.

U.S. Social Security Board. 1937b. “Second Annual Report of the Social Security Board,
 Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 1937.” U.S. Government Printing Office.

U.S. Social Security Board. 1939a. “Social Data on Recipients of Public Assistance
 Accepted in 1937-1938.” Bureau of Research and Statistics Memorandum No. 34.

                                           35
U.S. Social Security Board. 1939b. “Social Data on Recipients of Public Assistance
 Accepted in 1938-1939.” Bureau of Research and Statistics Memorandum No. 42.

U.S. Social Security Board. 1940a. Characteristics of state plans for old-age assistance.
 USGPO.

U.S. Social Security Board. 1940b. “Social Security Yearbook for the Calendar Year
 1939.”

U.S. Social Security Board. 1940c. “Trends in Public Assistance, 1933-1939.” Bureau of
 Research and Statistics Report No. 8.

U.S. Social Security Board. 1941. “Social Data on Recipients of Public Assistance Ac-
 cepted in 1939-1940.” Bureau of Public Assistance Research Memorandum No. 1.

Varian, Hal R. 1982. “The Nonparametric Approach to Demand Analysis.” Econometrica,
 50(4): 945–973.

Wallis, John Joseph. 1987. “Employment, Politics, and Economic Recovery during the
 Great Depression.” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 69(3): 516–520.

Wallis, John Joseph. 1989. “Employment in the Great Depression: New data and hy-
 potheses.” Explorations in Economic History, 26(1): 45–72.

Wendt, Laura. 1938. “Census Classifications and Social Security Categories.” Social Secu-
 rity Bulletin, 1(4): 3–12.

Wooldridge, Jeffrey. 2010. Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data. Vol. 1.
 2 ed., The MIT Press.

Ziliak, James P. 2015. “Temporary Assistance for Needy Families.” Economics of Means-
  Tested Transfer Programs in the United States, volume 1, 303–393. University of Chicago
  Press.




                                           36
Tables and Figures

                                                  Figure 1: Government old-age support and retirement over the mid-20th century
                                                   (a) Aggregate trends 1920-70                     (b) Age profiles, 1930-60
                      60




                                                                                                                                  OAA+OASI payments per person 65+, 2010 USD



                                                                                                                                                                                                 1
                                                                                                                                                                       8000
 Labor force participation rate, men 65+




                                                                                                                                                                               Share in the labor force at Census
                                 50




                                                                                                                                                                                                            .8
                                                                                                                                                             6000
                    40




                                                                                                                                                  4000




                                                                                                                                                                                               .6
                                                                                                                                        2000
       30




                                                                                                                                                                                  .4
                      20




                                                                                                                                                                                                 .2
                                                                                                                                  0
                                           1920      1930   1940                                      1950    1960         1970                                                                                     55   57    59    61    63     65      67    69    71   73

                                                     LFP                     OAA+OASI (includes pre−1935 state programs)                                                                                                            1930   1940        1950    1960




Notes: Panel (a) shows labor force participation rate of men 65 and older, from Series D35 of U.S. Bureau
of the Census (1975), and payments under Old Age Assistance (OAA) and Old Age and Survivors Insurance
(OASI) per person 65 and older, in 2010 US dollars. OAA payments data come from Parker (1936) for 1925
to 1935 and Series Bf621 of Carter et al. (2006) for 1936 onwards. OASI payments data come from Series
BF396 of Carter et al. (2006). Panel (b) shows share of men in the labor force at each age, calculated from
the 1930-60 Censuses. Rates prior to 1940 are adjusted for comparability: see Appendix Section A.1 for
details.


              Figure 2: Labor force participation in 1940, by age and state OAA payments per person 65+
                                                                              1
                                                            Share in the labor force at Census
                                                                .4          .6.2         .8




                                                                                                 55      57   59     61        63      65       67                                                                            69     71     73
                                                                                                                              Age in April 1940

                                                                                                              Above median states                                                                               Below median states




Notes: Figure shows share of men in the labor force at the time of the 1940 Census, in states with above-
and below-median OAA payments per person 65+ in 1939, for states with an eligibility age of 65 in 1939.




                                                                                                                                                                      37
                 Figure 3: OAA payments per person 65 and above, December 1939




Figure shows total OAA payments for the month of December 1939 scaled by the population 65 and above
in the 1940 Census. OAA payments data come from U.S. Social Security Board (1940c). In 2010 dollars,
bottom quintile is approximately $1.40 to $27 and top quintile is $93 to $419.



                             Figure 4: Lifetime budget constraint with OAA
                           LC

                                                           slope = w − ȳ

                                                                            LC = a0 + wT



                                       OAA


             a0 + (T − Telig )ȳ             No OAA

                             a0



                                                                                age of retirement
                             t0 = 0                     Telig            T

Lifetime budget constraint relating the present value of lifetime consumption (LC) to age at retirement,
with and without OAA. The OAA program depicted is an income-floor program with eligibility age Telig ,
which implicitly taxes labor earnings at a 100 percent rate from the first dollar (by phasing out benefits
dollar-for-dollar with labor income). For simplicity, the figure depicts the case in which the rate of return is
zero, r = 0.


                                                      38
        Figure 5: Differential changes in labor force participation and receipt of non-wage income
 .05         (a) Labor force participation                  (b) Receipt of non-wage/salary income




                                                                                                                        .1
 0




                                                                                                                        .05
 −.05




                                                                                                                        0
 −.1
 −.15




                                                                                                                        −.05
        55   57   59   61                                63                  65   67    69         71        73                55        57        59      61    63        65    67   69   71   73




Notes: Figure shows point estimates and 95% confidence intervals on age-payment interactions from estima-
tion of equation (1), using log simulated payment by age interactions as instruments for log per-65+ payment
by age interactions and controlling for state border by age fixed effects. Sample restricted to counties on
state boundaries, excluding counties on borders of states with age eligibility requirement other than 65 in
1939. Unit of observation is an individual-state border pair. Standard errors clustered at the state level.
For Panel (a), N = 2403915 and Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F-stat is 3.06. For Panel (b), N = 2238476 and
Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F-stat is 3.55.




 Figure 6: Breaks in non-wage/salary income versus breaks in labor force participation, by state
                                                                                         ar
                                                   0




                                                                                        ms
                            Estimated break in labor force particiation




                                                                                       ga           va
                                                                                                   fl  vt
                                                                                              nc             ky
                                                                                                        al         de
                                                       −.05




                                                                                                          me nm mi ct
                                                                                                       la      nymd
                                                                                                    sc      nd
                                                                                                            tn
                                                                                                               ri      dc
                                                                                                                   nj
                                                                                                                  or      all
                                                                                                                      wv
                                                                                                                           tx              id
                                                                                                                                         iawi ne in
                                                                                                                                    ma     oh
                                                                                                                                          ks      wy
                                      −.1




                                                                                                                                    az
                                                                                                                                                            nv
                                                                                                                                                wasd il
                                                                                                                                                ca      mt mn

                                                                                                                                                                 ut
                                                   −.15




                                                                                                                                                                      ok

                                                                          −.05             0                 .05                .1                                         .15
                                                                                       Estimated break in receipt of non−wage income



Notes: Figure shows point estimates from estimation of equation (2) for receipt of non-wage income in 1939
against estimates for labor force participation in 1940, separately by state. Sample: men aged 56-64 or
66-73 at 1940 Census, in states with an eligibility age of 65 in 1939; breaks in receipt of non-wage income
estimated on sample of men with non-missing 1939 income information (N = 5277150) and breaks in labor
force participation estimated on sample of men with non-missing 1940 labor force participation information
(N = 5649733).



                                                                                                                  39
                                                          Figure 7: Actual and counterfactual profile of labor force participation




                                                                                      1          .8
                                                                        Share in the labor force
                                                                             .4       .2
                                                                                      0 .6




                                                                                                      50 52 54 56 58 60 62 64 66 68 70 72 74 76 78 80 82 84
                                                                                                                           Age in April 1940

                                                                                                                                     Observed                                            No OAA




Notes: Figure shows observed rates of labor force participation by age and estimated counterfactual rates of
labor force participation in the absence of OAA, based on IV estimates of equation (3).




                                                Figure 8: OAA reduced labor supply more for men with lower potential earnings
                                                   (a) By years of education                  (b) By predicted earnings decile
                     .05




                                                                                                                                                                    0
 Coefficient on log payment X age 65−69




                                                                                                                                                Coefficient on log payment X age 65−69
                                                                                                                                                                                  −.02
                                0




                                                                                                            13−15 years
                                                                                                                                                                          −.04




                                                                                                                             17+ years
                                                                                                                                                                    −.06
                    −.05




                                                                     8 years 9−11 years
                                                                                                         12 years
                                                         5−7 years
                                                                                                                                                           −.08




                                                                                                                          16 years

                                                  1−4 years
       −.1




                                                                                                                                                  −.1               −.12
                     −.15




                                          500         1000           1500           2000         2500           3000                                                                       500        1000                    1500      2000
                                             Average wage and salary earnings for non−self−employed, by education                                                                                 Median predicted earnings by decile



Notes: Figure shows estimates of age 65-69 interaction in equation (1) separately by grouped years of
education (Panel (a)) and by decile of predicted earnings (Panel (b)), using log simulated payment by age
interactions as instruments for log per-65+ payment by age interactions and controlling for state border by
age fixed effects. Sample restricted to counties on state boundaries, excluding counties on borders of states
with age eligibility requirement other than 65 in 1939. Unit of observation is an individual-state border pair.
In Panel (a), education groups are arranged horizontally by average 1939 wage and salary earnings for 45-54
year old men who were not self-employed at the time of the Census.




                                                                                                                                         40
             Figure 9: 1940 OAA payments are not associated with differential age trends in 1930
                    (a) 1930 coefficients                  (b) 1940 coefficients for same states
 .05




                                                                .05
 0




                                                                0
 −.05




                                                                −.05
 −.1




                                                                −.1




        55    57   59   61   63   65   67   69   71   73               55   57   59   61   63   65   67   69   71   73




Notes: Panel (a) shows point estimates and 95% confidence intervals on age-payment interactions from
estimation of equation (1) using “gainful employment” in 1930 as the outcome and December 1939 payments
as the payment variable, with log simulated payment by age interactions used as instruments for log observed
payment by age interactions and controlling for state border by age fixed effects. Sample includes only those
states that had no old-age assistance program in 1930. For comparison, panel (b) shows analogous estimates
for 1940 labor force participation for the same sample of states. In both, sample restricted to counties on
state boundaries, excluding counties on borders of states with age eligibility requirement other than 65 in
1939. Standard errors clustered at the state level. For 1930 coefficients N = 1602079 and Kleibergen-Paap
rk Wald F statistic is 1.36, for 1940 coefficients N = 1930322 and Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F statistic is
1.44.




                                                           41
                                                                   Figure 10: Empirical vs. simulated moments
                                                  (a) Moments in the estimation                       (b) All earnings levels

                                                                                                                                   0.25                                                                  1.0                                            0.25
                                            0.4                                                                   Empirical                                                                                     Empirical
                                                                                                                  Simulated                                                                                     Simulated
 Proportional break in LFP(age) at age 65




                                                                                                                                                              Proportional break in LFP(age) at age 65
                                                                                                                                   0.20                                                                                                                 0.20
                                            0.2                                                                                                                                                          0.5

                                                                                                                                   0.15                                                                                                                 0.15




                                                                                                                                      Pr(wage in bin)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Pr(wage in bin)
                                            0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.0
                                            0.2                                                                                    0.10                                                                                                                 0.10

                                            0.4                                                                                                                                                          0.5
                                                                                                                                   0.05                                                                                                                 0.05

                                            0.6
                                                                                                                                   0.00                                                                  1.0                                            0.00
                                              0    200   400   600                                 800   1000   1200        1400                                                                            0        1000   2000        3000   4000   5000




Notes: Empirical vs. simulated moments and annual earnings distribution for moments in the estimation
(Panel (a)) and for all earnings levels, including those not in the estimation (Panel (b)). Dashed lines are 95
percent confidence intervals of the empirical moments. The moments are the proportional breaks in labor
force participation-age profiles at age 65. Empirical moments correspond to the proportional breaks at age
65 in the share of men with the specified amount of wage/salary income in Massachusetts in 1939, relative to
the predicted share at age 65 based on data from younger ages. The earnings distribution is the distribution
of wage/salary income among men in Massachusetts aged 60–64 in 1939 who had any wage/salary income.
For reference, the “income floor” in Massachusetts is $360 per year (about $5,600 in 2010 dollars). Earnings
above $5,000 are set to $5,000.




                                                           Figure 11: Simulated effects of OAA on labor force participation

                                                                                                  1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                No OAA
                                                                                                  0.9                                                                                                           OAA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                OAA but no ET
                                                                                                  0.8
                                                                 Labor force participation rate




                                                                                                  0.7

                                                                                                  0.6

                                                                                                  0.5

                                                                                                  0.4

                                                                                                  0.3
                                                                                                    55                 60                                65                                                     70                 75
                                                                                                                                                        Age


Notes: Simulated life cycle labor force participation profiles of the cohort of people aged 55 in 1940 in the
US under different OAA programs. The policy underlying the “OAA but no ET” profile is a counterfactual
OAA program that did not impose an earnings test.



                                                                                                                                                        42
                            Table 1: Basic features of state OAA programs

                                                               Mean     Median     SD     Min     Max     N
                 OAA recipiency rate, December 1939             0.23     0.23      0.09   0.08    0.49    49
         OAA payment per recipient, December 1939              17.93     18.90     6.49   6.01    32.97   49
      OAA payment per person 65+, December 1939                4.16       3.59     2.59   1.01    13.17   49
                            Legal maximum payment              29.37       30      5.34    15      45     41
                             99th percentile payment           29.43       30      6.22    12      45     49
 99th percentile payment, states with legal maximum            28.78       30      4.85    15      45     41
Includes the 48 states and the District of Columbia. ‘99th percentile payment’ is for new recipients in fiscal
year 1938-39. Eight states had no legal maximum payment. Recipiency rate and payments per person 65+
are normalized by state population from 1940 Census. Sources: data on OAA dollar payments and number
of recipients from U.S. Social Security Board (1940b), data on legal maximum payments from U.S. Social
Security Board (1940a), data on 99th percentile payment from U.S. Social Security Board (1939b).


                                  Table 2: Summary statistics
                                                 Full sample                     Border county sample
                                            Mean    SD        N                 Mean     SD      N
                       Years of education 7.142 3.740 6722869                   7.013 3.718 2055456
               Completed primary school 0.547 0.498 6722869                     0.528 0.499 2055456
                                Non-white 0.079 0.269 6722869                   0.088 0.283 2055456
                                US citizen 0.946 0.227 6722869                  0.953 0.211 2055456
                        Currently married 0.755 0.430 6722869                   0.755 0.430 2055456
                In the labor force in 1940 0.713 0.452 6722869                  0.725 0.447 2055456
                        Employed in 1940 0.651 0.477 6722869                    0.666 0.472 2055456
   Employed, non-emergency work in 1940 0.616 0.486 6722869                     0.630 0.483 2055456
                          Worked in 1939 0.720 0.449 6283146                    0.730 0.444 1915313
         Any wage/salary income in 1939 0.480 0.500 6283146                     0.480 0.500 1915313
             Wage/salary income in 1939      557   911 6283146                   551    905 1915313
        ≥$50 in non-wage/salary income 0.516 0.500 6283146                      0.518 0.500 1915313
Full sample: men aged 55-74 in states with 1939 eligibility age of 65 with non-missing demographic informa-
tion (education, race, birthplace, citizenship, and marital status). For demographic variables and 1940 labor
force and employment variables (reflecting labor force status in last week of March 1940), sample restricted
to men with non-missing information on labor force status and non-missing demographic information. For
1939 employment and income variables, sample restricted to men with non-missing information for all 1939
employment and income variables and non-missing demographic information. State border county sample
further limits to counties that border a state included in the sample.




                                                     43
           Table 3: Labor force participation by state payments per person 65+ and age
           Panel A. OLS results
                                                   (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)
           Log per-65+ payment                    0.018∗∗∗ 0.016∗∗∗ 0.000       0.001
           × age 55-59                           (0.005)   (0.004)   (0.004)   (0.003)

            Log per-65+ payment                         -0.061∗∗∗ -0.057∗∗∗ -0.049∗∗∗ -0.049∗∗∗
            × age 65-69                                (0.004)    (0.006)   (0.004)   (0.004)

            Log per-65+ payment                        -0.068∗∗∗    -0.068∗∗∗    -0.060∗∗∗    -0.061∗∗∗
            × age 70-74                               (0.008)      (0.009)      (0.006)      (0.006)
            Observations                              6722869      2403915      2403915      2403915
            Sample                                       full       border       border       border
            Border segment × age fixed effects            no          no           yes          yes
            Education × age fixed effects                 no          no           no           yes
            Race × age fixed effects                      no          no           no           yes
            Panel B. IV results
                                                         (1)         (2)       (3)             (4)
            Log per-65+ payment                         0.048∗      0.028∗∗∗  0.006           0.006
            × age 55-59                                (0.019)     (0.007)   (0.005)         (0.005)

            Log per-65+ payment                         -0.070∗∗∗ -0.060∗∗∗ -0.063∗∗∗ -0.063∗∗∗
            × age 65-69                                (0.008)    (0.010)   (0.008)   (0.008)

            Log per-65+ payment                        -0.089∗∗∗    -0.078∗∗∗    -0.074∗∗∗    -0.075∗∗∗
            × age 70-74                               (0.016)      (0.013)      (0.010)      (0.010)
            Observations                              6722869      2403915      2403915      2403915
            Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F-stat              2.00         8.39         20.46        20.53
            Sample                                       full       border       border       border
            Border segment × age fixed effects            no          no           yes          yes
            Education × age fixed effects                 no          no           no           yes
            Race × age fixed effects                      no          no           no           yes
Dependent variable is indicator for being in the labor force at 1940 Census. In Panel B, log simulated
payment by age interactions used as instruments for log per-65+ payment by age interactions. Sample for
column (1): men aged 55-74 in states with 1939 eligibility age of 65. Columns (2)-(4) include only counties
on state boundaries and exclude counties on borders of excluded states. Unit of observation in columns
(2)-(4) is an individual-state border pair. All specifications include county fixed effects and 5-year age group
fixed effects. All age-interactions are with 5-year age groups. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered
at the state level. ∗ : p < 0.05, ∗∗ : p < 0.01, ∗∗∗ : p < 0.001




                                                      44
Table 4: Alternative labor force participation outcomes by state payments per person 65+ and age

                                                        (1)            (2)             (3)
                                                  In labor force    Employed      Non-emergency
         Log per-65+ payment                           0.006          0.008           0.001
         × age 55-59                                  (0.005)        (0.005)         (0.004)

         Log per-65+ payment                          -0.063∗∗∗       -0.050∗∗∗        -0.032∗∗∗
         × age 65-69                                 (0.008)         (0.008)          (0.008)

         Log per-65+ payment                          -0.075∗∗∗       -0.060∗∗∗       -0.042∗∗∗
         × age 70-74                                 (0.010)         (0.009)         (0.008)
         Observations                                2403915         2403915         2403915
         Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F-stat                20.53           20.53           20.53
         Sample                                       border          border          border
         Border segment × age fixed effects             yes             yes             yes
         Education × age fixed effects                  yes             yes             yes
         Race × age fixed effects                       yes             yes             yes

Dependent variables: in labor force at 1940 Census (1), employed at 1940 Census (2), employed in private
or non-emergency government work (3). Log simulated payment by age interactions used as instruments for
log per recipient payment by age interactions. Sample restricted to counties on state boundaries, excluding
counties on borders of states with age eligibility requirement other than 65 in 1939. Unit of observation is
an individual-state border pair. All specifications include county fixed effects and 5-year age group fixed
effects. All age-interactions are with 5-year age groups. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at
the state level. ∗ : p < 0.05, ∗∗ : p < 0.01, ∗∗∗ : p < 0.001




                                                    45
A       Appendix

A.1      Comparability of labor force participation rates over time

The 1940 Census was the first Decennial Census to use the concept of “labor force participa-
tion,” which was based on a person’s employment or unemployment status in the last week
of March 1940. Earlier Censuses, including the 1930 Census, provide information on the
closely related but distinct concept of “gainful employment,” measuring whether an individ-
ual reported having had an occupation in the previous year. Comparability of these concepts
is not an issue for our main estimates, which are all based solely on the 1940 Census, but
we do make adjustments when we make comparisons over time.

Durand (1948) reports adjustment factors to make data from 1930 and earlier comparable
to measures of labor force participation from 1940 onwards. A separate adjustment factor
is given for men in each 5-year age bin from ages 20 to 74 and for men aged 75 and older.
We use these age-specific adjustment factors in all comparisons of 1940 data with data from
earlier years. In Figure 1(b), which plots labor force participation in 1930 by single years of
age, we linearly interpolate to obtain adjustment factors for each age.

On the general issue of constructing consistent measures of labor force activity over time,
see Costa (1998) for further details and Moen (1988) for an extensive discussion.


A.2      State OAA programs and construction of the simulated in-
         strument

A.2.1     The OAA budget constraint

Payments, and to some extent eligibility, under OAA programs were in general based on
an income floor or a consumption floor. Lansdale et al. (1939) provides a contemporary
overview of how these worked in practice. The most common method for determining a
basis for a payment was a “budgetary deficiency” principle. This involved the determination
of a basic standard of living and, based on this standard, an estimate of the “needs” of a
particular applicant for a given length of time (which could vary across applicants) and an
estimate of the applicant’s “resources” (which would always include any regular income).
The deficit determined the basis for an OAA payment.28 This method had been common
in the administration of relief to the poor prior to the growth of OAA. By the late 1930s,
some states had also begun using a more explicit income floor, which amounted to specifying
a standard amount for “needs” (such as 30 dollars per month). In both types of systems,
increases in income would lead to a reduction in benefits.

It is relevant to both our regressions and the structural estimation that to the extent that
“needs” varied across people according to unobserved characteristics, it need not have been
the case that OAA payments in a state would have been the same to all individuals with
  28
     Note that under this system, there is no necessary reason why retiring later would lead to higher OAA
payments.


                                                   46
the same level of income. In practice, in many states payments varied substantially even
across people with no other source of earnings. This issue is illustrated in Figure A1, which
is based on data from U.S. Social Security Board (1939b). In Ohio, among new recipients
in 1939, only about 10 percent of payments were at the legal maximum of $30 per month,
even among recipients with no other source of income.29 However, conforming with the
contemporary literature (e.g., Lansdale et al., 1939), the data suggest that a few states did
have programs that more closely resembled an income floor set at a common level across
people. As examples, California and Massachusetts had legal minimum amounts for the
sum of income and benefits. For recipients with no other source of income, these states
saw payments cluster right around this minimum. For new recipients in Massachusetts in
1939, for example, close to 70 percent of recipients with no other source of income received
payments of $30 per month. California specified both a maximum and minimum income plus
benefit of $35 per month, and for recipients with no other income all payments clustered at
this amount.

Lacking data on possible determinants of payments in states without a uniform income
floor, our baseline estimation of the structural model utilizes data from Massachusetts only,
a state whose OAA program is close to a uniform income floor for all individuals. The reason
to prefer Massachusetts to California is that California had a $15 earnings disregard that
slightly complicates the budget constraint, though we do not find any apparent effects of
the earnings disregard. As discussed in Section A.8.1, the key results are robust to using
moments estimated based on the entire US or California.


A.2.2     The relationship of maximum payments to the size of state OAA pro-
          grams

The simulated instrument used in our analysis relies primarily on measures of state maximum
payments. Its construction is described in more detail in Section A.2.3 of this appendix. This
section provides more detail on variation in maximum payments across states, and how it
was related to variation in the size of state OAA programs relative to the elderly population,
to give background for its use in the simulated instrument.

Table A1 lists basic information for the 48 states and the District of Columbia, with states
ordered by OAA per person 65 and older in December 1939. This table includes the four
states excluded from our analysis sample—the three with an eligibility age of 70 in 1939, and
Colorado, where long-term residents were eligible starting at age 60. The legal maximum,
if present, indicates that the state OAA law limited monthly payments to that amount
per individual. This information comes from the summary of state OAA laws in U.S. Social
Security Board (1940a). A majority of states set legal maximum payments at $30 per month,
the level beyond which the federal government would not match additional spending. Figure
A2 shows a map of legal maximum payments by state, which illustrates the cross-state
differences that can be used once comparisons are restricted to state boundaries. Some
neighboring states that differ starkly in OAA payments, such as Texas and Oklahoma, do
  29
    We do not directly observe payments to those with no other source of income, but rather the uncondi-
tional distribution of payments and the share of recipients with no other source of income. We assume that
the recipients with other sources of income received the lowest payments.



                                                   47
not differ in maximum payments.

In our baseline simulated instrument, for the eight states that did not have legal maximum
payments, we measure a de facto maximum as the 99th percentile payment in that state, and
use this measure in place of a legal maximum. As noted in the main text, the idea is that with
payments being set as the difference between “needs” and “resources,” payments near the top
of the distribution in a state would reflect payments to individuals with virtually no resources,
and hence reflect differences across states in assessments of needs (the reason not to use the
observed maximum payment is that it tended to reflect highly unusual situations). Table
A1 reports our measure of the 99th percentile payment, as well as an observed maximum
payment for each state. These variables are both based on grants to new recipients in
fiscal year 1938-39, reported in U.S. Social Security Board (1939b). To estimate a 99th
percentile payment, we use summary tables on the distribution of grant amounts by state.
We have information on the share of payments in either 1- or 5-dollar bins, so we cannot
always calculate the 99th percentile precisely. Instead, we identify the bin containing the
99th percentile and use the smaller value of the upper endpoint of the bin or the observed
maximum payment (in two cases we also round 30.99 down to 30). For all but three of the
states with statutory maximum payments, these 99th percentile payments were the same as
the statutory maxima.30 Figure A3 shows a map of 99th percentile payments by state.

Maximum payments are useful in that they tend to reflect, at least broadly, differences in the
level of the income or consumption floor across states. Appendix Figure A7 plots average
payments per recipient against our measure of state maximum payments. Especially at the
modal maximum monthly payment of $30 there is considerable variation across states. Based
on the description of payment determination in Lansdale et al. (1939), this variation likely
reflects, in large part, differences between maximum payments and the typical administrative
determination of “need,” as well as variation in the level of “need” determined across different
people. Despite the presence of some variation that maximum payments do not capture,
differences in maximum payments across states are strongly predictive of average payments
overall.


A.2.3    Construction of the simulated instrument

To simulate payments per person aged 65 and older in Section 5, we apply a measure of
each state’s maximum payment and any income disregards (which existed in five of the 45
states with an eligibility age of 65) to a national population of men and calculate a predicted
payment per person in the sample, which is then used as an instrument for the observed total
OAA payments per person in the state. The national population we use for each state omits
the state itself, although in practice this has very small effects on the estimates. As described
in the text and in Section A.2.2 of this appendix, for our main simulated IV exercise, we
use statutory maximum payments in 1939 as a measure of maximum payments for all states
that had statutory maxima, and the 99th percentile payment to new recipients in fiscal year
1938-39 in the eight states that had no statutory maximum in 1939. In Appendix Table A8
  30
    Observed maximum payments were the same as the legal maxima in all but four states. In New Jersey
and Connecticut the legal maxima were greater, and in Alabama and Utah the reported value of the observed
maximum is greater. Alabama, unlike other states, reported the budget deficit approved rather than the
actual payment approved. It is unclear why there is a discrepancy for Utah.


                                                   48
we show alternative results that use the highest legal maximum across states (45 dollars per
month, in Colorado) for these eight states.

Given a measure of an individual i’s earnings in 1939, for each state s we calculate a predicted
OAA payment per person under that state’s law as the mean over all individuals of

paymentis = max {0, min{(max payment)s , (max payment)s + (income disregard)s − (income)i }}


A typical application of a simulated IV strategy would use characteristics of a population in
a base period to simulate the effects of policy changes over time. We are leveraging cross-
sectional policy variation, not within-state policy variation over time, and hence address the
potential for endogenous earnings responses by using an ineligible population to simulate
payments. We use the population of men aged 60–64 in 1940 (those just under the eligibility
age for OAA), in the 45 states that had an eligibility age of 65 (except for the state itself),
to construct the instrument. Because self-employment earnings are not reported in the 1940
Census, for any person who reported being self-employed at the time of the Census and who
worked a positive number of weeks in 1939, we impute earnings by randomly drawing 1939
earnings amounts from the population of non-self-employed men with the same number of
years of education and the same number of weeks worked in 1939.

Figure A5 shows the distribution of monthly earnings (including these imputed values) for
the population used in the construction of the simulated instrument, along with the mini-
mum, median, and maximum values of the “income limit” (maximum payment plus income
disregards, if any existed). A significant share, just over 20 percent, of men at these ages
reported zero weeks worked in 1939 and zero earnings. Although many of these men would
likely have been ineligible for OAA under its other eligibility criteria, this large share illus-
trates the potential for many OAA recipients to have been inframarginal non-participants
in the labor force.

Appendix Figure A6 plots the actual level of OAA payments per person 65 and older in each
state against the simulated value from this procedure. Particularly in this comparison across
all states, there is considerable variation in the actual size of state OAA programs for states
with the same simulated value—especially for those with the modal maximum payment of
30 dollars per month—but the simulated measure captures the positive relationship across
states. In addition to the variation in assessments of “needs” within states or across states
with the same maximum payment, the reasons for variation in observed payments per person
for states with the same simulated payments per person include features of eligibility deter-
mination that are not included in our simulated instrument. For example, the Census lacks
information on non-housing assets, which is necessary for determining eligibility in states
with asset tests. Some data sources from this time period offer some potential for measuring
relevant characteristics—the 1935–36 Survey of Consumer Purchases includes more detail on
non-housing assets, for example—but in practice, maximum payments have provided most
of the predictive power when we explored using these alternatives as well. For some other
eligibility criteria, such as not having relatives able to provide support, it is unlikely that
any realistic data source from the time would be sufficient. As noted in the text, it was
also the case that state and local relief officials retained a significant amount of discretion
in determining eligibility, so that features of OAA other than statutory eligibility criteria
could have important effects on recipiency rates. Fetter (2017), for example, documents

                                               49
that holding other features of OAA laws fixed, the allocation of responsibility for funding
OAA payments between local and state governments had significant impacts on recipiency
rates, particularly in those states where local governments played a greater role in making
decisions.

Table A4 reports first-stage regressions for the interactions used in our main results. Consis-
tent with the positive relationship evident in Appendix Figure A6, for each of the interactions
of log payments per person 65 and older with age, the corresponding interaction of the log
simulated payment with age is highly statistically significant.


A.3     The relationship between OAA and other factors associated
        with retirement ages

A.3.1    Correlation of state OAA programs with state demographics and income

At the state level, OAA payments per person 65 and older were correlated with demographics
and state incomes. Table A2 reports regressions at the state level, for the 45 states, including
the District of Columbia, that had eligibility ages of 65 in 1939. States with larger elderly
populations and states with larger foreign-born populations had larger OAA programs; states
with larger non-white populations (almost entirely the South) had smaller OAA programs.
(These variables are calculated using data from Haines (2010).) OAA programs tended to be
larger in states that had higher levels of income. The two measures shown in Table A2 are
median years of education for 25–54-year-olds and log median wage and salary earnings for
25–54-year-old men who were not self-employed (these are based on our calculations using
individual-level Census data). Both were positively correlated with the size of state OAA
programs. Note that, as emphasized by, e.g., Wallis (1987), the structure of the federal
matching grants for public assistance meant that states with higher incomes not only tended
to spend more on assistance, but also, because of this, received more in matching grants
from the federal government as well.

The relationship between the size of state OAA programs and these characteristics is one
reason why it is important to make narrower comparisons across states in our main speci-
fications. Table A3 reports regressions on county-level data that relate these demographic
and income measures to the two policy measures we use in the main specifications and ro-
bustness checks—rest-of-state payments per person and simulated payments per person. We
limit the sample to the same counties that are included in the main analysis (border counties
in states with an eligibility age of 65 in 1939). Panels A and C report regressions without
fixed effects for state border groups, and show the same relationships observed in the cross-
state comparison. Panels B and D, which add fixed effects for state borders, show that these
systematic differences largely disappear once comparisons are made only across state bor-
ders (only one coefficient is statistically significant at conventional levels, and for only one of
the two policy measures). These results support our assumption that once comparisons are
limited to state borders, differences in OAA policies are not correlated with factors that lead
to differential underlying age trends in labor force participation. They also provide support
for the stronger assumption of equal levels of labor force participation used in estimation of
the counterfactual age-labor force participation profile reported in Figure 7.

                                                50
A.3.2    The prevalence of other types of pensions

In this section we provide further details on the prevalence of other sources of pensions circa
1940. As noted in the text, Social Security made no regular monthly payments until 1940,
and even then they were quite small relative to OAA: less than 2 percent of the elderly
received them in that year, compared to 22 percent of the elderly receiving OAA. Prior to
1940, Social Security made one-time payments to some workers. The original Social Security
Act excluded work done after age 65 from coverage, and required a certain number of years
of coverage in order to receive regular benefits. Hence, those who turned 65 between 1936
and 1939 received lump-sum payments to reimburse them for taxes collected before they
reached 65. These payments ended after the 1939 Amendments to the Social Security Act
extended coverage to work at ages older than 65. These payments would have been relevant
only for workers who turned 65 in that year, however, and only about 7 percent of 65 year
olds received them in 1939. These payments tended to be smaller than OAA: the average
OASI lump-sum payment at age 65 in 1939 was about 77 dollars, whereas the average annual
OAA payment per recipient was 232 dollars.

The other major sources of old-age pensions at the time were private pensions, state and
local government pensions, federal civil service pensions, and railroad pensions. In 1940
there were about 160,000 monthly beneficiaries of private pensions (Carter et al., 2006,
Series Bf848).31 McCamman (1943) estimates that there were about 158,000 beneficiaries
of state and local government pensions, but notes that a significant share of these were for
police and firemen, who typically had retirement ages before 65. There were about 141,000
beneficiaries of railroad retirement benefits (Carter et al., 2006, Series Bf753) and about
32,000 beneficiaries of federal civil service pensions with a retirement age of 65 (Reticker,
1941). By way of comparison, slightly more than 9 million people were aged 65 and older
in the 1940 Census. Hence, the total number of beneficiaries of these plans was only about
5 percent of the population 65 and older in 1940, and some of these plans had retirement
ages other than 65. Average payments under these plans were also much larger than OAA
(between 750 and 950 dollars per year) and were likely primarily relevant for people higher
in the income distribution than OAA recipients. In Section A.3.3 we discuss variation across
states in the prevalence of these other types of pensions.


A.3.3    OAA and other state policies potentially relating to work at older ages

A related set of potential concerns with our empirical approach is that states varied in other
policies that may have differentially affected work after the OAA eligibility age. One class of
potential confounders is other types of pensions. As noted in Section A.3.2, these pensions
were certainly present in 1940, although they were substantially less prevalent than OAA.
The evidence we present in this section, however, suggests that those pensions that did exist
do not provide an alternative explanation for our results.

There is no comprehensive data source on private pensions by state, but there is little reason
  31
    Much of the growth in private pensions took place during and after World War II, associated with
expanded labor demand and wage controls during wartime, as well as the expansion of the income tax
combined with preferential tax treatment of pensions (see, e.g., Sass, 1997).


                                                51
to think that they varied systematically across state borders.32 Despite the existence of
some state policies that could have been relevant to the prevalence of private pensions, they
do not appear to have been important. Latimer and Tufel (1940), in a study of industrial
pensions, note that states sometimes had tax laws relating to private pensions, but mainly
to point out that these taxes were too small or too uncommon to have been important
determinants of private pension decisions. Latimer (1932) discusses state law relating to
pensions more broadly and also suggests that these laws were not very important. Most
often, the purpose of these laws was to specifically enable firms to establish pension systems,
but by 1916, federal courts had already made decisions that implied providing a pension
would be a legitimate function for any profit-making enterprise.

For the other two significant sources of pensions at the time—railroad pensions and pensions
for state and local government employees—some state-level data are available. We digitized
data on retirement payments under the Railroad Retirement System (which had assumed
responsibility from private railroad pensions plans in 1937) in fiscal year 1939-40, by state,
from the Annual Report of the Railroad Retirement Board (Railroad Retirement Board,
1941). We also digitized data on retirement payments under state and local government
pension systems in 1941, from the first comprehensive survey of state and local government
retirement systems (U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1943). In Table A9, we re-estimate our main
specification adding these other types of pensions as controls. We scale total dollar payments
under each type of pension by the state population 65 and older in 1940, and interact each
measure with age group fixed effects. Across all specifications, controlling for these other
types of pensions has little effect on the estimated effect of OAA. This is unsurprising, in
that these other types of pensions were significantly smaller than OAA, primarily affected a
higher-income population, and were at best weakly correlated with OAA across states.

Finally, we are not aware of state labor laws or characteristics of firms’ hiring practices that
would be a plausible explanation for our results. Many states had labor laws governing
weekly work hours, for example, but for the most part these laws applied only to women
(U.S. Department of Labor, 1940). We are not aware of other laws that would have applied
to workers specifically after age 65. Some firms did report explicit age limits on employment,
and there was some geographic variation in these age limits, but nearly all of these limits
were at ages well below 65—typically between 40 and 50 (Latimer, 1932).

As for other forms of public assistance that may vary across states, we have also investigated
whether differences across states in “general assistance” explains the results. “General assis-
tance” comprised assistance payments provided by states or localities other than through the
three categorical assistance programs that received federal matching funds under the Social
Security Act (Aid to the Blind, Aid to Dependent Children, and Old Age Assistance). A
priori there is no strong reason to expect that general assistance would drive the results, be-
cause states and/or localities would receive no federal matching funds for general assistance,
and hence would have a strong fiscal incentive to provide aid to the elderly through OAA,
at least up to the federal matching cap. We use state-level data on the total dollar value
of general assistance payments in December 1939 from U.S. Social Security Board (1940b).
This information was unavailable for four states. In a fashion parallel to our measure of
OAA, for each county we calculate the per-capita general assistance payments in that state
  32
    A standard source on private pensions over this period is Latimer (1932), which relies on a sample of
firms and industries.


                                                   52
(however, we scale by the full population instead of the population 65 and older). In Table
A10 we report estimates of our main specification with and without controls for general
assistance (interacted with age fixed effects), limiting to a common sample. The results are
quite similar.


A.4     The OAA recipiency rate among men aged 65–74

To calculate the fraction of OAA recipients among men aged 65–74 who adjusted their labor
supply in response to OAA, we need to know the total number of OAA recipients among
men aged 65–74. Unfortunately, while we know the total number of OAA recipients in the
full population, we do not have a direct measure of the number of OAA recipients among
men aged 65–74. A priori it is likely that the recipiency rate for this group would be below
the overall 22 percent recipiency rate that includes both men and women as well as older
individuals. We do have information on the age and sex of new recipients at various points in
time, however, so to provide a rough measure of the relevant recipiency rate in 1940 (a stock),
we add up flows into the program and adjust for mortality and for aging out of the 65–74 age
group. From U.S. Social Security Board (1939a), U.S. Social Security Board (1939b), and
U.S. Social Security Board (1941) we have the number of new male recipients in fiscal years
1937/38 through 1939/40 by age at the end of the fiscal year, where age is reported in two
groups: 65–69 and 70–74. The annual reports of the Social Security Board for 1935/36 and
1936/37 (U.S. Social Security Board, 1937a,b) provide the same information for fiscal year
1936-37, although not all states collected data for the entire fiscal year, meaning that we
understate inflows in that year (for the period from July 1, 1936 through September 30, 1936
we observe the age distribution but not separately by sex; we assume half of new recipients
aged 65–69 and 70–74 were men, which is approximately true in subsequent years). We
do not have data on (and hence exclude from our calculation) any individuals who started
receiving OAA prior to July 1, 1936.

In adding up flows, we adjust for aging out of the 65–74 range and for mortality. All men
who started receiving OAA between the ages of 65 and 69 from July 1, 1936 onwards would
still have been aged 65–74 as of mid-1940. We make a conservative assumption about the
ages of 70–74 year olds, which is that no new recipients aged 70–74 by mid-1937 would still
be 74 or younger by mid-1940, one-third of those 70–74 in mid-1938 would be 74 or younger
in mid-1940, and two-thirds of those 70–74 in mid-1939. We then assume that recipients’
mortality rate was 5.5% per year, just above the mortality rate of 65–74 year old men in
the second half of the 1930s (Grove and Hetzel, 1968). This calculation yields 523,987 male
recipients aged 65–74 in mid-1940, compared to a male 65–74 population in the 1940 Census
of 3,167,055, for a recipiency rate of about 16.5 percent.


A.5     Comparison of labor supply results to prior literature on
        OAA

To the extent that our estimates can be directly compared to those in the earlier litera-
ture, they are similar. Friedberg (1999) investigates the effects of OAA in a differences-in-


                                              53
differences analysis from 1940 to 1950 using Census samples, and estimates effects of pay-
ments per recipient that are similar to (and perhaps slightly larger than) our findings from
1940. In particular, she estimates a probit coefficient on log OAA payments per recipient
of -0.264. Dividing by 2.5—following the rule-of-thumb comparison of probit coefficients to
those from a linear probability model (e.g., Wooldridge, 2010, p. 573)—yields approximately
-0.1, while estimating our main specification using payments per recipient yields coefficients
between -0.080 and -0.095. The earlier study by Parsons (1991) uses state-by-year aggre-
gate data from 1930 to 1950 and estimates that OAA could account for about half of the
1930–1950 decline in male labor force participation, in line with our results.


A.6      Testing for migration responses to OAA

A possible concern with the results is that individuals with high disutility of labor chose to
move to states with more generous OAA programs when they became eligible, or migrated
out of more generous states at a lower rate. In either case, our empirical test would over-
estimate the reduction in labor supply upon aging into eligibility. The minimum residency
requirements imposed by almost all states makes the first type of migration less likely, but to
address the possibility of higher in-migration and lower out-migration we test for such effects
using information on state of residence in 1935. Appendix Table A11 reports estimates of the
baseline specifications with the dependent variable indicating whether an individual lived in
a different state in 1935. Point estimates are quite small, and the upper and lower bounds
of the 95% confidence intervals are an order of magnitude smaller than our labor supply
results.33 Hence, net migration of individuals with lower baseline levels of labor supply to
more generous states after aging into eligibility is unlikely to explain our results.


A.7      Bounding the cost to recipients of the earnings test based on
         counterfactual retirement ages in the absence of OAA

This section provides details of the calculations underlying the second bound of the cost of
the earnings test reported in Section 6.1. The maximum cost the earnings test imposes on
an individual is the maximum amount of benefits he loses by working past the eligibility
age, min{w, ȳ}φ(O), where φ(O) is the number of periods he works after the eligibility age
when facing the OAA budget constraint.34 If leisure is non-inferior, people work no more
when facing the OAA budget constraint than when facing the no-OAA budget constraint,
  33
     If migration prior to age 65 responds to OAA benefits but people continue to work while still ineligible,
the baseline specification may not pick up such effects on migration. To assess the extent to which effects of
this sort would influence our results, we have estimated an alternative specification that restricts comparisons
to state borders and simply tests for differences in the probability of migration within each age group. The
results of this alternative specification are similarly small in magnitude.
  34
     φ(O) is based on the latent retirement distribution: It is the number of periods after the OAA eligibility
age the individual would work if he were not constrained to spend a non-negative amount of time retired.
Consider an individual whose latent retirement age with OAA exceeds the maximum age, T , and whose
potential OAA benefit is no larger than potential earnings, ȳ ≤ w. For such an individual, the maximum
cost of the earnings test equals the maximum lifetime OAA benefits the individual could receive, so the
minimum value of OAA to this individual is zero. (The maximum cost of the earnings test can be no larger
than the maximum amount of OAA benefits the individual could receive by not working.)

                                                      54
φ(O) ≤ φ(N ), where φ(N ) is the number of periods he works after the eligibility age when
facing the no-OAA budget constraint. So for any individual whose preferences are in the
broad class in which leisure is not an inferior good, the maximum cost of the earnings test
is min{w, ȳ}φ(N ).

We use the joint distribution of earnings and OAA benefits observed in the 1940 cross section.
We use the counterfactual age profile of labor force participation estimated in Section 5.1
together with the assumption that the observed cross-sectional relationship between labor
force participation and age is a good proxy for the unobserved life-cycle relationship. We
make the conservative assumption that take up of OAA benefits is uniform across the joint
earnings-OAA benefit distribution. This tends to bias upward the cost of the earnings test,
since people with higher replacement rates, for whom the earnings test was less costly, were in
reality more likely to take up benefits. The lack of bunching of retirements at any particular
age in the no-OAA counterfactual tightens the bounds from this approach, since it means
that everyone’s marginal rate of substitution, a key input into these calculations, is point-
identified rather than bounded. This is another advantage of the lack of bunching in our
setting.

Within the class of preferences in which utility is quasilinear in retirement—the usual case in
many applications of the life cycle model—the average $1 of OAA was worth at least $0.72 of
unconditional late-life income. Under the opposite extreme (and non-standard) assumption
that utility is quasilinear in consumption (and so borderline inferior in leisure/retirement),
the average $1 of OAA was worth at least $0.57 of unconditional late-life income. Intuitively,
the earnings test was not that costly because many people would have retired either before
or relatively soon after the OAA eligibility age even without OAA or even if OAA did not
impose an earnings test.


A.8     Estimation of the life cycle model

A.8.1    Estimation results and robustness

Table A12 reports results based on the baseline specification and several alternative speci-
fications of the model. The parameter estimates are fairly stable across specifications, and
the key conclusions are extremely robust. Additional robustness tests not reported in the
table, and available upon request, include estimating the model based on data from Cali-
fornia (instead of Massachusetts or the full US), setting the discount rate and interest rate
to zero, doubling the slope of the counterfactual labor force participation-age profile absent
OAA, dropping low-earnings moments, fixing the slope of the eligibility-potential earnings
relationship to zero, and setting the maximum age to 80 and 85. Across all specifications, the
cost to recipients of the earnings test is always less than 7 percent of benefits received, and
the reduction in labor force participation from 1940–1960 due to Social Security is always
at least 5.6 percentage points, 41 percent of the observed 13.5 percentage point decline from
1940 to 1960.

The poor labor market conditions in 1940 would tend to reduce the cost to recipients of
the earnings test. As we discuss in Section 6.2.5, the key determinants of the cost of the


                                              55
earnings test are replacement rates and counterfactual retirement ages. Bad labor market
conditions likely cause both of these to change in ways that reduce the cost of the earnings
test. Bad labor market conditions reduce wages, which increases replacement rates (holding
fixed benefit levels). This tends to decrease the cost of the earnings test, since higher
replacement rates lead people to retire earlier due to income effects, which reduces their
exposure to the earnings test. Bad labor market conditions also tend to reduce labor force
participation, which reduces our inferred counterfactual retirement ages. This also tends to
decrease the cost of the earnings test, since a greater fraction of benefits are inframarginal.
To bound the likely effect of these issues, we estimate the cost of the earnings test under
assumptions that are likely to overstate what its cost would have been had labor markets been
“typical” in 1940. We assume that the labor force participation-age profile in the absence of
OAA in 1940 matches the observed labor force participation-age profile in 1930 (in fact we
assume it matches the “gainful employment” profile—which is to say, we do not apply the
correction described in Section A.1—meaning that it is a slight overestimate of what “labor
force participation” would likely have been had that concept been used in the 1930 Census).
Given the trend reductions in late-life work, this may overstate the counterfactual retirement
ages that would have arisen in 1940 had the labor market been better. We assume that the
potential earnings distribution in 1940 matches the observed earnings distribution in 1950
of 45–54 year olds with positive earnings, which reflects the rapid growth in wages during
the 1940s. Even with these assumptions, which bias upward the cost of the earnings test,
we estimate that the earnings test reduces the value of the average dollar of OAA benefits
to recipients by $0.07. The robustness of the result about the low cost of the earnings test
is driven largely by the substantial fraction of benefits that were inframarginal in the sense
that people would have received them even without adjusting their labor supply. This is
true even with the somewhat greater labor force participation in 1930.

The key results are also robust to using moments estimated based on the entire United
States or California as opposed to Massachusetts.35 Figures A16 and A18 plot the share
of men earning each amount up to $1,000 for the full US and California, respectively. The
general patterns are the same in the US, California, and Massachusetts (Figure A11): At
age 65 the probability of earning low amounts drops sharply, and the drops fade away by
earnings levels of about $900 or more per year. One wrinkle in estimating the empirical
moments is the discreteness of observation of age, which technically violates the assumption
of a continuous forcing variable. This becomes more relevant in the full-US case because
of the larger sample. The pilot bandwidth proposed by Imbens and Kalyanaraman (2012),
for example, is less than two years on either side (from which we cannot estimate a line).
Hence, in the full-US estimation, we use the smallest feasible number of years of age on
  35
     The disadvantage of estimating the model based on the full US is that eligibility requirements varied
across states in hard-to-measure ways, and computation costs prevent us from estimating separate eligibility
parameters for each state. We estimate the model based on California because it is one of two other states
(the other was Nevada) that had a fairly unambiguous single income floor like Massachusetts, in that they
set state-wide minimum values for the sum of income and payments clearly in the state OAA law. We do
not estimate the model based on Nevada because of sample size issues given its small population and the
data-intensive estimation procedure. Moreover, unlike California and Massachusetts, Nevada did not have an
asset limit, so using Nevada would require us to use a different procedure from the one in the main analysis
of Massachusetts. Based on distributions of payments, and consistent with the contemporaneous description
by Lansdale et al. (1939) of how OAA programs operated, it appears that a number of other states were also
implementing uniform income floors, but using de facto (as opposed to de jure) income floors would require
a procedure for backing out the de facto level of the floor empirically.


                                                    56
either side of the eligibility cutoff, two years, to estimate all empirical moments. Figures
A15 and A17 plot the empirical and simulated moments for the estimations based on the
full US and California, respectively. The fit of the model is good in these cases as well, and
the key conclusions are unchanged. In both cases, the average $1 of OAA is valued highly
by recipients ($0.94 based on the full US and $0.95 based on California), and Social Security
is predicted to reduce labor force participation among 65–74-year-olds significantly (11.0
percentage points based on the full US and 6.7 percentage points based on California).36

In addition to the robustness tests discussed above, it is useful to discuss the possible role
that other assumptions might play in the results. Because of older workers’ worse health
and greater difficulty re-entering the labor force after adverse employment shocks (see, e.g.,
Costa, 1998), the assumption that potential earnings are constant over the life cycle likely
overstates potential earnings at older ages. Overstating late-life potential earnings tends to
bias us against our key findings, since it tends to increase the cost of the earnings test and
decrease the labor-supply effects of Social Security. The assumption that OAA is the only
source of non-labor income understates non-labor income among people eligible for OAA
somewhat. Empirically, 72 percent of new OAA recipients in the 1939–1940 fiscal year had
no source of income other than OAA (U.S. Social Security Board, 1941). The main effect of
understating other sources of non-labor income is to reduce the estimated level of eligibility
for OAA, which is a lower bound anyway. The assumption that individuals cannot borrow is
consistent with the poor functioning of household credit markets at the time (see e.g. Rose,
2014) and is reinforced by our estimation results. An alternative version of the model with
perfect capital markets is highly inconsistent with the pattern of bunching of retirements at
the OAA eligibility age.

One reason the results are robust to a wide variety of possible changes in the model is the
combination of two key aspects of our approach: We estimate the model based on breaks in
labor force participation at the OAA eligibility age, and we require the model to match the
distribution of retirement ages in the absence of OAA. The key determinants of the amount
of bunching of retirement ages in response to OAA are the fraction of people who would
retire soon after the OAA eligibility age in the absence of OAA and the curvature of the
utility function. The main effect on the bunching of retirements of many possible changes in
the model, e.g., a correlation between discount rates and the disutility of labor, would come
through any effects on the counterfactual distribution of retirement ages in the absence of
the program. But because we force the estimation to match this distribution directly, the
analysis is not very sensitive to changes in assumptions about the underlying determinants
of retirement ages in the absence of OAA.

Additional results suggest that the timing of information about OAA shaped the observed
effects of the program. Our baseline assumption that people learned about OAA in 1936
(when many state OAA programs were introduced) means that people had relatively little
time before 1940 to incorporate OAA into their plans. Simulations of the model indicate
that OAA would have had significantly greater effects on labor supply in 1940 had people
  36
    The only substantive difference across these three estimations is the estimate of the coefficient of relative
risk aversion. In the estimation based on the US, the estimate of the coefficient of relative risk aversion
(0.6) is significantly smaller than it is in the estimations based on Massachusetts (1.3), California (1.5), and
indeed any other estimation. This might reflect the incorrect assumption in this particular estimation of a
common eligibility-potential earnings relationship in all states.


                                                       57
had more time to build OAA into their plans.


A.8.2    Identification

Figure A13 plots the objective function. The figure reveals that the model is well-identified;
moving away from the estimates along any dimension of the parameter vector increases the
mismatch between the simulated and empirical moments, as measured by the classical min-
imum distance-type objective function. If instead of estimating the slope of the eligibility-
potential earnings relationship using the observed relationship between earnings and house
value (as we do in the baseline specification) we estimate the slope of the eligibility-potential
earnings relationship together with the other key parameters in the second stage of the es-
timation, the model is not as well identified. In this case, the estimation has a hard time
distinguishing the source of the fadeout in the bunching of retirements in potential earnings
between curvature in the utility function (η) on the one hand and declining eligibility with
potential earnings on the other (βe ). This is why we invoke other evidence (the observed re-
lationship between earnings and house value) to estimate the slope of the eligibility-potential
earnings relationship in our baseline specification. Fortunately, as shown in Table A12, the
key results are not sensitive to this choice.


A.8.3    Estimating the latent retirement distribution

We estimate the curvature of utility from consumption, η, and the intercept of the eligibility-
potential earnings relationship, αe , by attempting to match the pattern of bunching of retire-
ments at the OAA eligibility age, while also requiring that the distribution of the disutility
of work, F (δ), be such that the model matches the counterfactual distribution of retirement
ages in the absence of OAA. The key assumptions are that all heterogeneity in retirement
behavior among people who face the same budget constraint is driven by heterogeneity in
the disutility of labor and that all potential earnings groups have the same counterfactual
no-OAA retirement distribution. We estimate the F (δ) distribution non-parametrically by
using the model to invert the (counterfactual) distribution of retirements without OAA.

The Census data do not contain all of the information necessary to construct individuals’
lifetime budget constraints. For example, the data contain only incomplete information
about assets (just housing wealth) and non-labor income (just an indicator about whether
it exceeds $50 per year). This means that unobserved heterogeneity in assets or non-labor
income could help explain the observed heterogeneity in labor supply among people who share
the same observable components of lifetime budget constraints. Given OAA eligibility rules,
however, assets and non-labor income are likely to be quite limited among the population
of people potentially eligible for OAA. As noted earlier, this is consistent with evidence on
the characteristics of new OAA recipients in the 1939–1940 fiscal year, which indicates that
72 percent of new recipients had no source of income other than OAA (U.S. Social Security
Board, 1941). The main effect of understating non-OAA non-labor income is to reduce the
estimated eligibility rate, which is a lower bound for other reasons as well.

In order to estimate the full distribution of the disutility of work, F (δ), we need to know the
full latent retirement distribution, out to the maximum age at which the person with the

                                               58
lowest disutility of labor would work if he could. In the model, everyone lives to exactly age
75 and so cannot work beyond that age. So for any given budget constraint, there exists a
range of δ values that lead the individual to work until age 75: from the threshold δ such that
the individual is just indifferent between retiring at age 74 and 75 down to δ = 0 (people to
whom work provides no disutility and so would continue working as long as possible). People
with low enough δ values would work longer if they could. They can be said to have a negative
latent demand for retirement, where the latent demand for retirement is the number of years
an individual would choose to enjoy leisure (not work) were it possible to consume negative
amounts of leisure, i.e., to work longer than one’s full lifetime. Working longer than one’s
lifetime has the benefit of increasing consumption through higher earnings and the cost of
incurring the disutility of work in the “extra” periods. The latent retirement distribution is
fundamentally unobservable, and the data become progressively less informative about this
object at greater ages due to the small number of individuals at these ages and the bias
induced by selective survival. We therefore use the estimated relationship between labor
force participation and age from age 50 to 84 to fit a polynomial out to the age at which
labor force participation becomes zero. This polynomial serves as our estimated distribution
of latent retirement ages, from which we infer the distribution of the disutility of labor, F (δ).
An important assumption implicit in this procedure is that the cross-sectional relationship
between labor force participation and age is similar to what the age profile of retirements
would have been for a single cohort (had government policies and other factors been held
constant at their 1940 values).


A.8.4    Our application of the Method of Simulated Moments

The Method of Simulated Moments estimator is the parameter vector θ ≡ (η, αe , F (δ)) that
minimizes the distance between the model-simulated moments and their empirical counter-
parts, where distance is measured by a classical minimum distance objective function. In the
baseline specification we estimate η and αe by attempting to match the pattern of bunching
of retirements at the OAA eligibility age, while at the same time requiring that F (δ) be such
that the model matches the counterfactual distribution of retirement ages in the absence of
OAA.

Given a candidate parameter vector θ, we simulate the 15 moments—one for each of the
15 potential earnings groups whose probability of retiring at the OAA eligibility age we
estimate—using the following procedure. First, we simulate the retirement ages of a large
sample of individuals. This involves drawing an individual’s potential earnings, disutility of
work, and eligibility for OAA, and then calculating the individual’s optimal retirement age.
Second, we aggregate the simulated data into moments.

The moment for each potential earnings group is the proportional break in that group’s
(otherwise smooth) labor force participation-age profile at the OAA eligibility age. Formally,
this is the probability of retiring immediately upon becoming eligible for OAA conditional
on not yet having retired:

         P r(Retire immediately upon becoming eligible for OAA | Not yet retired).




                                               59
This conditional probability can be written as the conditional expectation,

        E(1(Retire immediately upon becoming eligible for OAA) | Not yet retired).

The one wrinkle involved in implementing this in practice is that model time is discrete.
In discrete time, estimating the “break” in the labor force participation-age profile at the
eligibility age requires using information from other nearby parts of the profile, not just its
level at the eligibility age itself. This is because, in discrete time, the fraction of people who
retire “at the eligibility age,” i.e., sometime during the discrete period (year in our case)
in which they reach the eligibility age, is weakly greater than the “break” in labor force
participation or “excess” retirements at that age, since it also includes retirements during
the rest of that discrete period. We deal with this issue by following a procedure analogous
to the one we use to estimate the empirical moments in the Census data, in the spirit of a
regression discontinuity. We simulate predicted labor force participation at ages 63 and 64
(immediately before the eligibility age) and ages 66 and 67 (immediately after the eligibility
age). We use these labor force participation rates to form two predictions of what labor
force participation would have been at exactly the OAA eligibility age, age 65. One is based
on participation before the OAA eligibility age (at ages 63 and 64). The other is based
on participation after the OAA eligibility age (at ages 66 and 67). These predictions of
participation at the OAA eligibility age are based on the assumption that, at least within
two years of the OAA eligibility age, labor force participation declines linearly with age,
except for any break at the OAA eligibility age. The estimated break, i.e., the probability of
retiring immediately upon becoming eligible for OAA given that the individual is not already
retired, is
                                         LL(65) − RL(65)
                                                            ,
                                               LL(65)
where LL(65) is predicted labor force participation at exactly age 65, the OAA eligibility
age, based on labor force participation rates at younger ages (“left limit”), and RL(65) is
predicted labor force participation at exactly age 65 based on labor force participation rates
at older ages (“right limit”).

In practice, for computational feasibility we discretize both the potential earnings and disu-
tility of work distributions. We assume that potential earnings take one of 15 values corre-
sponding to the midpoint of the ranges that we use for estimating the empirical moments.
For each candidate vector of parameter values, θ, and for each of the 15 possible potential
earnings levels, w, we construct the simulated moment condition in the following way. First,
we calculate the disutility of work distribution, F (δ; w, η). The F (δ; w, η) distribution is
that which matches the counterfactual no-OAA retirement age distribution (predicted using
variants on our main regressions), given potential earnings and the curvature of utility of
consumption, w and η. Because time is discrete in the model, any given (discrete) retirement
age is consistent with a range of δ values. We use the midpoint of these ranges. For each
of these δ values, we calculate the optimal (discrete) retirement ages for people eligible and
ineligible for OAA, Tr∗ (O; w, ȳ, η, δ) and Tr∗ (N ; w, η, δ), respectively. We use these mappings
from δ to optimal retirement ages with and without OAA together with the disutility of
work distribution, F (δ; w, η), to calculate the full distributions of retirement ages with and
without OAA for this potential earnings group, F (Tr∗ (O; w, ȳ, η, δ)) and F (Tr∗ (N ; w, η, δ)),
respectively. We use these distributions together with the fraction of people in this poten-


                                                60
tial earnings group eligible for OAA, P r(eligiblei |wi ; αe , βe ), to calculate the overall retire-
ment age distribution among this group, including both eligible and ineligible individuals,
F (Tr∗ (w, ȳ, η, δ)). Finally, we use this retirement-age distribution to calculate this potential
earnings group’s simulated moment based on the procedure detailed above.

The objective function is
                                         gN (θ)0 W gN (θ),
where gN (θ) is the vector of moment conditions (whose elements are the differences between
the empirical and simulated moments) and W is a positive definite weighting matrix. Pakes
and Pollard (1989) and Duffie and Singleton (1993) show that the MSM estimator, θ̂, is
consistent and asymptotically normally distributed under regularity conditions satisfied here.
For our weighting matrix, we follow Pischke (1995) and use the inverse of the diagonal of
the estimated variance-covariance matrix of the second-stage moment conditions.


A.9     Validation of the estimated life cycle model

A natural validation test of the model is to use it to simulate the cross-sectional relationship
between labor force participation and age in 1940 and to compare the results with the
observed empirical relationship. This requires an additional empirical input not used in
the estimation: the joint distribution of potential earnings and OAA benefits. In each
state, we use the observed distribution of earnings in 1940 among people aged 48–52 with
positive earnings together with the OAA benefit level in 1940. Among other things, this
tests the extent to which the model estimated based on Massachusetts data alone matches
an important feature of the data on the full US. Figure A14 plots the results. The “No OAA”
profile shows the counterfactual no-OAA profile predicted based on our regression results and
presented in Figure 7. The “OAA” profile is the part that is relevant for testing the model. It
is simulated based on the estimated model and can be compared to its empirical counterpart,
also depicted in Figure 7. The model captures the key features of the data well and provides
a fairly close fit quantitatively. The model predicts a roughly 6.3 percentage point reduction
in average labor force participation over the ages 65–74, whereas our regression analysis
indicated an 8.5 percentage point reduction. A relatively minor difference between the
model and the data is in labor force participation at ages younger than the OAA eligibility
age. The model predicts small but noticeable anticipatory effects in the years before OAA
eligibility, whereas there is relatively little evidence of anticipatory effects based on our
regression analysis. The close match between the model and the empirical evidence of the
effects of OAA on labor supply, including the good fit of the simulated to the empirical
moments, suggests that the model may be capturing some of the key factors that determine
the labor-supply effects of OAA and so may be useful for understanding the effects of OAA
and predicting the effects of the early Social Security program.


A.10      Simulations of the Effects of OAA and Social Security

This section presents details of the calculations underlying the simulations of the life cycle
model discussed in Section 6 and Section 7. The goals of these calculations are to understand


                                                 61
the observed effects of OAA—the value of OAA to recipients and the extent to which the
labor-supply effects of OAA are due to income vs. substitution effects—and to predict the
effects of Social Security. To this end, we simulate the model under various policies and
calculate statistics of the simulated data. The key statistics concern the predicted effects of
OAA and Social Security on retirement, the equivalent variation of OAA, and the income
and substitution effects of OAA.


A.10.1    Simulating the effects of OAA

We simulate the effects of OAA as it existed in 1940 on the cohort aged 55 in 1940. The key
ingredient of the simulation is the joint distribution of potential earnings and potential OAA
benefit levels among this cohort. Each individual’s potential OAA benefit is the 95th per-
centile OAA benefit in 1940 in his state. Due to a lack of data on assets other than housing,
these calculations assume that all states implement “income-focused” OAA programs that
do not limit benefits based on assets, other than any limitations that operate through our
estimated model of eligibility. In the baseline specification, the probability that an individual
is eligible for OAA is given by the eligibility-potential wage relationship estimated using data
from Massachusetts only. Although the eligibility-potential wage relationship likely varies
across states, the key results about the effects of the earnings test on labor supply and the
value of OAA to recipients are not sensitive to the particular eligibility-potential wage rela-
tionship. For the distribution of potential earnings among individuals in a particular state,
we use the observed distribution of earnings in 1940 among people aged 48–52 with positive
earnings in that state. We assume that the unobservable distribution of self-employment
earnings is the same as the observable distribution of wage and salary earnings. This is a
strong assumption, but some broadly supportive evidence is that the education distribution
of the self-employed in 1940 was quite similar to that of wage and salary workers. We fur-
ther assume that potential earnings are constant over the life cycle. This assumption likely
overstates late-life earnings (worse health or weaker labor demand for older workers likely
lead potential earnings to decline with age, Costa, 1998, and in the cross section earnings
fall with age), which tends to push against our key finding that the earnings test had little
effect on the ex-post value of the program to recipients.

Given the subsequent changes in OAA over the 1940s, most of which increased OAA benefits,
this simulation is not representative of the actual experience of any one cohort. Instead, it
is meant to answer the question of what effects OAA would have been expected to have had
it remained as it was in 1940.

The simulations reported in the text focus on the role of OAA’s earnings test. Another im-
portant feature of OAA was its minimum age requirement, which meant that OAA payments
were back-loaded to later ages. Given the evidence that borrowing constraints significantly
affected the pattern of labor-supply responses to OAA, OAA’s back-loaded payment struc-
ture may have reduced the value of OAA benefits to recipients relative to a cost-equivalent
transfer made earlier in life. We find that the average OAA recipient values $1 of present
value worth of OAA benefits equally to $0.75 in initial assets. Combined with our other
results, this implies a non-negligible cost of OAA’s back-loaded payment schedule, which is
consistent with evidence of poorly-functioning household credit markets in this period (Rose,
2014).

                                               62
A.10.2    Simulating the effects of Social Security

We simulate the effects of a counterfactually-modest Social Security program on the cohort
of men aged 50 in 1940. The goal of this exercise is not to simulate the actual experience of
this cohort. The goal is to simulate a simple counterfactual in which Social Security would
be expected to have smaller effects than it actually did in order to estimate a lower bound
of Social Security’s likely effects.

This simulation requires three key inputs. One is Social Security program rules. We base
our counterfactual Social Security program on the Social Security program as of the 1939
Amendments, which implied much lower eligibility and benefit levels than members of this
cohort actually enjoyed due to subsequent expansions in Social Security. Total household
benefits were the sum of primary benefits (for the worker) and supplementary benefits (for
spouses and dependent children), up to a maximum of $85 or 80 percent of the average
monthly wage (AMW), whichever was smaller. The primary monthly benefit was the sum of
(i) 40 percent of the first $50 of the AMW plus 10 percent of the amount by which the AMW
exceeds $50 up to an AMW of $250 and (ii) 1 percent of the amount in (i) multiplied by the
number of years in which the individual earned at least $200 in covered employment. The
minimum primary benefit was $10. Supplementary benefits for aged spouses and dependent
children were one half of the primary benefit per person. We assume that only 50 percent of
men qualify for supplemental benefits, whereas about 70 percent of 65–74-year-old men in
1940 were married. We assume that everyone had 15 years of covered employment regardless
of when they retired. Taxes were 1 percent of covered earnings.

As of the 1939 Amendments, eligibility for Social Security was limited to workers in commerce
and industry (except railroads), and excluded farm and domestic workers and non-farm self-
employed, among others. We assume that only those individuals whose 1940 occupations
were covered by Social Security as of the 1939 Amendments were eligible, thereby ignoring
the large expansions in coverage during the 1950s and ruling out the possibility that more
people worked in covered occupations after 1940. For men aged 48–52 in 1940 who had
positive earnings, we estimate the share, by earnings level, who were in occupations in 1940
that were covered by Social Security as of 1939. A complication is that with only measures
of wage and salary earnings, we do not observe earnings for the self-employed (who were
ineligible for Social Security). We assume that self-employment status was independent of
earnings, and within each earnings level we simply multiply the share of non-self-employed
who were eligible by the share who were non-self-employed to estimate an overall share
who were eligible. We follow Wendt (1938) to determine which workers were eligible for
Social Security under its original provisions. When Census information on occupation and
industry is too coarse we make assumptions that tend to reduce the estimated share eligible.
These classifications imply that overall, about 42 percent of this cohort is eligible for our
counterfactual Social Security program, whereas as of the end of 1959, 67 percent of men
aged 65–74 were actually receiving benefits, based on our calculations from the Census and
Social Security Administration (1960).

The second key input to the simulation is the wage histories of people eligible for Social
Security. We assume that an individual’s average nominal monthly wage over his entire
career was 3.6 times its level in 1940. This is the nominal wage that the individual would
have received in 1960—at the very end of his career—had he received the average rate of

                                             63
wage growth from 1940 to 1960 among production workers in manufacturing (Carter et al.,
2006, Series Ba4362). To the extent that this rate of wage growth was high relative to wage
growth overall during the “Great Compression” of the 1940s and 1950s (Goldin and Margo,
1992), it will tend to overstate wage growth of this cohort overall. More important, assuming
that members of this cohort received their 1960 wages over their entire careers leads us to
significantly overstate their lifetime wages. Overstating wages from 1939 until retirement
understates the predicted effects of Social Security on labor supply by understating Social
Security replacement rates.

The third key input to the simulation is the counterfactual retirement-age distribution that
would have arisen in the absence of OAA and Social Security. We make the conservative
assumption that the observed labor force participation-age profile in 1960 is the counterfac-
tual retirement-age distribution that would have arisen in the absence of OAA and Social
Security. This is conservative because by 1960 Social Security was a large program that
likely had already reduced labor force participation substantially. Our assumption therefore
understates counterfactual labor supply in the absence of the program, which tends to re-
duce the predicted effects of Social Security by reducing the amount of labor available to
potentially be reduced by the program. This tends to reduce the effects of Social Security
on the key statistic we simulate, labor force participation among people aged 65–74, since it
reduces the fraction of people who would otherwise (in the absence of Social Security) retire
after age 65. This ensures that our predictions about the likely effects of Social Security are
conservative despite the various un-modeled factors that might have increased the demand
for retirement, such as private pensions and changes in the prices of leisure goods.

Figure 1(b) shows the cross-sectional labor force participation-age profiles in 1930, 1940,
1950, and 1960. As documented by Costa (1998) and others, the labor force participation-
age profile underwent major changes between 1930 and 1960. In 1930, there is no apparent
change in the profile at age 65. By 1940, the profile drops slightly at age 65. Our analysis
implies that this drop can be explained by the introduction and expansion of OAA during the
1930s. By 1960, it is apparent from the labor force participation-age profile that something
special is going on around and after age 65. This is consistent with OAA and Social Security
having a major impact on labor supply. Because of the large changes in the 1960 labor force
participation-age profile around age 65, when we fit a polynomial to this profile to predict
counterfactual labor force participation at ages beyond age 84, we fit it using ages 65 and
older only. The resulting polynomial under-predicts labor force participation at ages younger
than 65, but labor force participation at these ages is not relevant for the key statistic we
wish to simulate, the reduction in labor force participation at ages 65–74.

Our simulations ignore OAA entirely. We do this to be conservative in terms of the total effect
of government old-age support over this period, since OAA should have reduced labor supply
still further. An important caveat, though, is that because our comparison is to a scenario
with no old-age support, program substitution from OAA to Social Security would reduce
the implied effect of Social Security relative to the observed level of labor force participation
in 1940 (which was already lower because of OAA). The share of Social Security-eligible men
who were also eligible for OAA is likely to be slightly lower than the overall OAA eligibility
share (which we estimate to be 22 percent), since the earnings of men we classify as Social
Security-eligible tend to be higher than those we estimate to be OAA-eligible. A rough
correction would be to suppose that about 20 percent of men who left the labor force to take

                                               64
up Social Security would otherwise have taken up OAA, which would suggest multiplying
our estimates by about 0.8. Although the model does not include some other factors that
may have reduced late-life labor supply over this time period, such as private pensions (Stock
and Wise, 1990; Samwick, 1998) and changes in relative prices, especially those of leisure
substitutes and complements (Costa, 1998), we capture the combined effect of such factors
on labor supply by using observed labor force participation in 1960 as our no-Social Security
counterfactual level. This assumption tends to reduce the implied effect of Social Security.

We do not attempt to evaluate the welfare costs of the Social Security earnings test to
recipients. In addition to our thought experiment being a policy experiment that was never
actually realized, the set of assumptions we make to understate the overall impact of Social
Security unfortunately makes it difficult to sign the bias in the cost of the earnings test.
On the one hand, understating benefits reduces implied replacement rates, which tends to
overstate the costs of the earnings test. On the other hand, understating counterfactual
no-program labor supply in 1960 overstates the growth in the demand for retirement due to
non-program factors like wage growth, which tends to understate the costs of the earnings
test by making more years of retirement inframarginal.


A.10.3      Decomposition of the effects of OAA on retirement into income and
            substitution effects

We decompose the effects of OAA into income and substitution effects using the following
method. We solve for the optimal retirement age under three budget constraints: OAA, No
OAA, and “No OAA with Compensation.”37 We consider two different “No OAA with Com-
pensation” budget constraints. Each is identical to the No OAA budget constraint except
for one change. In one case, initial assets are increased exactly enough that the individual is
able to achieve exactly the same utility that he would achieve under OAA. In the other case,
non-labor income after the OAA eligibility age is increased exactly enough that the individ-
ual is able to achieve exactly the same utility that he would achieve under OAA. If capital
markets were perfect, the individual would be indifferent between receiving an immediate
transfer of assets and receiving a present value-equivalent increase in his future non-labor
income. But with borrowing constraints, individuals weakly prefer an increase in initial
assets to a present value-equivalent increase in late-life income. The estimated equivalent
variation of OAA is therefore weakly greater under the late-life income compensation than
it is under the initial assets compensation. In the text, we discuss the equivalent variation of
OAA based on both measures, but for measuring income effects we use the late-life income
compensation.

The income effect of OAA is the number of years earlier that people retire under the “No
OAA with Compensation” budget constraint relative to the No OAA budget constraint
due to being richer with OAA.38 The substitution effect of OAA is the number of years
earlier that people retire under the OAA budget constraint relative to the “No OAA with
Compensation” budget constraint due to the taxation of late-life labor supply implicit in
  37
     We hold utility fixed at the level of utility the individual achieves with OAA in order to ensure invertibility
in the presence of borrowing constraints.
  38
     Recipients of OAA likely had their opportunity sets expanded by OAA since it was means-tested.



                                                        65
OAA’s means tests.




                     66
Appendix Figures and Tables

                                              Figure A1: Distributions of payments to new recipients in 1938-39, by state

                                                                Ohio: all recipients                                                                                              Ohio: recipients with no other income
 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100




                                                                                                                                 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
           Percent




                                                                                                                                           Percent
                 0




                                                                                                                                                 0
                                  <5     [5,10) [10,15) [15,20) [20,25) [25,30) [30,31) [35,40) [40,45) [45,50) [50,55)   >=55                                    <5     [5,10) [10,15) [15,20) [20,25) [25,30) [30,31) [35,40) [40,45) [45,50) [50,55)   >=55
                                                                           Amount                                                                                                                            Amount
                                  Legislated maximum in 1939: 30. 1939 average monthly payment: 22.64.                                                            Percent of recipients with no other income: 81.7



                                                       Massachusetts: all recipients                                                                                     Massachusetts: recipients with no other income
 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100




                                                                                                                                 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
           Percent




                                                                                                                                           Percent
                 0




                                                                                                                                                 0




                                  <5     [5,10) [10,15) [15,20) [20,25) [25,30) [30,31) [35,40) [40,45) [45,50) [50,55)   >=55                                    <5     [5,10) [10,15) [15,20) [20,25) [25,30) [30,31) [35,40) [40,45) [45,50) [50,55)   >=55
                                                                           Amount                                                                                                                            Amount
                                  No legislated maximum. 1939 average monthly payment: 28.43.                                                                     Percent of recipients with no other income: 62.2



                                                            California: all recipients                                                                                       California: recipients with no other income
 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100




                                                                                                                                 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
           Percent




                                                                                                                                           Percent
                 0




                                                                                                                                                 0




                                  <5     [5,10) [10,15) [15,20) [20,25) [25,30) [30,31) [35,40) [40,45) [45,50) [50,55)   >=55                                    <5     [5,10) [10,15) [15,20) [20,25) [25,30) [30,31) [35,40) [40,45) [45,50) [50,55)   >=55
                                                                           Amount                                                                                                                            Amount
                                  Legislated maximum in 1939: 35. 1939 average monthly payment: 32.56.                                                            Percent of recipients with no other income: 54




Notes: Left figures show distributions of payment amounts to new recipients in 1938-39 by state, based on
data from U.S. Social Security Board (1939b). Vertical lines correspond to average monthly payment and
legislated maximum payment (if one existed) in 1939. Right figures show estimated distribution for recipients
with no other source of income, under the assumption that those with other sources of income received the
lowest payments.



                                                                                                                            67
                   Figure A2: OAA statutory maximum monthly payments, 1939




Figure shows statutory maximum monthly payment, from U.S. Social Security Board (1940a). Analysis
sample excludes Colorado, Missouri, New Hampshire, and Pennsylvania.




                           Figure A3: OAA 99th percentile payments 1939




Figure shows estimate of 99th percentile payment, based on data from U.S. Social Security Board (1939b).
For details on construction of this measure, see Appendix Section A.2.2. Analysis sample excludes Colorado,
Missouri, New Hampshire, and Pennsylvania.




                                                    68
                              Figure A4: OAA variation and missing data
 .04
             (a) Demographic and 1940 work                (b) Demographic and 1939 work




                                                                                  .02
                                                                                  0
 .02




                                                                                  −.02
 0




                                                                                  −.04
 −.02




                                                                                  −.06
        55   57   59   61           63       65     67     69     71    73               55   57    59   61   63     65   67   69   71   73




Figure shows point estimates and 95% confidence intervals on age-payment interactions from estimation of
equation (1), using log simulated payment by age interactions as instruments for log observed payment by
age interactions and controlling for state border by age fixed effects. Dependent variable in Panel (a) is
missing (or allocated) information on demographics or 1940 labor force status; dependent variable for Panel
(b) is missing (or allocated) information on demographics or 1939 work or income information. Demographic
variables are sex, race, marital status, years of education, birthplace, and citizenship. Sample restricted to
counties on state boundaries, excluding counties on borders of states with age eligibility requirement other
than 65 in 1939. Unit of observation is an individual-state border pair. All specifications include county
fixed effects and age fixed effects. Standard errors clustered at the state level. For both panels, N = 2675836
and Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F-statistic is 3.06.


              Figure A5: Distribution of monthly income in population used for simulated IV
                                 .25




                                             7 states: income limit in [12,30)
                                 .2




                                                  28 states: income limit = 30
                                   .15




                                                     10 states: income limit in (30,50]
                            Fraction
                                 .1
                                 .05
                                 0




                                         0                  100              200                   300             400
                                                                         Monthly earnings


Figure shows distribution of monthly earnings in the population of men used for calculation of the simulated
instrument (men aged 60-64 in states with an eligibility age of 65 in 1939). Monthly earnings is imputed for
men reporting positive weeks worked in 1939 who were self-employed at the time of the Census, as described
in Section A.2.3. Vertical lines show minimum, median, and maximum values of “income limit” (the sum
of maximum payments and any income disregards) across states. These values are $12, $30, and $50 per
month.


                                                                             69
              Figure A6: Relationship between actual and simulated OAA payments




                     Actual payment per person 65+, December 1939
                                                               10
                                                                                                                              ut

                                                                                                                              nv
                                                                                                                              az
                                                                                                                              ok




                                                        8
                                                                                                                                                             ca


                                                                                                                                       mn                               ma
                                                                                                                              wy        mt


                                                6
                                                                                                                              wa              id
                                                                                                                              sd
                                                                                                                              oh
                                                                                                                  ia          ilor
                                                                                                                              wi
                                                                                                                              ne
                                                                                                                              ndin
                                       4
                                                                                                                               mi
                                                                                                                              la
                                                                                                                              me                   ct
                                                                                                                              fltx                      ks              ny
                                                                                                            tn                vt
                                                                                                                              md
                                                                                                                              ri
                                                                                                                              nm
                                                                                        ky        sc                           nc
                                                                                                                              wv                        nj
                                                                                                                              dc
                               2




                                                                                        ms                  de                al
                                                                                   ar             va                          ga
                      0




                                                                    0                            5                       10                                                       15
                                                                                              Simulated payment per person 65+

                                                                              States with legal maximum                      States with no legal maximum



Figure shows relationship between observed state-level OAA payments per person 65 and older in December
1939 and simulated payments based on maximum payments and income disregards. “Maximum payment” is
the statutory maximum monthly payment for those states with a statutory maximum and the 99th percentile
payment for states without a statutory maximum. Only states with eligibility age of 65 in 1939 are included.




             Figure A7: Relationship of maximum payments to payments per recipient
                                                             40
                     Monthly payment per recipient, Dec 1939




                                                                                                                                             ca
                                                    30




                                                                                                                                                                             ma
                                                                                                                      az     nv                               ct
                                                                                                                             dc                                              ny
                                                                                                                      wy     oh
                                                                                                                      wa
                                                                                                                       wi
                                                                                                                       or    id
                                                                                                                      mn     ut
                                                                                                                             me
                                      20




                                                                                                            ia               il                                    nj
                                                                                                                        ri                                         ks
                                                                                                                       mt
                                                                                                                      nd
                                                                                                                       ok
                                                                                                                      md     sd
                                                                                                                             in
                                                                                                                             mi
                                                                                                                      ne     vt
                                                                                                                      nm     la
                                                                                                                      wv     fl
                                                                                                       de
                            10




                                                                                        va                  tn        nc     al
                                                                              ky                                       tx    ga
                                                                              ms             sc
                                                                        ar
                                            0




                                                                             15          20             25               30              35                   40              45

                                                                                              Legal maximum                       99th percentile


Figure shows relationship between average payment per recipient in December 1939 and statutory maximum
monthly payment (for those states that had them) or 99th percentile payment (for states without a statutory
maximum). Only states with eligibility age of 65 in 1939 are included. Sources: data on OAA dollar payments
and number of recipients from U.S. Social Security Board (1940b), data on legal maximum payments from
U.S. Social Security Board (1940a).




                                                                                                                 70
                           Figure A8: Alternative measures of labor force attachment
                       (a) employment                            (b) non-emergency employment
 .05




                                                                .05
 0




                                                                0
 −.05




                                                                −.05
 −.1




                                                                −.1
        55   57   59    61   63   65   67   69   71   73               55   57   59   61   63   65   67   69   71   73




Notes: Figure shows point estimates and 95% confidence intervals on age-payment interactions from estima-
tion of equation (1), using log simulated payment by age interactions as instruments for log per-65+ payment
by age interactions and controlling for state border by age fixed effects. Standard errors clustered at the
state level. For both panels, N = 2403915 and Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F-stat is 3.06.




      Figure A9: Effect of OAA on labor force participation by county unemployment rates
(a) Bottom quartile (mean unemployment=.05)        (b) Top quartile (mean unemployment=.2)
 .05




                                                                .05
 0




                                                                0
 −.05




                                                                −.05
 −.1




                                                                −.1
 −.15




                                                                −.15
 −.2




                                                                −.2




        55   57   59    61   63   65   67   69   71   73               55   57   59   61   63   65   67   69   71   73




Notes: Figures show point estimates and 95% confidence intervals on age-payment interactions from estima-
tion of equation (1), using log simulated payment by age interactions as instruments for log per-65+ payment
by age interactions and controlling for state border by age fixed effects. Panel (a) limits sample to counties
in the bottom quartile of county unemployment rates, not weighting counties by population (N = 306124)
and Panel (b) limits to counties in the top quartile of county unemployment rates (N = 807613). County
unemployment rate is that of 45-54 year old men and includes work relief in unemployment. Standard errors
clustered at the state level.




                                                           71
 Figure A10: Change at 65 in share of men with specified amount of wage/salary income in 1939
            (a) Unscaled estimates                     (b) Proportional change at age 65
                .1




                                                                                                                                                                                           .4
                           .08




                                                                                                                                                                            Proportional change at age 65
 Change in share at age 65




                                                                                                                                                                                                     .2
            .04     .06




                                                                                                                                                                                          0
    .02




                                                                                                                                                                              −.2
                0
                −.02




                                                                                                                                                                                           −.4
                                 0

                                      0

                                               0

                                                     0

                                                              0

                                                                    0

                                                                             0

                                                                                   0

                                                                                            0

                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                       00

                                                                                                                0

                                                                                                                      0

                                                                                                                               0

                                                                                                                                     0

                                                                                                                                              0

                                                                                                                                                    0

                                                                                                                                                             0

                                                                                                                                                                   0




                                                                                                                                                                                                            0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  00

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0
                                     10

                                           20

                                                    30

                                                          40

                                                                   50

                                                                         60

                                                                                  70

                                                                                        80

                                                                                                 90



                                                                                                            10

                                                                                                                     20

                                                                                                                           30

                                                                                                                                    40

                                                                                                                                          50

                                                                                                                                                   60

                                                                                                                                                         70

                                                                                                                                                                  80




                                                                                                                                                                                                                10

                                                                                                                                                                                                                      20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                               30

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     40

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              50

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    60

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             70

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   80

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            90



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       10

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      30

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               40

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     50

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              60

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    70

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             80
                                                                                                      10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 10
                                 1−

                                          1−

                                                1−

                                                         1−

                                                               1−

                                                                        1−

                                                                              1−

                                                                                       1−

                                                                                             1−



                                                                                                           −1

                                                                                                                 −1

                                                                                                                          −1

                                                                                                                                −1

                                                                                                                                         −1

                                                                                                                                               −1

                                                                                                                                                        −1

                                                                                                                                                              −1




                                                                                                                                                                                                            1−

                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1−

                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1−

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1−

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1−

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1−

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1−

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1−

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1−



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      −1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            −1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     −1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           −1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    −1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          −1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   −1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         −1
                                                                                                  1−




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1−
                                      10

                                               20

                                                     30

                                                              40

                                                                    50

                                                                             60

                                                                                   70

                                                                                            80



                                                                                                       01

                                                                                                                01

                                                                                                                      01

                                                                                                                               01

                                                                                                                                     01

                                                                                                                                              01

                                                                                                                                                    01

                                                                                                                                                             01




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 10

                                                                                                                                                                                                                          20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                30

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         40

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               50

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        60

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              70

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       80



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  01

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           01

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 01

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          01

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                01

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         01

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               01

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        01
                                                                                                 90




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            90
                                                                                                      10

                                                                                                            11

                                                                                                                     12

                                                                                                                           13

                                                                                                                                    14

                                                                                                                                          15

                                                                                                                                                   16

                                                                                                                                                         17




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 10

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       11

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                12

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      13

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               14

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     15

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              16

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    17
                                                                    1939 wage and salary income range                                                                                                                                          1939 wage and salary income range




Notes: Figures show point estimates and 95% confidence intervals from separate estimations of equation (2),
with dependent variable indicating wage/salary earnings of each specified amount in 1939. Sample: men
within IK bandwidth around age 65 at 1940 Census in Massachusetts. Vertical line denotes “income floor”
of $360 per year. Standard errors clustered by years of age. Panel (a) shows estimates of β1 ; Panel (b)
shows estimates of β1 /β0 to measure proportional change at age 65 (with standard errors calculated using
the delta method).




                                                                                                                                                                       72
      Figure A11: Share of Massachusetts men with specified 1939 wage and salary earnings
                             Share with $1−100 in wage and salary earnings                         Share with $101−200 in wage and salary earnings




                                                                                       .025
                .012




                                                                                       .02
                .01




                                                                                       .015
                .008




                                                                                       .01
                .006




                                                                                       .005
                       55     57   59    61   63    65   67    69   71       73               55     57    59   61    63   65   67    69   71    73



                            Share with $201−300 in wage and salary earnings                        Share with $301−400 in wage and salary earnings
                .03




                                                                                       .03
                .025




                                                                                       .025
                .02




                                                                                       .02
                .015




                                                                                       .015
                .01




                                                                                       .01
                       55     57   59    61   63    65   67    69   71       73               55     57    59   61    63   65   67    69   71    73



                            Share with $401−500 in wage and salary earnings                        Share with $501−600 in wage and salary earnings
                                                                                       .05
                .035
                .03




                                                                                       .04
                .025




                                                                                       .03
                .02




                                                                                       .02
                .015
                .01




                                                                                       .01




                       55     57   59    61   63    65   67    69   71       73               55     57    59   61    63   65   67    69   71    73



                            Share with $601−700 in wage and salary earnings                        Share with $701−800 in wage and salary earnings
                                                                                       .05
                .04




                                                                                       .04
                .03




                                                                                       .03
                .02




                                                                                       .02
                .01




                                                                                       .01




                       55     57   59    61   63    65   67    69   71       73               55     57    59   61    63   65   67    69   71    73



                            Share with $801−900 in wage and salary earnings                        Share with $901−1000 in wage and salary earnings
                .035




                                                                                       .05
                .03




                                                                                       .04
                .025




                                                                                       .03
                .02




                                                                                       .02
                .015
                .01




                                                                                       .01




                       55     57   59    61   63    65   67    69   71       73               55     57    59   61    63   65   67    69   71    73




Notes: Figures show share of men reporting 1939 wage and salary earnings in specified range, by age at 1940
Census.


                                                                                  73
                 Figure A12: Share eligible for OAA based on their housing wealth




                      Share with less than $3000 in housing assets
                                   .4        .2 .6             .8
                                                                20 00

                                                                40 00

                                                                60 00

                                                                80 00

                                                                        0

                                                                         0

                                                                         0

                                                                 01 00

                                                                 01 00

                                                                         0

                                                                         0

                                                                         0

                                                                 01 00

                                                                         0

                                                                         0

                                                                         0

                                                                 01 00

                                                                 01 00

                                                                         0

                                                                         0

                                                                         0

                                                                 01 00

                                                                         0

                                                                         0

                                                                         0
                                                              10 −90

                                                              12 110

                                                              14 130




                                                              20 190

                                                              22 210

                                                              24 230



                                                              28 270

                                                              30 290

                                                              32 310




                                                              38 370

                                                              40 390

                                                              42 410



                                                              46 450

                                                              48 470

                                                                      90
                                                                      1

                                                                      3

                                                                      5

                                                                      7




                                                                      5

                                                                      7




                                                                      5




                                                                      3

                                                                      5




                                                                      3
                                                                   1−

                                                                   1−

                                                                   1−

                                                                   1−




                                                                   −1

                                                                   −1




                                                                   −2




                                                                   −3

                                                                   −3




                                                                   −4




                                                                   −4
                                                                   −

                                                                   −




                                                                   −

                                                                   −

                                                                   −



                                                                   −

                                                                   −

                                                                   −




                                                                   −

                                                                   −

                                                                   −



                                                                   −

                                                                   −
                                                                   1
                                                                 01

                                                                 01

                                                                 01




                                                                 01

                                                                 01

                                                                 01



                                                                 01

                                                                 01

                                                                 01




                                                                 01

                                                                 01

                                                                 01



                                                                 01

                                                                 01
                                                              16

                                                              18




                                                              26




                                                              34

                                                              36




                                                              44
                                                                                                               1939 wage income



Notes: Share of Massachusetts men aged 60–64 who had less than $3,000 of house value, as a function of
wage and salary income. Massachusetts limited eligibility for OAA to people with less than $3,000 in real
property and did not have any home disregard. The figure therefore shows the share of people who were not
ineligible for OAA on the basis of their house value alone.




                    Figure A13: Method of simulated moments objective function
                                                                                                                                                      2000




                                                                     0.4
                                                                                                                                                           .000




                                                                     0.6
                                                                                                                                                      1500




                                                                                                   30.000
                                                                                                      35.
                                                                                                        000 25




                                                                     0.8
                                                                                                                                                           .000




                                                                                                       20
                                                                                          40.000




                                                                                                         .00
                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                               .




                                                                                                                                                 1000.00
                                                                                                                      240.0
                                                                                                             000




                                                                     1.0
                                                                                                                         2000..0000
                                                                                                                         16 00

                                                                                                                         28000.

                                                                                                                                      500.
                                                                                                                         120.0 0
                                                                             80.000




                                                                                                                          80.00
                                                                                120.000
                               eta




                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                               000

                                                                                                                                          000
                                                                                                            15.0




                                                                                                                                 00




                                                                     1.2
                                                                                                             00




                                                                     1.4

                                                                     1.6
                                                                                                      35.000
                                                                     1.8

                                                                     2.0
                                                                       0.0            0.2                    0.4               0.6         0.8                1.0
                                                                                                                   alphaElig


Notes: Method of simulated moments objective as a function of η (“eta,” the negative of the coefficient of
relative risk aversion) and αe (“alphaElig,” the constant in the eligibility-potential earnings relationship).
Higher contours indicate a worse fit of the model. The asterisk marks the estimated values.




                                                                                                                    74
        Figure A14: Simulated cross-sectional age-labor force participation profile in 1940

                                                      1.0
                                                                         No OAA
                                                      0.9                OAA
                                                                         Unconditional OAA


                     Labor force participation rate
                                                      0.8
                                                      0.7
                                                      0.6
                                                      0.5
                                                      0.4
                                                      0.3
                                                         55   60    65        70             75
                                                                   Age

Notes: Simulated cross-sectional relationship between labor force participation and age in 1940 in the US.
The “No OAA” profile is the counterfactual no-OAA profile predicted based on our regression results and
presented in Figure 7. The “OAA” profile is simulated based on the estimated model. It can be compared
to its empirical counterpart, also depicted in Figure 7. The “Unconditional OAA” profile is simulated based
on the estimated model using a counterfactual OAA program that did not impose an earnings test. The
difference between this figure and Figure 11 is that this figure focuses on the 1940 cross section, whereas
Figure 11 focuses on the life cycle profiles of the cohort of men aged 55 in 1940. The predicted effects of
OAA in the 1940 cross section are smaller than those over the life cycle of the cohort of men aged 55 in 1940
because in the latter case people had more time to build OAA into their plans.




                                                                   75
                                                       Figure A15: Empirical vs. simulated moments for full-US estimation
                                                  (a) Moments in the estimation                      (b) All earnings levels

                                                                                                0.25                                                                 1.0                                       0.25
                                            0.4                                     Empirical                                                                               Empirical
                                                                                    Simulated                                                                               Simulated
 Proportional break in LFP(age) at age 65




                                                                                                                          Proportional break in LFP(age) at age 65
                                                                                                0.20                                                                                                           0.20
                                            0.2                                                                                                                      0.5

                                                                                                0.15                                                                                                           0.15




                                                                                                   Pr(wage in bin)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Pr(wage in bin)
                                            0.0
                                                                                                                                                                     0.0
                                            0.2                                                 0.10                                                                                                           0.10

                                            0.4                                                                                                                      0.5
                                                                                                0.05                                                                                                           0.05

                                            0.6
                                                                                                0.00                                                                 1.0                                       0.00
                                              0    200   400   600   800   1000   1200   1400                                                                           0     1000      2000   3000   4000   5000




Notes: Empirical vs. simulated moments and annual earnings distribution for the full US for moments in
the estimation (Panel (a)) and for all earnings levels, including those not in the estimation (Panel (b)). The
moments are the proportional breaks in labor force participation-age profiles at age 65. Empirical moments
correspond to the breaks at age 65 in the share of men with the specified amount of wage/salary income in
1939, relative to the predicted share at age 65 based on data from younger ages. The earnings distribution is
the distribution of wage/salary income among men in the US aged 60–64 in 1939 who had any wage/salary
income. For reference, the average OAA benefit in the US is $232 per year. Earnings above $5,000 are set
to $5,000.




                                                                                                                     76
            Figure A16: Share of all men with specified 1939 wage and salary earnings
                             Share with $1−100 in wage and salary earnings                         Share with $101−200 in wage and salary earnings




                .03




                                                                                       .04
                                                                                       .035
                .025




                                                                                       .03
                .02




                                                                                       .025
                                                                                       .02
                .015




                       55     57   59    61   63    65   67    69   71       73               55     57    59   61    63   65   67    69   71    73



                            Share with $201−300 in wage and salary earnings                        Share with $301−400 in wage and salary earnings
                .04




                                                                                       .035
                .035




                                                                                       .03
                .03




                                                                                       .025
                .025




                                                                                       .02
                                                                                       .015
                .02
                .015




                                                                                       .01
                       55     57   59    61   63    65   67    69   71       73               55     57    59   61    63   65   67    69   71    73



                            Share with $401−500 in wage and salary earnings            .04         Share with $501−600 in wage and salary earnings
                .035
                .03




                                                                                       .03
                .025
                .02




                                                                                       .02
                .015
                .01




                                                                                       .01




                       55     57   59    61   63    65   67    69   71       73               55     57    59   61    63   65   67    69   71    73



                            Share with $601−700 in wage and salary earnings                        Share with $701−800 in wage and salary earnings
                                                                                       .035
                .025




                                                                                       .03
                .02




                                                                                       .025
                .015




                                                                                       .02
                .01




                                                                                       .015
                                                                                       .01
                .005




                       55     57   59    61   63    65   67    69   71       73               55     57    59   61    63   65   67    69   71    73



                            Share with $801−900 in wage and salary earnings                        Share with $901−1000 in wage and salary earnings
                .025




                                                                                       .035
                                                                                       .03
                .02




                                                                                       .025
                .015




                                                                                       .02
                .01




                                                                                       .015
                                                                                       .01
                .005




                       55     57   59    61   63    65   67    69   71       73               55     57    59   61    63   65   67    69   71    73




Notes: Figures show share of men reporting 1939 wage and salary earnings in specified range, by age at 1940
Census, for all states with an eligibility age of 65 in 1939.



                                                                                  77
                                                      Figure A17: Empirical vs. simulated moments for California estimation
                                                  (a) Moments in the estimation                      (b) All earnings levels

                                                                                                0.25                                                                 1.0                                       0.25
                                            0.4                                     Empirical                                                                               Empirical
                                                                                    Simulated                                                                               Simulated
 Proportional break in LFP(age) at age 65




                                                                                                                          Proportional break in LFP(age) at age 65
                                                                                                0.20                                                                                                           0.20
                                            0.2                                                                                                                      0.5

                                                                                                0.15                                                                                                           0.15
                                                                                                   Pr(wage in bin)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Pr(wage in bin)
                                            0.0
                                                                                                                                                                     0.0
                                            0.2                                                 0.10                                                                                                           0.10

                                            0.4                                                                                                                      0.5
                                                                                                0.05                                                                                                           0.05

                                            0.6
                                                                                                0.00                                                                 1.0                                       0.00
                                              0    200   400   600   800   1000   1200   1400                                                                           0     1000      2000   3000   4000   5000




Notes: Empirical vs. simulated moments and annual earnings distribution for California for moments in the
estimation (Panel (a)) and for all earnings levels, including those not in the estimation (Panel (b)). The
moments are the proportional breaks in labor force participation-age profiles at age 65. Empirical moments
correspond to the breaks at age 65 in the share of men with the specified amount of wage/salary income in
1939, relative to the predicted share at age 65 based on data from younger ages. The earnings distribution is
the distribution of wage/salary income among men in California aged 60–64 in 1939 who had any wage/salary
income. For reference, the “income floor” in California is $420 per year. Earnings above $5,000 are set to
$5,000.




                                                                                                                     78
        Figure A18: Share of California men with specified 1939 wage and salary earnings
                             Share with $1−100 in wage and salary earnings                         Share with $101−200 in wage and salary earnings




                .025




                                                                                       .03
                                                                                       .025
                .02




                                                                                       .02
                .015




                                                                                       .015
                .01




                                                                                       .01
                       55     57   59    61   63    65   67    69   71       73               55     57    59   61    63   65   67    69   71    73



                            Share with $201−300 in wage and salary earnings                        Share with $301−400 in wage and salary earnings
                .035




                                                                                       .04
                .03




                                                                                       .03
                .025




                                                                                       .02
                .02




                                                                                       .01
                .015
                .01




                                                                                       0
                       55     57   59    61   63    65   67    69   71       73               55     57    59   61    63   65   67    69   71    73



                            Share with $401−500 in wage and salary earnings            .04         Share with $501−600 in wage and salary earnings
                .035
                .03




                                                                                       .03
                .025
                .02




                                                                                       .02
                .015




                                                                                       .01
                .01




                       55     57   59    61   63    65   67    69   71       73               55     57    59   61    63   65   67    69   71    73



                            Share with $601−700 in wage and salary earnings                        Share with $701−800 in wage and salary earnings
                                                                                       .035
                .025




                                                                                       .03
                .02




                                                                                       .025
                .015




                                                                                       .02
                .01




                                                                                       .015
                                                                                       .01
                .005




                       55     57   59    61   63    65   67    69   71       73               55     57    59   61    63   65   67    69   71    73



                            Share with $801−900 in wage and salary earnings                        Share with $901−1000 in wage and salary earnings
                                                                                       .04
                .025




                                                                                       .03
                .02




                                                                                       .02
                .015




                                                                                       .01
                .01
                .005




                                                                                       0




                       55     57   59    61   63    65   67    69   71       73               55     57    59   61    63   65   67    69   71    73




Notes: Figures show share of men in California reporting 1939 wage and salary earnings in specified range,
by age at 1940 Census.



                                                                                  79
                                        Table A1: Monthly payments in 1939
                                            Legal max   Observed max   99th percentile     Payment          Payment
                    State    Age eligible    payment      payment         payment        per recipient   per person 65+
                 Virginia        65             20           20              20               9.65            1.01
                Arkansas         65              .           12              12              6.01             1.03
                 Georgia         65             30           30              25               8.07            1.16
                Alabama          65             30           111             30               9.42            1.27
             Mississippi         65             15           15              15               7.51            1.29
                Delaware         65             25           25              25              10.98            1.37
        New Hampshire            70             30           30              30              20.95            1.98
   District of Columbia          65             30            39             30              25.08            2.02
         South Carolina          65             20           20              20               7.98            2.07
               Kentucky          65             15            15             15               8.66             2.07
          West Virginia          65             30            30             30              12.34            2.12
             New Jersey          65             40           30              30              20.22            2.22
        North Carolina           65             30           30              30               9.99             2.23
            New Mexico           65              .           42              30              13.43            2.33
               Tennessee         65             25            25             25              10.06            2.39
           Rhode Island          65             30            30             30              19.20            2.40
               Maryland          65             30           30              30              17.31            2.52
           Pennsylvania          70             30            30             30              21.77            2.52
                Vermont          65             30           30              30              15.60            2.53
                   Texas         65             30           30              30               8.75            3.04
               New York          65              .           86              45              25.20            3.13
                  Kansas         65              .            94             40              19.07            3.16
                  Florida        65             30           30              30              11.70            3.23
            Connecticut          65             39            30             30              27.04            3.55
                   Maine         65             30            30             30              20.64            3.59
               Louisiana         65              .           46              30              14.10            3.66
               Michigan          65             30           30              30              16.47            3.86
          North Dakota           65             30            30             30              17.78             4.00
                 Indiana         65             30           30              30              17.55            4.02
               Nebraska          65             30            30             30              15.61            4.05
              Wisconsin          65             30            30             30              21.65            4.44
                Missouri         70             30            30             30              18.90            4.57
                     Iowa        65             25           25              25              20.13            4.75
                 Oregon          65             30            30             30              21.33             4.78
                  Illinois       65             30            30             30              20.03             4.89
                     Ohio        65             30            30             30              22.82            5.31
          South Dakota           65             30            30             30              17.67             5.65
                   Idaho         65             30            30             30              21.47             5.84
            Washington           65             30            30             30              22.04             5.97
                Montana          65              .            30             30              17.99             6.05
               Wyoming           65             30            30             30              23.29             6.15
              Minnesota          65             30            30             30              20.64             6.42
          Massachusetts          65              .            91             45              28.91            6.46
               California        65             35            35             35              32.97             7.95
              Oklahoma           65             30            30             30              17.59             8.54
                 Arizona         65             30            30             30              26.58             8.64
                 Nevada          65              .            30             30              26.64             8.84
                    Utah         65             30            47             30              21.06             9.67
                Colorado      60 or 65          45            45             45              28.44            13.17

Notes: Includes the 48 states and the District of Columbia. ‘99th percentile payment’ is for new recipients
in fiscal year 1938-39. Eight states had no legal maximum payment. Recipiency rate and payments per
person 65+ are for December 1939, and are normalized by state population from 1940 Census. Sources:
data on OAA dollar payments and number of recipients from U.S. Social Security Board (1940b), data on
legal maximum payments from U.S. Social Security Board (1940a), data on observed maximum payments
and 99th percentile payment from U.S. Social Security Board (1939b).




                                                            80
              Table A2: Variation in log OAA payments per person 65+ across states
                                                 (1)           (2)         (3)          (4)         (5)
                 Share population 65 and       11.895∗
                 above                         (5.759)

                 Share population foreign                     4.103∗
                 born                                        (1.555)

                 Share population                                         -2.878∗∗∗
                 non-white                                               (0.491)

                 Median years of                                                       0.364∗∗∗
                 education                                                            (0.076)

                 Log median earnings                                                               1.059∗∗∗
                                                                                                  (0.244)
                 Observations                    45            45          45           45           45

Dependent variable: log of OAA payments in December 1939 per person 65 and above. Sample includes
states with 1939 eligibility age of 65. Median years of education is calculated for all people aged 25-54 in
that state, median earnings is state median wage and salary earnings in 1939 for men aged 25-54 who were
not self-employed. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in parentheses. ∗ : p < 0.05, ∗∗ : p < 0.01, ∗∗∗ :
p < 0.001


          Table A3: Variation in Log OAA payments per person 65+ for border counties
       Dependent variable   Share 65     Share      Share     Median years                                Log median
                           and above foreign born nonwhite     of schooling                                earnings
       Panel A. Observed payments variable, no border fixed effects

       Log per-65+ payment           0.010∗∗       0.033∗∗∗             -0.127∗∗∗        1.137∗∗∗            0.291∗∗∗
                                    (0.003)       (0.007)              (0.027)          (0.136)             (0.072)

       Observations          1192        1192         1192                               1183                1183
       Panel B. Observed payments variable, border fixed effects

       Log per-65+ payment           0.002         0.003                0.015∗           -0.045              -0.045
                                    (0.001)       (0.002)              (0.007)          (0.132)             (0.046)

       Observations           1192        1192       1192         1183                                       1183
       Panel C. Simulated payments variable, no border fixed effects

       Log simulated per-65+         0.014∗        0.058∗∗∗             -0.175∗          1.258∗∗∗            0.534∗∗∗
       payment                      (0.006)       (0.012)              (0.075)          (0.303)             (0.071)

       Observations           1192       1192         1192        1183                                       1183
       Panel D. Simulated payments variable, border fixed effects

       Log simulated per-65+         0.002         0.001                -0.011           -0.205              -0.013
       payment                      (0.002)       (0.001)              (0.012)          (0.176)             (0.038)

       Observations                  1192             1192              1192             1183                1183

Sample: border counties in states with 1939 eligibility age of 65. Unit of observation is a county-state border
pair. Smaller sample size for schooling and earnings is due to missing data in nine small border counties.
Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the state level. ∗ : p < 0.05, ∗∗ : p < 0.01, ∗∗∗ : p < 0.001




                                                         81
                          Table A4: Simulated IV first stage regressions
                                                     (1)          (2)                     (3)
                                                 age 55-59 age 65-69                  age 70-74
               Log simulated per-65+                0.897∗∗∗     0.000                  -0.000
               payment × age 55-59                 (0.113)      (0.001)                (0.000)

               Log simulated per-65+                         0.002        0.892∗∗∗      0.001
               payment × age 65-69                          (0.003)      (0.114)       (0.002)

               Log simulated per-65+                         -0.004       -0.002         0.907∗∗∗
               payment × age 70-74                          (0.003)      (0.002)       (0.110)
               Observations                                 2403915      2403915       2403915
               Sample                                        border       border        border
               Border segment × age fixed effects              yes          yes           yes
               Education × age fixed effects                   yes          yes           yes
               Race × age fixed effects                        yes          yes           yes
Dependent variables: log state OAA payments per person 65+ in December 1939, interacted with indicator
for specified age group. Sample restricted to counties on state boundaries, excluding counties on borders of
states with age eligibility requirement other than 65 in 1939. Unit of observation is an individual-state border
pair. All specifications include county fixed effects and 5-year age group fixed effects. All age-interactions
are with 5-year age groups. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the state level. ∗ : p < 0.05, ∗∗ :
p < 0.01, ∗∗∗ : p < 0.001




                                                       82
             Table A5: Non-wage income by state payments per person 65+ and age
           Panel A. OLS results
                                                (1)      (2)       (3)      (4)
           Log per-65+ payment                -0.010∗∗ -0.005     0.006    0.006
           × age 55-59                       (0.003)   (0.004)   (0.005)  (0.005)

           Log per-65+ payment                         0.063∗∗∗ 0.062∗∗∗ 0.052∗∗∗ 0.053∗∗∗
           × age 65-69                                (0.005)   (0.007)  (0.003)  (0.003)

           Log per-65+ payment                        0.093∗∗∗ 0.088∗∗∗ 0.073∗∗∗ 0.073∗∗∗
           × age 70-74                               (0.009)   (0.011)  (0.005)  (0.006)
           Observations                              6283146 2238476 2238476 2238476
           Sample                                      full    border   border   border
           Border segment × age fixed effects           no       no       yes      yes
           Education × age fixed effects                no       no       no       yes
           Race × age fixed effects                     no       no       no       yes
           Panel B. IV results
                                                         (1)       (2)         (3)         (4)
           Log per-65+ payment                         -0.018∗∗  -0.007       0.007       0.007
           × age 55-59                                (0.006)   (0.007)      (0.006)     (0.006)

           Log per-65+ payment                         0.066∗∗∗ 0.062∗∗∗ 0.061∗∗∗ 0.061∗∗∗
           × age 65-69                                (0.008)   (0.009)  (0.006)  (0.006)

           Log per-65+ payment                        0.109∗∗∗ 0.100∗∗∗ 0.075∗∗∗ 0.075∗∗∗
           × age 70-74                               (0.018)   (0.015)  (0.008)  (0.008)
           Observations                              6283145 2238476 2238476 2238476
           Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F-stat              1.98      8.79    21.60    21.66
           Sample                                      full    border   border   border
           Border segment × age fixed effects           no        no      yes      yes
           Education × age fixed effects                no        no      no       yes
           Race × age fixed effects                     no        no      no       yes

Dependent variable is indicator for receipt of more than $50 in non-wage income in 1939. In Panel B, log
simulated payment by age interactions used as instruments for log per-65+ payment by age interactions.
Sample for column (1): men aged 55-74 in states with 1939 eligibility age of 65. Columns (2)-(4) include
only counties on state boundaries and exclude counties on borders of excluded states. Unit of observation in
columns (2)-(4) is an individual-state border pair. All specifications include county fixed effects and 5-year
age group fixed effects. All age-interactions are with 5-year age groups. Standard errors (in parentheses) are
clustered at the state level. ∗ : p < 0.05, ∗∗ : p < 0.01, ∗∗∗ : p < 0.001




                                                     83
                   Table A6: Main results using payments per person 65+ in levels
                                                 (1)                 (2)           (3)               (4)
                                          Non-wage income      In labor force   Employed       Non-emergency
  Per-65+ payment ×                            -0.000               0.001         0.002            -0.001
  age 55-59                                   (0.002)              (0.002)       (0.002)          (0.001)

  Per-65+ payment ×                             0.019∗∗∗            -0.020∗∗∗      -0.014∗∗∗       -0.009∗∗
  age 65-69                                    (0.003)             (0.004)        (0.004)         (0.003)

  Per-65+ payment ×                              0.024∗∗∗          -0.023∗∗∗      -0.017∗∗∗        -0.012∗∗∗
  age 70-74                                    (0.004)            (0.004)        (0.004)          (0.002)
  Observations                                 2238476            2403915        2403915          2403915
  Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F-stat                 10.48              10.63          10.63            10.63
  Sample                                        border             border         border           border
  Border segment × age fixed effects              yes                yes            yes              yes
  Education × age fixed effects                   yes                yes            yes              yes
  Race × age fixed effects                        yes                yes            yes              yes

Dependent variables: receipt of non-wage income in 1939, in labor force at 1940 Census, employed at 1940
Census, employed in private or non-emergency government work at 1940 Census. Simulated payment by
age interactions used as instruments for per-65+ payment by age interactions. Payments in 1940 dollars.
Sample restricted to counties on state boundaries, excluding counties on borders of states with age eligibility
requirement other than 65 in 1939. Unit of observation is an individual-state border pair. All specifications
include county fixed effects and 5-year age group fixed effects. All age-interactions are with 5-year age groups.
Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the state level. ∗ : p < 0.05, ∗∗ : p < 0.01, ∗∗∗ : p < 0.001




                                                       84
Table A7: Test for heterogeneous labor force participation effects by county age 45-54 unemploy-
ment

                                                                  (1)          (2)
                         Unemployment rate × Log                 0.028        0.021
                         per-65+ payment × age 55-59            (0.068)      (0.061)

                         Unemployment rate × Log                 0.059        0.106
                         per-65+ payment × age 65-69            (0.141)      (0.129)

                         Unemployment rate × Log                 0.308        0.346∗
                         per-65+ payment × age 70-74            (0.170)      (0.156)

                         Log per-65+ payment ×                   -0.000       0.001
                         age 55-59                              (0.010)      (0.009)

                         Log per-65+ payment ×                   -0.063∗∗∗ -0.068∗∗∗
                         age 65-69                              (0.018)    (0.017)

                         Log per-65+ payment ×                   -0.101∗∗∗    -0.107∗∗∗
                         age 70-74                              (0.023)      (0.022)
                         Observations                           2402073      2402073
                         Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F-stat           10.78        10.82
                         Sample                                  border       border
                         Border segment × age fixed effects        yes          yes
                         Education × age fixed effects             no           yes
                         Race × age fixed effects                  no           yes

Dependent variable: in labor force at 1940 Census. Log simulated per-65+ payments used as instruments for
observed log per-65+ payments. Sample: men aged 55-74 in states with 1939 eligibility age of 65, including
only individuals in counties on state boundaries. All specifications include county fixed effects, 5-year age
group fixed effects, interactions of age group effects with the unemployment rate, and border segment by age
fixed effects. Unemployment rate is that of 45-54 year old men living in the individual’s county and includes
work relief in unemployment. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the state level. ∗ : p < 0.05,
∗∗
   : p < 0.01, ∗∗∗ : p < 0.001




                                                     85
                           Table A8: Alternative simulated IV specifications
                                                 (1)                 (2)             (3)             (4)
                                          Non-wage income      In labor force     Employed      Non-emergency
  Log per-65+ payment                          -0.016               0.007           0.012           0.004
  × age 55-59                                 (0.018)              (0.008)         (0.009)         (0.008)

  Log per-65+ payment                           0.050∗∗∗             -0.061∗∗∗      -0.041∗∗∗        -0.011
  × age 65-69                                  (0.011)              (0.013)        (0.012)          (0.012)

  Log per-65+ payment                            0.054∗∗∗            -0.093∗∗∗      -0.070∗∗∗       -0.036∗
  × age 70-74                                  (0.016)              (0.021)        (0.017)         (0.014)
  Observations                                 2238476              2403915        2403915         2403915
  Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F-stat                  2.09                2.64           2.64            2.64
  Sample                                        border               border         border          border
  Border segment × age fixed effects              yes                  yes            yes             yes
  Education × age fixed effects                   yes                  yes            yes             yes
  Race × age fixed effects                        yes                  yes            yes             yes

Dependent variables: receipt of non-wage income in 1939, in labor force at 1940 Census, employed at 1940
Census, employed in private or non-emergency government work. Log simulated per-65+ payment by age
interactions used as instruments for log per-65+ payment by age interactions. Simulated IV based on
maximum payments (and any earnings disregards), assigning the highest legal maximum across states (45
dollars per month) to states with no legal maximum. Sample restricted to counties on state boundaries,
excluding counties on borders of states with age eligibility requirement other than 65 in 1939. Unit of
observation is an individual-state border pair. All specifications include county fixed effects and 5-year age
group fixed effects. All age-interactions are with 5-year age groups. Standard errors (in parentheses) are
clustered at the state level. ∗ : p < 0.05, ∗∗ : p < 0.01, ∗∗∗ : p < 0.001


           Table A9: Controls for railroad pensions and state/local government pensions
                                                   (1)       (2)         (3)      (4)
           Log per-65+ payment                    0.006     0.005      -0.009   -0.009
           × age 55-59                           (0.005)   (0.004)    (0.005)  (0.005)

            Log per-65+ payment                         -0.063∗∗∗ -0.060∗∗∗ -0.059∗∗∗ -0.060∗∗∗
            × age 65-69                                (0.008)    (0.007)   (0.010)   (0.010)

            Log per-65+ payment                         -0.075∗∗∗    -0.069∗∗∗    -0.069∗∗∗    -0.070∗∗∗
            × age 70-74                                (0.010)      (0.008)      (0.011)      (0.011)
            Observations                               2403915      2403915      2375865      2375865
            Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F-stat               20.53        23.11        11.43        13.20
            Sample                                      border       border       border       border
            Border segment × age fixed effects            yes          yes          yes          yes
            Education × age fixed effects                 yes          yes          yes          yes
            Race × age fixed effects                      yes          yes          yes          yes
            Railroad × age fixed effects                  no           yes          no           yes
            State/local × age fixed effects               no           no           yes          yes
Dependent variable: in labor force at 1940 Census. Log simulated OAA payment by age interactions used
as instruments for log per-65+ OAA payment by age interactions. Sample in all columns: men aged 55-74
in states with 1939 eligibility age of 65 and living in counties on state borders (columns 3 and 4 additionally
omit states with missing information on state and local pensions). For definitions of railroad and state and
local pension payments, see the text. Unit of observation is an individual-state border pair. All specifications
include county fixed effects and 5-year age group fixed effects. All age-interactions are with 5-year age groups.
Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the state level. ∗ : p < 0.05, ∗∗ : p < 0.01, ∗∗∗ : p < 0.001


                                                       86
                             Table A10: Controls for general assistance
                                                             (1)         (2)
                       Log per-65+ payment                  0.005      -0.009
                       × age 55-59                         (0.006)    (0.012)

                       Log per-65+ payment                         -0.068∗∗∗ -0.088∗
                       × age 65-69                                (0.015)    (0.039)

                       Log per-65+ payment                        -0.067∗∗∗    -0.094∗
                       × age 70-74                               (0.017)      (0.041)
                       Observations                              2097968      2097968
                       Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F-stat              7.34         1.54
                       Sample                                     border       border
                       Border segment × age fixed effects           yes          yes
                       Education × age fixed effects                yes          yes
                       Race × age fixed effects                     yes          yes
                       Genl asst × age fixed effects                no           yes
Dependent variable: in labor force at 1940 Census. Log simulated OAA payment by age interactions used
as instruments for log per-65+ OAA payment by age interactions. Sample in all columns: men aged 55-74
in states with 1939 eligibility age of 65 and non-missing general assistance data, and living in counties on
state borders. Unit of observation is an individual-state border pair. All specifications include county fixed
effects and 5-year age group fixed effects. All age-interactions are with 5-year age groups. Standard errors
(in parentheses) are clustered at the state level. ∗ : p < 0.05, ∗∗ : p < 0.01, ∗∗∗ : p < 0.001




       Table A11: Cross-state migration 1935-40 by state payments per person 65+ and age
                                                  (1)       (2)      (3)        (4)
          Log per-65+ payment                   -0.0015   -0.0022  -0.0006    -0.0006
          × age 55-59                          (0.0022) (0.0023) (0.0021) (0.0021)

           Log per-65+ payment                        0.0044      0.0005       0.0031∗    0.0033∗
           × age 65-69                               (0.0032)    (0.0027)     (0.0014)   (0.0014)

           Log per-65+ payment                        0.0059      0.0012       0.0016     0.0017
           × age 70-74                               (0.0054)    (0.0058)     (0.0037)   (0.0037)
           Observations                              6619726     2366217      2366217    2366217
           Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F-stat              1.98        8.30         20.56      20.63
           Sample                                       full      border       border     border
           Border segment × age fixed effects            no         no           yes        yes
           Education × age fixed effects                 no         no           no         yes
           Race × age fixed effects                      no         no           no         yes
Dependent variable: moved states between 1935 and 1940. Log simulated payment by age interactions used
as instruments for log per-65+ payment by age interactions. Sample for column (1): men aged 55-74 in states
with 1939 eligibility age of 65 and non-missing 1935 state of residence and 1940 employment information.
Columns (2)-(4) include only counties on state boundaries and exclude counties on borders of excluded states.
Unit of observation in columns (2)-(4) is an individual-state border pair. All specifications include county
fixed effects and 5-year age group fixed effects. All age-interactions are with 5-year age groups. Standard
errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the state level. ∗ : p < 0.05, ∗∗ : p < 0.01, ∗∗∗ : p < 0.001



                                                     87
                                                            Table A12: Estimation results and robustness
                                                       Baseline      βe in      Elig(w/ȳ)   η = −2    η = −1/2     PVBC        Halve           Full US     Outside
                                                                   2nd stage                                                 LFP(age) slope                estimates
       Parameter estimates
       α̂e                                               0.36        0.30          0.36        0.37      0.29       0.38            0.31          0.20
       1000 × β̂e                                        -0.12     -2.9E-10       -41.50      -0.12      -0.12      -0.12          -0.12        -5.9E-10
       η̂                                                 -1.3        -1.3         -1.3        -2.0       -0.5       -1.3           -1.0           -0.6

       Key implications
       Percentage of men eligible for OAAa                22.1        30.4         16.3       23.0        15.2       23.3          17.4           19.9
       Equivalent variation of OAA, %b                    94.7        93.4         95.4       94.4        96.9       94.6          93.3           94.3
       Effect of OAA earnings test, % of total            45.9        50.7         42.4       37.0        53.6       51.2          53.3           62.0
       Reduc. in LFP(65–74) from Soc. Sec., p.p.c          7.3         7.4          7.3        5.6        12.1        7.3           8.7           11.0

       Validation tests
       Reduc. in LFP(65–74) from OAA in 1940               6.3         6.5          5.7        5.5         6.8       6.6            5.7           6.1         8.5d
       OAA recip. rate among men 65–74, %                 19.0        24.0         15.0       18.3        14.9       20.0          15.0           18.0        16.5e




88
       Objective function value                           11.1        8.9          11.1       33.9        37.3       24.4          14.9           25.0

     Notes:
     Parameter estimates and implications of the estimated model under various assumptions. “βe in 2nd stage” is an estimation in which the slope of the
     eligibility-potential earnings relationship is estimated jointly with the other parameters in the second stage. In all but one of the other estimations, this
     parameter is estimated separately in a first stage based on the slope of the relationship between earnings and house value in Massachusetts. The exception
     is the “Full US” estimation, in which estimating βe based on housing wealth would be inappropriate given that many states did not condition eligibility on
     housing wealth. “Elig(w/ȳ)” is based on the assumption that eligibility for OAA is linear in the ratio of the wage over the OAA benefit, whereas the baseline
     assumption is that it is linear in the wage. As a result, β̂e from this estimation is not directly comparable to those from the other estimations, since it is
     in different units. “PVBC” is based on a model with perfect capital markets, in which individuals can borrow as much as they wish as long as they satisfy
     a present value budget constraint. “Halve LFP(age) slope” halves the slope of the counterfactual no-OAA labor force participation-age profle while holding
     fixed the level of the profile at age 65. This increases late-life labor supply, which tends to increase the cost of the earnings test. In all cases, the objective
     function is a standard classical minimum distance objective function, so lower values indicate a better fit of the model. See Appendix A.8.1 for a summary of
     the results from additional specifications as well.
     (a) Percentage of men “eligible” for OAA is the percentage of men who would receive OAA benefits if they had no earnings and were 65 and older.
     (b) Present value of the welfare-equivalent unconditional late-life income stream (received each year from age 65 on regardless of earnings) as a percentage of
     the present value of actual OAA benefits received.
     (c) The observed reduction in LFP(65–74) from 1940 to 1960 (against which reductions from Social Security can be compared) was 13.5 percentage points.
     (d) Extrapolation based on authors’ instrumental variables regression results.
     (e) Authors’ calculations based on data on the characteristics of new recipients of OAA, 1936–1940.
