                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              THE THEORY OF UNCONVENTIONAL MONETARY POLICY

                                        Roger Farmer
                                        Pawel Zabczyk

                                      Working Paper 22135
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22135


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2016




An earlier incarnation of this paper with the title “Qualitative Easing: How it Works and Why it
Matters” (Farmer, 2012d) appeared as an NBER and a CEPR working paper. The current version
was written after extensive discussions with Pawel Zabczyk during, and following, Farmer's visit,
as Senior Houblon-Norman Fellow at the Bank of England in 2013. In contrast to the earlier
paper, here we introduce money. Farmer thanks the Center for Central Bank Studies at the Bank
of England for their hospitality. We thank participants of seminars at the National Institute for
Economic and Social Research, Warwick University, The Swiss National Bank and the Bank of
Italy. Bernard Winkler, Francesco Lippi and Christian Hepenstrick have all contributed
thoughtful dicussions of our work and we thank them for their comments. We have also benefited
from discussions with Andy Haldane, Minouche Shafik and Martin Weale. The views expressed
in this paper are those of the authors, and not necessarily those of the Bank of England or the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Roger Farmer and Pawel Zabczyk. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Theory of Unconventional Monetary Policy
Roger Farmer and Pawel Zabczyk
NBER Working Paper No. 22135
March 2016, Revised December2016
JEL No. E02,E6,G11,G21

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper is about the effectiveness of qualitative easing, a form of unconventional monetary
policy that changes the risk composition of the central bank balance sheet with the goal of
stabilizing economic activity. We construct a general equilibrium model where agents have
rational expectations and there is a complete set of financial securities, but where some agents are
unable to participate in financial markets. We show that a change in the risk composition of the
central bank's balance sheet will change equilibrium asset prices and we prove that, in our model,
a policy in which the central bank stabilizes non-fundamental fluctuations in the stock market is
Pareto improving and self-financing.


Roger Farmer
UCLA
Department of Economics
Box 951477
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
and NBER
rfarmer@econ.ucla.edu

Pawel Zabczyk
Center for Central Bank Studies HO7-BD
Bank of England
Threadneedle Street EC2R 8AH,
London, UK
pawel.zabczyk@bankofengland.co.uk
         THE THEORY OF UNCONVENTIONAL MONETARY POLICY



                                         ROGER E.A. FARMER

                                  University of California Los Angeles


                                            PAWEL ZABCZYK

                      CCBS, Bank of England and Centre for Macroeconomics

        Abstract. This paper is about the effectiveness of qualitative easing, a form of unconventional
        monetary policy that changes the risk composition of the central bank balance sheet with
        the goal of stabilizing economic activity. We construct a general equilibrium model where
        agents have rational expectations and there is a complete set of financial securities, but where
        some agents are unable to participate in financial markets. We show that a change in the
        risk composition of the central bank’s balance sheet will change equilibrium asset prices and
        we prove that, in our model, a policy in which the central bank stabilizes non-fundamental
        fluctuations in the stock market is Pareto improving and self-financing.



     Central banks throughout the world have recently engaged in two kinds of unconventional
monetary policies: quantitative easing (QE), which is “an increase in the size of the balance
sheet of the central bank through an increase in its monetary liabilities”, and qualitative easing
(QualE) which is “a shift in the composition of the assets of the central bank towards less liquid
and riskier assets, holding constant the size of the balance sheet.”1
     Because qualitative easing is conducted by the central bank, it is often classified as a
monetary policy. But because it adds risk to the public balance sheet that is ultimately borne
by the taxpayer, QualE is better thought of as a fiscal or quasi-fiscal policy (Buiter, 2010).
This distinction is important because, in order to be effective, QualE necessarily redistributes
resources from one group of agents to another.
     In theoretical papers that study the effectiveness of QualE, researchers often assume that
financial markets are complete and that there is complete participation in these markets. When

Date: December 4, 2016.
An earlier incarnation of this paper with the title “Qualitative Easing: How it Works and Why it Matters”
(Farmer, 2012d) appeared as an NBER and a CEPR working paper. The current version was written after
extensive discussions with Pawel Zabczyk during, and following, Farmer’s visit, as Senior Houblon-Norman Fellow
at the Bank of England in 2013. In contrast to the earlier paper, here we introduce money. Farmer thanks the
Center for Central Bank Studies at the Bank of England for their hospitality. We thank participants of seminars
at the National Institute for Economic and Social Research, Warwick University, The Swiss National Bank and
the Bank of Italy. Bernard Winkler, Francesco Lippi and Christian Hepenstrick have all contributed thoughtful
dicussions of our work and we thank them for their comments. We have also benefited from discussions with
Andy Haldane, Minouche Shafik and Martin Weale. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors,
and not necessarily those of the Bank of England.
1
 The quote is from Willem Buiter (2008) who proposed this very useful taxonomy in a piece on his ‘Maverecon’
Financial Times blog. Farmer (2013) used this distinction to argue that the Bank should actively stabilize the
asset markets. This paper provides the theory that explains why Qualitative Easing is effective. Earlier working
papers that explain why financial markets may be Pareto Inefficient include Farmer (2002b,a, 2012c, 2014, 2015)
and Farmer et al. (2012).
                                                       1
these two conditions hold, a change in the risk composition of the central bank’s balance sheet
has no effect on asset prices.
      For example, in an influential paper that was presented at the 2012 Jackson Hole Confer-
ence, Michael Woodford (2012) made the claim that QualE is unlikely to be effective and, to the
extent that it does stimulate economic activity, that stimulus must come through the impact
of QualE on the expectations of financial market participants of future Fed policy actions.2 In
contrast, Joseph Gagnon (2012) has argued that qualitative easing works through the portfolio
balance effect, a term attributed to James Tobin (1963; 1969) who assumed that private agents’
asset demands are functions of relative asset prices, much as the demands for commodities
depend on relative goods prices.3
      QualE is ineffective when participation in assets markets is complete because market par-
ticipants are able to undo the effects of a portfolio shift by the central bank through private
trades in securities. As a consequence, QualE has no effect on the distribution of resources,
either between borrowers and lenders in the current financial markets, or between current mar-
ket participants and those yet to be born. We will argue here, that the assumption of complete
participation is not a good characterization of real world financial markets and that QualE is
effective because it redistributes resources across states of nature for people who are unable to
participate in financial markets that open before they are born.
      We make the case for the effectiveness of qualitative easing by constructing a simple general
equilibrium model where agents are rational and have rational expectations and where the
financial markets are complete. Our model has two important features. First, the people in
our model use money as a medium of exchange. This feature ensures that, in the absence of
uncertainty, the model possesses multiple equilibria. Second, some people in our model are not
present in the financial markets. That property is a feature of all real world economies where
it follows from the fact that people have finite lives.
      In this environment, we show that 1) a central bank that takes risk onto its balance sheet
can increase welfare and 2) the optimal intervention restores efficiency and is self-financing.
When all uncertainty is non-fundamental, the optimal policy is for the central bank to stabilize
the stock market so that the return to the stock market is equal in every state to the return
on a one-period real government bond. In the presence of fundamental shocks, the government
intervention eliminates non-fundamental volatility.


                   1. How our Model is Related to Previous Literature

     Our model is related to the work of Cass and Shell (1983). These authors construct a
two-period, purely real, pure-exchange general-equilibrium model. In the first period, of their
model, households trade financial assets. In the second period they trade goods. In the Cass-
Shell example there are multiple equilibria in the second period. They show that, if some

2
 Citing papers by Krugman (1998) and Eggertsson and Woodford (2002) where the case is made explicitly,
Woodford (2012) argues that this so-called portfolio balance view is invalid, and, if central bank asset purchases
are to be effective, their effectiveness must rely on their ability to alter the public’s expectations of future central
bank policies.
3
 Examples of recent empirical papers that find a significant effect of Fed asset purchases on asset prices include
Vissing Jorgensen and Krishnamurthy (2011); Gagnon et al. (2011); D’Amico and King (2010); Neely (2010); Li
and Wei (2012), and Hamilton and Wu (2012).
                                                           2
households are not present in period 1, purely non-fundamental uncertainty can influence the
equilibrium allocation of goods across households.
      We adapt the Cass-Shell example in two ways. First, we introduce money as a medium
of exchange. Second, we build a model with production, rather than pure exchange. Adding
money allows us to explain the distinction between conventional monetary policy, which alters
the size of the central bank’s balance sheet, and unconventional monetary policy, which alters
its composition between safe and risky assets. Adding production, allows us to explain how
unconventional monetary policy can alter output and employment.
      To model money, we include the real value of money balances as an argument of utility
functions. This approach originated with Don Patinkin (1956) and we think of it as a short-
cut that explains why people choose to hold an asset that is dominated in rate-of-return. For
convenience, and to simplify algebra, we use the money wage as our numeraire and we assume
that money, measured relative to the money wage, yields utility.4
      Frank Hahn (1965) pointed out that monetary general equilibrium models always contain
at least two equilibria; one in which money has value and one in which it does not. In these
models, money is not essential for exchange, and there is always an equilibrium in which the
price level is infinite and exchange is accomplished by barter.
      In addition to these two equilibria, one with barter and one where money has value, infi-
nite horizon general equilibrium monetary models typically also contain a continuum of non-
stationary equilibria. Sometimes, as shown by Brock (1974), most of these equilibria are unre-
alistic as a description of reality: They converge to a steady state where money has no value.
But in other examples, as shown by Benhabib et al. (2001), there is a continuum of equilibria
that converge to a steady state where money has positive value but the money interest rate is
low. These equilibria provide a possible description of the current situation where interest rates
in many western economies have been equal to zero, or even negative, for several years.
      It is possible to construct dynamic examples of the argument we make in this paper.5 To
keep our argument as transparent as possible, we have chosen instead to use a two-period model.
That presents the challenge of explaining why the people in our model would choose to hold
an asset, fiat money, that will be worthless when the model ends. To meet that challenge, we
adopt a device proposed by Starr (1974). We assume that money is required to pay taxes at
the end of the second period. Money has value in our model because the government decrees it
to be so.
      Related work of which we are aware includes papers by Michael McMahon and Herakles
Polemarchakis (2011), McMahon, Udara Peiris and Polemarchakis (2015) and Peiris and Pole-
marchakis (2015). Although the environments they study are similar to ours, these authors do
not study the optimal monetary policy and they do not explicitly model an equilibrium selec-
tion rule as we do here. Robert Hall and Ricardo Reis 2016 have studied the implications of
policies that pay interest on reserves for price level stabilization and Ricardo Reis 2016 studies
the role of unconventional monetary policies in response to a future fiscal crisis. Neither of


4
 It is common in general equilibrium models of money, to divide cash-balances by the price level. We divide
instead by the money wage to simplify some of the algebra. Nothing of substance in our argument hinges on this
modeling choice.
5
 See for example, Farmer (2016).
                                                      3
these approaches considers the implications, for monetary policy, of incomplete asset market
participation.
     Two alternative theories to ours include the market segmentation approach of Dimitri
Vayanos and Jean-Luc Vila (2009) and Robin Greenwood, Samuel Hanson and Gordon Liao
(2015). These authors posit that different asset purchasers inhabit different segments of the mar-
ket. Alternatively, Mark Gertler and Peter Karadi (2011), Vasco Curdia and Michael Woodford
(2011) and Zhiguo He and Arvind Krishnamurthy (2013) present theories in which capital con-
straints may be alleviated by large scale central bank asset purchases that offset the restrictions
imposed by borrowing restrictions. Krishnamurthy and Annette Vissing Jorgensen (2011) sur-
vey these alternative approaches and discuss the evidence in favour of each. They conclude that
intervention in the MBS market had bigger effects than purchases of long-bonds, a conclusion
that is further substantiated by evidence of Marco Di Maggio, Amir Kermani and Christopher
Palmer (2015).
     Our own work is complementary to both the segmentation approach of Vayanos and Vila
(2009) and Greenwood et al. (2015) and the capital constraints theories of Gertler and Karadi
(2011), Curdia and Woodford (2011) and He and Krishnamurthy (2013). We provide a deep
theory of market segmentation that explains why some asset market participants are constrained
in their ability to participate in some markets. Those markets open before the relevant people
are born.


                              2. A simple Two-Period Model

    In this section we construct a simple stylized model that is, nevertheless, rich enough to
capture the main points of our argument.


2.1. Assumptions about Workers and Entrepreneurs. There are two periods, three types
of people and two public agents; a central bank and a treasury. We refer to type 1 and 2 people
as workers and to type 3 people as entrepreneurs. Workers are alive in both periods and they
are each endowed, in period 2, with one unit of leisure. Entrepreneurs are alive only in period
2. They are endowed with a technology for producing a unique consumption good in period 2.
The fact that we call these people ‘entrepreneurs’ is not important to the economic arguments
we will make. In a more complicated model with multiple periods and long lives there would
be people of all types present in all periods.
     In period 1, workers trade in asset markets with each other, with the central bank, and
with the treasury. Production and consumption takes place only in period 2. There is a paper
asset called money, that is an argument of workers’ utility functions. Workers face the following
budget constraint in period 1,
                                      Mi + QAi − T Ri = 0,
were, T Ri is a nominal transfer to workers by the treasury. This money transfer can be held as
money, Mi , or interest bearing bonds, Ai . Q is the period 1 price of a dollar-denominated pure
discount bond and the subscript i ∈ {1, 2} indexes workers.
     In period 2, workers face the constraint,

                              pci + w(1 − ni ) ≤ w + Mi + Ai − Ti .
                                                 4
Here, w is the money wage, p is the price of commodities, ni is labor supply, ci is consumption
and Ti is a lump-sum tax obligation. Putting together the budget constraints of workers for
periods 1 and 2, and rearranging terms, leads to the life-cycle constraint,

                                  pci + w(1 − ni ) + rMi ≤ Wi ,                              (1)

where
                                                  T Ri
                                       Wi ≡ w +        − Ti ,                                (2)
                                                   Q
is the dollar value, at date 2, of a worker’s wealth and
                                                   1−Q
                                            r≡         ,                                     (3)
                                                    Q
is the money interest rate.




2.2. Assumptions about the Treasury and the Central Bank. The treasury pays for its
transfer to people in period 1 by issuing dollar denominated debt,
                                            X
                                      QB =      T Ri ≡ T R.                    (4)
                                               i

The left side of this equation is the value of debt floated by the treasury in the asset markets
and the right side is the value of the dollar denominated transfers to the private sector. The
value of debt is broken into the face value of dollar denominated pure discount bonds, denoted
by B, and their price at date 1, denoted by Q. We refer to the choice of B as a fiscal policy.
    An amount ACB of treasury debt is purchased by the central bank and the remaining
portions A1 and A2 are purchased by workers. This leads to the following asset market clearing
equation,
                                   QB = QACB + QA1 + QA2 .
    The portion of the debt purchased by the central bank is equal to the monetary base.
Because we do not include private banks in our model, the monetary base is equal to the money
supply and all of it is held by private agents as checking accounts at the central bank,

                                           QACB = M.                                         (5)

We refer to the choice of M as a monetary policy.
     Because the bank does not pay interest on its liabilities, the creation of money generates
equity for the central bank equal to the present value of the bank’s seigniorage revenues,

                                           ECB = QS,

where S is defined as,
                                     S ≡ (ACB − M ) = rM.                                    (6)
Table 1 represents the balance sheet of the central bank in period 1.
    At date 2, the treasury must repay its debt by raising taxes T on the private sector, or
from seigniorage revenues, S, received from the central bank,

                                           B = T + S.                                        (7)
                                                   5
                                             Assets Liabilities
                                               QACB      M
                                               QS
                                                       ECB

                               Table 1. The Central Bank Balance Sheet


Replacing B in Equation (4) from Equation (7) leads to the intertemporal government budget
constraint,
                                    Q(T + S) = T R.
This equation clarifies that the dollar value of the transfer to the workers in period 1 is equal
to the present value of tax revenues plus the present value of seigniorage revenue.

2.3. The Equal Treatment Assumption. We assume that people alive in each period are
treated equally, and thus each worker receives half the transfer
                                                   TR
                                              T R1 = T R2 =
                                                       ,                                                         (8)
                                                    2
and workers and the entrepreneurs each pay a third of the tax burden,
                                                    T
                                              T1 = T2 = T3 =
                                                      .                                                          (9)
                                                    3
We can then express workers’ wealth Wi in equation (2) as
                                                     
                                             B rM
                                  W ≡w+         +       ,                                                      (10)
                                             6      3
where the equal treatment assumptions imply that W is identical for both workers, allowing us
to drop the subscript i.6 This expression makes clear that the value of the transfer to workers
depends on both fiscal policy, represented by B, and monetary policy, represented by M .
     Fiscal policy in our model is a pure transfer from one generation to another. All government
expenditures in period 1 are in the form of transfer payments to workers. Those transfers are
repaid in period 2 by taxes levied on both workers and entrepreneurs and from seigniorage
revenues. Because entrepreneurs are not present in period 1, they do not benefit from transfers.
They do, however, incur part of the cost of paying for those transfers.7

                  3. Equilibria Under the Perfect Foresight Assumption

    In this section we derive the demand and supply functions of workers and entrepreneurs
and we define the concept of a competitive perfect foresight equilibrium. Our main result is
6In words, Equation (10) says that the period 2 money value of the wealth of a young worker is equal to the
money value of his leisure endowment plus 1/6 of the period 2 value of his transfer plus 1/3 of the government’s
seigniorage revenue from money creation. The fraction 1/6 appears because workers receive half of the government
transfer but only have to repay a third of it (1/6 = 1/2 − 1/3). The fraction 1/3 of seigniorage revenue follows
from the fact that, for a given transfer, additional seigniorage revenues reduce the tax burden on all three types.
More generally, the wealth effect of a transfer policy will depend on the population growth rate and the period
length.
7It would be relatively simple to extend our model to allow for government purchases and for trade in goods in
period 1. We have not pursued that extension because our goal in this paper is to focus on the role of trade in the
asset markets. In our view, central bank asset trades have non-trivial effects because they generate fiscal transfers
between generations that cannot be undone by private markets. We show subsequently that these trades can
sometimes be Pareto improving.
                                                         6
that, because the transfer is denominated in nominal units, there is a different perfect foresight
equilibrium for every value of the numeraire.

3.1. The Behavior of Workers. Workers have logarithmic preferences defined over consump-
tion, leisure and the real value of money balances in period 2 with weights λi on consumption,
µi on leisure and γi , on real money balances defined in wage units,8
                                                                      
                                                                      Mi
                           Ui = λi log ci + µi log(1 − ni ) + γi log     ,
                                                                      w
where
                                               λi + µi + γi = 1.
     Workers differ in their preference weights and we use the subscript i to index type. It is
not essential for our main results that there should be two types of workers. We make this
assumption to ensure that our model has a non-trivial equilibrium where there is active trade
in the asset markets.
     Workers maximize utility subject to the lifecycle constraint, Inequality (1). The solution to
this problem, given the assumption of logarithmic preferences, is for the workers’ expenditure
shares on leisure, consumption and money to equal the respective coefficients in the utility
function times wealth, W, that is,

                                               w(1 − ni ) =µi W,                                         (11)
                                                       pci =λi W,                                        (12)
                                                     rMi =γi W.                                          (13)

Rearranging terms in Equation (11), we obtain the following expression for the labor supply
function of type i,
                                                W
                                     ni = 1 − µi .                                     (14)
                                                w

3.2. The Behavior of Entrepreneurs. Entrepreneurs do not participate in the asset markets
since, by assumption, they are born in period 2. Each entrepreneur owns a decreasing returns-
to-scale technology,
                                           y = nα ,
that transforms labor into output. Entrepreneurs receive real profits, Π, defined as,
                                                 w
                                       Π ≡ nα − n,
                                                  p
and their consumption is subject to the constraint
                                                             T3
                                                 c3 ≤ Π −       .                                        (15)
                                                             p
Using the equal treatment assumption, Equation (9), and the consolidated government budget
constraint, Equation (7), we may write taxes, T3 as,
                                                       B − rM
                                                T3 =          .
                                                          3

8The assumption of logarithmic utility is not important for our results. All the qualitative properties of our
model can be derived for the case of general concave utilities.
                                                        7
    Entrepreneurs choose c3 and n to solve the problem

                                         max U3 = log(c3 ),
                                         {c3 ,n}

                     T3
such that c3 ≤ Π −   p .   The solution is characterized by the labor demand function,
                                                                1
                                                       1w        α−1
                                          n=                           ,                    (16)
                                                       αp
the output supply function,
                                                 α
                                             1 w α−1
                                       y=            ,                                      (17)
                                             αp
and the entrepreneur’s consumption demand function,
                                               α
                                           1 w α−1 (B − rM )
                            c3 = (1 − α)           −         .                              (18)
                                           αp          3p
     We have assumed that entrepreneurs have logarithmic utility. That assumption is not
important for the construction of a perfect foresight equilibrium. As long as their utility is
increasing in consumption, entrepreneurs will maximize profit Π. But the assumption that
preferences are logarithmic implies that entrepreneurs and workers are risk averse: this property
will affect outcomes when we discuss equilibria under uncertainty in Section 5. Because people
are risk averse, equilibria where non-fundamental shocks influence the allocation of goods across
states are Pareto inefficient.


3.3. The Definition of Perfect Foresight Equilibria. In this section we write down three
equations that characterize equilibria. These are excess demand equations for labor, consump-
tion and money. It follows from Walras law that only two of these equations are independent
of each other and thus, if we find prices that solve two of them, the third equation will also be
satisfied.
     If this were a standard Arrow-Debreu general equilibrium model (Arrow and Debreu, 1954),
we would be able express the excess demand functions in terms of relative prices. But in our
model, there is a dollar denominated transfer from one group of people to another. It follows
that the price level is not simply a numeraire; it determines the real value of the nominal
transfer. We will show that there is a different equilibrium for every value of the numeraire. In
each of these equilibria it is not not only money prices that differ, but also employment, output
and the distribution of output between generations.
     To resolve the indeterminacy of equilibria, following (Farmer, 1999), we introduce a new
fundamental, the belief function. The belief function acts a selection device that determines the
behavior of people in an environment where there is more than one equilibrium action.
     The three goods in our model are labor, consumption, and money. The three dollar de-
nominated prices are the money price of goods, p, the money wage, w and the money interest
rate, r. We will characterize equilibria as the solutions to the excess demand functions for two
of these three goods.
     To simplify our analysis we first define three new parameters,
                       X                         X                          X
                 λ≡         λi ,            µ≡        µi ,            γ≡         γi .        (19)
                     i∈{1,2}                           i∈{1,2}             i∈{1,2}
                                                         8
Using these definitions, the labor market clearing equation is,
                                     Labor Demand
                                     z     }|   { Labor Supply
                                            1    z }| {
                                         1 w α−1          W
                                                 = 2−µ         ,                                  (20)
                                         αp               w
the goods market clearing equation is,
                 Output         Entrepreneur’s Consumption             Workers’ Consumption
             z     }|   { z              }|          {
                    α                 α                                  z }| {
                 1 w α−1             1 w α−1 (B − rM )                       w W
                         = (1 − α)          −                      +           λ              ,   (21)
                 αp                  αp         3p                            p w
and the money market clearing equation is,
                                     Money Demand
                                     z}|{       Money Supply
                                       W            z}|{
                                     γ        =      M       ,                                    (22)
                                       r
where W is the value of workers’ wealth, defined in Equation (10).




        (a) Labor Market Clearing.                           (b) Money Market Clearing.

                   Figure 1. The Demand and Supply of Labor and Money.


     Figure 1(a) plots the demand and supply for labor as functions of the real wage, the
money wage and the money interest rate. The real wage appears on the horizontal axis and
the quantities of labor demanded and supplied are on the vertical axis. The downward sloping
curve is the labor demand function; this is the left-hand-side of Equation (20). The horizontal
line is the labor supply function; this is the right-hand-side of Equation (20). The function
is horizontal because, when people have logarithmic preferences, the income and substitution
effects exactly balance each other.
     Figure 1(b) plots the demand and supply of money as functions of the money wage, w,
and the money interest rate r. The horizontal line is the money supply. The downward sloping
curve is the demand for money as a function of r.
     The following definition of a competitive equilibrium is fairly standard. What sets our
model apart from more familiar general equilibrium models without money is that the value
of w appears independently in the labor market clearing equation and in the money market
clearing equation.
                                                    9
Definition 1. An equilibrium is a monetary policy and a fiscal policy {M, B}, an allocation
{{ni , Mi }i∈1,2 , {ci }i=1,2,3 , y, n} and a set of prices {p, w, r} that satisfies non-negativity, budget
balance and optimality. An equilibrium price system is a non-negative triple {p, w, r} such that
equations (20), (21) and (22) hold.

     Proposition 1 establishes that there is a continuum of equilibria and it characterizes them
in closed form.

Proposition 1. Let {M, B} ≥ 0 characterize monetary and fiscal policy, and let w > 0 satisfy
the feasibility conditions,
                            µi B                                          2 − µ + λ (2 − 3α) B
              w≥                        ,      i ∈ {1, 2}    and    w≥                         .              (23)
                    4 (1 + λ + µ) − 6µi                                         µ + αλ       2
The equilibrium level of nominal wealth, the interest rate and the real wage are given by,
                                                                    µW α−1
                                                                        
                          6w + B             γ         w
                 W=                  , r=      W,         =α 2−               .            (24)
                       2 (1 + λ + µ)        M           p            w
The equilibrium values of {{ni , Mi }i∈1,2 , {ci }i=1,2,3 , y, n} are determined by equations (11) –
(13) and (16) – (18) respectively. 

     See Appendix A for a proof of this proposition.
     In our model, there is a continuum of equilibria because transfers are defined in nominal
units but they have real effects on the allocation of resources between workers and entrepreneurs.
Although we have proven this in a two period model, the result is more general.9

3.4. Beliefs and Equilibrium Selection. In any model with multiple equilibria we must take
a stand on what selects an equilibrium. Multiplicity occurs in a dynamic model because there
is more than one possible future price. A decision maker, placed in an environment where many
different things can happen, must take an action. Following Farmer (2012b), we select what
will happen by modeling the way people form beliefs as a new primitive of the model with the
same methodological status as preferences and technology.
      In the 1960s, it was common to distinguish the future value of a price, we will call this
P , from the expectation of that price, we will call this P E . Because P and P E were modeled
as separate objects the researcher was obliged to introduce a new equation to explain how P E
is determined. Following the work of Friedman (1957), macroeconomists often assumed that
expectations are formed adaptively. Under the adaptive expectations hypothesis,
                                           E
                                          Pt+1 = ψPtE + (1 − ψ)Pt ,

where ψ is a parameter that determines the speed of adjustment of the belief about the future
price to its actual value and the subscript t denotes time period.
     With the introduction of rational expectations by Robert Lucas (1972), the way that
economists model expectations changed. Lucas argued that the world is uncertain and that
the people who inhabit our models would be expected to adapt to uncertainty. He suggested
that prices fluctuate because of random shocks to the fundamentals of the economy. If the
9Every general equilibrium model of money contains multiple equilibria since there is always at least one equi-
librium where money has value and a second equilibrium where it does not (Hahn, 1965). Generically, models in
this class also contain a continuum of non-stationary equilibria for which the inflation rate converges to the rate
associated with one of the stationary equilibria.
                                                        10
economy enters some state, captured by the random variable X, the price we observe will be a
function, P (X). If X is stationary, every time the world enters state X the people who inhabit
our model would expect to observe the same price, P (X). Eventually, they will learn the map-
ping from X to P (X) and they will form their expectations P E (X) using the equilibrium price
function P (X).
     That argument was widely accepted and for the past forty years, almost all macroeconomic
models have adopted the rational expectations assumption. The argument is persuasive; but
it relies on the assumption that the rational expectations equilibrium is unique. In monetary
models, the uniqueness property is almost always violated. In models with multiple rational
expectations equilibria we cannot dispense with an equation that explains how expectations are
formed. Farmer (2002c) referred to that equation as the belief function and we will adopt that
same terminology here.
     The belief function, ϕ(·), is a mapping from present and past observable variables to a
probability measure over future prices. For example, the people in our model might believe
that,
                                        wE = ϕ(B, M, ε),
where wE is the anticipated money wage next period and ε is a random variable with probability
distribution,                    (
                                    H with probability πH
                              ε=
                                    L with probability πL .
    Here, ε captures the possibility that people may over-react or under-react to fundamental
uncertainty as well as the possibility that they may react to purely non-fundamental shocks. If
expectations are rational, the model will be closed by the equation,

                                       wE (ε) = w(ε),       ε ∈ {H, L}.

In words, the realization of the money wage, wE (ε), that people expect to occur if the random
variable ε is realized, will coincide with w(ε), the value of w that actually occurs.
     Consider the following simple example of a belief function. People believe that w may take
one of two values,
                                      (
                                         M + H ≡ w (H) with probability πH
                ϕ(M, ε) = M + ε ≡                                                          (25)
                                          M + L ≡ w (L) with probability πL .
We have included the policy variable M in the belief function to capture the idea that beliefs
depend on observable variables. In this example, beliefs are independent of B but they do
depend on M . We have included the random variable ε in the belief function to capture
the idea that non-fundamental uncertainty may matter simply because people believe that it
will. We will demonstrate in the next section that non-fundamental beliefs cause allocations to
fluctuate even when there is a complete set of insurance markets.10




10Our example, where money is the only fundamental that affects beliefs, is very special. More generally, beliefs
about the future wage might depend on current and past wages, or on current and past output or employment.
For an example of a complete model closed with a belief function see Farmer (2012a).
                                                       11
                       4. Introducing Uncertainty to the Model

     In this section we expand the model to allow for non-fundamental uncertainty. We assume
that the workers assume, correctly, that there are two possible future realizations of the money
wage. In one state of the world, state H, the money wage is high and in the other, state L, it
is low.
     We allow workers to write complete insurance contracts that pay one amount in state
H and another in state L. We show that, because the entrepreneurs cannot participate in
the insurance market, employment, output and the allocation of consumption across states is
different in different states. Our result is an example of the Cass and Shell (1983) result that,
when there is incomplete participation, ‘sunspots matter’.




4.1. Budget Constraints Under Uncertainty. We model uncertainty with the assumption
that the money wage in Period 2 may take one of two values and that people form beliefs using
Equation (25). If ε = H, the realization of the money wage is equal to w (H) and if ε = L the
realization of the money wage is equal to w (L). Further, these beliefs are correct. The fact
that the money wage will be different in different states influences the asset market trades that
workers make in period 1.
     There are complete insurance markets, represented by a pair of Arrow securities (Arrow,
1964), one for each state. The H security pays one dollar if and only if state H occurs and the
L security pays one dollar if and only if state L occurs. The H security costs Q (H) dollars in
period 1 and the L security costs Q (L) dollars. Because there are complete markets, workers
face a single life-cycle budget constraint. They may transfer income across dates and across
states by buying or selling these securities.
     In period 1, each worker receives a transfer T Ri that he may use to acquire money Mi , and
he may buy or sell Arrow securities Ai (ε),
                                  X
                                        Q (ε) Ai (ε) + Mi ≤ T Ri .
                                 ε∈{H,L}

In period 2 state ε, the worker faces the constraint,

                    p (ε) ci (ε) + w (ε) (1 − ni (ε)) ≤ w (ε) + Ai (ε) + Mi − Ti .

Substituting for Ai (ε) from the period 2 constraint into the first period gives the following
lifecycle budget constraint,
             X
                  Q (ε) [p (ε) ci (ε) + w (ε) (1 − ni (ε)) − w (ε) − Mi + Ti ] + Mi ≤ T Ri .
          ε∈{H,L}

     To make the connection between this model, which has two dates and two states, with a
standard general equilibrium model with one date and multiple goods, it will help if we introduce
the concept of state prices. The state prices of leisure and consumption are the dollar costs of
a unit of leisure or a unit of consumption for delivery in Period 2 in state ε. These prices are
denominated in units of Period 1 dollars and they are divided by the probability that state ε
will occur. Dividing by probabilities in this way allows us to replace the summation operator
in the budget constraint by an expectations operator.
                                                  12
     The state prices of leisure and consumption are defined as,11
                                        Q (ε) w (ε)                         Q (ε) p (ε)
                             w̃ (ε) ≡                     and    p̃ (ε) ≡               .                (26)
                                         Q     πε                            Q πε
We may also exploit the no-arbitrage assumption to find a connection between Q, Q(H) and
Q(L)                                  X
                                           Q (ε) = Q,
                                                ε∈{H,L}
Using these definitions we may write the lifecycle budget constraint of a worker as follows,

                               E [p̃ (ε) ci (ε) + w̃ (ε) (1 − ni (ε))] + rMi ≤ W,                        (27)

where workers’ wealth in the model with uncertainty, but complete markets, is defined as
                                                         
                                                 B rM
                               W ≡ E[w̃ (ε)] +      +       .                            (28)
                                                 6     3
Here E is the expectations operator, defined using the probability distribution {πH , πL } and
the term in the last bracket denotes the net transfer from the government.

4.2. Workers’ Choices Under Uncertainty. Next, we turn to the behavior of workers in
our expanded model where there are two possible future realizations of the money wage and
the money price. Workers maximize the following logarithmic expected utility function,
                                                                            
                                                                         M
                 Ui = E λi log (ci (ε)) + µi log(1 − ni (ε)) + γi log            ,
                                                                        w (ε)
subject to the lifecycle budget constraint, Equation (27). The assumption that preferences are
logarithmic implies, as in the certainty case, that budget shares are constant,

                                            w̃ (ε) (1 − ni (ε)) =µi W,                                   (29)
                                                    p̃ (ε) ci (ε) =λi W,                                 (30)
                                                           rMi =γi W.                                    (31)

Rearranging terms in Equation (29) leads to the labor supply function for type i in state ε,
                                                                  W
                                              ni (ε) = 1 − µi          .                                 (32)
                                                                w̃ (ε)
     If w (H) is different from w (L), the real value of the worker’s net transfer will differ
across states. One might think that this difference would be irrelevant in a complete markets
environment, with only non-fundamental uncertainty.
     People, by assumption, are risk averse, and they would prefer the mean of a gamble to the
gamble itself. Because all uncertainty is non-fundamental, that mean is available. Why don’t
people remove this welfare reducing uncertainty through trade? For two people to engage in a
mutually beneficial insurance trade they must both be present before the random event occurs.
Those trades cannot take place in our environment because entrepreneurs are not present to
buy or sell Arrow securities.

4.3. Entrepreneurs’ Choices Under Uncertainty. We have derived five equations that
characterize how workers behave under uncertainty when markets are complete. There are

11Note that this definition implies w̃ (ε) /p̃ (ε) = w (ε) /p (ε) which we shall exploit subsequently.
                                                            13
two state-dependent equations for labor supply, two state-dependent equations for consumption
demand, and one non-state-dependent equation for money demand. Next, we turn to the
behavior of entrepreneurs.
      Entrepreneurs are not present in the first period and they are unable to trade Arrow secu-
rities. This assumption implies they must solve two different problems, one for each realization
of ε. In state ε, the entrepreneurs solve the problem,

                                      max          U3 (ε) = log(c3 (ε)),
                                   {c3 (ε),n(ε)}

subject to the budget constraint
                                                               T3
                                        c3 (ε) ≤ Π (ε) −            .                         (33)
                                                              p (ε)
The term Π (ε) , represents real profits in state ε and is defined as follows,
                                                            w̃ (ε)
                                   Π (ε) ≡ (n (ε))α −              n (ε) .                    (34)
                                                            p̃ (ε)
The term T3 , defined as
                                            (B − rM )
                                           T3 ≡         ,                                   (35)
                                                   3
is the money value of the entrepreneur’s tax liability. The solution to the entrepreneurs’ prob-
lems leads to the labor demand functions,
                                                       1
                                              1 w̃ (ε) α−1
                                   n (ε) =                 ,                                (36)
                                              α p̃ (ε)
the output supply functions,
                                                        α
                                               1 w̃ (ε) α−1
                                    y (ε) =                    ,                              (37)
                                               α p̃ (ε)
and the entrepreneurs’ consumption demand functions,
                                                  α
                                         1 w̃ (ε) α−1 w̃ (ε) (B − rM )
                      c3 (ε) = (1 − α)                  −                .                    (38)
                                         α p̃ (ε)          p̃ (ε) 3w (ε)
Notice that w (ε) enters Equation (38) independently of w̃ (ε). That follows from the fact the
dollar value of taxes paid by entrepreneurs is the same in both states, but it’s real value depends
on the realization of the money wage and the money price of goods.



      5. Incomplete Participation Equilibrium in the World of Uncertainty

     In Sections 5, 6 and 7, we explore the properties of equilibria in a world of uncertainty
under three different assumptions about the environment. We begin, in Section 5, by defining
an equilibrium in a world where there is a complete asset market but entrepreneurs cannot
participate in this market. We show, in this world, that non-fundamental uncertainty may have
real effects on the output produced and on its allocation across people.
     In Section 6, we ask the counter-factual question: what would the equilibrium look like if
we did allow entrepreneurs to participate in the asset market? We show, in this environment,
that output, employment and consumption allocations are the same in both states. Finally,
in Section 7 we show that government can restore the complete participation equilibrium by
trading on behalf of the entrepreneurs.
                                                       14
5.1. Rational Expectations Equilibrium with Incomplete Participation. The model
with two states has five goods: consumption in states H and L, leisure in states H and L
and money. There are four state-contingent prices, p̃ (H), p̃ (L), w̃ (H), w̃ (L), and one non
state-contingent interest rate, r.
     Entrepreneurs’ consumption demand functions are given by Equation (38). These equations
depend, not just on state prices, but also on the dollar wages, w (H) and w (L). This fact is
the key to understanding why non-fundamental uncertainty has real effects.
     Using the definitions of λ and µ from Equation (19), the labor market clearing equation in
state ε is given by the expression,
                                              1
                                     1 w̃ (ε) α−1         W
                                                  =2−µ         .                           (39)
                                     α p̃ (ε)           w̃ (ε)
The goods market clearing equation in state ε is found by equating output supply from Equation
(37) to the sum of workers’ consumption demands, from Equation (30), and entrepreneurs’
consumption demands, from Equation (38). Rearranging terms and dividing by w̃ (ε) /p̃ (ε) we
arrive at Equation (40),
                                      1                        
                             1 w̃ (ε) α−1        W        B − rM
                                          =λ          −             .                     (40)
                             α p̃ (ε)          w̃ (ε)      3w (ε)
The equality of the demand and supply of money, gives one additional equation,
                                                 W
                                               M =γ  .                                      (41)
                                                  r
    To complete our characterization of a rational expectations equilibrium, we define the belief
function,
                                  w (ε) = ϕ(M, ε) ≡ M + ε.                                  (42)
This is a fundamental equation of our model that represents the way people form their beliefs.
In a rational expectations equilibrium, these beliefs are not only fundamental, they are also
rational in the sense that they are correct in equilibrium. Using the definitions of the market
clearing equations, we define an incomplete participation rational expectations equilibrium as
follows,

Definition 2. An incomplete participation rational expectations equilibrium is a pair of mone-
tary and fiscal policies {M, B}, a belief function ϕ(M, ε), an allocation {{ni (ε) , Mi }i∈1,2 , {ci (ε)}i=1,2,3 ,
y (ε) , n (ε)}ε∈{H,L} , a set of state-prices {p̃ (ε) , w̃ (ε) , r}ε∈{H,L} , and a pair of Arrow security
prices {Q(ε)}ε∈{H,L} that satisfies budget balance and optimality.
     An equilibrium price system is a non-negative 7-tuple {p̃ (ε) , w̃ (ε) , Q (ε) , r}ε∈{H,L} such
that equations (39) and (40) hold in each state ε, Equation (41) holds and the money wage in
each state is given by the belief function, Equation (42).

     We now turn to a proposition that characterizes the properties of an incomplete participa-
tion rational expectations equilibrium. Because we assume that people have rational expecta-
tions, the belief function determines the money wage in each state, w(L), w(H). For any given
money wage, the market clearing equations determine w̃ (ε) , p̃ (ε) , Q (ε) and r and, as in the
perfect foresight case, the feasibility condition rules out belief functions that would result in
negative prices or negative allocations in one or more states.

                                                    15
Proposition 2. Let {M, B} ≥ 0 characterize public sector policy, and let {w (L) , w (H)} > 0
be wages implied by a belief function ϕ(M, ε). Assume further that the feasibility condition holds
in both states
                                       µi B
                  w (ε) ≥                          , i ∈ {1, 2} , ε ∈ {L, H}                  (43)
                               4 (1 + λ + µ) − 6µi
                               2 − µ + λ (2 − 3α) B
                  w (ε) ≥                            . ε ∈ {L, H}                             (44)
                                     µ + αλ        2
Define the following constants θ, XL , YL , XH , YH , θ1 and θ2 ,
                                                       λ+µ
                                                  θ≡       ,                                 (45)
                                                        γ
              XL ≡ [6w (L) + B] , XH ≡ [6w (H) + B] , YL ≡ 3πL θ, YH ≡ 3πH θ,        (46)
                             [XH (1 + YL ) − XL (1 + YH )]         XH YL
                       θ1 ≡                                 , θ2 ≡       .           (47)
                                        XL YH                      XL YH
     The equilibrium ratio of Arrow security prices q ≡ Q(L)/Q (H), is the unique positive
solution to the quadratic equation
                                       q 2 − θ1 q − θ2 = 0.                          (48)
The equilibrium Arrow security prices satisfy
                                             (q + YL [q + 1]) M
                        Q (H) =                                             ,                (49)
                                  XL q (1 + q) + (1 + q) (q + YL [q + 1]) M
and
                                            Q (L) = qQ (H) .                                 (50)
      The equilibrium state wages w̃(ε) are given by the expressions
                                         w (L)                           w (H)
                           ω̃ (L) =                  ,      ω̃ (H) =              ,          (51)
                                      (1 + q −1 ) πL                   (1 + q) πH
and the state prices are equal to
                                                           1−α
                                   w̃ (ε)           µW
                          p̃ (ε) =              2−                 ,   ε ∈ {L, H} ,          (52)
                                     α             w̃ (ε)
where
                                             1−Q                 (1 − Q)
                 Q = Q (L) + Q (H) ,        r≡     , and W =             M .              (53)
                                               Q                    Q
      Conditional on the w̃(ε), p̃(ε) and Q(ε) characterized above, the equilibrium quantities
ci (ε), ni (ε) and Mi can then be determined from Equations (29) – (31), while n(ε), y(ε) and
c3 (ε) are characterized in Equations (36) – (38).

     Proposition 2, proved in Appendix B, establishes a mapping from beliefs to equilibrium
prices and allocations. The following corollary confirms that these beliefs don’t only affect
nominal prices but also the corresponding real allocations.

Corollary 3. Whenever w (L) 6= w (H) ,

                            ni (L) 6= ni (H) ,         and     ci (L) 6= ci (H) .            (54)

    Corollary 3 is proved in Appendix C. This is an example, for a monetary economy, of Cass
and Shell’s (1983) result that, when there is incomplete asset market participation, “sunspots
matter”.
                                                       16
        6. Complete Participation Equilibrium in the World of Uncertainty

      In this section we consider a counter-factual economy in which entrepreneurs are present
in the asset markets that open before they are born and we derive their decision rules in the
asset markets. In Sub-section 6.2 we will use this result to characterize a rational expectations
equilibrium with complete participation and we will show that, in this equilibrium, output,
employment and allocations are stabilized across states. Although there are still multiple equi-
libria in the complete participation case, sunspots cease to have real effects. We will also show
that for a given belief function, which we take as primitive, the resulting equilibrium is Pareto
efficient.

6.1. Entrepreneur’s Choice under Complete Participation. We continue to assume that
entrepreneurs only care about consumption and receive no part of the government transfer. We
alter the assumptions of the previous section by allowing entrepreneurs to trade assets in Period
1, subject to the first period constraint,
                                       X
                                            Q (ε) A3 (ε) = 0.                                (55)
                                    ε∈{L,H}

    The entrepreneur’s maximum pre-tax profit in each state is given by,
                                                        α
                                               1 w̃ (ε) α−1
                             Π (ε) = (1 − α)                .                               (56)
                                               α p̃ (ε)
Her consumption in each state is constrained by the single budget constraint,
                                                           
                                                     B − rM
                      p (ε) c3 (ε) ≤ p (ε) Π (ε) −            + A3 (ε) ,                    (57)
                                                        3
where                                              
                                           B − rM
                                                        ≡ T3 ,                              (58)
                                              3
is her nominal tax liability.
     Substituting Inequality (57) into (55) and using the no arbitrage condition and the defini-
tion of state prices leads to the entrepreneur’s lifecycle constraint,
                                                                          
                                                                    B − rM
                           E [p̃ (ε) c3 (ε)] ≤ E [p̃ (ε) Π (ε)] −            .             (59)
                                                                       3
    When the entrepreneur allocates consumption across states to maximize expected utility
she will choose the following consumption demands,
                                                                      
                                    E [p̃ (ε) Π (ε)]      1     B − rM
                           c3 (ε) =                  −                   .           (60)
                                          p̃ (ε)       p̃ (ε)      3
     Notice, and this is important, that dollar prices p (ε) or w (ε) no longer separately appear
in the entrepreneur’s budget constraint, which can be expressed entirely using state prices.
Although the entrepreneur makes the same labor demand and output supply decisions in each
state, she does not make the same consumption decisions. Instead of consuming the after
tax profit in each state, access to an insurance market allows the entrepreneur to smooth
consumption.

6.2. Rational Expectations Equilibrium with Complete Participation . In this sub-
section we characterize the equations that define equilibrium in the complete participation
                                               17
economy. Recall that W, the wealth of a worker, is defined as
                                                         
                                                 B rM
                              W = E[w̃ (ε)] +       +        .
                                                  6     3
Using this definition, the labor market equilibrium condition is given by Equation (61),
                                             1
                                    1 w̃ (ε) α−1          W
                                                 =2−µ          ,                                     (61)
                                    α p̃ (ε)            w̃ (ε)
and the goods market equilibrium condition is,
                         α                                       
                1 w̃ (ε) α−1       1                          B − rM         W
                              =          E [p̃ (ε) Π (ε)] −             +λ        .                  (62)
                α p̃ (ε)        p̃ (ε)                           3         p̃ (ε)
Finally, equality of the demand and supply of money is represented by Equation (63).

                                              γW = rM.                                               (63)

The important difference of the equations that characterize the complete participation economy
from the incomplete participation economy, is to be found in Equation (62), which no longer
contains terms in w (L) or w (H). That fact implies that equations (61) and (62) are identical
in states L and H.
     Given our amended definitions of demand and supply equations we are ready to define the
concept of a complete participation rational expectations equilibrim.

Definition 3. A complete participation rational expectations equilibrium is a monetary and a
fiscal policy {M, B}, a belief function ϕ(M, ε), an allocation {{ni (ε) , Mi }i∈1,2 , {ci (ε)}i=1,2,3 ,
y (ε) , n (ε)}ε∈{H,L} and a set of state-dependent prices {p̃ (ε) , w̃ (ε) , Q (ε) , r}ε∈{H,L} that satis-
fies budget balance and optimality. An equilibrium price system, {p̃ (ε) , w̃ (ε) , Q (ε) , r}ε∈{H,L} ,
is a non-negative 7-tuple such that equations (61) and (62) hold in each state, Equation (63)
holds, and the money wage in each state is given by the belief function, Equation (42).

    Next, we turn to a proposition that characterizes the properties of employment, output
and the distribution of output in the complete participation rational expectations equilibrium.

Proposition 4. Let {M, B} ≥ 0 characterize public sector policy, and let {w (L) , w (H)} > 0
be wages implied by a belief function ϕ(M, ε) such that the feasibility constraints hold
                                         µi B
                    w (ε) ≥                          , i ∈ {1, 2} , ε ∈ {L, H}                       (64)
                                 4 (1 + λ + µ) − 6µi
                                 2 − µ + λ (2 − 3α) B
                    w (ε) ≥                            . ε ∈ {L, H}                                  (65)
                                       µ + αλ        2
Define q ≡ Q (L) /Q (H). Then,
                                              w (H) πL
                                            q=          .                                            (66)
                                               w (L) πH
       The equilibrium value of Q (H) is given by the expression
                                             M (6 − 2γ) πH
                        QH =                                                                         (67)
                                (1 + q) (M (6 − 2γ) + Bγ) πH + 6γw (H)
with
                        Q (L) = qQ (H)          and       Q = Q (L) + Q (H) .
                                                    18
The equilibrium state wages w̃(ε) are given by the expressions
                                      w(L)                             w(H)
                        w̃(L) =                  ,        w̃(H) =              ,                 (68)
                                  (1 + q −1 ) πL                    (1 + q) πH
and the equilibrium state price of consumption goods p̃(ε) are equal to
                                                      µW 1−α
                                                           
                                          w̃ (ε)
                                 p̃ (ε) =         2−           .                                 (69)
                                            α        w̃ (ε)
     Conditional on the prices, w̃(ε), p̃(ε) and Q(ε) characterized above, the equilibrium quanti-
ties ci (ε), ni (ε) and Mi can be found from Equations (39) – (41), while n(ε), y(ε) and c3 (ε) are
characterized in Equations (36) – (37) and 60. 

    See Appendix D for a proof of this proposition. We also have the following corollary,

Corollary 5. Under full participation, the equilibrium associated with any belief function has
the property that

            ni (L) = ni (H) ,   i ∈ {1, 2}       and      ci (L) = ci (H) ,    i ∈ {1, 2, 3} .   (70)

Proof. The proof follows directly from the proposition above: the formula for Q(ε) implies
that state-wages w̃(ε) are the same in both states, and thus, by definition, so are state-prices
p̃(ε). The solutions to the workers’ optimization problems, equations (39) – (41), then show
that the corresponding real allocations are state-invariant. This establishes that, in a com-
plete participation rational expectations equilibrium, there is complete consumption and leisure
insurance.
    To clarify what is happening in the model, we now characterize the entrepreneur’s asset
portfolio.

Proposition 6. In the full participation model, the entrepreneur’s asset position is given by
                                                                                   
                       B − rM           w (H)                     B − rM            w (L)
  A3 (H) = (1 − πH )               1−           , A3 (L) = πH                  1−           .
                          3             w (L)                        3             w (H)
                                                                                           (71)

     Proposition 6 is proved in Appendix E.
     An immediate implication of this proposition and the fact that w (H) > w (L) is that
A3 (H) is negative, while A3 (L) is positive. The entrepreneur uses the asset market to buy
insurance from the workers against the w (L) outcome and to sell insurance to the workers
against the w (H) outcome.
     When the entrepreneur is excluded from trade in Arrow securities, she is positively affected
by higher w (ε) for two reasons. First, the entrepreneur pays for part of the nominal transfer
which workers receive from the government. Higher nominal wages mean that the real value of
the transfer is lower which makes her better off when ε = H. Second, the fact that workers are
poorer in state ε = H means that they consume less leisure. Equilibrium employment, output
and the real value of profits are higher. In contrast, workers are worse off in state ε = H. Both
groups of agents will trade Arrow securities up to the point at which their real consumption
and leisure are constant across states.

6.3. Nominal Bond and Equity Portfolios. In this sub-section we translate the abstract
notion of Arrow securities into the more familiar case in which agents cross-insure using debt
                                                     19
and equity. We assume that a nominal bond pays a dollar in every state ε, while equities entitle
their owners to a share of the entrepreneur’s nominal profit stream, which we denote with the
symbol Π̃ (ε) to distinguish it from the real profit stream, Π (ε) ,

                                  Π̃(ε) ≡ p (ε) y(ε) − w(ε)n(ε).

    Using these definitions we prove the following proposition.
Proposition 7. In the full participation model, the entrepreneur purchases nominal bonds with
a face value of
                                               B − rM
                                        B3 ≡           ,                                 (72)
                                                  3
where
                                               1−Q
                                          r=         .                                   (73)
                                                 Q
The purchase of bonds by entrepreneurs is financed by selling a share λ of the entrepreneur’s
profit stream where
                                                QB
                               λ=                               .                        (74)
                                    Q (L) Π̃ (L) + Q (H) Π̃ (H)
Proof. See Appendix F.
     If workers and firms were to trade two assets, debt and equity, the entrepreneur would
use nominal bonds to insure herself against volatility in real tax expenditures. In equilibrium,
fluctuations in the nominal price level cause fluctuations in the real value of tax liabilities that
are perfectly insured by the nominal bonds she purchases from workers. Workers provide this
insurance by purchasing a share in the firm. This share is risk free because fluctuations in the
nominal profit stream are offset, in equilibrium, by fluctuations in the price level.
     The equilibrium with complete participation Pareto dominates the equilibrium in the ab-
sence of complete participation because it provides an additional opportunity for trade. In
Section 7 we show how the government can restore Pareto efficiency, even if entrepreneurs are
not present in period 1, by trading on their behalf.

   7. The Role of Qualitative Easing in a World of Incomplete Participation

     We are now ready to discuss the role of qualitative easing; a policy in which the Treasury,
and or the Central Bank, makes trades of debt for equity in the asset markets. In a complete
markets environment, with complete participation, a policy of this kind will have no real effects
(Woodford, 2012). We show that, in an environment with incomplete participation, central
bank trades in the asset markets will improve welfare.
     We return to the case where entrepreneurs are excluded from participating in asset trades,
and we assume that the treasury makes dollar denominated lump-sum transfers worth QB/2
to workers, paid for by issuing nominal debt with a face value of B. We retain the assumption
that workers trade two Arrow securities and, in addition we add the possibility of trading debt
and equity. In this environment, there are redundant assets since the returns to debt and equity
can be replicated by trades in Arrow securities.
     A bond is a claim to B dollars in state ε that can be replicated by the purchase of B Arrow
securities of type L and B securities of type H. Equity, is a claim to λΠ̃ (ε) dollars in state
ε that can be replicated by the purchase of a portfolio of λΠ̃ (L)−1 securities of type L and
λΠ̃ (H)−1 securities of type H where λ is a share of the firm.
                                                 20
    We assume that workers purchase Arrow securities and they do not buy or sell bonds or
equities.12 We continue to assume that the central bank, purchases debt ACB where,

                                                   M = QACB .

In addition, we allow the bank to make supplementary trades in debt and equity, subject to the
constraint that these supplementary security purchases are self-financing,

                                     M = QACB + QÃCB + PE λCB .                                         (75)

The self-financing condition implies that

                                           QÃCB + PE λCB = 0.                                           (76)

Here, ÃCB are additional purchases of debt by the central bank that may be positive or negative,
λCB is the number of shares to the nominal profit stream that is bought or sold by the central
bank and
                               PE = Q (L) Π̃ (L) + Q (H) Π̃ (H) ,                           (77)
is the price of a claim to a share in the firm. We allow short sales so that λCB may be negative.
     Let S denote seigniorage revenues associated with money issuance and define
                                                 h            i
                                    S̃ (ε) = S + Π̃ (ε) − ÃCB ,                            (78)

where                                          h                i
                                                   Π̃ (ε) − ÃCB ,                                       (79)
is the additional profit or loss associated with the risky component of the bank’s balance sheet.
Using these definitions, we arrive at the balance sheet of the central bank presented in Table 2.


                                            Assets        Liabilities
                                             QACB              M
                                              QS
                                             QÃCB           PE λCB
                                                             ECB

                              Table 2. The Central Bank Balance Sheet


     As in our previous model, the seigniorage revenues from money creation are repaid to
the treasury. However, there is now risk associated with the central bank’s balance sheet. The
following modified definition of an equilibrium accounts for the fact that the central bank trades
in the asset markets.
Definition 4. A rational expectations equilibrium with a self-financing stabilization policy
is a monetary and a fiscal policy {M, B, ACB , λCB }, a belief function ϕ(M, ε), an alloca-
tion {{ni (ε) , Mi }i∈1,2 , {ci (ε)}i=1,2,3 , y (ε) , n (ε)}ε∈{H,L} and a set of state-dependent prices
{p̃ (ε) , w̃ (ε) , Q (ε) , r}ε∈{H,L} that satisfies budget balance and optimality and the self-financing
condition,
                                            QÃCB + λCB PE = 0,                                     (80)
12This assumption is made for convenience. Because bonds and equities are redundant securities, the allocation
of worker’s assets across the two Arrow securities plus debt and equity is indeterminate.
                                                        21
where
                                     PE = Q (L) Π̃ (L) + Q (H) Π̃ (H) .                                  (81)
     An equilibrium price system, {p̃ (ε) , w̃ (ε) , Q (ε) , r}ε∈{H,L} , is a non-negative 7-tuple such
that equations (61) and (62) hold in each state, Equation (63) holds, and the money wage in
each state is given by the belief function, Equation (42).

    Proposition 8, establishes that there exists a set of central bank trades that leads to the
same real allocations as those in the complete participation equilibrium described in Proposition
4.
                      n                  o                                               
Proposition 8. Let M, B, ÃCB , λCB ≥ 0 characterize public sector policy, and let w (L) ,
w (H) > 0 be wages implied by a belief function ϕ(M, ε) such that the feasibility constraints
hold
                                  µi B
               w (ε) ≥                        , i ∈ {1, 2} , ε ∈ {L, H}                  (82)
                          4 (1 + λ + µ) − 6µi
                          2 − µ + λ (2 − 3α) B
               w (ε) ≥                          . ε ∈ {L, H}                             (83)
                                µ + αλ        2
Let the central bank buy debt equal to ÃCB , financed by selling equities, λCB , where,
                                                                                  
                                                                 B − rB
             ÃCB = B − rM, and          λCB = −Q                                    .                   (84)
                                                      Q (L) Π̃ (L) + Q (H) Π̃ (H)
The prices Q (L), Q (H) and r = (1 − Q) /Q and the money value of profits in each state Π̃ (L)
and Π̃ (H), are the values defined in Proposition 6.
     Under this policy, there exists a unique equilibrium in which allocations are the same as
those implemented in the complete participation rational expectations equilibrium.

Proof. See Appendix G.

     The fact that the equilibrium allocations are identical to those under complete participation
means that the central bank is able to restore efficiency. In the proof of the proposition we
establish that the central bank’s position in the asset markets is three times the position that
would be taken by the entrepreneur in the counter-factual complete markets equilibrium.13
Hence the workers’ portfolios of risky assets will be larger under complete participation than
without. In both cases, the real value of the workers’ and entrepreneurs’ after tax incomes will
be stabilized under the optimal policy.

Corollary 9. In the stabilization equilibrium, the return on a real indexed bond is equal to the
real return from holding equity.

Proof. In the Pareto efficient equilibrium the real value of profit is the same in both states. It
follows immediately that the return to an indexed bond is the same as the return to an equity
share .

    This corollary implies that, when all uncertainty is non-fundamental, the central bank can
implement the optimal policy by standing ready to trade indexed bonds at the same price as
13This number follows from the fact that there are two times as many workers as entrepreneurs. In general, the
size of the central bank portfolio will be a function of the population growth rate.
                                                        22
claims
n        to the
             o stock market. By doing so, it would end up holding the optimal asset portfolio
  ÃCB , λCB described in Proposition 8.

                                           8. Summary

     Willem Buiter made the distinction between Quantitative Easing, defined as an increase
in the size of the central bank balance sheet, and Qualitative Easing, defined as a change in
its risk composition. In this paper we have provided a theory that explains the channel by
which Qualitative Easing influences asset prices. According to our explanation, some asset
price fluctuations are Pareto inefficient because people cannot insure themselves against the
state of the world they are born into. By trading debt for equity in the asset markets, the
central bank can make trades that stabilize Pareto inefficient asset price movements and that
make everyone better off.
     Our explanation builds on the idea that general equilibrium models of money always contain
multiple equilibria. Standard accounts of asset market dynamics struggle to account for the
volume of trades that we observe in real world asset markets (Milgrom and Stokey, 1982), and
for the the observed volatility in asset prices, relative to dividend movements (Shiller, 1981).
We explain these features of data by exploiting shifts across different equilibria in the presence
of incomplete participation. In our view, significant portions of asset price fluctuations in the
real world are caused by self-fulfilling shifts from one equilibrium to another that are associated
with inefficient fluctuations in wealth.
     Although we have explained our case in a simple two-period model, multiple equilibria are
endemic to monetary models and our argument is more general than the model that we have
used to explain it. The fact that asset price volatility is Pareto inefficient provides, we believe,
a strong case to make Qualitative easing a permanent component of future financial policy.




                                                 23
                                       References

Arrow, K. J. (1964): “The Role of Securities in the Optimal Allocation of Risk Bearing,”
  Review of Economic Studies, 31, 91–96.
Arrow, K. J. and G. Debreu (1954): “Existence of a Competitive Equilibrium for a Com-
  petitive Economy,” Econometrica, 22, 265–90.
Benhabib, J., S. Schmitt-Grohe, and M. Uribe (2001): “The Perils of Taylor Rules,”
  Journal of Economic Theory, 96, 40–69.
Brock, W. A. (1974): “Money and Growth: The Case of Long-Run Perfect Foresight,” Inter-
  national Economic Review, 15, 150–177.
Buiter, W. H. (2008): “Quantitative easing and qualitative easing: a terminological and
  taxonomic proposal,” Financial Times, Willem Buiter’s mavercon blog.
——— (2010): Reversing unconventional monetary policy: technical and political considera-
  tions, SUERF - The European Money and Finance Forum, chap. 3, 23–42.
Cass, D. and K. Shell (1983): “Do Sunspots Matter?” Journal of Political Economy, 91,
  193–227.
Curdia, V. and M. Woodford (2011): “The Central-Bank Balance Sheet as an Instrument
  of Monetary Policy, Journal of Monetary Economics 58: 54-79 (2011). (With V. Curdia.),”
  Journal of Monetary Economics, 58, 54–79.
D’Amico, S. and T. B. King (2010): “Flow and Stock Effects of Large-Scale Treasury Pur-
  chases,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series Division of Research and Statistics and
  Monetary Affairs, Federal Reserve Board Washington D.C., Paper, 2010-52.
Eggertsson, G. B. and M. Woodford (2002): “The zero bound on interest rates and
  optimal monetary policy,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2, 139–211.
Farmer, R. E. A. (1999): The Macroeconomics of Self-Fulfilling Prophecies, Cambridge, MA:
  MIT Press, second ed.
——— (2002a): “Business Cycles with Heterogenous Agents,” UCLA mimeo, paper prepared for
  a conference at GREQAM on” New Perspectives of (In)Stability, the Role of Heterogeneity”,
  Marseilles, June 2001.
——— (2002b): “Fiscal Policy, Equity Premia, and Heterogenous Agents,” UCLA mimeo, paper
  presented to the conference: New Developments in Fiscal Policy Analysis, at Universitat
  Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona May 2002.
——— (2002c): “Why Does the Data Reject the Lucas Critique?” Annales d’Economie et de
  Statistiques, 67/68, 111–129.
——— (2012a): “Animal Spirits, Persistent Unemployment and the Belief Function,” in Re-
  thinking Expectations: The Way Forward for Macroeconomics, ed. by R. Frydman and E. S.
  Phelps, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, chap. 5, 251–276.
——— (2012b): “Confidence, Crashes and Animal Spirits,” Economic Journal, 122.
——— (2012c): “The effect of conventional and unconventional monetary policy rules on infla-
  tion expectations: theory and evidence.” Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 28, 622,639.
——— (2012d): “Qualitative Easing: How it Works and Why it Matters,” NBER working paper
  18421 and CEPR discussion paper 9153.
——— (2013): “Qualitative easing: a new tool for the stabilisation of financial markets,” Bank
  of England Quartely Bulletin, Q4, 405–413.
                                             24
——— (2014): “Asset prices in a Lifecycle Economy,” NBER Working Paper Number 19457.
——— (2015): “Global Sunspots and Asset Prices in a Monetary Economy,” NBER Working
  Paper 20831.
——— (2016): “Pricing Assets in an Economy with Two Types of People,” NBER Working
  Paper 22228.
Farmer, R. E. A., C. Nourry, and A. Venditti (2012): “The Inefficient Markets Hypoth-
  esis: Why Financial Markets Do Not Work Well in the Real World,” NBER Working Paper
  18647.
Friedman, M. (1957): A Theory of the Consumption Function, Princeton, N.J.: Princeton
  University Press.
Gagnon, J. E. (2012): “Michael Woodford’s Unjustified Skepticism on Portfolio Bal-
  ance (A Seriously Wonky Rebuttal),” Peterson Institute for International Economics,
  http://blogs.piie.com/realtime/?p=3112, accessed January 12th 2016.
Gagnon, J. E., M. Raskin, J. Remache, and B. Sack (2011): “The Financial Market
  Effects of the Federal Reserve’s Large Scale Asset Purchases,” International Journal of Central
  Banking, 7, 3–43.
Gertler, M. and P. Karadi (2011): “A Model of Unconventional Monetary Policy,” Journal
  of Monetary Economics, 58, 17–34.
Greenwood, R., S. G. Hanson, and G. Y. Liao (2015): “Price Dynamics in Partially
  Segmented Markets,” Harvard Business School: Mimeo.
Hahn, F. (1965): “On some problems of proving the existence of an equilibrium in a mone-
  tary economy,” in The theory of interest rates, ed. by F. Hahn and F. Brechling, London:
  Macmillan.
Hall, R. and R. Reis (2016): “Achieving Price Stability by Manipulating the Central Banks
  Payment on Reserves,” LSE mimeo.
Hamilton, J. D. and J. C. Wu (2012): “The Effectiveness of Alternative Monetary Policy
  Tools in a Zero Lower Bound Environment,” Journal of Money Credit and Banking, 44, 3–46.
He, Z. and A. Krishnamurthy (2013): “Intermediary Asset Pricing,” American Economic
  Review, 103, 732–720.
Krishnamurthy, A. and A. Vissing-Jorgensen (2011): “The effects of quantitative easing
  on interest rates: channels and implications for policy,” Brookings papers on economic activity,
  Fall.
Krugman, P. R. (1998): “It’s Baaack: Japan’s Slump and the Return of the Liquidity Trap,”
  Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 137–206.
Li, C. and M. Wei (2012): “Term Structure Modelling with Supply Factors and the Federal
  Reserve’s Large Scale Asset Purchase Programs,” Federal Reserve Board mimeo.
Lucas Jr., R. E. (1972): “Expectations and the Neutrality of Money,” Journal of Economic
  Theory, 4, 103–124.
Maggio, M. D., A. Kermani, and C. Palmer (2015): “How Quantitative Easing Works:
  Evidence on the Refinancing Channel,” NBER Wrking Paper 22638.
McMahon, M., U. Peiris, and H. Polemarchakis (2015): “Perils of Quantitative Easing,”
  Warwicks Economics Research Paper Series: 1089.
McMahon, M. and H. Polemarchakis (2011): “The Unintended Consequences of Uncon-
  ventional Monetary Policy,” University of Warwick, Department of Economics: Mimeo.
                                                25
Milgrom, P. and N. Stokey (1982): “Information Trade and Common Knowledge,” Journal
  of Economic Theory, 26, 17–27.
Neely, C. J. (2010): “The Large-Scale Asset Purchases Had Large International Effects,”
  Economic Research, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, Working Paper 2010-018D.
Patinkin, D. (1956): Money Interest and Prices, Cambridge, Massachusetts: The MIT Press,
  second abridged ed.
Peiris, U. and H. Polemarchakis (2015): “Quantitative easing in an open economy: prices,
  exchange rates and risk premia,” Centre for Economic Theory and its Applications: Working
  Paper 09.
Reis, R. (2016): “QE in the future: the central bank’s balance sheet in a financial crisis,” LSE
  mimeo.
Shiller, R. J. (1981): “Do stock prices move too much to be justified by subsequent changes
  in dividends?” American Economic Review, 71, 421–436.
Starr, R. (1974): “The Price of Money in a Pure Exchange Monetary Economy with Taxa-
  tion,” Econometrica, 42, 45–54.
Tobin, J. (1963): “An Essay on the Principles of Debt Management,” in Fiscal and Debt
  Management Policies, ed. by C. o. M. a. Credit, Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 143–
  218.
——— (1969): “A General Equilibrium Approach to Monetary Theory,” Journal of Money,
  Credit and Banking, 14, 15–29.
Vayanos, D. and J.-L. Vila (2009): “The Preferred-Habitat Model of the Term Structure of
  Interest Rate,” NBER Working Paper No. 15487.
Vissing Jorgensen, A. and A. Krishnamurthy (2011): “The Effects of Quantitative Easing
  on Interest Rates: Channels and Implications for Policy,” Brookings Papers on Economic
  Activity, 43, 215–287.
Woodford, M. (2012): “Methods of Policy Accommodation at the Interest-Rate Lower
  Bound,” Columbia University mimeo, paper presented at the Jackson Hole Symposium, ”The
  Changing Policy Landscape,” August 31-September 1, 2012.


                            Appendix A. Proof of Proposition 1

Proof. Combining the definition of wealth (2) with the money market clearing condition, Equa-
tion (22), we have the following definition of wealth that must hold in equilibrium
                                                6w + B
                                      W=                   .                               (A1)
                                             2 (1 + λ + µ)
Feasibility requires that
                                                    W
                                       ni = 2 − µi     > 0,                                (A2)
                                                     w
for both types, which implies the first feasibility condition, Equation (A3).
                                          µi B
                             w>                       ,        i ∈ {1, 2}                  (A3)
                                  4 (1 + λ + µ) − 6µi
To derive the expression for the equilibrium value of r, we use the money market equilibrium
condition, Equation (22), together with the equilibrium value of wealth from (A1). The real
wage follows directly from inverting the labor market clearing equation.
                                                26
    For a valid equilibrium we also require that
                                             α
                                         1 w α−1 (B − rM )
                          c3 = (1 − α)           −         > 0.                           (A4)
                                         αp         3p
Using equilibrium prices and wealth from equations (24), and the market clearing equations,
(16) – (18), evaluated at equilibrium prices, we arrive at the second feasibility condition,
                                           2 − µ + λ (2 − 3α) B
                                     w≥                         .                         (A5)
                                                 µ + αλ       2



                           Appendix B. Proof of Proposition 2

Proof. We begin with three facts that follow from the definitions of market clearing, Equations
(39) – (41). First, from money market clearing,
                                            (1 − Q) M 1  x
                                      W=                ≡ ,                               (B1)
                                                Q     γ  γ
where we define
                                          (1 − Q) M
                                      x≡              ≡ rM.                              (B2)
                                               Q
Second, putting together the labor market and goods market clearing equations for each state,
equations (39) and (40), and using the definition of x from Equation (B2) and the money market
clearing equation, (B1), we have that,
                                  θx       x      B
                           2−          =       −       , ε ∈ {L, H} ,                     (B3)
                                w̃ (ε)   3w (ε) 3w (ε)
where we define
                                                   λ+µ
                                              θ≡       .                                  (B4)
                                                    γ
Third, we use the definition of w̃ (ε),
                                           Q (ε) w (ε)
                                w̃ (ε) ≡               , ε ∈ {L, H} .                     (B5)
                                              Qπε
Substituting (B5) into (B3) gives,
                              Qπε θx         x      B
                        2−               =       −       , ε ∈ {L, H} .                   (B6)
                             Q (ε) w (ε)   3w (ε) 3w (ε)
Rearranging this equation and using the no arbitrage condition, Q = Q (L) + Q (H) leads to
the following expression for x
                       [6w (L) + B] Q (L)             [6w (H) + B] Q (H)
             x=                                 =                               .         (B7)
                  Q (L) + 3πL θ [Q (L) + Q (H)]   Q (H) + 3πH θ [Q (L) + Q (H)]
    Next define q ≡ Q (L) /Q (H) , and divide the numerator and denominator of Equation
(B7) by Q (H) to give
                             [6w (L) + B] q       [6w (H) + B]
                                              =                   .               (B8)
                            q + 3πL θ [1 + q]   1 + 3πH θ [1 + q]
Rearranging this equation and defining

             XL ≡ [6w (L) + B] , XH ≡ [6w (H) + B] , YL = 3πL θ, YH ≡ 3πH θ,              (B9)

                           XL q [1 + YH (1 + q)] = XH [q + YL (1 + q)] ,                 (B10)
                                                   27
and
                            [XH (1 + YL ) − XL (1 + YH )]        XH YL
                       θ1 ≡                               , θ2 ≡       ,                   (B11)
                                        XL YH                    XL YH
gives the following quadratic equation in q,

                                       q 2 − θ1 q − θ2 = 0.                                (B12)

This is Equation (48) in Proposition 2. Let r1 and r2 be the roots of this quadratic and note
that r1 and r2 are given by the expressions
                                                       
                                       1
                                               q
                                  ri =            2
                                           θ1 ± θ1 + 4θ2 .                              (B13)
                                       2
It follows that both roots are real and that there is a unique non-negative root.
     Next note that                                          
                                    (1 − Q)        1             M
                             x≡M              ≡        −1−q         ,                      (B14)
                                        Q         QH            1+q
and use Equation (B8) to write
                                                  XL q
                                        x=                  .                              (B15)
                                             q + YL (1 + q)
Combining equations (B15) and (B14) leads to the expression for Q (H), Equation (49) in
Proposition 2. Equation (50) follows from the definition of Q. To derive Equations (51) use the
definitions of w (ε), Equations (26).
     Equation (52) follows from the labor market clearing equation and (53) from the (B1) and
the no arbitrage assumption. It remains to check that Inequality (43) is sufficient to guarantee
that labor supply is feasible and that (44) guarantees that entrepreneurs’ consumption is non-
negative. That follows from the fact that theses assumptions guarantee feasibility in each state
individually and therefore feasibility in a convex combination of the states as well.




                           Appendix C. Proof of Corollary 3

Proof. Labor supply of person i, for i ∈ {1, 2} is given by the expression
                                                          W
                                      ni (ε) = 1 − µi          ,                            (C1)
                                                        w̃ (ε)
and consumption by
                                                    W
                                        ci (ε) = λi      .                                  (C2)
                                                  w̃ (ε)
Hence to establish inequalities (54) we need only show that

                                        w̃ (L) 6= w̃ (H) .                                  (C3)

But from Equation (B3) we have that
                                   θx       B      x
                                        =       −       − 2,                                (C4)
                                 w̃ (ε)   3w (ε) 3w (ε)
from which it follows that w̃ (L) = w̃ (H) if and only if, w (L) 6= w (H) . The inequality of the
consumption of entrepreneurs across states follows from the fact that their income is a function
of the real wage.
                                               28
                            Appendix D. Proof of Proposition 4

Proof. Combining labor market equilibrium, Equation (61) with goods market equilibrium (62)
leads to
                                                        
    1         W           1                          B − rM         W
        2−µ          =          E [p̃ (ε) Π (ε)] −             +λ        , ε ∈ {L, H} . (D1)
    α       w̃ (ε)     w̃ (ε)                           3         w̃ (ε)
Because these two state equations are identical (the term in the wiggly brackets is a constant)
it immediately follows that
                                     ω̃ (L) = w̃ (H) ≡ w̃.                                (D2)
Using this fact, and the definition of w̃ (ε) gives,
                                            Q (L)   w (H) πL
                                      q≡          =          .                              (D3)
                                            Q (H)   w (L) πH
This establishes the expression for q, Equation (66), in the statement of Proposition 4.
    Next we seek expressions for Q (L) and Q (H) individually. Combining the definition of
workers wealth, Equation (28) with the money market equilibrium condition, Equation (63),
and using Equation (D2) gives the following equation linking ω̃ and r,
                                            rM       B rM
                                      W=       = w̃ + +                                     (D4)
                                             γ       6  3
Note also that
                                         w (H) Q (H)
                                           w̃ =       .                                     (D5)
                                            QπH
The no arbitrage condition, Q = Q (L) + Q (H) implies that
                                            Q (H)    1
                                                  =     .                                   (D6)
                                              Q     1+q
Using no arbitrage and the definition of r we also have that
                                                                 1
                                 1−Q   1 − QL − QH              QH    − (1 + q)
                            r=       =             =                              ,         (D7)
                                  Q      QL + QH                      1+q
which simplifies to give,
                                                         1
                                          QH =                    .                         (D8)
                                                  (1 + r) (1 + q)
Next, we rearrange Equation (D4)
                                               
                                          3−γ              w (H)     B
                                 rM                 =3              + ,                     (D9)
                                           γ             (1 + q) πH  2
to find the following expression for (1 + r)
                                                               −1
                                 3−γ           w (H)      B      3−γ
                 (1 + r) = M             +3             +     M           .                (D10)
                                   γ         (1 + q) πH   2       γ
Finally, combining (D10) with (D8) and using the definition of γ gives Equation (67) in the
statement of Proposition 4, which is the expression we seek
                                              M (6 − 2γ) πH
                        QH =                                            .                  (D11)
                                 (1 + q) (M (6 − 2γ) + Bγ) πH + 6γw (H)
    Equations (68) follow immediately from the definitions of state wages and Equation (69) fol-
lows from labor market clearing. The feasibility conditions, Inequalities (64) and (65) guarantee

                                                     29
that labor supply for each worker and the consumption of entrepreneurs are each non-negative
in equilibrium.



                             Appendix E. Proof of Proposition 6

Proof. From the entrepreneur’s budget constraint, Equation (57),
                                                           
                                                     B − rM
                      p (ε) c3 (ε) ≤ p (ε) Π (ε) −            + A3 (ε) .                         (E1)
                                                        3
From the solution to the entrepreneur’s problem, we have that
                                                                     
                                   E [p̃ (ε) Π (ε)]      1     B − rM
                          c3 (ε) =                  −                   .                        (E2)
                                         p̃ (ε)       p̃ (ε)      3
But from Proposition 4, p̃ (ε) is the same in both states and thus,
                                                               
                                                   1     B − rM
                               c3 (ε) = Π (ε) −                   .                              (E3)
                                                p̃ (ε)      3
Rearranging Equation (E1) and combining it with (E3) gives the following expression,
                                                          
                                       B − rM         p (ε)
                            A3 (ε) =              1−           .                                 (E4)
                                          3           p̃ (ε)
Finally, from the definitions of p̃ (ε) and q we have that
                                 p (H)     πH          p (L)    qπL
                                        =     ,               =     .                            (E5)
                                 p̃ (H)   1+q          p̃ (L)   1+q
Combining equations (E4) and (E5)and using the facts that
                                       w (H) πL   w (H) 1 − πH
                                 q=             =              ,                                 (E6)
                                       w (L) πH   w (L) πh
gives
                                                                                         
                            B − rM        w (H)                             B − rM        w (L)
   A3 (H) = (1 − πH )                  1−         ,     A3 (L) = πH                    1−         ,
                               3          w (L)                                3          w (H)
                                                                                                 (E7)
which is the expression we seek.



                             Appendix F. Proof of Proposition 7

Proof. By purchasing bonds with face value
                                              B − rM
                                                     ,                                           (F1)
                                                 3
the entrepreneur consumes
                                                    "                 #
                                 Π̃ (ε) (B − rM )      B3      Π̃ (ε)
                        c3 (ε) =       −          +         −λ          ,                        (F2)
                                 p (ε)    3p (ε)      p (ε)    p (ε)
where
                                        A3 (ε) ≡ B3 − λΠ̃ (ε) ,                                  (F3)
is the dollar value of Arrow securities in state ε. This is equal to the face value of debt, B3 ,
minus the share of profits, λΠ (ε) that was sold to finance the purchase of debt. We established
                                                  30
in Proposition 4, that Π̃ (ε) /p (ε) is the same in both states. It follows that if
                                                B − rM
                                          B3 =          ,                                   (F4)
                                                   3
that the entrepreneurs consumption is independent of the state. The share of profits that the
entrepreneur sells to workers, λ, is defined by the entrepreneur’s budget constraint in period 1,

                                         QB3 − λPE = 0,                                        (F5)

where
                                PE = Q (L) Π̃ (L) + Q (H) Π̃ (H) ,                             (F6)
is the price of a claim to the money value of profits.


                           Appendix G. Proof of Proposition 8

    To prove this proposition we show first that, if the security prices Q (L) and Q (H) and
the nominal profit streams Π̃ (L) and Π̃ (H) are equal to the equilibrium values defined in
Proposition 6 then the portfolio defined by Equation (84) stabilizes the real value of tax revenues.
    In state ε the tax revenue levied by the treasury is given by the expression,
                                               h                   i
                             T (ε) = [B − S] − ÃCB + λCB Π̃ (ε) .                             (G1)

To stabilize the real value of tax revenues the central bank must take a net asset position such
that                       h                  i             h                 i
                [B − S] − ÃCB + λCB Π̃ (L)       [B − S] − ÃCB + λCB Π̃ (H)
                                                =                               .           (G2)
                             w (L)                            w (H)
By holding additional bonds equal to

                                         ÃCB = [B − S] ,                                      (G3)

Equation (G2) gives
                                         Π̃ (L)       Π̃ (H)
                           T (L) ≡ λCB          = λCB        ≡ T (H) .                         (G4)
                                         w (L)        w (H)
But from by definition,
                                                                   p̃ (ε)
                              Π̃ (ε) = Π (ε) p (ε) = Π (ε) w (ε)          ,                    (G5)
                                                                   w̃ (ε)
where the last equality follows since
                                          p (ε)   p̃ (ε)
                                                =        .                                     (G6)
                                          w (ε)   w̃ (ε)
Combining these expressions gives
                                         p̃ (L)             p̃ (H)
                     T (L) ≡ λCB Π (L)          = λCB Π (H)        ≡ T (H) .                   (G7)
                                         w̃ (L)             w̃ (H)
But from Proposition 6, Π (H) = Π (L). Hence the portfolio
                                                                             
                                                            B − rB
           ÃCB = B − rM, and        λCB = −Q                                   ,              (G8)
                                                  Q (L) Π̃ (L) + Q (H) Π̃ (H)
is self-financing and stabilizes the real value if tax revenues as claimed.
      Next we establish that this tax policy generates the same after tax wealth positions for
entrepreneurs and workers that they would choose if entrepreneurs could self insure. We showed
                                                 31
in Proposition that entrepreneurs would choose to hold debt equal to
                                                B − rM
                                         B3 =           .                                    (G9)
                                                   3
In the counter-factual complete participation equilibrium the wealth of the entrepreneur is equal
to                                                            
                                      1 B − rM          B3 − λPE
                             Π (ε) −                +              ,                       (G10)
                                      3    w (ε)          w (ε)
where                                                
                                          1 B − rM
                                                        ,                                  (G11)
                                          3    w (ε)
is the real value of her tax obligation and

                                           {B3 , λPE } ,                                    (G12)

is the debt and equity portfolio that she takes to offset fluctuations in after-tax wealth.
     In contrast, in the equilibrium with policy stabilization, the after tax wealth of the en-
trepreneur is                                                         !
                                            
                                 1 B − rM         1 ÃCB − λCB PE
                         Π (ε) −               +                         .                  (G13)
                                 3    w (ε)       3          w (ε)
It follows immediately that if the central bank chooses a policy where

                                     ÃCB = 3B3 = B − rM,                                   (G14)

then the after tax wealth of the entrepreneur is identical in the equilibrium with stabilization as
in the counter-factual complete markets equilibrium. It follows from Walras law that stabilizing
the entrepreneurs income at its complete participation value also stabilizes the workers wealth
at its complete participation value.




                                                32
