                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       ANIMAL SPIRITS IN A MONETARY MODEL

                                     Roger E.A. Farmer
                                     Konstantin Platonov

                                      Working Paper 22136
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22136


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   March 2016




We would like to thank Gauti Eggertsson for his discussion of our work at the Conference in
Honor of Michael Woodford's Contributions to Economics, held at the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York on May 19th and 20th of 2016. We also thank the participants at the conference and
participants at the UCLA macro and international finance workshops. We have both benefited
from conversations with Giovanni Nicolò. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Roger E.A. Farmer and Konstantin Platonov. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Animal Spirits in a Monetary Model
Roger E.A. Farmer and Konstantin Platonov
NBER Working Paper No. 22136
March 2016, Revised February 2017
JEL No. E12,E3,E4

                                          ABSTRACT

We propose a fresh way of thinking about the monetary transmission mechanism. By integrating
Keynesian economics with general equilibrium theory in a new way, we provide an alternative
model and an alternative narrative to New-Keynesian economics to explain how macroeconomic
policy influences prices and employment. We develop a simple graphical apparatus, the IS-LM-
NAC framework, that can be used by policy makers to understand how policy affects the
economy. A new element, the NAC curve, connects the interest rate to current and expected
future values of the stock market and it explains how ‘animal spirits’ influence economic activity.
Our framework provides a rich new approach to policy analysis that explains the short-run and
long-run effects of policy, without the assumption that prices are prevented from moving by
artificial barriers to price adjustment.


Roger E.A. Farmer
UCLA
Department of Economics
Box 951477
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
and NBER
rfarmer@econ.ucla.edu

Konstantin Platonov
University of California at Los Angeles
kplatonov@ucla.edu
                  Animal Spirits in a Monetary Model

             By Roger E.A. Farmer and Konstantin Platonov∗


          We propose a fresh way of thinking about the monetary transmis-
          sion mechanism. By integrating Keynesian economics with gen-
          eral equilibrium theory in a new way, we provide an alternative
          model and an alternative narrative to New-Keynesian economics
          to explain how macroeconomic policy influences prices and employ-
          ment. We develop a simple graphical apparatus, the IS-LM-NAC
          framework, that can be used by policy makers to understand how
          policy affects the economy. A new element, the NAC curve, con-
          nects the interest rate to current and expected future values of the
          stock market and it explains how ‘animal spirits’ influence eco-
          nomic activity. Our framework provides a rich new approach to
          policy analysis that explains the short-run and long-run effects of
          policy, without the assumption that prices are prevented from mov-
          ing by artificial barriers to price adjustment.


   In the lead-up to the 2008 financial crisis, a consensus developed among aca-
demic macroeconomists that the problem of macroeconomic stability had been
solved. According to that consensus, the New-Keynesian dynamic stochastic gen-
eral equilibrium (DSGE) model provides a good first approximation to the way
that monetary policy influences output, inflation and unemployment. In its sim-
plest form, the NK model has three equations; a dynamic IS curve, a policy
equation that describes how the central bank sets the interest rate, and a New-
Keynesian Phillips curve. In its more elaborate form, the New-Keynesian DSGE
model is reflected in work that builds on the medium scale DSGE model of Frank
Smets and Raf Wouters (2007).
   The NK model evolved from post-war economic theory in which the Keynesian
economics of the General Theory, (Keynes, 1936), was grafted onto the microeco-
nomics of Walrasian general equilibrium theory (Walras, 1899). Paul Samuelson,
in the third edition of his undergraduate textbook, (Samuelson, 1955), referred
to this hybrid theory as the ‘neoclassical synthesis’. According to the neoclas-
sical synthesis, the economy is Keynesian in the short-run, when not all wages
and prices have adjusted to clear markets; it is classical in the long-run, when all
wages and prices have adjusted to clear markets and the demands and supplies

  ∗ Farmer: Department of Economics, UCLA, rfarmer@econ.ucla.edu. Platonov: Department of Eco-
nomics, UCLA, kplatonov@ucla.edu. We would like to thank Gauti Eggertsson for his discussion of
our work at the Conference in Honor of Michael Woodford’s Contributions to Economics, held at the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York on May 19th and 20th of 2016. We also thank the participants at
the conference and participants at the UCLA macro and international finance workshops. We have both
benefited from conversations with Giovanni Nicolò.
                                                1
2                              UCLA WORKING PAPER                                         MARCH 2016


for all goods and for labor are equal.1
   The neoclassical synthesis is still the main framework taught in economics text-
books, and, in the form of ‘dynamic IS-LM analysis’, it is used by policy makers
to frame the way they think about the influence of changes in fiscal and mone-
tary policy on economic activity.2 This paper proposes an alternative framework.
Building on work by Roger Farmer (2010b) we integrate Keynesian economics
with general equilibrium theory in a new way to demonstrate that low-income
high-unemployment inefficient equilibria may be sustained in the long run. Our
work displays two main differences from the New Keynesian model.
   First, the steady state equilibria of our model display dynamic indeterminacy.
For every steady state equilibrium, there are multiple dynamic paths, all of which
converge to the same steady state. We use that property to explain how changes
in the money supply may be associated with immediate changes in real economic
activity without invoking artificial barriers to price change.3
   Second, our model displays steady state indeterminacy. We adopt a labor search
model in which the presence of externalties generates multiple steady state equi-
libria. Unlike classical search models we do not close the model by assuming that
firms and workers bargain over the wage.4 Instead, as in Farmer (2010b; 2012a;
2016a), firms and workers take wages and prices as given and employment is
determined by aggregate demand. We use that feature to explain why unemploy-
ment is highly persistent in the data. Persistent unemployment, in our model,
represents potentially permanent deviations of the market equilibrium from the
social optimum.5
   To close our model, we assume that equilibrium is selected by ‘animal spirits’
and we model that idea with a belief function as in Farmer (1993, 2002, 2012c). We
treat the belief function as a fundamental with the same methodological status as
preferences and endowments and we study the implications of that assumption for
the ability of monetary policy to influence inflation, output and unemployment.

    1 This characterization of the history of thought is drawn from Farmer (2010a) and elaborated on in
Farmer (2016a).
    2 See, for example, Mankiw (2015).
    3 For earlier papers that invoke that idea see Farmer and Woodford (1984, 1997), Farmer (1991, 1993,
2002, 2000), Matheny (1998), and Benhabib and Farmer (2000). We prefer to avoid the assumption of
menu costs (Mankiw, 1985) or price rigidity (Christiano et al., 2005; Smets and Wouters, 2007), because
our reading of the evidence as surveyed by Klenow and Malin (2017), is that prices at the micro level are
not sticky enough to explain the properties of monetary shocks in aggregate data. King et al. (1991);
Beyer and Farmer (2007); Farmer (2012b) and Farmer (2015) find evidence of a unit root in the U.S.
unemployment rate. Sticky-price models have difficulty generating enough persistence to understand this
fact, as do models of the monetary transmission mechanism that assume sticky information (Mankiw
and Reis, 2007) or rational inattention, (Sims, 2003). Our approach generates permanent equilibrium
movements in the unemployment rate that are consistent with a unit root, or near unit root, in U.S.
unemployment data.
    4 By classical search models, we mean the literature that builds on work by Peter Diamond, (1982),
Dale Mortensen, (1970), and Chris Pissarides (1976).
    5 Olivier Blanchard and Lawrence Summers (1986; 1987) attribute persistent unemployment to models
that display hysteresis. Our model has that feature, but for different reasons than the explanation given
by Blanchard and Summers. For a recent survey that explains the evolution of models of dynamic and
steady state indeterminacy, see Farmer (2016b).
                                         ANIMAL SPIRITS                                            3


                                         I.   The Model

   We construct a two-period overlapping generations model. In every period
there are two generations of representative households; the young and the old.
The young inelastically supply one unit of labor, but, due to search frictions, a
fraction of young individuals remain unemployed in any given period. We assume
that there is perfect insurance within the household and that labor income is split
between current consumption, interest bearing assets, and money balances.
   Households hold money, physical capital and financial assets in the form of gov-
ernment bonds. Money is dominated in rate-of-return and is held for transaction
purposes. We model this by assuming that real money balances yield utility as in
Patinkin (1956). The old generation receives interest on capital and bonds and
they sell assets to the young generation. We close the markets for physical capital
and labor by assuming that there is one unit of non-reproducible capital and that
the labor-force participation rate is constant and equal to one. We also assume
that government bonds are in zero net supply.
   There is a single good produced by a continuum of competitive firms. Firms
rent capital from old generation individuals and hire young generation individuals.
Hiring labor is subject to search frictions. Firms take prices and wages as given
and they allocate a fraction of labor to recruiting. We assume that every worker
allocated to recruiting can hire q new workers, where q is taken as given by firms
but determined in equilibrium by the search technology. Every worker allocated
to recruiting is one less worker allocated to production.
   Search in the labor market generates multiple equilibria. To select equilibrium,
we assume that economic agents form beliefs about the real value of their financial
wealth using a belief function that is a primitive of our model. Our Keynesian
search approach differs from the more usual assumption in the classical labor
search literature where the equilibrium is pinned down by Nash bargaining over
the real wage.6
   Our model provides a microfoundation from the textbook Keynesian cross, in
which the equilibrium level of output is determined by aggregate demand. Our
labor market structure explains why firms are willing to produce any quantity
of goods demanded, and our assumption that beliefs are fundamental determines
aggregate demand. In our model, beliefs select an equilibrium and in that equi-
librium, the unemployment rate may differ permanently from the social planning
optimum.

                                   II.    Aggregate Supply

  There is a continuum of competitive firms and we represent the labor and capital
employed and output produced by each individual firm with the symbols Lt , Kt ,

   6 Farmer (2016a, Chapter 7) distinguishes Keynesian search models, where employment is determined
by aggregate demand, from classical search models, where employment is determined by Nash bargaining.
4                                UCLA WORKING PAPER                                   MARCH 2016


and Yt .7 To refer to aggregate labor and aggregate output we use the symbols L̄t
and Ȳt . The variables Lt , Kt , and Yt are indexed by j ∈ [0, 1] where
                  Z                   Z                         Z
            L̄t = Lt (j)dj, K̄t = Kt (j)dj, and Ȳt = Yt (j)dj.
                         j                       j                                j

Since we assume that all firms make the same decisions it will always be true
that Lt (j) = Lt , Kt (j) = Kt and Yt (j) = Yt , hence, we will dispense with the
subscript j in the remainder of our exposition.
  We assume that all workers work only in the first period of their life. A firm
puts forward a production plan in which it proposes to allocate Xt workers to
production and Vt workers to recruiting where

                                            Lt = Xt + Vt .

Output is given by the expression

                                            Yt = Ktα Xt1−α ,

and the total number of workers employed at the firm is equal to

(1)                                             L t = qt V t ,

where the firm takes qt as given. Puting these pieces together, we may express
the output of the firm as
                                                                   1−α
                                                        1
(2)                                Yt =   Ktα        1−          Lt          .
                                                        qt

    The profit maximizing firm sets
                                        Yt   Wt                       Yt   Rt
                              (1 − α)      =            and α            =    ,
                                        Lt   Pt                       Kt   Pt
where Pt is the money price of goods, Wt is the money wage and Rt is the money
rental rate of capital.
   Notice that Equation (2) looks like a classical production function with one
exception. The variable, qt , which represents labor market tightness, influences
total factor productivity. One may show that qt is greater than 1 in equilibrium.
A low value of qt corresponds to a tight labor market in which firms must devote
a large amount of resources to recruiting and in which productivity is low. A high
value of qt corresponds to a loose labor market in which firms may devote a small
amount of resources to recruiting and in which productivity is high.
   At the aggregate level, we assume the existence of a matching technology that
    7 The   model developed in this section is drawn from Farmer (2012a).
                                           ANIMAL SPIRITS                                              5


determines aggregate employment L̄t as a function of aggregate resources devoted
to recruiting, V̄t , and the aggregate number of unemployed searching workers, Ūt .
This function is given by,

                                                          1/2
(3)                               L̄t = m V̄t , Ūt ≡ ΓV̄t      ,

where Ūt does not appear in the aggregate matching function because the as-
sumption that workers are fired every period implies that the number of searching
workers is equal to 1 at the beginning of every period.8 Because the economy is
endowed with one unit of labor, this assumption implies that

                                            Lt + Ut = 1.

 The parameter Γ in the matching function determines the efficiency of the
matching technology. In a symmetric equilibrium where Lt = L̄t , we may combine
Equations (1), (2) and (3) to find an expression for Yt in terms of Lt and L̄t
                                                   1−α
                                                 L̄t
(4)                              Yt = Ktα Lt 1 −           ,
                                                  Γ

where L̄t /Γ = 1/qt .
  Equation (4) is the private production function. This function represents the
connection between the output of an individual firm, Yt , the labor and capital
inputs at the level of the firm, Lt and Kt , and the labor input of all other firms, L̄t .
The private production function is distinct from the social production function,
Equation (5),
                                                                     1−α
                                                                 L̄t
(5)                              Ȳt =   K̄tα       L̄t       1−               ,
                                                                  Γ

which represents the connection between aggregate output Ȳt and aggregate labor
and capital inputs, L̄t and K̄t . We illustrate the properties of the social produc-
tion function in Figure 1. On this figure, we see that output is increasing in
employment up to a maximum that occurs at Γ/2.
  The social production function exhibits search externalities. For large values of
aggregate employment, L̄t , the labor market becomes tighter and further reduc-
tion of unemployment is costly. As firms allocate more workers to the recruiting
activity, those workers are withdrawn from production. If employment increases
beyond Γ/2, additional increases in aggregate employment become counter pro-
   8 This simplification requires the assumption that workers can, in effect, recruit themselves. Farmer
(2012a) discusses the assumption further and Farmer (2013) drops the assumption and treats employment
as an additional state variable. Nothing of substance is added to the model by complicating it in this
way and we have chosen, in this paper, to use the simpler model, where labor is not a state variable, for
expositional purposes.
6                              UCLA WORKING PAPER                                          MARCH 2016




                            Figure 1. The Social Production Function




ductive.9 The value of unemployment at the social optimum,
                                                         Γ
(6)                                          U =1−         ,
                                                         2
is our definition of the natural rate of unemployment.10

                                   III.    Aggregate Demand

  There is a continuum of households. Each household lives for two periods and
derives utility from consumption when young Cty , consumption when old Ct+1      o ,

and real money balances purchased in the first period of their life Mt+1 /Pt . Labor
does not deliver disutility, and therefore the participation rate is always equal
to 1.11
  Preferences are given by a logarithmic utility function and we assume that
    9 In the special case when Γ = 1, output is maximized when L̄ = 1/2 and, when L̄ = 1, aggregate
output falls to zero.
   10 Friedman (1968) defined the natural rate of unemployment to be the equilibrium rate. That definition
only makes sense when equilibrium is unique. In our model, there is a continuum of steady state equilibria
and in this framework it makes more sense to define the natural rate of unemployment to be the social
planning optimum.
   11 Allowing for disutility from participation in the labor market would make the participation rate
endogenous. However, the connection between the participation rate and the unemployment rate appears
limited. The participation rate is driven mostly by demography and does not exhibit pronounced co-
movement with the business cycle.
                                       ANIMAL SPIRITS                                     7


households maximize expected utility,
                                                                                 
                                                                           Mt+1
                       log (Cty )                 o
                                                       
(7)             ut =                + βEt log    Ct+1        + δ log                  .
                                                                            Pt

  In the first period of their life, households earn labor income Wt Lt . They use
their income to purchase current consumption Pt Cty , capital goods PK,t Kt+1 and
government bonds Bt+1 . All prices are in terms of money.

  In the second period of life, households rent capital to firms and earn the
rental payment Rt+1 Kt+1 , and interest accrued on their loan to the government
(1 + it )Bt+1 . In addition, at the end of the period they sell capital and money to
the new young generation. Their first and second period budget constraints are
given by the following equations:

(8)                 Pt Cty + Mt+1 + Bt+1 + PK,t Kt+1 = Wt Lt ,

                  o
(9)         Pt+1 Ct+1 = (Rt+1 + PK,t+1 )Kt+1 + (1 + it )Bt+1 + Mt+1 .


  The no-arbitrage condition implies that the return to government bonds must
be equal to the return on physical capital, when evaluated in terms of utility from
consumption in the second period,
                                                           
                     β      1 + it    (PK,t+1 + Rt+1 ) /Pt+1
(10)          Et     o              −                           = 0.
                    Ct+1   Pt+1 /Pt          PK,t /Pt

Here the first term in round parentheses is the expected real interest rate payed on
government bonds. The second term in the round parentheses is the real return
to physical capital. In words, this equation states that the young are indifferent
between investing in bonds and capital. Using this condition, and defining real
savings of the young in non-monetary assets as follows,

(11)                          Sty = (Bt+1 + PK,t Kt+1 )/Pt ,

we can write the young’s consumption function Cty , the demand for real money
balances Mt+1 /Pt and the young’s real savings function Sty that solve the utility
maximization problem:
                                                1    Wt Lt
(12)                                Cty =                  ,
                                            1 + β + δ Pt

                                                              
                          Mt+1     δ                  1 + it       Wt Lt
(13)                           =                                         .
                           Pt    1+β+δ                  it          Pt
8                               UCLA WORKING PAPER                                          MARCH 2016

                                            Wt Lt         Mt+1
(14)                                Sty =         − Cty −      .
                                             Pt            Pt
Substituting for consumption and money balances in (14) gives the following
alternative expression for saving
                                            
                           y      1       δ Wt Lt
(15)                     St =          β−          .
                               1+β+δ      it   Pt

  In our model, the saving of the young is an increasing function of the money
interest rate because money and consumption are substitutes in utility and the
money interest rate is the opportunity cost of holding money. In the traditional
IS-LM model, saving is sometimes written as an increasing function of the real
interest rate. That channel for the interest rate to influence saving is missing
from our model because of our simplifying assumptions that utility is logarithmic
and that labor supply occurs only in youth.12
  To simplify the exposition of our model, we assume that government bonds
are in zero net supply and we concentrate on the role of monetary policy. We
study a policy in which the central bank keeps the money supply Mt constant,
and where that policy is expected to continue forever. In that environment we
study the effect of an unanticipated change in Mt that we implement through
an unanticipated cash transfer to the old generation. In future work we plan to
study the role of fiscal interventions.

                                    IV.     The Role of Beliefs

  Although our work is superficially similar to the IS-LM model and its mod-
ern New Keynesian variants; there are significant differences. By grounding the
aggregate supply function in the theory of search and, more importantly, by drop-
ping the Nash bargaining assumption, we arrive at a theory where preferences,
technology and endowments are not sufficient to uniquely select an equilibrium.
  Following Farmer (2012a) we close our model by making beliefs fundamental.
Farmer studies that assumption in the context of a purely real representative
agent model. In the current paper we explore the implications of multiple steady
state equilibria in a model where money is used as a means of exchange and
where the representative agent assumption is replaced by a model of overlapping
generations.13
   12 Relaxing the unitary elasticity of intertemporal substitution by considering a utility function of the
form U (C y , C o , M/P ) = log (C y ) + β log C o + C̄ + δ log (M/P ) would add the real interest rate as
                                                       

an argument of the savings function. When C̄ > 0, the intertemporal substitution effect dominates the
income effect, making the savings function increasing in both money interest rate as the price of money
and the real interest rate as the relative price of consumption when old. In this model, we adopt C̄ = 0
for expository purposes.
   13 Plotnikov (2013, 2014) explores a similar idea in a version of a real business cycle model, closed
with Farmer’s (2012a) Keynesian search model of the labor market. Plotnikov closes his model with the
assumption that beliefs about future human wealth are adaptive and he shows that a model, closed in
this way, generates jobless recoveries.
                                             ANIMAL SPIRITS                                 9


  The assumption that beliefs are fundamental is not sufficient to explain how
they are fundamental and the belief function could take different forms. In our
view, beliefs are most likely learned and we see the work of George Evans and
Seppo Honkapohja (Evans and Honkapohja, 2001) as a promising avenue in de-
scribing how a particular belief function may arise. In this respect beliefs are
similar to preferences.14
  Economists assume that a human being is described by a preference ordering
and that by the time a person achieves adulthood he or she is able to make
choices over any given commodity bundle. But those choices are learned during
childhood; they are not inherited. At the age of twenty one, an Italian is likely
to choose a glass of wine with a meal; a German is more likely to choose a beer.
But a German child, adopted into an Italian family at birth, will grow up with
the preferences of his adoptive parents, not with those of his biological parents.
Beliefs, in our view, are similar.
  During a period of stable economic activity, people learn to make forecasts
about future variables by projecting observations of variables of interest on their
information from the recent past. When there is a change in the environment,
caused by a policy shift or a large shock to fundamentals, they continue to use
the beliefs that they learned from the past. That argument suggests that we
should treat the parameters of the belief function in the same way that we treat
the parameters of the utility function. They are objects that we would expect to
remain stable over the medium term and that should be estimated using econo-
metric methods.
  In this paper we investigate one plausible assumption about the belief function
and we study its role as a way of closing our model. We assume that beliefs are
determined by the equation
                                           
                                   ∗ PK,t+1
(16)                             Et           = Θt ,
                                      Pt+1

where the expectations operator in Equation (16) is subjective and reflects the
beliefs of a representative person of the probabilities of future events. To impose
discipline on our analysis we assume that expectations are rational; that is,
                                                 
                           ∗ PK,t+1          PK,t+1
(17)                     Et           = Et            = Θt ,
                              Pt+1            Pt+1

where the expectation E is taken with respect to the true probabilities in a rational
expectations equilibrium.
  Because there is no aggregate investment in our model, capital represents an
input in fixed supply. We interpret PK to be the the average price of assets traded
in the stock market and changes in PK represent self-fulfilling shifts in perceptions

  14 The   discussion in this section closely follows the presentation in Farmer (2016a).
10                        UCLA WORKING PAPER                           MARCH 2016


of financial wealth.

                        V.     The Equations of the Model

  The equilibrium of our model is described by the following seven equations. To
obtain these equations, we used two facts. First, factor incomes are proportional
to GDP,
                       Rt Kt                  Wt Lt
(18)                         = αYt     and          = (1 − α)Yt
                        Pt                     Pt
and second, in a symmetric equilibrium, social employment equals individual
employment and each firm employs one unit of capital,

(19)                            Lt = L̄t   and Kt = 1.

  Now we turn to a description of each of the seven equations that comprise our
model.
                                          
                          1−α            δ        PK,t
(20)                                β−       Yt =      .
                        1+β+δ           it         Pt

Equation (20) equates the demand for interest bearing assets by the young (the
young’s real savings function Sty ) to the real value of the single unit of capital
(PK,t /Pt ) available in the economy. This is our analog of the IS curve.
                              ∗
                           Mt+1
                                                    
                                    (1 − α)δ 1 + it
(21)                             =                     Yt .
                             Pt    1+β+δ         it

Equation (21) is the money market clearing condition and it is our equivalent
of the LM curve. Here Mt+1  ∗   is the stock of money exogenously determined by
the central bank and available for the young generation to hold as part of their
optimal portfolio.
                                                               
                  β      1 + it     (PK,t+1 + αPt+1 Yt+1 ) /Pt+1
(22)        Et    o              −                                  = 0.
                 Ct+1   Pt+1 /Pt              PK,t /Pt

Equation (22) is the no-arbitrage relation between the money interest rate and the
return to capital. This equation represents the assumption that physical capital
and government bonds pay the same rate of return and it has no analog in the
simplest version of the IS-LM model.
                                                       ∗
(23)                         Pt Cto = αPt Yt + PK,t + Mt+1 .

Equation (23) is the expenditure function of the old. It says that the old’s expen-
diture on consumption must be equal to the income plus principal from selling
                                       ANIMAL SPIRITS                                       11


capital plus the value of the money held by the old.
                                                            1−α
                                                 Lt
(24)                            Yt =        1−            Lt          .
                                                 Γ

Equation (24) is the social production function. This equation serves only to
determine employment and it plays the role of the 45 degree line in the Keynesian
Cross model.
  Next, we define GDP to be the sum of the consumption of the two generations

(25)                                   Yt = Cty + Cto ,

and, finally, we add a seventh equation, the belief function (26).
                                           
                                     PK,t+1
(26)                            Et            = Θt .
                                      Pt+1

  The belief function distinguishes our model from the New Keynesian approach
and it replaces the New Keynesian Phillips curve. In the absence of this new
element, the other six equations would not uniquely determine the seven endoge-
nous variables {Yt , Pt , it , PK,t , Lt , Cty , Cto }. The belief function is an equation that
determines how much households are willing to pay for claims on the economy’s
capital stock. It represents the aggregate state of confidence or ‘animal spirits’
and, in combination with the other six equations of the model, the belief function
selects an equilibrium.
  In our comparative statics exercises in Section VII, we compare two alternative
specifications for the belief function. In one specification we assume that,

(27)                                 Θt = Θ      for all t.

We call this assumption fixed beliefs and it amounts to the assumption that, in
the collective view of asset market participants, the stock market has some fixed
real value measured in terms of the CPI.
  In a second specification we assume that
                                                 PK,t
(28)                                     Θt =         .
                                                  Pt
We call this assumption adaptive beliefs and it amounts to the assumption that, in
the collective view of market participants, the real value of the stock market is a
random walk. This second assumption, which is a better description of the actual
behavior of stock market prices, has a non-standard implication that we draw
attention to in Section IX.C. It implies that unanticipated shocks to the money
12                            UCLA WORKING PAPER                                      MARCH 2016


supply can have permanent effects on the steady state unemployment rate.15
  Equations (20), (21), (22), (23), (25), and (26) determine aggregate demand.
Given beliefs {Θt } and monetary policy Mt∗ , these equations select an equilibrium
sequence for {Yt , Pt , it , PK,t , Cty , Cto } and Equation (24) determines how much la-
bor firms need to hire to satisfy aggregate demand. Since employment is deter-
mined recursively, in the subsequent parts of the paper we dispense with Equation
(24) in our discussion of equilibrium.

           VI.     The IS-LM-NAC Representation of the Steady-State

  In this section, we show that the steady-state equilibrium of our model admits a
representation that is similar to the IS-LM representation of the General Theory
developed by Hicks and Hansen. The IS-LM model is a static construct in which
the price level is predetermined. To provide a fully dynamic model, Samuelson
closed the IS-LM model by adding a price adjustment equation that later New-
Keynesian economists replaced with the New-Keynesian Phillips curve.
  We take a different approach. We select an equilibrium by closing the labor
market with a belief function. In our model, the IS curve, the LM curve and the
NAC curve, intersect to determine the price level, GDP and the interest rate in
a steady state equilibrium. Unlike the neoclassical synthesis, in our model high
Pareto inefficient unemployment can persist forever in the presence of pessimistic
beliefs. And unlike the interpretation of animal spirits that was popularized by
George Akerlof and Robert Shiller (2009), pessimistic animal spirits are fully
rational. The people in our model are rational and have rational expectations
but they are, sometimes, unable to coordinate on a socially efficient outcome.
  The following equations characterize the steady-state equilibrium:
                                                  
                                   1−α           δ
(29)                       IS:              β−       Y = Θ,
                                1+β+δ            i
                                                       
                                M      (1 − α)δ 1 + i
(30)                     LM:        =                     Y,
                                 P     1+β+δ         i
                                    αY
(31)                    NAC: i =        .
                                     Θ
Equations (29) – (31) determine the three unknowns: Y , i and P , for given values
of M and Θ. We treat Θ = E[PK /P ] as a new exogenous variable that reflects
investor confidence about the real value of their financial assets and by making
Θ exogenous we provide a new interpretation of Keynes’ idea that equilibrium is
selected by ‘animal spirits’.
  In (Y, i) space, the IS and NAC curves determine Y and i and the price level
adjusts to ensure that the LM curve intersects the IS and NAC curves at the
  15 Farmer (2012b, 2015) finds evidence that the real value of the stock market and the unemployment
rate can be parsimoniously modeled as co-integrated random walks. Our work in this paper provides one
possible theoretical model that can explain this finding.
                                 ANIMAL SPIRITS                                  13


steady state. We illustrate the determination of a steady state equilibrium in
Figure 2.




             Figure 2. The IS-LM-NAC Representation of the Steady State




  The IS curve, Equation (29), is downward sloping and its position is determined
by animal spirits, Θ where,
                                               
                                         PK,t+1
(32)                            Θ = Et            .
                                          Pt+1

In a steady state equilibrium, beliefs about future wealth are self-fulfilling. When
people feel wealthy, they are wealthy. Increased confidence shifts both the IS
curve, and the NAC curve, to the right. The economy arrives eventually at a new
steady state equilibrium with higher output, but the path by which the economy
attains this steady state depends on how people form expectations about future
prices. We analyze the movement between equilibria in Section VII.

                   VII.   Two Comparative Static Exercises

   In this section we ask how shifts in exogenous driving variables affect the equi-
librium values of Y , i and P . We conduct two comparative static exercises. In
the first exercise we increase Θ from a low value to a higher value at some date,
t = 1, and we assume that it remains constant thereafter. In the second exercise,
14                             UCLA WORKING PAPER                                      MARCH 2016


we hold Θ fixed forever and we increase the stock of money.16
   Consider first, the experiment of an increase in the belief about the value of
financial wealth. A greater value of Θ influences output through two channels.
Firstly, since consumers believe, correctly, that they are wealthier, real consump-
tion of goods and services increases. The IS curve shifts to the right. Moreover,
higher asset prices reduce the interest rate and the NAC curve becomes flatter.
These effects are illustrated in Figure 3.




                               Figure 3. An Increase in Confidence




  As people become more confident, the IS curves shifts to the right beginning
at the solid IS curve and ending at the dashed IS curve. At the same time, the
NAC curve shifts down and to the right, from the solid NAC to the dashed NAC
curve. Because output increases, the demand for real money balances increases,
and the price level must be lower in the new steady state equilibrium. This is
reflected on Figure 3 by a rightward shift in the LM curve. Because the class
of Cobb-Douglas utility functions implies a unitary elasticity of intertemporal
substitution, the intertemporal substitution effect and the income effect cancel
each other out and, at the new equilibrium, the interest rate remains unchanged.
  Consider next, the effect of an increase in the stock of money, which we illustrate
on Figure 4.
  Equations (29) and (31) determine the equilibrium values of output and the

  16 In section IX we consider an alternative model of expectation formation in which the belief about
the future value of capital is equal to its current realized value.
                                   ANIMAL SPIRITS                                15


interest rate independently of the stock of money. The demand for real balances
depends only on Y and i and, once these variables have been determined, the
price level, P, adjusts to equate the real value of the money supply to the real
value of money demand. It follows that changes in the supply of money will cause
proportional changes in the price level and the nominal value of wealth, leaving
output and the interest rate unchanged.




                      Figure 4. An Increase in the Money Supply



   Figure 4 illustrates the effects of a change in M on a graph. The LM curve
after the increase in the money supply is identical with the LM curve before the
change, illustrating the concept that money, in our model, is neutral. However, as
we will show in Section IX, this result depends on the form of the belief function.
If beliefs about the future value of financial wealth depend on the current realized
value of wealth, an increase in the money supply may have a permanent real effect
on output through its effect on business and consumer confidence.

                           VIII.    Dynamic Equilibria

  In this section we shift from a comparison of steady states to a description of
complete dynamic equilibria. To study the equilibria of the complete model, we
use the algorithm, GENSYS, developed by Christopher Sims (2001). First, we
choose a constant sequence {M, Θ} to describe policy and we log-linearize the
dynamic equations around a steady state. Let
                                                                                 0
(33)            xt ≡ yt , ĩt , pt , pK,t , Et [yt+1 ] , Et [pt+1 ] , Et [pK,t+1 ]
16                       UCLA WORKING PAPER                             MARCH 2016


be log deviations of the endogenous variables from their steady state values. Let

(34)                                εt ≡ [mt , θt ]0

log deviations of the exogenous variables from their initial values and define three
new variables,

(35)                          ηt1 ≡ pt − Et−1 [pt ],
(36)                          ηt2 ≡ pK,t − Et−1 [pK,t ],
(37)                          ηt3 ≡ yt − Et−1 [yt ].

These new variables represent endogenous forecast errors. Next, we log-linearize
equations (20) – (22) and Equation (26) and we append them to equations (35) –
(37). That leads to the following linear system of seven equations in seven un-
knowns,

(38)                       Γ0 xt = Γ1 xt−1 + Ψεt + Πηt ,

  The matrix Ψ is derived from the linearized equations and it explains how shocks
to M and shocks to Θ influence each of the equations of the model. Once we have
provided a model of beliefs, the steady state of our system is determinate. For
every specification of the belief function, Equation (26), there is a unique steady
state. In this sense, our animal spirits model is similar to any dynamic stochastic
general equilibrium model. For a given specification of fundamentals, there is a
unique predicted outcome.
  But the fact that the model, augmented by a belief function, has a unique steady
state, is not enough to uniquely determine a dynamic equilibrium. To establish
uniqueness of a dynamic equilibrium, we must show that for every representation
of fundamentals, where fundamentals now include beliefs, there is a unique dy-
namic path converging to the steady state. The uniqueness or non-uniqueness of
dynamic equilibria is determined by the properties of the matrices Γ0 and Γ1 , in
Equation (38).
  To establish the properties of a dynamic equilibrium, we must provide a cal-
ibrated version of the model since determinacy of equilibrium is, in general, a
numerical question. To study determinacy, we used the calibration from Table 1.


                                Table 1—Calibration

        Parameter                      Definition                     Value
            α        Share of capital in output                         .33
            β        Subjective discount rate                           .50
            δ        Coefficient on real money balances in utility      .05
                                  ANIMAL SPIRITS                                  17


  For this calibration, we found that our model has one degree of indeterminacy.
In words, that implies that for any set of initial conditions there is a one dimen-
sional continuum of dynamic paths, all of which converge to a given steady state.
In practice, it means that the rational expectations assumption is not sufficient
to uniquely determine all three of the forecast errors, ηt , as functions of the fun-
damental shocks, εt . When the model displays dynamic indeterminacy, there are
many ways that people may use to forecast the future, all of which are consistent
with a rational expectations equilibrium (Farmer, 1991, 1993).
  Following Farmer (2000), we resolve this indeterminacy by selecting a particular
equilibrium for which

(39)                          ηt1 ≡ pt − Et−1 [pt ] = 0.

This equation is a special case of Equation (35). In words, this assumption means
that money prices are set one period in advance. It is important to note that price
stickiness does not violate the property of rational expectations. The equilibrium
with sticky prices is one of many possible equilibria of the economy where agents
form self-fulfilling beliefs about wealth and it is an equilibrium that explains an
important property of the data: Unanticipated monetary shocks have real short
run effects and they feed only slowly into prices.

                      IX.    Three Dynamic Experiments

   In this section, using the parameter values from Table 1, we analyze three
dynamic experiments. In the first experiment, we begin from a steady state,
and we ask how a permanent unanticipated increase in confidence affects the
endogenous variables of the model. In the second and third experiments, we
ask how a permanent unanticipated increase in the stock of money affects the
economy.
   In our second experiment, the belief of households about the future real value
of the stock market is invariant to its current value. In our third experiment,
households expect the future real value of the stock market to be equal to its
current value. We refer to the alternative assumptions in experiments two and
three as fixed and adaptive beliefs.
   In the case of fixed beliefs, the experiment of increasing the money supply,
has the same effects that it would have in a classical model in which output
is supply determined: Money is neutral. In contrast, if households form their
beliefs adaptively, a permanent increase in the money supply has a permanent
effect on output. Money is non-neutral because it increases the real value of the
stock market and that increase is translated, through a confidence effect, into a
permanent increase in beliefs about the value of the stock market.
   Is it reasonable to think that a change in a nominal variable may have permanent
real effects? We think so. Farmer (2012c) and Farmer and Nicolò (2016) have
estimated a model of the US economy in which beliefs about future income growth
18                          UCLA WORKING PAPER                          MARCH 2016


are equal to current income growth and they have shown that a belief function
of this kind outperforms standard New-Keynesian models closed by a Phillips
curve. In their model, the central bank sets the money interest rate and changes
in the interest rate have a permanent effect on the unemployment rate by shifting
the economy from one equilibrium to another. In our model a similar shift from
one steady state equilibrium to another is achieved by an increase in the money
supply which raises share prices and has a permanent effect on animal spirits.

                       A.   Experiment 1: A Shock to Confidence

  Figure 5 displays the dynamic paths of eight variables in response to a one
time increase in beliefs about the future value of capital. We call this a shock to
confidence.




                       Figure 5. A Permanent Shock to Confidence




     Panel (a) depicts the value of beliefs about the future real value of the stock
                                         ANIMAL SPIRITS                                             19


market, Et [PK,t+1 /Pt+1 ] . This is the variable we refer to as Θ. In our first
experiment, Θ increases by one percent and it remains one percent higher for
ever after. Panel (b) shows the value of the money supply, which we hold fixed
for this experiment.
  Panel (c) shows that, in period 2, output increases and remains permanently
higher by one percent. This occurs because rational forward-looking consumers
increase their spending on goods and services and firms respond by hiring ad-
ditional workers to produce these goods. Panel (d) shows that the price level
falls and stays permanently lower. Greater output increases the demand for real
money balances and the price level must fall to equate the demand and supply of
money.
  Panel (e) shows that, in period 2, the realized value of real stock-market wealth
increases by one percent. That follows from the rational expectations assumption;
people expected the value of share prices to increase and, in a rational expectations
equilibrium, that belief is supported by the way that people form their beliefs in
period 2 and in all subsequent periods. From panel (g), we see that the real
interest rate jumps up in period 1 and reverts to its steady-state value thereafter.
Because the price level and the money interest rate do not adjust in the first
period, the real interest rate adjustment is achieved by a self-fulfilling adjustment
to the expected future price level.
  We want to draw attention to several features of these impulse responses. First,
although adjustment to a confidence shock is delayed, the delay lasts for only one
period. That follows from the stylized nature of a model in which there are no
endogenous propagation mechanisms. Second, prices do not respond at all in
the first period. Unlike the New-Keynesian model, prices are not sticky because
of adjustment costs or restrictions on choice. They are fixed because people
rationally anticipate that output, not prices, will respond to unanticipated shocks.
  If models in this class are to be taken seriously as descriptions of data, they must
be tied down by an assumption about how beliefs are formed. To give the model
empirical content, one must assume that the belief function remains time invariant
at least over the medium term. If that assumption holds, the parameters of the
belief function can be estimated in the same way that econometricians estimate
preference parameters.17 We propose to tie down our model by assuming that
the covariance of prices with contemporaneous variables should be treated as
a separate parameter of the belief function and that this parameter should be
estimated using standard econometric methods.

           B.   Experiment 2: A Shock to the Money Supply with Fixed Beliefs

  In subsections IX.B and IX.C we show that the way economic agents form
beliefs about the future, matter for the long-term effect of monetary shocks.

  17 See Farmer (2012c) and Farmer and Nicolò (2016) for examples of empirical exercises that estimate
a version of this model on U.S. data.
20                       UCLA WORKING PAPER                              MARCH 2016




       Figure 6. A Permanent Shock to the Supply of Money under Fixed Beliefs




  In subsection IX.B, we consider the case of fixed beliefs, which we model with
Equation (40),
                                          
                                    PK,t+1
(40)                           Et            = Θ.
                                     Pt+1

   Figure 6 displays the dynamic paths for the variables of this economy in response
to a shock to the money supply when beliefs are modeled in this way. This shock
is reflected in Panel (b) which depicts the time path for M . We assume that at
date 1, M increases by one percent and that it remains one percent higher forever
after. Panel (a) reflects our assumption that beliefs are fixed.
   Panel (c) shows that output increases temporarily in the first period by one
percent. This happens because prices are predetermined and are unable to adjust
                                           ANIMAL SPIRITS                                                21


until period 2. Instead, the increase in the money supply causes an increase in
aggregate demand that is met by a corresponding temporary increase in output
and employment. Firms hire more workers to satisfy the increased aggregate
demand.
  Panel (d) shows that prices respond in period 2 and remain 1 percent higher.
This increase neutralizes the increase in the money supply and is consistent with
the return to steady state of output reflected in panel (c). Panels (e) and (f)
show that the real value of shares in the stock market increases and then returns
to its original value. In contrast, the money value of shares in the stock market
goes up by one percent and remains permanently higher. From panel (g) we see
that the real interest rate falls in period 1 and panel (h) shows that the money
interest rate remains constant during the entire exercise.

         C.    Experiment 3: A Shock to the Money Supply with Adaptive Beliefs

  To model adaptive beliefs, we replace Equation (40), with Equation (41),
                                         
                                   PK,t+1     PK,t
(41)                          Et            =      .
                                    Pt+1       Pt

When beliefs are adaptive, households expect the real value of the stock market
to be a random walk. This is a special case of a more general model in which
beliefs are formed by the following adaptive expectations equation,18
                                                     
                PK,t+1        PK,t                   PK,t
           Et            =λ          + (1 − λ)Et−1          , λ ∈ [0, 1].
                 Pt+1          Pt                     Pt

   Figure 7 displays the dynamic paths for the variables of this economy in response
to a shock to the money supply when beliefs about the real value of shares in the
stock market are determined by a random walk. We assume that M increases by
one percent and that it remains one percent higher for ever after. The shock to
the money supply is reflected in Panel (a).
   The increase in the stock of money causes an increase in the money price of
financial assets; this is shown in Panel (f). Because the price of goods is predeter-
mined, the increase in the nominal share price is also an increase in its real price
as shown in Panel (e). Panel (b) shows that beliefs about the future real value of
shares respond to this monetary shock and they remain permanently one percent
higher in all subsequent periods. Panel (c) shows that the increase in the real
value of the stock market triggers an increase in output that is sustained because
of the effect of the increase in the money supply on beliefs, as reflected in Panel
(b). Panels (d), (g) and (h) show that the price level, and the real and nominal
interest rates do not respond at all to a one off permanent increase in the money
  18 We have restricted ourselves to the special case of λ = 1 because Farmer (2012c) estimated a model
that allows λ to lie in the interval [0, 1] and found that empirically, the data favors a model where λ = 1.
22                       UCLA WORKING PAPER                             MARCH 2016




     Figure 7. A Permanent Shock to the Supply of Money under Adaptive Beliefs



supply which is reflected entirely in changes to output and in the real value of
financial assets.

                                 X.   Conclusion

  We have proposed a fresh way of thinking about the monetary transmission
mechanism. By integrating Keynesian economics with general equilibrium theory
in a new way, we have provided an alternative to the IS-LM framework that we
call the IS-LM-NAC model. Our new model provides an alternative narrative to
New-Keynesian economics to explain how macroeconomic policy influences prices
and employment.
  Our approach differs from New Keynesian economics in two fundamental ways.
First, our model displays dynamic indeterminacy. We focus on a dynamic path
with predetermined prices to show that changes in the money supply may affect
                                  ANIMAL SPIRITS                                  23


real economic activity even if all nominal prices are perfectly flexible. Second, our
model displays steady state indeterminacy that arises as a consequence of search
frictions in the labor market. We replace the classical search assumption that
firms and workers bargain over the wage, with the Keynesian search assumption
that beliefs about the future value of the stock market select a steady-state equi-
librium. In our view, beliefs should be treated as a new fundamental of the model.
The belief function advances our understanding of why the unemployment rate is
so persistent in real world data.
   Finally, we have presented a simple graphical apparatus that can be used by
policy makers to understand how policy affects the economy. A new element, the
NAC curve, connects the interest rate to current and expected future values of
the stock market and it explains how ‘animal spirits’ influence economic activity.
The IS-LM-NAC framework provides a rich new approach to policy analysis that
explains the short-run and long-run effects of policy, without the assumption that
prices are prevented from moving by artificial barriers to price adjustment.

                                 REFERENCES

George A. Akerlof and Robert J. Shiller. Animal Spirits. Princeton University
 Press, Princeton and Oxford, 2009.

Jess Benhabib and Roger E. A. Farmer. The monetary transmission mechanism.
  Review of Economic Dynamics, 3(3):523–550, 2000.

Andreas Beyer and Roger E. A. Farmer. Natural rate doubts. Journal of Economic
 Dynamics and Control, 31(121):797–825, 2007.

Olivier J. Blanchard and Lawrence H. Summers. Hysteresis and the european
  unemployment problem. In Stanley Fischer, editor, NBER Macroeconomics
  Annual, volume 1, pages 15–90. National Bureau of Economic Research, Boston,
  MA, 1986.

Olivier J. Blanchard and Lawrence H. Summers. Hysteresis in unemployment.
  European Economic Review, 31:288–295, 1987.

Lawrence Christiano, Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles Evans. Nominal rigidities
  and the dynamics effects of a shock to monetary policy. Journal of Political
  Economy, 113(1):1–45, 2005.

Peter A. Diamond. Aggregate demand management in search equilibrium. Journal
  of Political Economy, 90:881–94, 1982.

George W. Evans and Seppo Honkapohja. Learning and Expectations in Macroe-
 conomics. Princeton University Press, Princeton, 2001.

Roger E. A. Farmer. Sticky prices. Economic Journal,, 101(409):1369–1379, 1991.
24                      UCLA WORKING PAPER                           MARCH 2016


Roger E. A. Farmer. The Macroeconomics of Self-Fulfilling Prophecies. MIT
  Press, Cambridge, MA, 1993.
Roger E. A. Farmer. Two new keynesian theories of sticky prices. Macroeconomic
  Dynamics, 4(1):74–107, 2000.
Roger E. A. Farmer. Why does the data reject the lucas critique?         Annales
  d’Economie et de Statistiques, 67/68:111–129, 2002.
Roger E. A. Farmer. How the Economy Works: Confidence, Crashes and Self-
  fulfilling Prophecies. Oxford University Press, New York, April 2010a.
Roger E. A. Farmer. Expectations, Employment and Prices. Oxford University
  Press, New York, March 2010b.
Roger E. A. Farmer. Confidence, crashes and animal spirits. Economic Journal,
  122(559), March 2012a.
Roger E. A. Farmer. The stock market crash of 2008 caused the great recession:
  Theory and evidence. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 36:697–707,
  2012b.
Roger E. A. Farmer. Animal spirits, persistent unemployment and the belief
  function. In Roman Frydman and Edmund S. Phelps, editors, Rethinking Ex-
  pectations: The Way Forward for Macroeconomics, chapter 5, pages 251–276.
  Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 2012c.
Roger E. A. Farmer. Animal spirits, financial crises and persistent unemployment.
  Economic Journal, 123(568):317–340, 2013.
Roger E. A. Farmer. The stock market crash really did cause the great recession.
  Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, 77(5):617–633, 2015.
Roger E. A. Farmer. Prosperity for All: How to Prevent Financial Crises. Oxford
  University Press, New York, September 2016a.
Roger E. A. Farmer. The evolution of endogenous business cycles. Macroeconomic
  Dynamics, 20:554–557, 2016b.
Roger E. A. Farmer and Giovanni Nicolò. Keynesian economics without the
  phillips curve. UCLA mimeo, June 2016.
Roger E A Farmer and Michael Woodford. Self-fulfilling prophecies and the
  business cycle. Caress Working Paper 84-12, 1984.
Roger E A Farmer and Michael Woodford. Self-fulfilling prophecies and the
  business cycle. Macroeconomic Dynamics, 1(4):740–769, 1997.
Milton Friedman. The role of monetary policy. American Economic Review, 58
 (March):1–17, 1968.
                               ANIMAL SPIRITS                                  25


John Maynard Keynes. The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money.
  MacMillan and Co., London and Basingstoke, 1936. 1973 edition published for
  the Royal Economic Society, Cambridge.
Robert G. King, Charles I. Plosser, James Stock, and Mark. Watson. Stochastic
  trends and economic fluctuations. American Economic Review, 81(4):819–840,
  1991.
Peter J. Klenow and Benjamin A. Malin. Microeconomic evidence on price set-
  ting. In Benjamin M. Friedman and Michael Woodford, editors, Handbook of
  Monetary Economics, volume 3, pages 231–284. Elsevier, Amsterdam & New
  York, 2017.
Gregory N. Mankiw. Small menu costs and large buiness cycles: A macroeconomic
  model of monopoly. QJE, 100:529–537, 1985.
N. Gregory Mankiw. Principles of Economics. Cengage, New York, 2015. Seventh
  Edition.
N. Gregory Mankiw and Ricardo Reis. Sticky information in general equilibrium.
  Journal of the European Economic Association, 5(2-3):603–613, 2007.
Kenneth Matheny. Non-neutral responses to money supply shocks when con-
  sumption and leisure are pareto substitutes. Economic Theory, 11:379–402,
  1998.
Dale T. Mortensen. A theory of wage and employment dynamics. In Edmund S.
 Phelps, G. C. Archibald, and Armen A. Alchian, editors, Microeconomic Foun-
 dations of Employment and Inflation Theory. W. W. Norton, New York, 1970.
Don. Patinkin. Money Interest and Prices. The MIT Press, Cambridge, Mas-
 sachusetts, second abridged edition, 1956.
C. A. Pissarides. Job search and participation. Economica, 43:333–349, 1976.
Dmitry Plotnikov. Three Essays on Macroeonomics with Incomplete Factor Mar-
 kets. PhD thesis, UCLA, 2013.
Dmitry Plotnikov. Hysterisis in unemployment and jobless recoveries. IMF Work-
 ing Paper Series, (77), May 2014.
Paul A. Samuelson. Economics: An Introductory Analysis (3rd Ed.). McGraw
  Hill, 1955.
Christopher A. Sims. Solving linear rational expectations models. Journal of
  Computational Economics, 20(1-2):1–20, 2001.
Christopher A. Sims. Implications of rational inattention. Journal of Monetary
 Economics, 50:665–690, 2003.
26                     UCLA WORKING PAPER                        MARCH 2016


Frank Smets and Raf Wouters. Shocks and frictions in U.S. business cycles: A
  Bayesian DSGE approach. American Economic Review, 97(3):586–606, June
  2007.
Léon Walras. Elements of Pure Economics, 4th ed. 1926, rev ed. 1926, Engl
   transl. 2003. Routledge, New York, 1899.
