                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        THE PRODUCTION OF HUMAN CAPITAL IN DEVELOPED COUNTRIES:
             EVIDENCE FROM 196 RANDOMIZED FIELD EXPERIMENTS

                                      Roland G. Fryer, Jr

                                      Working Paper 22130
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22130


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2016




I am grateful to Lawrence Katz and numerous colleagues whose ideas and collaborative work fill
this chapter. William Murdock III provided a truly unprecedented amount of effort, attention to
detail, and input into this project. Tanaya Devi, Meghan Howard-Noveck, C. Adam Pfander, and
Rucha Vankudre also provided exceptional research assistance. Financial support from the Broad
Foundation and the EdLabs Advisory Group is gratefully acknowledged. Correspondence can be
addressed to the author by e-mail at rfryer@fas.harvard.edu. The usual caveat applies. The views
expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Roland G. Fryer, Jr. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
The Production of Human Capital in Developed Countries: Evidence from 196 Randomized
Field Experiments
Roland G. Fryer, Jr
NBER Working Paper No. 22130
March 2016
JEL No. I0,J0,J38

                                          ABSTRACT

Randomized field experiments designed to better understand the production of human capital
have increased exponentially over the past several decades. This chapter summarizes what we
have learned about various partial derivatives of the human capital production function, what
important partial derivatives are left to be estimated, and what – together – our collective efforts
have taught us about how to produce human capital in developed countries. The chapter
concludes with a back of the envelope simulation of how much of the racial wage gap in America
might be accounted for if human capital policy focused on best practices gleaned from
randomized field experiments.


Roland G. Fryer, Jr
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center 208
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
rfryer@fas.harvard.edu




A Online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w22130
      “The True Method of Knowledge is Experiment” – William Blake



1    Introduction

Racial and ethnic inequality is a stubborn empirical reality across the developed world. Blacks in the United
States earn twenty-four percent less, live five fewer years, and are six times more likely to be incarcerated on
any given day (Fryer 2010). Black men in the United Kingdom are three times more likely to be unemployed
and as full-time workers, earn twenty percent less (Hatton 2011). The Roma in Hungary are over two years
less educated, have worse self-reported health, and earn twenty-eight percent less (Kántor 2011). Turkish
immigrants in Germany are almost twice as likely to be unemployed and earn thirty-eight percent less
(von Loeffelholz 2011). African immigrants in Spain are less educated than natives, have a 4.9 percentage
point higher unemployment rate, and earn thirty-five percent less (de la Rica 2011). The income difference
between natives and second generation immigrants in Sweden is 11% (Nordin and Rooth 2007).
    Gaining a better understanding of the underlying causes of such stark racial and ethnic inequality is of
tremendous importance for public policy. Using data from the U.S., O’Neill (1990) and Neal and Johnson
(1996) demonstrate that blacks, Hispanics, and whites are paid similar prices for similar pre-market skill
bundles – yet, there are large differences in skills. Similarly, Nordin and Rooth (2007) show that differences
in income between natives and second generation immigrants in Sweden depend strongly on a skill gap –
when controlling for scores on the Swedish Military Enlistment Test, the income gap decreases by more
than seventy percent.
    An important question then, is what obstacles preclude the acquisition of productive skills. Using ten
large datasets which together, include students that range in age from eight months to 17 years old, Fryer
and Levitt (2013) show that the racial achievement gap is remarkably robust across time, samples, and
assessments. The achievement gap does not exist in the first year of life, but black students in the U.S. fall
behind by age two (in the raw data) and these racial differences in academic achievement after kindergarten
cannot be explained by including standard controls. Similarly, controls cannot explain differences between
children of natives and children of immigrants on international standardized tests such as the Programme for
International Student Assessment (PISA), Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study (TIMSS),
and Progress in International Reading Literacy Study (PIRLS) in other developed countries such as France,
Switzerland, Netherlands, and Sweden (Parsons and Smeeding 2008).
    If the deleterious effects of labor market discrimination are in decline and the importance of productive
skills are on the rise, an important public policy question is how to increase human capital – particularly for


                                                       1
those who, due to accident of birth, begin life disadvantaged. A fuller understanding would allow policy
makers to use basic economic principles (e.g. equating marginal return to marginal costs) in their decision
making. Is it more cost-effective to decrease class size or provide parents financial incentives to increase
student achievement? Should school districts increase the management skills of principals or increase early
childhood programs? What is a better use of resources – early childhood investments or providing high-
dosage tutoring to adolescents?
    In an effort to answer questions like these, education researchers have spent decades trying to infer causal
relationships from non-experimental data by examining large data sets and invoking various assumptions,
many of which are not verifiable. Prior to the late 1970s, research on the relationship between class size
and academic achievement was widely considered inconclusive (Porwell 1978; Glass and Smith 1978). In
fact, some studies, including the famous Coleman Report, suggested there were greater gains in classrooms
with more students (Nelson 1959; Coleman et al. 1966). These studies did not adequately account for the
fact that school districts commonly bundled better students and teachers in classrooms with more students.
A well-designed randomized experiment would enable researchers to avoid such confounding factors and
help settle the debate among non-experimental estimates. Using the random assignment of students to small
classes in Project STAR, Krueger (1999) showed that students assigned to small classrooms indeed do score
higher than students in regular sized classrooms. The effect sizes for the K-3 students in Project STAR are
in the range of 0.19-0.28 standard deviations and represent 64 to 82 percent of the white-black test score gap
in the data
    Similarly, a large body of non-experimental studies have found significant positive correlations between
neighborhood socioeconomic status and students’ academic achievement (Aaronson 1998; Ainsworth 2002;
Chase-Lansdale and Gordon 1996; Chase-Lansdale et al. 1997; Duncan, Brooks-Gunn, and Klebanov 1994;
Halpern-Felsher et al. 1997; Kohen et al. 2002). However, randomized and quasi-experimental studies have
failed to establish a causal link. Although Rosenbuam (1995) found that suburban students from Chicago’s
Gautreaux program outperformed urban students, Jacob (2004) found no effects on students’ test scores
from switching neighborhoods due to housing demolitions. Further, Oreopoulous (2003) found no evidence
of long-term impacts of neighborhood quality on labor market outcomes in a quasi-experimental analysis.
More importantly, in the short-run, the Moving to Opportunity randomized housing mobility experiment
(Ludwig et al. 2012; Kling, Liebman and Katz 2007; Sanbonmatsu et al. 2011) produced no sustained
improvements in academic achievement, educational attainment, risky behaviors, or labor market outcomes
for either female or male children, including those who were below school age at the time of random assign-
ment. Interestingly though, Chetty et al. (2016) show that the Moving to Opportunity experiment had large


                                                       2
impacts on early-adulthood outcomes for children who were younger than 13 years old at randomization.
In their mid-twenties, these individuals have 31% higher income, have higher college attendance rates, are
less likely to be single parents, and live in better neighborhoods relative to similar individuals in the control
group. For children who were older than 13 years old at randomization, the experiment had no positive
long-term impacts.
    In the 1920s, William McCall, an education psychologist at Columbia University, was one of the first
supporters of using randomization to investigate the validity of education programs. His 1923 book, “How
to Experiment in Education”, developed a method for gathering data by randomly determining treatment and
control groups. His work provided the framework for the experimental designs we see in educational field
experiments today. Many of the early influential education field experiments came decades after McCall’s
book with the wave of large-scale social experiments in the latter half of the 20th century.1 In the 1960s we
saw the Perry preschool experiment and the income maintenance experiments, in the 1970s the Abecedarian
project was initiated, and in the 1980s there was Project STAR, the Tennessee class size experiment. The data
from these randomized experiments alone were used for decades to investigate many interesting questions
about how to best produce human capital.
    The inherent power of randomized field experiments is in the ability to estimate partial derivatives of
the educational production function. That is, holding other variables constant, one can alter the amount of
time students spend in school or the salary of their teachers, or whether or not the students receive financial
incentives. One’s imagination is the only real bound.
    To see the advantages of this approach, imagine the following simple production process.2 Let Yi j denote
a measure of an academic achievement j for individual i, where j might represent state test scores or other
norm-referenced tests such as the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Tests or the Woodcock-Johnson Tests of
Achievement. For each j, assume a simple Education Production Function (EPF) of the following form:


                                                   Yi = f (Ei , Si , Hi , Mi , P)


where, Ei = denotes student i0 s early childhood experience, Si captures various school inputs, Hi represents
household and neighborhood inputs, Mi , captures “social skills” such as grit, resilience, or what psycholo-
gists often refer to as “the Big 5.” Let P be a vector of relevant prices.
    We assume that f is smooth and continuously differentiable in its arguments. Imagine that we want
    1 See Levitt and List (2009) for a brief history of field experiments.
    2 The  model is meant to illuminate, clarify, and contrast estimates in the literature. It is not meant to be “realistic” or to
be directly estimable. There is a rich literature designed to better understand and empirically estimate the education production
function (Cunha and Heckman 2007; Hanushek 1979; Krueger 1999; Todd and Wolpin 2003).


                                                                 3
to understand the impact of important changes in home environment on student test scores, holding school
                                                                                                              ∂Y
quality, mindset, and early childhood experience fixed. This is equivalent to estimating                      ∂H .   On the other
hand, we may want to understand the impact of investments in school-based reform on human capital holding
                                  ∂Y
all else equal by estimating      ∂S .   Or, the impact of instilling more “grit” or a “growth mindset” into students,
                                            ∂Y
all else equal. This is equivalent to       ∂M .

    Perhaps recognizing the net benefits of randomized field experiments and because of a desire to avoid
past miscues due to biased estimates, federal and local governments, early childhood centers, entrepreneurs,
and school districts have become laboratories for randomized field experiments. Forty-five years after the
famous Perry Preschool experiment, families in Chicago Heights were rewarded for teaching their own chil-
dren a similar curriculum (Fryer, Levitt, and List 2015). Thirty years after the seminal class size experiment
in public elementary schools of Tennessee, school districts in both America and Europe have implemented
various tutoring experiments, management best practices, and programs designed to increase the human
capital of the adults in school buildings (e.g. Fryer 2014; Cook et al. 2014; Clark et al. 2013; Garet et al.
2008; Carlson et al. 2011; May et al. 2013; Blachman et al. 2004). Forty years after the income maintenance
experiments, public policy across the developed world is being influenced by researchers investigating the
impacts of welfare-to-work programs, earnings supplements, and parental involvement (e.g. Hamilton et al.
2001; Michalopoulos et al. 2002; Avvisati et al. 2014).
    Indeed, randomized control trials in education have increased exponentially over the past 50 years. In
2000, 14 percent of reviewed education publications on What Works Clearinghouse met their standards
without reservations, a distinction given only to well-designed studies that have comparison groups deter-
mined through a random process. By 2010, that number had tripled to over 46 percent. Figure 1 provides a
time series of studies in education. Throughout the 1980s, these randomized education studies were sparse.
But in the 1990s, we start seeing a steady flow of approximately 10 publications a year that utilize a random
design and then this number increases all the way up to a high of 49 randomized experiments in 2009.
    Given the remarkable increase in the use of randomized field trials over the past 50 years and the robust
correlation between human capital and other economic outcomes such as income and employment, it’s time
to take stock and summarize what we have learned about various partial derivatives of the human capital
production function, what important partial derivatives are left to be estimated, and what – together– our
collective effort over the past several decades has taught us about how to produce human capital in developed
countries.3

     3 To be clear, randomized trials are not a panacea. There are important limitations to randomized controlled trials, which have

been documented in Deaton (2010), Mosteller and Boruch (2002), Worrall (2007), and Rothstein and von Wachter (2016), the latter
in this volume. We describe a few here. First, many questions that are potentially interesting to economists may not be answerable


                                                                 4
    This chapter attempts to do three things.
    First, We conducted a relatively exhaustive search of all randomized field experiments in education. We
define a field experiment as any intervention that uses a verifiably random procedure to assign participants to
treatment and control groups in a non-laboratory environment. This definition, while restrictive, is consistent
with the definition of a field experiment described in Harrison and List (2004) and the US Department of
Education’s What Works Clearinghouse “without reservation” standard. Using this definition, we sourced
almost one thousand field experiments to be included in our analysis. We further limited the sample of
studies to be included to studies conducted in “highly developed” countries with standardized reading or
math outcomes.4 These restrictions eliminated almost three-quarters of the experiments, leaving a sample
of 199.
    We divide our sample of studies into three main categories of intervention – early childhood, school-
based interventions, and home-based interventions – and provide a summary of the literature within each
category.5 Early childhood experiments investigate the impacts of preschool attendance, home-based ini-
tiatives that target pre-kindergarten children, and different preschool models on early achievement. Indeed,
any experiment with outcomes measured before kids enter school is categorized as early childhood – inde-

with a randomized trial. For instance, how much of the variance in achievement is explained by genetic endowment? Given we are
not likely to alter genetics by means of a field experiment, if one is wed to randomized controlled trials (RCTs) then this question
is unanswerable. Second, as with all statistics – the evaluation of field experiments has implications for the mean of the population
and may have little value in predicting individual behavior. With large enough RCTs, one can alleviate some of these concerns by
estimating heterogeneous treatment effects. Third, and likely most constraining, are a host of important caveats which center on
external validity. One cannot always generalize the results from a local RCT to other contexts. An obvious example of this is if an
RCT finds a program has large impacts using a sample of poverty-stricken minority children, one cannot assume the program will
have similar impacts on the universe of students in the U.S. However, even if the RCT uses a representative sample of the target
population, there are still concerns of external validity. For example, when implementing a large-scale policy, there could possibly
be general equilibrium effects that a pilot RCT did not detect. Fourth, Deaton (2010) expresses many concerns about the analyses
and implementations of RCTs – exploring heterogeneous treatment effects can be viewed as data-mining and researchers should
explore the implications of testing a large number of hypotheses in their studies; researchers rarely use appropriate standard errors
when reporting results; exploring different combinations of baseline variables to include in regressions is another potential form of
data-mining; including baseline variables can lead to substantial biases in small samples; attrition from the study must be addressed;
and it is not uncommon for RCTs to have implementation and operational issues that threaten the validity of the experiment. Fifth,
spillover effects could lead one to misstate a program’s overall effect. The example that Rothstein and von Wachter (2016) give is
a labor market program that attempts to increase the search effort of individuals in treatment. This program may lower the chances
of finding jobs for the control group and thus overstate the impact of the program’s total effect. Sixth, RCTs evaluating programs
are considered “black boxes” that do not reveal the true mechanisms of interest. Although one can use randomized admission
lotteries to estimate the causal impact of pre-existing charter schools, the causal relation between specific school inputs cannot
be determined from such a study. Finally, Deaton (2010) and others argue that in an effort to overcome the above issues, RCTs
can become prohibitively expensive. Still, with these important limitations in mind, the conventional wisdom is: if you can do a
randomized field experiment, you should. Of the above seven issues which are commonly discussed with RCTs, five of them can
be sidestepped by running more, larger, and better designed RCTs. Moreover, if one designs the RCT in a way that helps validate a
model of selection for observational data, then the only limitation appears to the budget of the researcher.
     4 We consider countries as highly developed if they received a classification of “Very High Human Development” in United

Nations Development Programme (2010). A country is classified as very high if they score in the top quartile on an index of human
development that includes life expectancy, mean years of schooling, expected years of schooling, and gross national income per
capita.
     5 We don’t focus on mindset experiments (M in the production function above) due to very few of these experiments passing
                                                   i
the inclusion restrictions of our meta-analysis discussed below.


                                                                  5
pendent of the nature of the treatment.
    School-based experiments target K-12 curricula, teachers, management practices, students in classroom
settings, principals, and other school resources. Any experiment where the dosage is applied in a school
setting – such as offering families vouchers to attend private schools or after-school programs – We cate-
gorize as a school-based intervention. Even experiments in which K-12 resources are given at home – for
instance tutors from the school tutor students in their living rooms – We code as a school-based experi-
ment. Home-based experiments focus on parenting, income constraints, neighborhood environment, and a
student’s access to educational resources in their household. Similar to above, if an experiment takes place
at home and focuses on these inputs, then it is considered a home-based experiment. For example, parenting
classes that take place in a school auditorium are considered a home intervention.
    While the above categories are mutually exclusive, collectively exhaustive, and internally consistent –
which categories to sort experiments into is a bit arbitrary. For example, in Sumi et al. (2012), both teachers
and parents received training on how to teach students replacement behaviors. This is potentially important
because when we combine estimates within categories across the set of experiments using the DerSimonian-
Laird meta-analysis coefficient (see DerSimonian and Laird 1986) – the labels on categories become a “lazy
man’s” way of deciding what works and what doesn’t. If the meta-analysis coefficient for early childhood
studies is greater than the coefficient for home studies, this is evidence that early childhood studies have a
higher impact on average. In an attempt to avoid interactions of the categories in our analysis, studies that
have characteristics of more than one category are excluded from our analysis (but are still included in the
tables).
    With these caveats in mind, the results of this inquiry are interesting and, in some cases, quite surpris-
ing. There is substantial heterogeneity in treatment effects across and within various categories of field
experiments. Experiments in early childhood and schools can be particularly effective at producing human
capital. The random effects meta-coefficients for early childhood experiments are 0.111σ (0.031) for stan-
dardized math scores and 0.165σ (0.032) for reading. The estimates for schools are 0.052σ (0.008) and
0.068σ (0.009) for math and reading scores, respectively. Within school-based field experiments, those that
alter the management practices of schools, or implement “high-dosage” tutoring tend to demonstrate large
effects. Having pooled impacts in the range of 0.507-0.655σ, the three most successful early childhood
experiments were the famous Ypsilanti Perry Preschool Project (Weikart et al. 1970) and evaluations of the
Breakthrough to Literacy and Ready, Set, Leap! curricula (Layzer et al. 2007). In schools, with evaluations
producing pooled impacts ranging from 0.779-1.582σ, the most successful programs appear to be Reading
Recovery (Center et al. 1995; Schwartz 2005) and Peer-Assisted Learning Strategies (Mathes and Babyak


                                                      6
2001).
    Interventions that attempt to lower poverty, change neighborhoods, or otherwise alter the home envi-
ronment in which children are reared have produced surprisingly consistent and precisely estimated “zero”
results. Avvisati et al. (2014) show that a comprehensive parent training program in France had large be-
havioral impacts that spilled over to students whose parents did not participate. However, the study found
no impacts on academic outcomes. The famous negative income tax experiment – which provided low-
income families with more money while incentivizing them to work less – had no impact on children’s test
scores (Maynard and Murnane 1979). As with Avvisati et al. (2014) and Maynard and Murnane (1979), the
average home or neighborhood experiment that our search returned has math and reading impacts that are
statistically indistinguishable from zero.
    The literature – all 196 randomized field experiments discovered through our search process – is sum-
marized in a large set of tables at the end of the chapter. This was the most laborius part of the process.
For each study, we collected data on sample demographics, key aspects of the research design, and effect
sizes. The typical study published in a top economics journal has this information readily available and
collecting the data only took a few minutes. But, some studies published in older journals, less technical
journals, or government reports required an exhaustive search of the publication to estimate effect sizes from
the information given. The large collection of tables provide a bird’s eye view of the set of randomized field
experiments that have been conducted and evaluated. We include a large set of studies that vary curriculum
choices. These are included in the tables but not described in the text, as they don’t align with traditional
economic choice variables in a concise way and because of the potential effects of publication bias on these
types of studies.
    Second, for every randomized field experiment found, we calculated the impact (in standard deviations)
of the intervention on standardized math and reading outcomes and collected data on features of the ex-
periment. These data include over forty potential explanatory variables, including length of intervention,
grade/age of subjects, location, if the sample was a majority English Language Learner (ELL), disadvan-
taged, black, Hispanic, or of low ability, and so on. This provides us with a novel dataset to investigate
the correlation of important sample demographics and treatment effects of experiments designed to increase
human capital.
    An important pattern that arises in the data is the correlation between effectiveness of treatment and age
of subjects at the time of intervention. It has also been observed that some interventions tend to be more
effective at increasing math achievement relative to reading achievement (Fryer 2014; Abdulkadiroglu et al.
2011; Angrist et al. 2011; Dobbie and Fryer 2011; Hoxby and Murarka 2009; Gleason et al. 2010). There


                                                      7
are many theories that may explain the disparity in treatment effects by subject area. A leading explanation
posits that reading scores are influenced by the language spoken when students are outside of the classroom
(Charity et al. 2004; Rickford 1999). Charity et al. (2004) argue that if students speak non-standard En-
glish at home and in their communities, increasing reading scores might be especially difficult. Research in
developmental psychology has suggested a second possibility – that the critical period for language devel-
opment occurs early in life, while the critical period for developing higher cognitive functions extends into
adolescence (Hopkins and Bracht 1975; Newport 1990; Pinker 1994; Nelson 2000; Knudsen et al. 2006).
    Our data suggests that the age theory has merit. In math, the treatment effect is not strongly related to
the age of the student at the time of intervention. The correlation coefficient is 0.0679. In stark contrast,
early in life, many reforms increase reading performance. Later in life, very few treatments have any effect
on reading, save “high dosage” tutoring. Put precisely – there is a negative relationship between age and
reading treatment effects. The correlation coefficient is -0.2069. To put this number in perspective, the
average effect on reading of interventions targeting children with an average age less than 5 is 0.177σ. The
average effect of reading interventions targeting students with an average age greater than 14 is 0.039σ.
    Third, We conclude this chapter by simulating a life-cycle model that enables us to make an educated
guess about how much of racial and ethnic wage inequality in America might be accounted for if we simply
used the best practices gleaned from an exhaustive review of what works in the literature. Although a
majority of the randomized field trials discussed in this chapter do not report impacts on adult outcomes, we
are able to use correlations from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979 (NLSY79) and NLSY79
Children and Young Adults (CNLSY) datasets to simulate how shocks in a given life-stage will impact
later outcomes. Specifically, we follow the methods described in Winship and Owen (2013) and construct a
model similar to the Social Genome Model (SGM). Using this model, we estimate that if children were given
a successful early childhood intervention and then received successful school-based interventions in mid-
childhood and again in adolescence, one might dramatically reduce, and under some assumptions eliminate,
wage inequality. Obviously, these types of educated guesses vis-a-vis simulations must be taken with a
proverbial grain of salt.
    The chapter proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes our method for culling and standardizing field
experiments from the education literature. Section 3 describes evidence from randomized field experiments
across the three categories: early childhood, home-based interventions, and school-based interventions.
Section 4 uses the estimates from the literature to simulate a life-cycle model and provide a sense of how
much of racial wage inequality in America might be accounted for if government policy focused on the best
practices gleaned from the literature. Section 5 concludes. There are 100 pages worth of Appendix Tables


                                                     8
that summarize the literature in a concise and consistent way.



2     A Method for Finding and Evaluating Field Experiments

In deciding which field experiments to include in our analysis, we first culled a reasonably exhaustive list
of field experiments and then narrowed our focus to studies that satisfied certain criteria. We began by
searching all “quick reviews” and “single study reviews” in the What Works Clearinghouse (WWC). WWC
was created by the U.S. Department of Education’s Institute of Education Sciences in 2002. Its goal is
to provide reviews of education studies, policies, and interventions in order for researchers to determine
“what works” in education. Currently, WWC has over 10,500 reviews available in an online searchable
database. Eligible studies are reviewed by a team of WWC’s certified staff against WWC standards and
assigned a rating. The highest rating of the Clearinghouse is reserved for studies that met standards without
reservations. This implies that groups compared in the study were determined through a random process,
there was low overall attrition from the sample, the differential attrition across groups was low, and there
were no confounding factors (U.S. Department of Education 2015).6 Our search of WWC produced 115
randomized field experiments that met standards without reservations.
    We augmented the WWC search by looking through recent education literature reviews (e.g. Almond
and Currie 2011; Fryer 2010; Heckman and Kautz 2013; Nye et al. 2006; Yeager and Walton 2011) to
ensure that all these potential studies had been included. In most all cases, the randomized studies were
already in the What Works Clearhinghouse, but this process produced important additions.
    Finally, we conducted relatively broad searches of known databases – such as ERIC, JSTOR, EconLit –
that include education papers to augment our sample of studies. In each database, we searched for all phases
generated by concatenating one element from the set of strings (“early childhood”, “education”, “housing”,
“neighborhood”, “parent”, “school”, “student”, “teacher”) with one element from (“experiment”, “random
assignment”, “randomization”). For each database, we collected all hits that searching for these 24 unique
phrases returned.7 These searches provided us with over 10,000 citations to check. To conduct this laborious
task, we had a team of five research assistants skim every article and select papers that explicitly mention a
random process determining the experimental sample.
    Using these approaches, we found 859 potential studies. Table 1 describes how we narrowed our set

    6 That  is, no factor other than the intervention itself is present that all treatment students in one group are exposed to and no
students in the comparison group are exposed to. If a confounding factor is present, it would be impossible to distinguish between
the effect of the intervention and the effect of the factor.
     7 JSTOR’s search algorithm occasionally returned thousands of results. Due to resource and time constraints, we decided to

only collect the top 200 (as determined by “relevance”) results for each phrase in JSTOR.


                                                                  9
of studies from 859 to 196. As discussed, we only included experiments that had samples determined
by a verifiably random process that were pre-college; that took place in a highly developed country (as
determined by the Human Development Index constructed by the United Nations Development Programme);
and that reported standardized reading or mathematics test scores as an outcome measure at posttest. The
random process is important for causal inference – though the rise of strong quasi-experimental analyses
makes this quite restrictive. Some experiments use non-norm referenced tests designed by the experimenter
for the purpose of the experiment. These evaluations are not comparable across experiments and were
omitted. In general, the restrictions are important for comparability and allow one to synthesize the estimates
from the studies in the analysis below.
    Unfortunately, these restrictions lead to us not including some influential experimental studies. For
example, our screening excluded the exploration of the impact of teacher value-added on students in Chetty
et al. (2014) because their research design is non-experimental. Housing demolitions in Jacob (2004) and
the famous brown and blue eye experiments performed by Jane Elliot in her classrooms in the late 1960s also
did not utilize verifiably random processes. A well-known incentive experiment in Israel (Angrist and Lavy
2009) was excluded because the main outcome was receipt of matriculation certificates. Similarly, many
important social-psychological, behavioral, and “mindset” experiments (e.g. Mischel et al. 1972; Cohen et
al. 2006; Cohen et al. 2009; Wilson and Linville 1982; Aronson et al. 2002; Miyake et al. 2010; Duckworth
et al. 2013) were excluded because they did not report results for standardized math or reading outcomes or
the sample was post high school.
    For each experiment that passed our screening, we report estimates of the annual pooled effect sizes
on reading and math outcomes, in standard deviations. If papers did not report results in this manner, we
attempted to use the information given to calculate standardized effect sizes. For example, if impacts were
presented as scale score points on a test, we would divide the coefficient by the standard deviation given
in the summary statistics. The most common calculation we performed was using the average treatment
and control posttest scores (or changes between pretest and posttest) as well as the corresponding standard
deviations to calculate the standardized difference between the two groups.
    Specifically, we used this information to calculate a statistic known as Hedge’s g and its corresponding
standard error (see Hedges 1981 and Lipsey and Wilson 2000). Since this measure is just the difference be-
tween the average test scores of treatment and control groups, point estimates obtained from this method are
identical to intent-to-treat (ITT) estimates that do not include controls and use the same standard deviation
to standardize the test scores. Note that since all studies included in this paper used a random procedure to
assign treatment and control groups, point estimates from multivariable ITT regressions should not differ


                                                      10
significantly from the raw differences. If possible, when necessary information for this statistic was missing
we would make assumptions (e.g. equal number of students assigned to treatment and control or use the
standard deviation from the national sample of the standardized test).8 If there was not enough information
presented in the paper for us to make credible assumptions, the study was excluded.
      One common issue we encountered was the calculation of standard errors. Unfortunately, without having
access to the micro-data, it was not possible to calculate the appropriate standard errors for every effect size.
In an attempt to not overstate the significance of an effect size, when calculating Hedge’s g, we erred on the
conservative side and used the number of units randomized to calculate the standard errors. For example,
although Slavin et al. (1984) had a sample of 504 students, randomization was done at the school level (N =
6).



3      Evidence from 196 Randomized Field Trials

3.1      Early Childhood Experiments

In the past five decades there have been many field experiments designed to increase achievement before
kids enter school.9 Appendix Table 1 provides an overview of 44 randomized field experiments (from 24
papers), the ages they serve, and their treatment effects on standardized math and reading outcomes. Here,
we partition the literature into interventions that are early childhood center-based and others that are more
home-based.


3.1.1         Center-Based Experiments

Perhaps the most famous early intervention program for children involved 123 students in Ypsilanti, Michi-
gan, who attended the Perry Preschool program in 1962 (58 were randomly assigned to treatment). The
program consisted of a 2.5-hour daily preschool program and weekly home visits by teachers, and targeted
children from disadvantaged socioeconomic backgrounds with IQ scores in the range of 70-85. An active
learning curriculum - High/Scope - was used in the preschool program in order to support both the cognitive
and non-cognitive development of the children over the course of two years beginning when the children
were three years old. Schweinhart, Barnes, and Weikart (1993) find that students in the Perry Preschool pro-
gram had higher test scores between the ages of 5 and 27, 21 percent less grade retention or special services
required, 21 percent higher graduation rates, and half the number of lifetime arrests in comparison to chil-

      8 We    documented all assumptions that were made for each study and these can be obtained from the author upon request.
      9 See   Carneiro and Heckman (2003) or Almond and Currie (2010) for extensive reviews.


                                                                  11
dren in the control group. Considering the financial benefits that are associated with the positive outcomes
of the Perry Preschool, Heckman et al. (2010) estimated that the rate of return on the program is between 7
and 10 percent, passing a traditional cost-benefit analysis.
    Although an influential experiment, Heckman et al. (2009) argues that the randomization protocol for
the Perry Preschool experiment was compromised. Post-randomization, some children initially assigned
to treatment whose parents were employed were swapped with control children whose parents were un-
employed. The researchers’ rationale for this swap was that employed mothers would find it difficult to
participate in the home visits that treatment families received. Heckman et al. (2010) investigates the
implications of these swaps and other potential issues with previously reported Perry results. Even after ac-
counting for the compromised randomization (by correcting for the imbalance in preprogram variables and
matching students), multiple-hypothesis testing, and small sample sizes of the original analysis, Heckman
et al. (2010) still find statistically and economically significant impacts.
    Another important center-based intervention, which was initiated three years after the Perry Preschool
program is Head Start. Head Start is a preschool program funded by federal matching grants that is designed
to serve 3- to 5-year-old children living at or below the federal poverty level.10 The program varies across
states in terms of the scope of services provided, with some centers providing full-day programs and others
only half-day. In 2007, Head Start served over 900,000 children at an average annual cost of about $7,300
per child.
    Evaluations of Head Start have often been difficult to perform due to the typical non-random nature
of enrollment in the program.11 Puma et al. (2010), in response to the 1998 reauthorization of Head
Start, conduct an evaluation using randomized admission into Head Start.12 The impact of being offered
admission into Head Start for 3- and 4-year-olds is 0.10 to 0.34 standard deviations in the areas of early
language and literacy. For 3-year-olds, there were also small positive effects in the social-emotional domain
(0.13 to 0.18 standard deviations) and on overall health status (0.12 standard deviations). Yet, by the time
the children who received Head Start services had completed first grade, almost all of the positive impact on

    10 Local Head Start agencies are able to extend coverage to those meeting other eligibility criteria, such as those with disabilities

and those whose families report income between 100 and 130 percent of the federal poverty level.
    11 Currie and Thomas (1995) use a national sample of children and compare children who attended a Head Start program with

siblings who did not attend Head Start, based on the assumption that examining effects within the family unit will reduce selection
bias. They find that those children who attended Head Start scored higher on preschool vocabulary tests but that for black students,
these gains were lost by age ten. Using the same analysis method with updated data, Garces et al. (2002) find several positive
outcomes associated with Head Start attendance. They conclude that there is a positive effect from Head Start on the probability of
attending college and - for whites - the probability of graduating from high school. For black children, Head Start led to a lower
likelihood of being arrested or charged with a crime later in life.
    12 Students not chosen by lottery to participate in Head Start were not precluded from attending other high-quality early child-

hood centers. Roughly ninety percent of the treatment sample and forty-three percent of the control sample attended center-based
care.


                                                                  12
initial school readiness had faded. The only remaining impacts in the cognitive domain are a 0.08 standard
deviation increase in oral comprehension for 3-year-old participants and a 0.09 standard deviation increase
in receptive vocabulary for the 4-year-old cohort (Puma et al. 2010).13
    Other early childhood interventions – many based on the early success of Perry Preschool and Head Start
– include the Abecedarian Project, the Early Training Project, the Milwaukee Project, and Tulsa’s universal
pre-kindergarten program. The Abecedarian Project provided full-time, high-quality center-based childcare
services for four cohorts of children from low-income families from infancy through age five between 1971
and 1977. Campbell and Ramey (1994) find that at age 12, those children who were randomly assigned
to the project scored 5 points higher on the Wechsler Intelligence Scale and 5-7 points higher on various
subscales of the Woodcock-Johnson Psycho-Educational Battery achievement test.


3.1.2    Home-Based Experiments

The most well known home-based field experiment in the early childhood years is the Nurse-Family Part-
nership. Through this program, low-income first-time mothers received home visits from a registered nurse
beginning early in the pregnancy and continued until the child is two years old – a total of fifty visits over the
first two years. The program aimed to encourage preventive health practices, reduce risky health behaviors,
foster positive parenting practices, and improve the economic self-sufficiency of the family. In a study of
the program in Denver in 1994-95, Olds et al. (2002) found that those children whose mothers had received
home visits from nurses (but not those who received home visits from paraprofessionals) were less likely
to display language delays and had superior mental development at age two. In a long-term evaluation of
the program, Olds et al. (1998) found that children born to women who received nurse home visits between
1978 and 1980 had fewer juvenile arrests, convictions, and violations of probation by age fifteen than those
whose mothers had not received treatment.
    The Early Training Project provided children from low-income homes with summertime experiences
and weekly home visits during the three summers before entering first grade in an attempt to improve the
children’s school readiness. Gray and Klaus (1970) report that children who received these intervention
services maintained higher Stanford-Binet IQ scores (2-5 points) at the end of fourth grade. The Infant
Health and Development Program specifically targeted families with low-birth-weight preterm infants and
provided them with weekly home visits during the child’s first year and biweekly visits through age three,
as well as enhanced early childhood educational care and bimonthly parent group meetings. Brooks-Gunn,

   13 The Early Head Start program, established in 1995 to provide community-based supplemental services to low-income families

with infants and toddlers, had similar effects (Administration for Children and Families 2006).


                                                                13
Liaw, and Klebanov (1992) report that this program had positive effects on language development at the
end of first grade, with participant children scoring 0.09 standard deviations higher on receptive vocabulary
and 0.08 standard deviations higher on oral comprehension. The Milwaukee Project targeted newborns born
to women with IQs lower than 80; mothers received education, vocational rehabilitation, and child care
training while their children received high-quality educational programming and three balanced meals daily
at “infant stimulation centers” for seven hours a day, five days a week until the children were six years old.
Garber (1988) finds that this program resulted in an increase of 23 points on the Stanford-Binet IQ test at
age six for treatment children compared to control children.
   Although the above parenting programs have shown promise, they are not widely accessible due to the
time demands they place on parents and high implementation costs. York and Loeb (2014) investigate the
impact of READY4K!, a low-cost text message program that targets parents of preschoolers. The program
helps these parents support their children’s literacy development by sending parents three text messages
per week for an entire school year. These texts were designed to provide parents with information on the
importance of their children developing particular skills, tips on how to support their children’s development
in a cost-effective manner, and encouragement. York and Loeb (2014) recruited parents from 31 preschool
sites run by the San Francisco Unified School District’s Early Education Department. Of the 874 eligible
families, 440 enrolled and were randomly assigned to treatment group that participated in READY4K! or a
control group.
   At the end of the school year, York and Loeb (2014) collected survey responses from parents and teachers
to investigate the intervention’s impact on parental involvement. They found that treatment parents engaged
in literacy activities at home with their child 0.22 to 0.34 standard deviations more than control parents and
were 0.13 to 0.19 standard deviations more involved at preschool. To investigate the impact the interven-
tion had on children’s literacy development, York and Loeb (2014) collected scores from the Phonological
Awareness Literacy Screening (PALS), a criterion-referenced test the school district administers to its early
education students every spring.14 They found that children in treatment families score 0.344 standard devi-
ations higher on the letter sounds subtest and 0.205 standard deviations higher on a measure of lower-case
alphabet knowledge. However, there were no significant impacts on measures of name writing, upper-case
letter knowledge, beginning word sounds, print and word awareness, rhyme awareness, and a summed score
of all the PALS subtests. For the sample of students that progressed to higher level subtests of PALS, there
were significant impacts on the upper-case letter subtest and the summed score. There was limited evidence
that READY4K! had differential impacts across family characteristics.

  14 Note that since this study did not report results from a norm-referenced outcome, it was not included in our tables and analysis.



                                                                14
    Fryer, Levitt, and List (2015) conducted a parental incentive experiment in Chicago Heights – a proto-
typical low performing urban school district – by starting a parent academy that distributed nearly $1 million
to 257 families (these numbers include treatment and control). There were two treatment groups, which dif-
fered only in when families were rewarded, and a control group. Parents in the two treatment groups were
paid for attendance at Parent Academy sessions which were designed as information sessions to aid parents
in educating their children, proof of homework completion, and the performance of their children on bench-
mark assessments. The only difference between the two treatment groups is that parents in one group were
paid in cash or via direct deposits (hereafter the “cash” condition) and parents in the second group received
the majority of their incentive payments via deposits into a trust account which can only be accessed if and
when the child enrolls in college (the “college” incentive condition). Eleven project managers and staff
worked together to ensure that parents understood the particulars of the treatment; that the parent academy
program was implemented with high fidelity; and that payments were distributed on time and accurately.
    Across the entire sample, the impact on cognitive test scores of being offered a chance to participate in
the parental incentive is 0.119σ (with a standard error of 0.094). These estimates are non-trivial, but smaller
in magnitude than some classroom based interventions. For instance, the impact of Head Start on test scores
is approximately 0.145σ. The impact of the Perry Preschool intervention on achievement at 14 years old is
0.203σ. Given the imprecision of the estimates, however, our results are statistically indistinguishable both
from these programs and from zero. The impact of the “college” and “cash” incentive schemes are nearly
identical.
    Fryer, Levitt, and List (2015) report that the impact of being offered a chance to participate in our
parental incentive scheme on non-cognitive skills is large and statistically significant (0.203σ (0.083)).
These results are consistent with Kautz et al. (2014), who argue that parental investment is an important
contributor to non-cognitive development. Again, the “cash” and “college” schemes yield identical results.
    They complement our main statistical analysis by estimating heterogeneous treatment effects across a
variety of pre-determined subsamples that we blocked on experimentally. Two stark patterns appear in the
data. The first pattern is along racial lines: Hispanics (48 percent of the sample) and whites (8 percent of
the sample) demonstrate large and significant increases in both cognitive and non-cognitive domains. For
instance, the impact of the parent academy for Hispanic children is 0.367σ (0.133) on our cognitive score
and 0.428σ (0.122) on our non-cognitive score. Among the small sample of whites, the impacts are 0.932σ
(0.353) on cognitive and 0.821σ (0.181) on non-cognitive. The identical estimates for blacks are actually
negative but statistically insignificant on both cognitive and non-cognitive dimensions: −0.234σ (0.134)
and −0.059σ (0.129), respectively. Importantly, p-values on the differences between races are statistically


                                                      15
significant at conventional levels. We explore a range of possible hypotheses regarding the source of the
racial differences (extent of engagement with the program, demographics, English proficiency, pre-treatment
scores), but none provide a convincing explanation of the complete effect.
    The second pattern of heterogeneity in treatment that we observe in the data relates to pre-treatment test
scores. Students who enter our program below the median on non-cognitive skills see no benefits from our
intervention in either the cognitive or non-cognitive domain. In stark contrast, students who enter our parent
academy above the median in non-cognitive skills experience treatment effects of roughly 0.3 standard
deviations on both cognitive and non-cognitive dimensions. If we segment children by both cognitive and
non-cognitive pre-treatment scores, the greatest gains are made on both the cognitive and non-cognitive
dimension by students who start the program above the median on non-cognitive skills and below the median
on cognitive skills.


3.1.3     Meta-Analysis

Early childhood interventions have amassed considerable popular and political support. Yet, like other
initiatives to improve human capital, they are not a panacea. For example, St. Pierre et al. (1997) find no
positive effects in a national evaluation of the Comprehensive Child Development Program (CCDP). The
CCDP delivers early and comprehensive services to low-income families with the aim of enhancing the
development of the children in these families and helping the parents achieve economic self-sufficiency.
The CCDP model revolves around the ideas that one should intervene as early as possible in children’s lives,
involve the entire family in an intervention, deliver comprehensive services to address the needs of young
children, enhance parents’ ability to contribute to their child’s development, help parents achieve economic
and social self-sufficiency, and ensure that families have access to all of these resources until their children
enter elementary school. In their evaluation, St. Pierre et al. (1997) found no significant differences between
families that were randomly assigned to a CCDP treatment group or a control group. CCDP had no impacts
on measures of mothers’ economic self-sufficiency or their parenting skills and CCDP had no effects on the
cognitive or social emotional development of the children included in the study.
    Still, early childhood investments are considered to be one of the least risky ways to increase academic
achievement (Heckman 2008). Combining the 44 randomized studies in early childhood over the past 50
years, the random effects coefficients are 0.111σ (0.031) for math interventions and 0.189σ (0.027) for
reading. Of the 64 treatment effects recorded in these randomized studies, 21 were statistically positive;
zero were statistically negative and 43 were statistically indistinguishable from zero.15
  15 We   consider an effect size statistically positive or negative if it is statistically significant at the 10% level.


                                                                     16
3.2     Home Environment

There is an ongoing debate as to whether efficient production of human capital should focus on improving
the environment in which a child lives or the environment in which they learn. Proponents of the school-
centered approach refer to anecdotes of excellence in particular schools or examples of other countries
where poor children in superior schools outperform average Americans (Chenoweth 2007). Advocates of
the community-focused approach argue that teachers and school administrators are dealing with issues that
originate outside the classroom, citing research that shows racial and socioeconomic achievement gaps are
formed before children ever enter school (Fryer and Levitt 2004; 2006), that mother’s IQ is highly correlated
with child achievement (Fryer and Levitt 2013; Wilson and Matheny 1983; Yeates et al. 1983) and that one-
third to one-half of the racial achievement gap can be explained by family-environment indicators (Phillips
et al. 1998; Fryer and Levitt 2004). In this scenario, combating poverty and having more constructive out-
of-school time may lead to better and more-focused instruction in school. Indeed, Coleman et al. (1966),
in their famous report on the equality of educational opportunity, argue that schools alone cannot treat the
problem of chronic underachievement in urban schools.
      In this subsection, we describe several attempts to provide households with more resources and to com-
bat poverty, in an effort to increase student achievement. We organize this strand of literature in rough
approximation to the “intensity” of treatment received – which ranges from providing parents with infor-
mation to poverty reduction though welfare-to-work programs and tax reform to moving families to better
neighborhoods. The literature is summarized in Appendix Table 2.


3.2.1    Parental Involvement

Parents matter. Using data from a national, cross-sectional study of children aged 8-12, Davis-Kean (2005)
found significant correlations between parents’ characteristics and parenting practices and students’ math
and reading achievement. Specifically, Davis-Kean (2005) found that strong correlations with students’
achievement existed for parents’ education levels, income, parental expectations, number of books owned,
and many parental behaviors such as being warm and affectionate, responding positively, and giving praise.
Jeynes (2005) conducts a meta-analysis of 41 studies that investigate the impact of parental involvement on
the academic achievement of elementary students. He found that increases in parental involvement have
an effect size on elementary students’ academic outcomes of about 0.7 standard deviations. Jeynes (2007)
conducts a similar meta-analysis using 52 studies that focus on secondary school students and finds the
effect size of parent involvement to be about 0.5 standard deviations.



                                                     17
    Although these results are interesting, they are are not causal estimates of the impact of parental involve-
ment on students’ outcomes. Levels of parental involvement are most likely correlated with many observable
and unobservable characteristics of the parents and it is exceedingly difficult to rid these estimates of thorny
issues of selection. Moreover, even if these estimates were causal, it is not obvious that it is possible for
interventions to change parents’ involvement to achieve these positive impacts on child outcomes.
    In what follows, we summarize the literature on experiments to increase parental involvement using
information treatments and incentive treatments.

A. I NFORMATION
    To better understand the impact of parental attitudes and school involvement on student achievement,
Avvisati et al. (2014) conducted an experimental study on middle school students and parents in the educa-
tional district of Creteil, an eastern suburb of Paris, France. Classrooms randomly selected from 34 middle
schools were offered a parental education program that taught parents how they can assist in their child’s
educational process.
    This paper was motivated by a strong perception that disadvantaged parents have inadequate knowledge
and confidence to be effective advocates for their children. The experiment sought to test if this could
be improved by a simple intervention. The experimental program consisted of three afterschool meetings
with parents, conducted by the school head. The first two sessions focused on how parents can help their
children’s education by participating at home and at school. The final session, which took place after the
end-of-term report card, focused on how parents can adapt to their children’s first term results. Of the 352
state-run middle schools in the Creteil district, 34 schools volunteered to participate in the program. Around
two-thirds of schools in the study were “priority education”, a label indicating a historically disadvantaged
area.
    Parents of 6th graders in the participating middle schools were asked, over a 6-week period, if they
would like to sign up for the informational meetings. After the sign-up period closed, the list of registered
families constituted the “volunteer families,” creating two populations within each class in each school.
There were no strong observable pre-treatment differences between volunteer and non-volunteer families.
After registration closed, randomization began at the class-level of each school (meaning that roughly half
of all classes were treated within each school). The randomization process defined four basic groups of
families within each school: volunteers in treatment classes, non-volunteers in treatment classes, volunteers
in control classes, and non-volunteers in control classes.
    The study was interested in addressing three outcomes: (1) parental involvement attitudes and behav-



                                                      18
ior; (2) children’s behavior as reflected by truancy, disciplinary record and work effort; and (3) children’s
academic results. To measure parental involvement attitudes and behavior, all families received a ques-
tionnaire on school-based involvement, home-based involvement, and parents’ perception of the school.
Student outcomes were reported by teachers and academic reports. Main subject teachers were also given a
questionnaire regarding both parental attitudes and child’s behavior/school performance.
   The evidence found that the program was successful in significantly improving volunteer parent atti-
tudes. Based on parents’ and teachers’ questionnaires, parental involvement by volunteer parents in treat-
ment classes increased. Children of volunteer parents in treatment classes saw a vast improvement in school
attitudes and discipline compared to control classes: truancy was lower by 1.1 half-days, treatment students
were 4.6 percentage points less likely to be punished for disciplinary reasons (6.4% versus 11.0%), more
likely to earn top marks for conduct, and, according to teacher questionnaire answers, were more likely to
be agreeable in class and work diligently. In addition to having a direct impact on the students whose par-
ents volunteered to participate, there were also spillover effects on students in treatment classrooms whose
parents did not participate. Treatment had a statistically significant impact on non-volunteer students’ ab-
senteeism, probability of disciplinary sanctions, and marks for conduct. For students of volunteer parents,
treatment increased average grades across all subjects by 0.08 standard deviations and increased academic
performance as measured by the teacher survey. However, the intervention had no impact on grades for
students whose parents did not volunteer and the intervention had no impacts on standardized test scores for
any students. The findings overall suggested that parental involvement can be a significant input in student
achievement—mostly through an impact on behavioral outcomes.
   Evidence from Avvisati et al. (2014) and other studies suggest that it may be difficult to increase stu-
dents’ academic outcomes using parental interventions. Other parental experiments that focus on improving
students’ academic outcomes through parental tutoring also tend to have insignificant impacts on academic
standardized measures (Warren 2009; Powell-Smith et al. 2000; Fantuzzo et al. 1995; Hirst 1972; Ryan
1964).
   On average, parental information experiments increased student achievement by -0.001σ (0.021) on
math scores and 0.034σ (0.050) on reading scores. Note that our search did not return any parental incentive
experiments that focused solely on parents of K-12 students. Therefore, the estimates from our meta-analysis
for parental involvement and parental information are identical.

B. I NCENTIVES
   The most well-known and well-analyzed incentive program for parents is PROGRESA. PROGRESA



                                                     19
was an experiment conducted in Mexico in 1998, which provided cash incentives linked to health, nutrition
and education. The largest component of PROGRESA was linked to school attendance and enrollment. The
program provided cash payments to mothers in targeted households to keep their children in school (Skoufias
2005). Programs based on the PROGRESA model have been replicated in New York City, Nicaragua, and
Columbia.
   Beginning in 1997, the Mexican government identified 506 rural communities on the basis of a “marginal-
ity index” gleaned from census data. Socio-economic data was collected from households within these
communities to target households living in extreme poverty. In 1998, about two thirds of the identified lo-
calities were randomly selected to receive financial incentives under PROGRESA; the remaining localities
served as controls. As a part of the program, households could receive up to $62.50 per month if children
attended school regularly. The amount of incentive was higher for older children who had to attend 85% of
all school days. The average amount of incentives received by any treatment household in the first two years
of treatment was $34.80, which was 21% of an average household’s income. Besides school attendance,
PROGRESA also emphasized actual student achievement by making a child ineligible for the program if
she failed a grade more than once (Skoufias 2005; Slavin 2010).
   Schultz (2000) reports that PROGRESA had a positive impact on school enrollment for both boys and
girls in primary and secondary school. For primary school children, PROGRESA increased school enroll-
ment for boys by 1.1 percentage points and 1.5 percentage points for girls from a baseline level of approxi-
mately 90 percent. For secondary school students, enrollment increased by 7.2 to 9.3 percentage points for
boys and 3.5 to 5.8 percentage points for girls, from a baseline level of approximately 70%. The author also
reports that PROGRESA had an accumulated effect of 0.66 years additional schooling for a student from
the average poor household. Taking the baseline level of schooling at face value, PROGRESA’s 0.66 years
accumulated effect translates into a 10% increase in schooling attainment.
   Behrman, Sengupta, and Todd (2001) also analyze the data and report that PROGRESA children entered
school at an earlier age, had less grade repetition and better grade progression. Treatment children also had
lower dropout rates and once dropped out, they had a higher chance of re-entry into high school.
   Opportunity NYC – based on PROGRESA – was an experimental conditional cash transfer program that
was conducted in New York City. The program had three components: the Family Rewards component that
gave incentives for to parents to fulfill responsibilities towards their children; the Work Rewards component
that gave incentives for families to work; and the Spark component that gave incentives to students to
increase achievement scores in classes. The program began in August 2007 and ended in August 2010 (see
Morais de Sá e Silva 2008).


                                                     20
    Riccio et al., 2013 analyze data from the Family Rewards component of the program during the first two
years of treatment. Their analysis is based on 4,800 families with 11,000 children out of which half were
assigned to treatment and the other half to control. Opportunity NYC spent $8,700 per family in treatment
over three years. The experiment had an insignificant impact on every school outcome measured (Riccio et
al. 2013).


3.2.2   Home Educational Resources

Education, like other industries, has evolved over the past few decades – due, in part, to technological
change. With the introduction of computers, the internet, mobile wifi, and smart phones, teaching strategies
have changed to utilize these technologies in the classroom. However, many children still lack access to
these resources in their homes. One could imagine that the returns to household computers are quite high.
Students can use them as a tool to efficiently complete assignments, learn new information, study, and
use for other educational purposes. Despite these potential returns, it is also possible that households face
constraints (e.g. credit or information) that prevent them from investing in household technology. This is
supported by the fact that ownership of household computers and access to household internet is correlated
with income (National Telecommunication and Information Administration 2011). Studies examining the
impact of home computers on poor families using observational or quasi-experimental data have generated
mixed results. Some studies find large positive effects (Attewell and Battle 1999; Fiorini 2010; Schmitt
and Wadsworth 2006; Fairlie 2005; Fairlie, Beltran and Das 2010; Malamud and Pop-Eleches 2011) and
some find evidence of small or even negative impacts (Fuchs and Woessmann 2004; Vigdor and Ladd 2010;
Malamud and Pop-Eleches 2011). Fairlie and Robinson (2013) present causal estimates from the first ever
randomized control experiment that investigates the impact of home computers.
    In their experiment, Fairlie and Robinson investigate the educational impacts of randomly giving home
computers to 1,123 students in grades 6 through 10 in California over the 2008-2009 and 2009-2010 school
years. No students who participated in the study had home computers at baseline. Half of these students
were randomly selected to receive free computers without any training or technological assistance. Fairlie
and Robinson collected administrative data on student academic outcomes and demographics pretreatment
and at the end of the school year (posttreatment). In addition, they conducted baseline and posttreatment
surveys that included questions about computer usage, knowledge, homework time, and other important
outcomes. Using this data, Fairlie and Robinson found that the experiment had large first-stage impacts.
They found that treatment students were 55 percentage points more likely to have a computer at follow-up,
25 percentage points more likely to have Internet service, they reported using a computer 2.5 hours more


                                                     21
per week than control students’ average of 4.2 hours, and almost all of this additional usage came from a
computer at home. However, not all of the computer usage was for educational purposes. Relative to control
students, treatment students used computers 0.80 hours more per week for schoolwork (control mean (CM)
was 1.89 hours), 0.42 hours more for e-mail (CM = 0.25 hours), 0.80 hours more for games (CM = 0.84
hours), and 0.57 hours more for social networking (CM = 0.57 hours).
    Despite these large first-stage impacts, Fairlie and Robinson find minimal evidence for impacts on ed-
ucational outcomes. ITT estimates for the impact of home computers on grades in math, English/reading,
social studies, and science classes are all close to zero and precisely estimated. With standard errors of ap-
proximately 0.04, they can rule out effect sizes on the scale of one-fourth of the difference between a “B+”
or “B” with 95 percent confidence. Using quantile regressions, they show that these null effects exist across
the entire posttreatment achievement distribution. Similarly, they find no evidence of impact on students’
test scores or proficiency statuses from the California Standardized Testing and Reporting (STAR) program,
total credits taken in the third quarter of the school year, total credits in the fourth quarter, unexcused ab-
sences, number of tardies, and if a student was still enrolled at the end of the school year. These zero
effects are consistent with survey results that show treatment students did not change intermediate inputs
and outcomes such as school effort, computer knowledge, and usage of important educational software.
    There are other randomized field experiments that investigate the impact of providing additional re-
sources to families – such as giving students books to read during the summer. Numerous studies suggest
that summer vacation is a critical time for forming and widening achievement gaps in reading, particularly
for the income-achievement gap.16 Kim (2005) conducted an experimental study to examine the causal ef-
fects of a voluntary summer reading intervention on the reading skills of fourth-grade students in the Lake
County Public School District, a large multi-ethnic school district located in a mid-Atlantic state. The dis-
trict contains more than 100 elementary schools and is therefore organized into small subdistricts, each with
its own superintendent. To be included in the sample, the subdistrict needed to contain high-poverty schools
that administered Title I school-wide programs and contain multi-racial schools in which reading scores
for black and Latino students contributed to the federal adequate yearly progress rating. The final sample
included four Title I schools and the six non-Title I schools with the largest percentage of minority students.
    This paper was motivated by inefficiencies in current voluntary reading policies and the little evidence
in support of these programs. Additionally, finding a cost-effective reading intervention was important for
policymakers and practitioners given the goals of federal education policy and mandates under the No Child

   16 See Heyns (1978), Cooper et al. (1996), Alexander et al. (2001), Broh (2004), Heyns (1987), Klibanoff & Haggart (1981),

Murnane (1975), and Phillips et al. (1998). Fryer and Levitt (2004) is a notable example of a nationally representative sample that
does not find “summer setback”.


                                                               22
Left Behind Act.17 The intervention addressed three main factors – access to books, students’ reading
levels, and students’ reading preferences – that are likely to shape opportunities to read in the summer and
affect reading outcomes. To increase access to books, each student in the treatment group received eight
free books to read during the summer. Students’ reading levels were based on performance on the reading
section of the Iowa Test of Basic Skills and preferences were obtained through a survey distributed before
the summer. A text-leveling system, the Lexile Framework, was used to provide books that were within
each student’s independent reading level using information about each student’s reading level and reading
preferences. With each book, students also received a postcard that asked students to check comprehension
strategies used while reading the book and to obtain a signature from a parent or family member after reading
a portion of the book aloud to the adult. Parents were instructed to mail each postcard back to the schools,
regardless of if their student completed the book or not.
   A total of 552 students received consent to participate in the study and took pretests in June 2005. These
students were randomly assigned to treatment and control groups (282 treatment and 270 control) within
their English Language Arts (ELA) classroom, and the author reports no statistically significant differences
between the two groups at the beginning of the experiment on numerous demographic and achievement
characteristics. Because of attrition, the final sample included 486 students (252 treatment and 234 control)
at the beginning of the Fall in 2005. The intervention attempts to improve reading skills by increasing
children’s access to books, matching books to children’s reading levels and preferences, and encouraging
children to read orally with a parent/family member to practice.
   To investigate if the intervention increased children’s access to books at home and literacy-related activ-
ities during summer vacation, the author used a two-way ANOVA on both self-reported measures of book
ownership and on literacy habits gathered from a survey conducted at the end of the summer. The results
suggest that the intervention did not increase children’s access to books nor the amount of silent reading.
However, children in the treatment group reported significantly more oral-reading at home with family
members than the control group children. For fall reading outcomes, ITT regressions showed no signifi-
cant differences between the treatment and control groups on a grade level measure of oral-reading fluency.
However, treatment had a 0.08σ (0.04) impact on students’ standardized reading test scores and there were
differential effects by race. Treatment increased test scores by 0.22σ (0.09) for black students, 0.14σ (0.08)
for Latino students, and 0.17σ (0.11) for Asian students. Further, the magnitude of the treatment effect was
largest among lower performing students, and there were no significant interactions between the treatment
and measures of reading ability or ownership of books

  17 Note   that the No Child Left Behind Act was superseded by the Every Student Succeeds Act in December 2015.


                                                             23
   Similarly, Allington et al. (2010) conducted a randomized trial in 17 high-poverty schools in Florida
where treatment students selected 12 books from a book fair to receive for summer reading. Allington et al.
(2010) found a 0.046σ (0.033) annual impact over the three years of the experiment.

   The meta-coefficients for home educational resource experiment were -0.060σ (0.050) for math scores
and 0.015σ (0.014) for reading scores.


3.2.3   Poverty Reduction Experiments

One of the most often articulated explanations for the racial and ethnic achievement gaps that exist across
developed countries is poverty. For families with higher income, it is easier to provide their children with
resources and raise them in environments that are conducive for learning. Poverty places constraints on key
factors of achievement such as health care, nutrition, child care, in-home educational resources, safe neigh-
borhoods, good schools, and college education (Brooks-Gunn and Duncan 1997; Evans 2004; Magnuson
and Duncan 2002; McLoyd 1998). In America, 42 percent of black children and 37 percent of Hispanic
children experience poverty while only 10 percent of white children are exposed to these hardships (Duncan
and Magnuson 2005). Studies suggest that this racial income gap is an important source of variation that
can account for large proportions of raw racial achievement gaps (Duncan and Magnuson 2005; Fryer and
Levitt 2004; Phillips et al. 1998; Brooks-Gunn et al. 2003).
   This subsection discusses the impact on student achievement of experiments that attempted to reduce
poverty through tax reform and work programs.

A. TAX R EFORM
   Maynard and Murnane (1979) discuss two mechanisms by which welfare reform could affect children’s
educational achievement by altering home environment: product inputs and time inputs. Product inputs are
things such as food, health care, and books. Examples of time inputs are time parents spend talking to,
playing with, and reading to their children. They assume that product inputs are positively related to family
income and that time inputs are positively related to time not working. Maynard and Murnane investigate
the educational impacts of a program that affects both of these mechanisms in unison by increasing families’
income and incentivizing them not to work.
   In the early 1970s, the Gary Income Maintenance Experiment was conducted by Indiana University un-
der contracts with the U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare and the Indiana State Department
of Public Welfare. Families who voluntarily enrolled and had at least one child under the age of 18 were
randomly assigned to negative income tax conditions or control. Of the 1,799 eligible families, 57 percent

                                                     24
were assigned to one of four negative income tax plans for three years. These tax plans were a combination
of two tax rates (40 or 60 percent) and two guaranteed income levels (about three fourths of the poverty level
or equal to the poverty level). The lower guarantee level was about $1,000 a year more than the support level
of the Indiana Aid to Families with Dependent Children program.18 The tax rate is the amount by which the
negative income tax payment is reduced for each dollar of income that a family earns.
    The sample for the Gary Income Maintenance Experiment was not nationally representative. All chil-
dren were black and three-fifths of them lived in female-headed households. In addition, the average family
had a much lower income compared to the national average (the average annual income of families in the
Gary experiment was only $5,200 and the national average at that time was $9,433) and over 40 percent of
the Gary families were living below the poverty line.
    Maynard and Murnane investigate the impact of a Gary family’s assignment to any one of the treatment
arms on educational outcomes of students in grades 4-10 at the end of the experiments (three years after
randomization). They found that treatment increased students’ standardized reading test scores by 0.23
standard deviations on the Iowa Test of Basic Skills in grades 4-6 but had no significant impact for students
in grades 7 -10. They found no evidence that treatment had an effect on grade point average of the younger
students, but found that it significantly decreased grade point average for the older students. They also found
no evidence that treatment had an impact on the number of days absent for either group of students.
    To better understand these results, Maynard and Murnane also investigate the mechanisms by which the
experiment might have affected school performance. They found that the Gary experiment had a signifi-
cant first stage impact on total family income, but caused minimal change in the number of hours worked.
Treatment families on average had their incomes increased by $2,000 per year (approximately a 50 percent
increase). For married mothers, there was no change in hours worked per week. For female family heads,
there was a decrease of about two hours per week. Additionally, experimental families that lived in public
housing before randomization were more likely to move to private dwellings than control families that lived
in public housing prior to randomization. However, there was no statistical difference in mobility in the
pooled sample.

B. W ORK P ROGRAMS
    Michalopoulos et al. (2002) evaluated another poverty reduction program, called the Self-Sufficiency
Project (SSP), that attempted to make work more appealing than welfare to long-time welfare recipients in
the Canadian provinces of British Columbia and New Brunswick by providing them with wage subsidies.
New Brunswick is located in eastern Canada and is bordered by the U.S. state of Maine on it’s western
  18 In   1972, the official poverty level for a four-person non-farm family was $4,275.


                                                                 25
boundary. New Brunswick has a population of 750,000, a majority of its inhabitants speak English as their
first language, and has a per capita GDP of 42,600 Canadian dollars. British Columbia is located in western
Canada and is bordered by the U.S. states of Alaska, Washington, Idaho, and Montana. British Columbia
has a population of 4,400,000, an official language of English, and a per capita GDP of 47,500 Canadian
dollars.19
    The study randomly assigned 6,000 single parents from British Columbia and New Brunswick, who
had been on income assistance for at least one year, to a treatment and control group. Treatment parents
were eligible to participate in SSP and control parents were not. Parents enrolled in SSP received a monthly
earnings supplement conditional on starting a full-time job and leaving income assistance. The earnings
supplement was in addition to earnings from employment for up three years, as long as the parent continued
to be employed full-time and remained off of income assistance. After random assignment, treatment parents
had one year to find full-time employment (at least 30 hours per week) and leave income assistance to enroll
in SSP. After enrollment, the supplement participants received was half of the difference between their
earnings and an earnings benchmark (the benchmark varied by location and year, but was $30,000 in New
Brunswick and $37,000 in British Columbia for the first year of the experiment). This supplement was not
affected by unearned income, earnings of other family members, and number of children. This supplement
would essentially double the wage of many low-wage workers.
    Michalopoulos et al. (2002) found significant first-stage impacts. Thirty-six percent of single parents
that were offered participation found full-time employment and took-up the supplement during the year
long eligibility window. Of those that participated in SSP, the average parent received the supplement for 22
months over the three years of the program and received more than $18,000 in supplements over that that
time. SSP increased treatment parents’ probability of employment throughout the duration of the program
and reduced income assistance payments received by these families. As a result, treatment parents earned
nearly $3,400 more than control members. Total income (supplements, earnings, and income assistance)
increased by $6,300 for the average treatment family. These impacts reduced the proportion of treatment
parents below Canada’s low income cut-offs by 10 percentage points. Although these large impacts were
observed during the program, these impacts did not persist after the completion of SSP. By six years af-
ter random assignment (two years after all treatment parents would have stopped receiving supplements),
treatment and control parents were equally likely to be employed and had similar average earnings.
    Michalopoulos et al. (2002) also investigated the impact of SSP on the outcomes of the parents’ children.
They found differential treatment effects by the age of the child at the beginning of treatment. For children

   19 Statistics   come from the 2011 Canadian census (Statistics Canada 2013).


                                                                 26
who were 1 or 2 years old at the time of random assignment, SSP had no effects on their performance on
a standardized test of vocabulary skills (Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test) and achievement as reported by
parents. For children who were 3 or 4, SSP increased students’ scores on a math skills test and parental-
reported achievement. Treatment children who were 13, 14, or 15 at the time of random assignment reported
doing worse in school and committing more minor acts of delinquency during the program, but these effects
faded away after parents were no longer eligible for the supplement. Finally, for older adolescents, SSP
had no impacts on educational, crime, or work related outcomes, but these students were significantly more
likely to have babies. Other than the effects stated above for the young adolescents, there was no evidence
of SSP having any impacts on health, behavior, and the emotional well-being of students in the study.
   In a large analysis of welfare-to-work programs in the U.S., Hamilton et al. (2001) conduct a national
evaluation of the long-term effects of 11 welfare-to-work programs on the recipients and their children. The
evaluation investigates the effectiveness of two different types of pre-employment strategies, Labor Force
Attachment (LFA) and Human Capital Development (HCD). LFA welfare-to-work programs typically con-
sist of short-term job search and encourage welfare participants to find employment quickly. HCD programs
emphasize investment in longer-term skills and typically encourage participants to enroll in training or basic
education programs. Hamilton et al. (2001) use data on over 40,000 single parents (mostly female) and their
children who were randomly assigned to these programs in sites across the nation to investigate the impact
of LFA and HCD programs
   Over the course of the five-year follow-up period, a majority of control group members worked at some
point. For example, 88 percent of the control parents from the Grand Rapids site were employed at some
point. In Oklahoma City, 79 percent worked at some point during that time and 66 percent worked in
Riverside. Although there was a high percentage of control parents that ever worked, treatment parents still
worked during more calendar quarters on average than control parents in 9 of 11 programs. Similarly, in 9 of
11 programs, treatment parents on average had higher total earnings. Typically, Hamilton et al. (2001) found
that employment-focused programs produced employment and earnings effects almost immediately while
education focused programs did not have effects until a year or more after randomization. However, when
directly comparing the LFA and HCD programs in the sites where they were run side by side, employment
and earnings levels over the five years were very similar.
   By the end of the follow-up period, almost all control families were off of welfare and the average
control group member remained on assistance for only 2 to 3 years. However, both treatment types still
reduced months on welfare relative to the control averages and there is some evidence that LFA treatment
members left welfare assistance at a faster pace than HCD participants. These reductions in welfare usage


                                                     27
appear to directly offset the increase in salary. Despite increasing earnings, treatment largely had no impact
on total combined income (earnings, welfare and Food Stamp payments, and Earned Income Tax Credits).
    Hamilton et al. (2001) also investigate if the welfare-to-work programs had effects on family circum-
stances and children’s well-being. They found that there was no evidence of impacts on health care cover-
age, marriage rates, and few impacts on household composition and living arrangements. However, adults
assigned to a welfare-to-work program were less likely to report recent physical abuse at the end of the
experiment.
    To investigate impacts on children, the researchers conducted a Child Outcomes Study in six of the
programs (three different sites that each offered LFA and HCD programs). These studies included almost
50 measures of children’s academic functioning, health, social skills, and behavior for children who were
preschool age at randomization. The authors report that 15 percent of these tests produced statistically
significant differences, but the sign and magnitudes were rarely consistent across sites. For example, the
estimates from the Atlanta LFA and HCD programs suggested favorable impacts on social skills and be-
havior for young children, but the Grand Rapids programs revealed negative effects. For older children, the
programs led to few significant results. However, whenever results for these students were significant, they
tended to be unfavorable. For example, a HCD program at one site increased the likelihood of dropping
out, increased percentage of adolescents who had a physical, emotional, or mental condition that impeded
their mother’s ability to go to work, and increased teenage pregnancies among families with lower levels of
education. Note again that no effects varied consistently by program approach or site for adolescents.

    Summarizing the literature on poverty reduction attempts to increase student achievement, the meta-
coefficients for this strand of literature are 0.008σ (0.029) and 0.016σ (0.024). And, perhaps more telling,
there is not one experiment that generates statistically significant positive effects on standardized test scores.20


3.2.4   Neighborhood Quality

A more nuanced version of the “poverty is first-order” argument is that the mechanism by which disad-
vantage affects achievement is not directly through income – hence, addressing the income problem has no
real impact – but through what sociologists refer to as “a culture of poverty.” This theory argues that the
poor are not simply lacking resources, but are also immersed in a culture that develops mechanisms or has
social institutions that perpetuate poverty (Moynihan 1969; Harrignton 1982). Taking the culture of poverty
paradigm at face value, the randomized field experiment that one would ideally conduct would be to move

  20 However,   note that some of these studies found impacts for sub samples of the participants or on non-cognitive outcomes.


                                                               28
families from high-poverty to low-poverty neighborhoods – particularly when children are young. This is
precisely what the Moving to Opportunity (MTO) randomized housing mobility experiment did – one of the
most pathbreaking experiments of our generation.
   From 1994 to 1998, MTO enrolled 4,604 poor families with children residing in public housing in high-
poverty neighborhoods of Baltimore, Boston, Chicago, Los Angeles, and New York City. Families were
randomly assigned to three groups: (1) the experimental voucher group, which received a restricted housing
voucher that could be used to pay for private rental housing initially restricted to be in a low-poverty area
(a census tract with under a 10 percent poverty rate in 1990) and some housing-mobility counseling; (2) the
Section-8 only voucher group, which received regular Section 8 housing vouchers with no MTO relocation
constraint; and (3) a control group, which received no assistance through MTO. Across the MTO treatment
sites, 61 percent of household heads were non-Hispanic blacks, 31 percent were Hispanic, and nearly all
households were female-headed at baseline. About half of the experimental voucher group and 63 percent of
the Section 8-only voucher group were able to obtain leases and move with an MTO voucher (the compliance
rate). The MTO families were tracked for 15 years using administrative data as well as major interim (4
to 7 years after random assignment) and long-term (10 to 15 years after random assignment) follow-up
surveys and analyses (Kling, Liebman, and Katz 2007; Sanbonmatsu et al. 2011). MTO generated large and
persistent improvements in residential neighborhoods for the treatment groups (especially the experimental
voucher group) relative to the control group but only modest changes in school quality. The average MTO
family lived at baseline in a neighborhood with a 53 percent poverty rate. MTO led to a 9 percentage point
decline in the duration-weighted average tract poverty rate over the 10-15 year follow-up period for the
experimental voucher group relative to the control group.
   In stark contrast, MTO only modestly improved school quality for the MTO treatment groups. From
the time of random assignment until the long-term follow-up, the experimental voucher group children at-
tended schools that outperformed their control group peers by only 3 percentile points on state exams, and
the Section-8 only voucher group children attended schools that performed just 1 percentile point higher.
MTO treatment group students also typically remained in schools where the majority of the students were
low-income and minority. MTO reduced the share of students eligible for free or reduced-price lunch by
4 percentage points for the experimental voucher group. Although it is difficult to compare the size of the
neighborhood quality change to that of the school quality change, MTO appears to have a larger improve-
ment on neighborhood quality. The MTO treatment groups experienced more than twice as large a reduction
in the share of poor residential peers as compared to poor school peers and more than three times as large an
improvement in percentile rank in the national Census-tract poverty distribution for their neighborhoods than


                                                     29
in the state test score distribution for their schools. Many of the MTO movers remained in the same school
districts and very similar schools. MTO also had no significant impact on adult economic self-sufficiency or
family income at the interim or long-run follow-ups. Thus, an analysis of the impacts of MTO treatments on
child outcomes comes close to getting at the pure effects of changes in home and neighborhood conditions
                                                                                        ∂Y
for disadvantaged kids (with little change in schools or family economic resources):    ∂H   in our framework.
    The MTO voucher treatments did not detectably impact parent’s economic outcomes, but they did sig-
nificantly and persistently improve key aspects of mother’s (adult female’s) mental and physical health in-
cluding substantial reductions in psychological distress, extreme obesity, and diabetes (Ludwig et al. 2011;
Sanbonmatsu et al. 2011). MTO movers also experienced significant increases in adult subjective well-
being with larger gains for adults from sites where treatment induced larger reductions in neighborhood
poverty (Ludwig et al. 2012). For female youth, MTO treatments similarly led to persistent and significant
improvements in mental health (including substantial reductions in psychological distress) and marginally
significant improvements in physical health, but there were no long-term detectable health impacts for male
youth (Kling, Liebman and Katz 2007; Sanbonmatsu et al. 2011). Analyses 4 to 7 and 10 to 15 years after
randomization found that MTO produced no sustained improvements in academic achievement, educational
attainment, risky behaviors, or labor market outcomes for either female or male children, including those
who were below school age at the time of random assignment. Interestingly though, using administrative
data from tax returns through 2012, Chetty et al. (2016) show that the Moving to Opportunity experiment has
had large impacts on early-adulthood outcomes for children who were younger than 13 years old at random-
ization. In their mid-twenties, these individuals have 31% higher incomes, have higher college attendance
rates, are less likely to be single parents, and live in better neighborhoods relative to similar individuals in
the control group. For children who were older than 13 years old at randomization, MTO had no positive
long-term impacts.
    The MTO findings imply that large improvements in neighborhood conditions for poor families (at least
in the range feasible with Section 8 housing vouchers) alone do not produce noticeable gains in children’s
short-term socioeconomic and educational outcomes but can have substantial impacts on important long-
term outcomes for children who were exposed to these environment changes before the age of 13. The
lack of school quality changes induced by treatment are suggestive of a key role for schools in children’s
short-term educational outcomes and risky behaviors.




                                                      30
3.2.5    Meta-Analysis

Combining all the randomized studies for home environment, the random effects coefficients are -0.004σ
(0.008) for math interventions and 0.010σ (0.007) for reading. Astonishingly, the only study that had a sta-
tistically positive pooled impact was an unpublished dissertation. These results show that interventions that
directly impact parents and households have struggled to have immediate effects on students’ achievement
outcomes.


3.3     Randomized Field Experiments in K-12 Schools

Thus far, the literature suggests that early childhood experiments yield strong effects, but policies designed
to reduce poverty, increase work opportunities, or increase neighborhood quality do little to effect the pro-
duction of human capital of school children. In this section, we explore 105 randomized field experiments
conducted in K-12 schools. The literature is summarized in Appendix Table 3.
      We categorize experiments into four buckets: student-based interventions, teacher-based interventions,
management reforms, and “market-based” reforms.


3.3.1    Student-Based Interventions


A. F INANCIAL I NCENTIVES
      Perhaps the most natural way to increase human capital production – at least to an economist – is to
change the incentives of school children to exert effort. Of course, rational agents – even little ones –
internalize the returns to education that accrue in the labor market. Yet, if agents discount the future or are
otherwise “boundedly rational”, individual effort may be below the optimum. Financial incentives offer a
chance to bridge the gap and thereby increase effort.
      There is a nascent but growing body of scholarship on the role of incentives in primary, secondary, and
post-secondary education around the globe (Angrist et al. 2002; Angrist and Lavy 2009; Kremer, Miguel,
and Thornton 2009; Behrman, Sengupta, and Todd 2005; Angrist, Bettinger, and Kremer 2006; Angrist,
Lang, and Oreopoulos 2009; Fryer 2011; Fryer and Holden 2013; Barrera-Osorio et al. 2011; Bettinger
2012; Hahn, Leavitt, and Aaron 1994; Jackson 2010). We describe a subset of the literature below.

Incentives in Primary Schools
      Psychologists argue that children understand the concept of money as a medium of exchange at a very
young age (Marshall and MacGruder 1960), but the use of financial incentives to motivate primary school


                                                        31
students is exceedingly rare.21 Bettinger (2012), who evaluates a pay-for-performance program for students
in grades three through six in Coshocton, Ohio, is one notable exception. Coshocton is ninety-four percent
white and fifty-five percent free/reduced-price lunch. Students in grades three through six took achievement
tests in five different subjects: math, reading, writing, science, and social studies. Bettinger (2012) reports
a 0.13σ increase in math scores and no significant effects on reading, social science, or science. Pooling
subjects produces an insignificant effect.
    Fryer (2011) and Fryer and Holden (2013) also describe student financial incentive experiments that
target primary students that were conducted during the 2007-2008 and 2010-2011 school year in Dallas and
Houston, respectively. In Dallas, Fryer (2011) paid second graders $2 per book to read and pass a short
computer-based comprehension quiz on the book in Accelerated Reader (AR), a software program that has
quizzes for 80,000 trade books, all major reading textbooks, and leading children’s magazines. Students
were allowed to select and read books of their choice at the appropriate reading level and at their leisure,
not as a classroom assignment. The books came from the existing stock available at their school (in the
library or in the classroom). To reduce the possibility of cheating, quizzes were taken in the library on a
computer and students were only allowed one chance to take a quiz. Data on the number of books read
for students in control schools in Dallas was not available because control schools did not have consistent
access to (AR). In total, the experiment distributed $42,800 (21,400 quizzes passed) to 1,777 children across
the 21 treatment schools.
    Paying students to read books yielded a treatment effect of 0.012σ (0.069) in reading and 0.079σ (0.086)
in math. The key result from this analysis emerges when one partitions students in Dallas into two groups
based on whether they took the exam administered to students in bilingual classes (Logramos) or the exam
administered to students in regular classes (Iowa Test of Basic Skills). Splitting the data in this way reveals
that there is a 0.173σ (0.069) increase in reading achievement among English speaking students and a 0.118σ
(0.104) decrease in reading achievement among students in bilingual classes. When we aggregate the results
in our main analysis this heterogeneity cancels itself out. Similarly, the treatment effect for students who
are not English Language Learners is 0.221σ (0.068) and -0.164σ (0.095) for students who are English
Language Learners.
    Fryer and Holden (2013) conducted a randomized field experiment in fifty traditionally low-performing
public schools in Houston, Texas – providing financial incentives to fifth grade students, their parents, and

   21 The use of non-financial incentives – gold stars, aromatic stickers, certificates, and so on – are a more common form of

incentive for young children. Perhaps the most famous national incentive program is the Pizza Hut Book It! Program which
provides one-topping personal pan pizzas for student readers. This program has been in existence for 25 years, but never credibly
evaluated.


                                                              32
their teachers in twenty-five treatment schools. Students received $2 per math objective mastered in Accel-
erated Math (AM), a software program that provides practice and assessment of leveled math objectives to
complement a primary math curriculum. Students practice AM objectives independently or with assistance
on paper worksheets that are scored electronically and verify mastery by taking a computerized test indepen-
dently at school. Parents also received $2 for each objective their child mastered and $20 per parent-teacher
conference attended to discuss their student’s math performance. Teachers earned $6 for each parent-teacher
conference held and up to $10,100 in performance bonuses for student achievement on standardized tests. In
total, the experiment distributed $51,358 to 46 teachers, $430,986 to 1,821 parents, and $393,038 to 1,734
students across the 25 treatment schools.
    The experimental results raise a number of questions. On outcomes for which direct incentives were
provided, there were very large and statistically significant treatment effects. Students in treatment schools
mastered 1.087 σ (0.031) more math objectives than control students. On average, treatment parents at-
tended almost twice as many parent-teacher conferences as control group parents. And, perhaps most im-
portant, these behaviors translated into a 0.081σ (0.025) increase in math achievement on Texas’s statewide
student assessment. The impact of our incentive scheme on reading achievement (which was not incen-
tivized) is -0.077σ (0.027), however, offsetting the positive math effect. These results are consistent with
the classic multitasking and job design work of Holmstrom and Milgrom (1991).
    Interestingly, there is significant heterogeneity in treatment effects as a function of pretreatment test
scores. Higher-achieving students (measured from pretreatment test scores) master 1.66σ more objectives,
have parents who attend two more parent-teacher conferences, have 0.228σ higher standardized math test
scores and equal reading scores relative to high-achieving students in control schools. Conversely, lower-
achieving students master 0.686σ more objectives, have parents who attend 1.5 more parent-teacher con-
ferences, have equal math test scores and 0.165σ lower reading scores. Put differently, higher-achieving
students put in significant effort and were rewarded for that effort in math without a deleterious impact in
reading. Lower-achieving students also increased effort on the incentivized task, but did not increase their
math scores and their reading scores decreased significantly. These data suggest that the classic “substitution
effect” may depend on baseline ability.
    Two years after removing the incentives, the treatment effect for high-achieving students is large and
statistically significant in math [0.271σ (0.110)] and is small and statistically insignificant in reading. In
stark contrast, low-achieving students have no treatment effect in math but a large, negative, and statistically
significant treatment effect on reading [-0.219σ (0.084)]. These data suggests that there may be long-run
impacts of multitasking through learning, dynamic complementarities, or both.


                                                      33
Incentives in Secondary Schools
    Fryer (2011) and Fryer (2010) describe the results of a series of randomized field experiments on fi-
nancial incentives and secondary student achievement. In NYC, seventh grade students were paid for per-
formance on a series of ten interim assessments administered by the NYC Department of Education to all
students. In Chicago, ninth graders were paid every five weeks for grades in their core courses. In Washing-
ton, DC, sixth, seventh, and eighth grade students were paid for their performance on a metric that included
attendance, behavior, and three inputs to the production function chosen by each school individually.
    The results reported in Fryer (2011) and Fryer (2010) are surprising. The impact of financial incentives
on state test scores is statistically zero in each city. In NYC, paying students for performance on standardized
tests yielded treatment effects of 0.004σ (0.017) in reading and -0.031σ (0.037) in mathematics in seventh
grade and similar results for fourth graders. In Chicago, rewarding ninth graders for their grades had no
effect on achievement test scores in math or reading. In Washington, DC, where students were paid for
various inputs to the educational production function, we observed an impact of 0.152σ (0.092) in reading
and 0.114σ (0.106) in mathematics.
    Overall, these estimates suggest that incentives are not a panacea – but we cannot rule out small to
modest effects (e.g., 0.10σ) which, given the relatively low cost of providing financial incentives to students,
have a positive return on investment.
    Perhaps even more surprisingly, financial incentives had little or no effect on the outcomes for which
students received direct incentives, self-reported effort, or intrinsic motivation. In NYC, the effect of student
incentives on the interim assessments is, if anything, negative. In Chicago, where we rewarded students for
grades in five core subjects, the grade point average in these subjects increased 0.093σ (0.057) and treatment
students earned 1.979 (1.169) more credits (half a class) than control students. Both of these impacts are
marginally significant. Incentives in Washington D.C. had no significant impacts on attendance rates, report
card grades, or behavioral incidents.
    Treatment effects on an index of “effort,” which aggregates responses to survey questions such as how
often students complete their homework or asks their teacher for help, are small and statistically insignif-
icant across all cities, though there may have been substitution between tasks. Finally, using the Intrinsic
Motivation Inventory developed in Ryan (1982), Fryer (2011), Fryer (2010), and Fryer and Holden (2013)
find little evidence that incentives decrease intrinsic motivation.

    Taken together, the randomized field experiments involving financial incentives for students have gener-
ated a rich set of facts. Paying second grade students to read books significantly increases reading achieve-



                                                       34
ment for students who take the English tests or those who are not English Language Learners, and is detri-
mental to non-English speakers. Paying fifth graders for completing math homework significantly increases
their math achievement and significantly decreases their reading achievement. All other incentive schemes
had, at best, small to modest effects – none of which were statistically significant.

B. N ON -F INANCIAL I NCENTIVES AND R ETURNS TO S CHOOLING
    Fryer (2013) describes a large and innovative randomized field experiment which grew out of a part-
nership between three large organizations: Tracphone – the largest pre-paid mobile phone provider in the
US, Droga5 – an internationally recognized advertising firm, and the Oklahoma City Public Schools. The
experiment, entitled “The Million”, was designed to provide accurate information to students about the im-
portance of education on future outcomes such as unemployment, incarceration, and wages and to provide
incentives to read books through free cell phones and minutes to talk and text.
    Students in three treatment groups were given cellular phones free of charge, which came pre-loaded
with 300 credits that could be used to make calls or send text messages. Students in the main treatment
arm received 200 credits per month to use as they wanted and received one text message per day on the link
between human capital and future outcomes delivered at approximately 6:00 P.M. A second treatment arm
provided the same text messages as well as non-financial incentives – credits to talk and text were earned by
reading books outside of school. A third treatment arm allowed students to earn credits by reading books
and included no information. There was also a pure control group that received neither free cellular phones,
information, nor incentives.
    On direct outcomes for students in the informational treatments, Fryer (2013) reports students’ ability
to answer specific questions about the information provided in the text messages. Treatment effects were
uniformly positive. Pooling across both informational treatments, treatment students were 4.9 (2.7) percent-
age points more likely to correctly identify the wage gap between college graduates and college dropouts,
17.9 (3.8) percentage points more likely to correctly identify the relationship between schooling and incar-
ceration, and 17.8 (3.8) percentage points more likely to answer both questions correctly. As a robustness
test, we included a “placebo” question on the unemployment rate of college graduates, about which students
never received information. The difference in the probability of answering this question correctly between
informational treatments and the control group was trivial and statistically insignificant. Moreover, 54 per-
cent of control students believe that incarceration rates for high school graduates and dropouts are “no[t]
differen[t]” or “really close”, suggesting that students in Oklahoma Public Schools do not have accurate
knowledge of the returns to schooling.



                                                      35
   Results are mixed for indirect outcomes such as self-reported effort, state test scores, and attendance.
Across the treatment arms, ITT estimates of the effect of treatment on self-reported effort are positive and
statistically significant for both incentives and information arms. For instance, students in the information
treatment were 15.1 (3.7) percentage points more likely to report feeling more focused or excited about doing
well in school and 7.0 (3.7) percentage points more likely to believe that students were working harder in
school.
   In stark contrast, on all administrative outcomes – math or ELA test scores, student attendance, or
behavioral incidence – there was no evidence that any treatment had a statistically significant impact, though
due to imprecise estimates one cannot rule out small to moderate effects which might have a positive return
on investment.
   Another potentially powerful incentive is offering students a chance to earn college credit or college
degrees while still in high school. The idea is that offering college credit will increase student incentives
to exert effort and increase access to college for some students. Over 240 schools nationwide, called Early
Colleges, have already adopted this model. Early Colleges combine a rigorous high school curriculum along
with the potential to earn two years of college credit or a two-year degree during high school. Most Early
Colleges target underserved students and team up with colleges to offer this opportunity at no or low cost
to the students. Berger et al. (2013) utilize the random lottery admission process of some Early Colleges to
investigate the causal impact of Early Colleges on students’ outcomes.
   In their study, Berger et al. (2013) used administrative and survey data from ten Early Colleges that
conducted random admission lotteries for the 2005-06, 2006-07, or 2007-08 school years. Comparing lottery
winners to lottery losers, they were able to estimate causal impacts on high school completion, college
enrollment, college degrees earned, standardized test scores, and high school and college experiences. High
school outcome and student demographic data were obtained directly from the administrative records of the
schools involved in the study; for college outcomes, students were matched to records in National Student
Clearinghouse; data on high school and college experiences as well as college credits obtained while in
high school came from a student survey that the researchers administered to students in eight of the Early
Colleges. The final sample included 2,458 students for the administrative outcomes and 1,294 students for
the survey outcomes.
   Using this data, Berger et al. (2013) found that students offered admission to Early Colleges were
significantly more likely to graduate high school and ever attend college than students who lost the lottery.
Eighty-six percent of Early College students graduated high school compared to 81 percent of lottery losers
and 80 percent of Early College students ever enrolled in college whereas only 71 percent of comparison


                                                     36
students did. Note that these numbers only reflect enrollment observed during the study period, 2005-2011,
and that the gap in enrollment rates between lottery winners and lottery losers was decreasing as time went
on. For example, for cohorts with six years of data available, the gap four years after 9th grade was 39.2
percentage points and this gap had decreased to 9.8 percentage points six years out. Further, when restricting
the sample to only students that enrolled in college after high school graduation, lottery students were only
5.7 percentage points more likely to attend a four-year college and they find no significant differences for
any college or two-year college enrollment. Similarly, during the study period, Early College students were
20 percentage points more likely to obtain a college degree (control mean was 2 percent). These degrees
were typically associate’s degrees and approximately 20 percent of Early College students earned a degree
before the end of high school
    Berger et al. (2013) found no impact on GPA and math standardized test scores. However, they found
that Early College students scored 0.14 standard deviations higher than lottery losers on standardized ELA
tests. The survey results showed that Early College students were 45.1 percentage points more likely to earn
college credit in high school than comparison students and that comparison students were 33.7 percentage
points more likely to take at least one advanced placement exam in high school. In addition, Early College
students reported engaging in rigorous learning activities in school more frequently, being exposed to higher
expectations of college attendance from teachers, principals, and their peers, and reported receiving more
help for completing college applications and financial aid forms.
    The findings overall suggest that Early Colleges can successfully impact students’ college enrollment
and attainment during the four years that the students are enrolled in an Early College – but that these
impacts might not spillover to the years following high school graduation.

    The meta-analysis coefficients for student incentives experiments are 0.024σ (0.018) for math achieve-
ment and 0.021σ (0.017) for reading.

C. T UTORING
    Throughout recorded history, the children of the elites were taught in a manner that would now be
referred to as tutoring. In ancient Greece, children from wealthy families received their primary education
individually or in small groups from masters or tutors (Dunstan 2010). This practice continued for children
of the rich and nobles throughout the Middle Ages (Nelson-Royes 2015). As late as the 17th century,
schooling was thought to be a social, not academic, activity with primary human capital produced in small
groups at home. Yet, the term, “tutoring”, has in more recent history become synonymous with remediation
and fallen out of favor.


                                                     37
   There is substantial heterogeneity in how schools implement various programs that fall under the general
umbrella of “tutoring.” Some schools place students in one-on-one settings with a trained tutor, other schools
place eight students with a volunteer. Some students receive tutoring 30 minutes per week, others are
provided 5 hours of intense instruction in the same time period. This heterogeneity leads, naturally, to large
differences in treatment effects. Dobbie and Fryer (2013), define “high-dosage” tutoring as being tutored
in groups of 6 or fewer for 4 or more days per week. Moreover, they demonstrate that tutoring itself is
not correlated with charter school effectiveness. However, schools who implement “high-dosage” tutoring
demonstrate marked treatment effects.
   Following Dobbie and Fryer (2013), we divide the randomized field experiments in tutoring into these
two groups: low-dosage and high-dosage tutoring. They are discussed in turn. In this exposition, high-
dosage tutoring is defined as being tutored in groups of 6 or fewer for more than three days per week or
being tutored at a rate that would equate to 50 hours or more over a 36-week period.22

High-Dosage Tutoring
   Blachman et al. (2004) report results from a study of a high-dosage tutoring program that targeted
struggling second and third grade readers. Their study specifically focused on these young readers in an
attempt to increase the growth trajectories of these students and possibly combat the negative adolescent
and adult outcomes that have been associated with poor early reading skills. The study uses data from
two cohorts of students drawn from eleven schools in the spring of 1997 and the spring of 1998. The
researchers sent letters home to the parents of 723 students that teachers identified as being in the lowest
20% of readers in their classroom. Of these, 295 students were screened using standardized reading and IQ
tests. In order to be eligible for the study, students had to obtain a standard score below 90 on either the
Word Identification or the Word Attack subtest of the Woodcock Reading Mastery Tests, obtain a standard
score below 90 on a composite of these two subtests, and have a Verbal IQ of at least 80. After screening and
balancing for gender, 89 students were randomly assigned to treatment or control (48 to treatment and 41 to
control). The study also contained a neuroimaging component that required an additional health screening
post-randomization, thus, the researchers contacted parents again to gain consent for both the neuroimaging
and tutoring aspects of the experiment. This resulted in a final sample of 37 students in treatment and 32
students in control. Balance tests revealed no significant differences on observables between the final set of
treatment and controls students at baseline.
   Treatment students received one-on-one tutoring instruction for 50 minutes a day, five days a week,
from September to June. This resulted in the average treatment student attending 126 sessions or 105 hours
  22 We   add to the Dobbie and Fryer (2013) definition because not all studies report days and group size.


                                                                38
of tutoring. This instruction replaced the typical remedial instruction that the schools offered and that the
control students participated in. The instruction was carried out by 12 tutors who were certified in reading
or special education. Prior to the intervention, each tutor received 45 hours of training on early childhood
interventions, early reading acquisition, and teaching strategies. Additionally, tutors received 2 hours of
training each month for the duration of the experiment. The instruction focused on developing fluency and
comprehension strategies, and teaching students to read for pleasure. To do this, tutors incorporated a five-
step plan that was featured in previous published studies into each session (Blachman 1987; Blachman et al.
1999). In over 90% of classroom observations and audiotapes of the tutor sessions, tutors included all five
steps of the instruction. Control students continued business-as-usual – nine control students received no
remedial instruction outside of their reading class and the rest participated in small group tutoring that met
for 3-5 times a week. On average, control students that received remedial instruction attended 104 sessions
and received 77 hours of additional instruction.
   To test the impact of treatment, Blachman et al. (2004) administered a battery of tests pretreatment,
immediately following treatment, and one year after treatment. The test battery included the Woodcock
Reading Mastery Tests—Revised (WRMT), Gray Oral Reading Tests—Third Edition (GORT), Wide Range
Achievement Test 3—Spelling (WRAT), and the Calculation and Applied Problems subtests from the Woodcock-
Johnson Psycho-Educational Battery—Revised (WJ-R). In addition, the researchers administered subtests
of the non-normed Comprehensive Test of Phonological Processes (CTOPP) four times during the treat-
ment year and four times during the follow-up year. At posttest, the researchers found large and statistically
significant impacts on all standardized reading measures. These impacts ranged from 0.55σ on the com-
prehension subtest of the GORT to 1.69σ on the WRMT basic skills cluster. Furthermore, 6 of these 8
impacts were still large and significant a year after the completion of the experiment (the two insignificant
impacts were 0.30σ and 0.24σ on the GORT accuracy and GORT comprehension subtests, respectively).
The authors saw similar reading results for the non-standardized subtests from the CTOPP. As expected,
treatment had no significant impacts on standardized measures of mathematics. If anything, at posttest, the
math results suggest negative impacts with effect sizes of -0.33σ and -0.37σ on the WJ-R calculations and
applied problems subtests, respectively.
   The findings overall suggest that one-on-one high dosage tutoring with research-proven instruction can
increase the growth rates of low-ability students. Although treatment and control students have statistically
indistinguishable growth rates in the follow-up year, the large impact on reading scores from one year of
treatment remains.
   Another randomized study that investigates the impacts of high-dosage tutoring on low-ability students


                                                     39
is Cook et al. (2014). In this study, we implemented an academic and behavioral intervention for 106 male
9th and 10th grade students from a public school in the south side of Chicago. Over 90% of the sample were
both black and eligible for free or reduced-price lunch. The intervention consisted of providing students with
non-academic supports that teach the students social cognitive skills through the “Becoming a Man” (BAM)
program while also providing students intensive individualized tutoring. The BAM program used principles
of cognitive behavioral therapy to deliver a curriculum that focused on values education. The program
sought to develop specific social or social cognitive skills such as generating new solutions to problems,
learning new ways to behave, and identifying consequences ahead of time. BAM was conducted in small
groups that met once a week for one hour each time. Over the course of the year, students had the chance to
participate in 27 different group sessions and typically had to skip an academic class in order to participate.
For the academic portion of the intervention, students met in groups of two with a math tutor one hour a
day, every day. The tutors were hired following the methodology of Match Corps and were paid $16,000
plus benefits for the nine-month academic year.23 Control students were not eligible to participate in BAM
or the intensive tutoring but could participate in other academic supports available at the high school.
    Students were selected to participate in the study based on an academic risk index that was a function of
the number of prior-year course failures, unexcused absences, and being previously held back. The 106 male
9th and 10th grade students with the highest risk index score were then randomly assigned to three groups:
Control (N=34), BAM only (N=24), and BAM plus high-dosage tutoring (N=48). In order to investigate the
impact of assignment to one of these two treatment arms, we obtained student-level records from Chicago
Public Schools that contained demographic information and scores from the EXPLORE and PLAN tests for
the year prior to and year of the intervention.
    We found that the ITT effect of assigning students to either one of the treatment arms was large and
statistically significant for math achievement and math GPA. Assignment to either treatment arm increased
math achievement by 0.51σ and increased math GPA by 0.425 grade points on a four-point scale. We found
no spillovers to reading achievement and no significant impacts on discipline incidents or number of days
suspended. However, treatment students were absent 10.272 fewer days throughout the school year. Mostly
due to the relatively modest size of our sample, when separated by treatment arm, we found no significant
difference between the impacts of the two groups.


   23 Match   Corps is an AmeriCorps program in which members spend a year attempting to close the achievement gap by tutoring
small groups of students in the various Match Charter Schools in Boston. Match Corps seeks to employ tutors who are dedicated to
constant improvement, who possess strong communication and writing skills, and who are committed to spending a year working
with children. Adopting their hiring best practices, tutors in Chicago were required to pass a math assessment, conduct a mock
tutorial session with actual high school students, and interview with the principal or principal’s designee.


                                                              40
    Summarizing, the meta-coefficient on high-dosage tutoring is 0.309σ (0.106) for math achievement and
0.229σ (0.033) for reading achievement. Indeed, 54.3% of coefficients demonstrate statistically significant
positive treatment effects; 0% yield statistically significant negative effects. Surprisingly, the fraction of
statistically positive treatments is larger than early childhood interventions.

Low-Dosage Tutoring
    The Early Start to Emancipation Preparation (ESTEP)-Tutoring program of Los Angeles County was
created in 1998. The program targets foster children aged 14 to 15 who are three or more years behind in
math or reading ability. ESTEP-Tutoring aims to improve the math and reading skills of these students and
encourage them to take advantage of educational resources of which they may have been previously unaware.
Tutoring is provided in the home of the students by college student tutors drawn from the surrounding twelve
community colleges. Tutors are trained to teach the students in math, reading, and spelling and are provided
with curriculum materials that fit a student’s skill level. In addition to tutoring, the program hopes to foster
a mentorship relationship between the tutor and the student. Once assigned to the program, each student is
eligible for 50 hours of tutoring and tutors are allotted additional time for preparation, mentoring, or other
activities. Courtney et al. (2008) take advantage of the high demand of ESTEP-Tutoring and conduct an
evaluation of the program using its oversubscribed application pool.
    For the study, all students referred to the program were screened to ensure their math or reading ability
was indeed three years behind grade level. Eligible students were then randomly assigned to a group that
could participate in ESTEP-Tutoring or a control group that could not. This resulted in a study sample of
445 students, 246 assigned to treatment and 219 assigned to control. On average, approximately four months
passed between assignment and a student’s first meeting with a tutor. Throughout the two years of the study
researchers found that 61.8 percent of treatment students eventually participated in ESTEP-Tutoring and
the average treatment student received 18 hours of math tutoring and 17 hours of reading tutoring. The
relatively low take-up rate is attributed to the high mobility of foster children and the length of time that
passed between assignment and receipt of tutoring. By the time tutors attempted to deliver the first tutoring
session, a majority of the non-participants were no longer in the foster home listed on their application.
Once the tutoring program was initiated, students were eligible for 50 hours of tutoring delivered through 2
hour sessions twice a week.
    In order to investigate the impact of ESTEP-Tutoring on these students, Courtney et al. (2008) con-
ducted three interviews over the two years after randomization (baseline, one year out, and two years out).
At each of these interviews, the researchers administered the letter-word identification, calculation, and



                                                       41
passage comprehension subtests of the Woodcock-Johnson Tests of Achievement III as well as a student
survey. The survey combined questions from The Midwest Evaluation of Adult Functioning of Former Fos-
ter Youth, The National Survey of Child Adolescent Well-Being, the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth,
and the National Longitudinal Survey of Adolescent Health. The survey collected data on demographics,
prior experiences in care, prior victimization, relationships, social support, employment, education, health
behaviors, and physical health.
   Courtney et al. (2008) found evidence of a first-stage impact in that treatment students were more likely
to report having been tutored at home. However, control students were more likely to report that they had
received tutoring at school and the total number of tutoring hours reported by treatment and control students
were not statistically different. The authors limit their impact analysis to the second follow-up interview
(two years after random assignment) due to the fact that participation in ESTEP was still ongoing for many
students one year after random assignment and they find no evidence of impacts on any outcome measure.
The difference between control and treatment groups on Woodcock-Johnson achievement scores, school
grades, educational attainment, and school behavior are all statistically indistinguishable from zero.

   Putting all low-dosage tutoring experiments together, the meta-coefficient on low-dosage tutoring is
0.015σ (0.013) for math achievement and 0.015σ (0.015) for reading achievement.


3.3.2   Teacher-Based Interventions

Great teachers matter. A one-standard deviation improvement in teacher quality translates into annual stu-
dent achievement gains of 0.15σ to 0.24σ in math and 0.15σ to 0.20σ in reading (Rockoff 2004; Rivkin et
al. 2005; Aaronson et al. 2007; Kane and Staiger 2008). These effects are comparable to reducing class size
by about one-third (Krueger, 1999). Using quasi-experimental methods, Chetty et al. (2011) estimate that a
one-standard deviation increase in teacher quality in a single grade increases earnings by about 1% per year;
students assigned to these better teachers are also more likely to attend college and save for retirement, and
less likely to have children when teenagers.
   How to select or produce great teachers is one of the most important open questions in human capital
research. Observable characteristics such as college-entrance test scores, grade point averages, or major
choice are not highly correlated with teacher value-added on standardized test scores (Aaronson et al. 2007;
Rivkin et al. 2005; Kane and Staiger 2008; Rockoff et al. 2008). And, many programs that aim to make
teachers more effective have shown little impact on teacher quality (see e.g., Boyd et al. 2007 for a review).
Some argue that these two facts, coupled with the inherent costs of removing low performing teachers due


                                                     42
to collective bargaining agreements along with increased job market opportunities for women, contributes
to the fact that teacher quality and aptitude has declined significantly in the past 40 years (Corcoran et al.
2004; Hoxby and Leigh 2004).
    We group the set of teacher-based random assignment studies into three subcategories: increasing
teacher supply, providing teachers incentives, or increasing human capital through professional develop-
ment.

A. I NCREASING T EACHER S UPPLY
    Perhaps the most obvious way to increase teacher supply is to lower the barriers into the teaching pro-
fession by allowing alternative routes for teachers to obtain necessary certifications. Due to the teacher
shortages and the No Child Left Behind Act, which required every classroom to be staffed with a certified
teacher or a teacher actively pursuing a certification through an approved program, there has been an in-
crease in teachers who enter teaching through alternative paths.Traditionally, teachers have completed all of
their certification requirements at an accredited university or program before starting to teach in a classroom.
In comparison, alternatively certified (AC) teachers start teaching before completing their requirements and
earn their certification while teaching. Well-known examples of AC programs include Teach for America
(TFA) and the New York City Teaching Fellows (NYCTF) program. Both of these programs attract ex-
tremely qualified uncertified individuals and place them in schools that are in dire need of good teachers.
The potential benefits and advantages of these different routes to certification have been debated by many.
For example, some argue that the coursework required for traditionally certified (TC) teachers is an unnec-
essary burden that discourages some from pursuing teaching and AC programs are a way to circumvent that.
In contrast, others argue that without that coursework, AC teachers enter classrooms underprepared and will
be less effective.
    In order to better understand the effectiveness of AC teachers relative to TC teachers, Constantine et
al. (2009) conducted a randomized study in elementary schools around the nation in the 2004-2005 and
2005-2006 school years. Their study included 63 schools from 20 districts in 7 states across the nation.
Within these schools, 2,610 K-5 students were randomly assigned to be taught by an AC teacher or a TC
teacher for one school year. Schools were only allowed to participate if they had at least one eligible AC
teacher and one eligible TC teacher in the same grade. In order for a teacher to be eligible to participate,
teachers had to be relative novices, had to teach in a regular classroom, and had to deliver both reading and
math instruction to all their students. Researchers collected data on student achievement by administering
the math and reading sections of the California Achievement Test, 5th Edition (CAT). The researchers



                                                      43
also collected data on the classroom practices of teachers through classroom observations and principals’
ratings. In addition, all teachers completed a survey in the spring that collected information on teachers’
professional and personal backgrounds, experience in the school as a full-time teacher, and SAT/ACT scores.
Finally, they also collected data on the details of each program a teacher attended for certification/alternative
placement.
    Constantine et al. (2009) found that students of AC teachers did not perform statistically different than
students of TC teachers. Furthermore, there were no statistically significant differences when comparing low
grade-level (K-1) teachers to high grade-level (2-5) teachers or low-experience teachers to high-experience
teachers. When exploring heterogeneous effect sizes across amount of coursework teachers were required
to do while teaching, there is some evidence that AC teachers who had high-levels of course work had neg-
ative impacts on student achievement. Similarly, there is no statistically significant difference in classroom
observation scores between AC and TC teachers. However, when restricting the sample to teachers that
had high-levels of coursework, there is evidence that AC teachers’ classroom practices were worse than TC
teachers’ practices.
    In addition to the experimental results, Constantine et al. (2009) also present non-experimental results
that explore the relationship between teacher characteristics and program details with the impacts on stu-
dents’ achievement. Overall, they found that teacher characteristics and training experiences only explained
5 percent of the variation in effects on math test scores and 1 percent of the variation in effects on reading test
scores. The only significant correlations they found were that AC teachers with master’s degrees were less
effective in improving student achievement in reading than TC teachers without a master’s degree and that
students in classrooms taught by AC teachers who were taking coursework towards a degree or certification
did worse in reading than students taught by TC teachers who weren’t taking coursework.
    Some argue that schools don’t just need access to more teachers, but specifically need access to different
and potentially better talent pools. Proponents of this argument often point to successful foreign education
systems, such as Hong Kong or Finland, that draw their teachers from the uppermost ranks of their univer-
sities (Tucker 2011). In contrast, it is a well-documented fact that the talent pool of American teachers has
been declining since 1960 (see Corcoran et al. 2004). Hoxby and Leigh (2004) attribute a large part of this
decline to opportunities outside of teaching drawing high-aptitude women from the profession. Over the
past couple decades, we have seen an increase of programs designed to combat this decline and get more
and better college students to enter into teaching. One such program is Teach for America.
    Teach For America, a non-profit organization that recruits recent college graduates to teach for two years
in low-income communities, is one of the nation’s most prominent service programs. Based on founder


                                                        44
Wendy Kopp’s undergraduate thesis at Princeton University, TFA’s mission is to create a movement that will
eliminate educational inequity by enlisting our nation’s most promising future leaders as teachers. In 1990,
TFA’s first year in operation, Kopp raised $2.5 million and attracted 2,500 applicants for 500 teaching slots
in New York, North Carolina, Louisiana, Georgia, and Los Angeles.
    Since its founding, TFA corps members have taught more than three million students. Today, there are
8,200 TFA corps members in 125 “high-need” districts across the country, including 13 of the 20 districts
with the lowest graduation rates. Roughly 80 percent of the students reached by TFA qualify for free or
reduced-price lunch and more than 90 percent are black or Hispanic.
    Entry into TFA is highly competitive; in 2010, more than 46,000 individuals applied for just over 4,000
spots. Twelve percent of all Ivy League seniors applied. In its recruitment efforts, TFA focuses on individu-
als who possess strong academic records and leadership capabilities, regardless of whether or not they have
had prior exposure to teaching. To apply, candidates complete an online application, which includes a letter
of intent and a resume. After a phone interview, the most promising applicants are invited to participate in
an in-person interview, which includes a sample teaching lesson, a group discussion, a written exercise, and
a personal interview. Applicants who are invited to interview are also required to provide transcripts, obtain
two online recommendations, and provide one additional reference.
    Using information collected through the application and interview, TFA bases their candidate selection
on a model that accounts for multiple criteria that they believe are linked to success in the classroom. These
criteria include achievement, perseverance, critical thinking, organizational ability, motivational ability, re-
spect for others, and commitment to the TFA mission. TFA conducts ongoing research on their selection
criteria, focusing on the link between these criteria and observed single-year gains in student achievement
in TFA classrooms.
    TFA teachers are required to take part in a five-week TFA summer institute to prepare them for place-
ment in the classroom at the end of the summer. The TFA summer institute includes courses covering
teaching practice, classroom management, diversity, learning theory, literacy development, and leadership.
During the institute, groups of participants also take full teaching responsibility for a class of summer school
students.
    At the time of their interview, applicants submit their subject, grade, and location preferences. TFA
works to balance these preferences with the needs and requirements of districts. With respect to location,
applicants rank each TFA region as highly preferred, preferred, or less preferred and indicate any special
considerations, such as the need to coordinate with a spouse. Over 90 percent of the TFA applicants accepted
are matched to one of their “highly preferred” regions (Glazerman et al. 2006).


                                                      45
    TFA also attempts to match applicants to their preferred grade levels and subjects, depending on appli-
cants’ academic backgrounds, district needs, and state and district certification requirements. As require-
ments vary by region, applicants may not be qualified to teach the same subjects and grade levels in all
areas. It is also difficult for school regions to predict the exact openings they will have in the fall, and late
changes in subject or grade-level assignments are not uncommon. Predicted effectiveness scores are not
used to determine the placement region, grade, or school, and the scores are not available to districts.
    TFA corps members are hired to teach in local school districts through alternative routes to certification.
Typically, they must take and pass exams required by their districts before they begin teaching and may also
be required to take additional courses to meet state certification requirements.
    TFA corps members are employed and paid directly by the school districts for which they work, and
generally receive the same salaries and health benefits as other first year teachers. Most districts pay a
$1,500 per corps member fee to TFA to offset screening and recruiting costs. TFA gives corps members
various additional financial benefits, including “education awards” of $4,725 for each year of service that
can be used for past or future educational expenses, and transitional grants and no-interest loans to help
corps members make it to their first paycheck.
    To date, there have been a couple randomized evaluations of the impact of TFA teachers. Glazerman et
al. (2006) report findings from a national evaluation of TFA. The experiment involved approximately 100
elementary classrooms from 17 schools drawn from Baltimore, Chicago, Compton, Houston, New Orleans,
and the Mississippi Delta. Students were stratified by grade and school and assigned randomly to either a
TFA or a non-TFA teacher. At the end of school year, Glazerman et al. (2006) found that students assigned to
TFA teachers score about 0.12σ higher in math and 0.03σ higher in reading than students assigned to tradi-
tionally certified teachers.They found no impacts on other student outcomes such as attendance, promotion,
or disciplinary incidents, but TFA teachers were more likely to report problems with student behavior than
were their peers.
    An even bigger study analyzed by Clark et al. (2013) uses a sample drawn from almost 100 schools
across eight states to investigate the effectiveness of middle school math teachers from TFA and a similar
program called The New Teacher Project (TNTP). In each participating school, students were randomly
assigned to math classrooms taught by a program teacher (TFA or TNTP) or a teacher that did not enter
teacher through either of these programs. Similar to Glazerman et al. (2006), Clark et al. (2013) find a
significant impact of TFA on students’ math test scores. Students assigned to TFA teachers scored 0.07σ
higher on state standardized testing whereas students assigned to TNTP teachers had test scores that were
indistinguishable from students in control classrooms. Note that this study was not designed to investigate


                                                       46
the difference between TFA and TNTP teachers. Students were not randomly assigned between TFA and
TNTP teachers, so differences between the effectiveness of the teachers could be due to differences in the
students they taught, the comparison teachers, or the schools they were in. Indeed, TFA and TNTP teachers
included in the study largely taught in different schools and districts. With this in mind, there are still some
major differences between the two programs worth noting. TFA requires its teachers to commit to two years
of teacher whereas TNTP expects their recruits to teach for many years. Also, TFA recruits heavily from
college campuses while TNTP recruits professionals that want to switch careers.
    Several other programs similar – in spirit – to TFA are Boston Teaching Residency, Match Teaching
Residency, NYC Teaching Fellowships, Inner-City Teaching Corps of Chicago, and Harvard Teaching Fel-
lows. Although these programs all differ in length, training procedures, and credentials earned through the
program, they all recruit college graduates with strong academic backgrounds and place them in struggling
school districts. To the best of our knowledge, no randomized evaluations exist yet for these programs.

B. T EACHER I NCENTIVES
    To increase teacher productivity, there is growing enthusiasm among policy makers for initiatives that tie
teacher incentives to the achievement of their students. Since 2006, the U.S. Department of Education has
provided over $1 billion to incentive programs through the Teacher Incentive Fund – a program designed
specifically to support efforts developing and implementing performance-based compensation systems in
schools. At least seven states and many more school districts have implemented teacher incentive programs
in an effort to increase student achievement (Fryer 2013).
    Yet, the empirical evidence on the effectiveness of teacher incentive programs is mixed. In developing
countries where the degree of teacher professionalism is extremely low and absenteeism is rampant, field
experiments that link pay to teacher performance are associated with substantial improvements in student
test scores (Duflo et al. 2012; Glewwe et al. 2010; Muralidharan and Sundararaman 2011). Conversely, the
few field experiments conducted in the United States have had, at best, mixed results.
    Theoretically, it is unclear how to design optimal teacher incentives when the objective is to improve
student achievement. Much depends on the characteristics of the education production function. If, for
instance, the production function is additively separable, then individual incentives may dominate group
incentives, as the latter encourages free-riding. If, however, the production function has important com-
plementarities between teachers in the production of student achievement, group incentives may be more
effective at increasing achievement (Baker 2002).

Group Incentives


                                                      47
    In the 2007-2008 through the 2009-2010 school year, the United Federation of Teachers (UFT) and the
New York City Department of Education (DOE) implemented a teacher incentive program in over 200 high-
need schools, distributing a total of roughly $75 million to over 20,000 teachers.24 The experiment was
a randomized school-based trial. Each participating school could earn $3,000 for every UFT-represented
staff member if the school met the annual performance target set by the DOE based on school report cards,
which the school could distribute at its own discretion. Each participating school was given $1,500 per UFT
staff member if it met at least 75% of the target but not the full target. Note that the average New York
City public school has roughly sixty teachers; this implies a transfer of $180,000 to schools on average if
they met their annual targets and a transfer of $90,000 if they met at least 75% of, but not the full target.
In elementary and middle schools, school report card scores hinge on student performance and progress on
state assessments, student attendance, and learning environment survey results. High schools are evaluated
similarly, with graduation rates, Regents exams, and credits earned replacing state assessment results as
proxies for performance and progress.
    An important feature of the experiment is that schools had discretion over their incentive plans. As
mentioned above, if a participating school met all of the annual targets, it received a lump sum equivalent
to $3,000 per full-time unionized teacher. Each school had the power to decide whether all of the rewards
would be given to a small subset of teachers with the highest value-added, whether the winners of the
rewards would be decided by lottery, or virtually anything in-between. The only restriction was that schools
were not allowed to distribute rewards based on seniority.
    An overwhelming majority of the schools decided on a group incentive scheme that varied the individ-
ual bonus amount only by the position held in the school. This could be because teachers have superior
knowledge of education production and believe the production function to have important complementar-
ities, because they feared retribution from other teachers if they supported individual rewards, or simply
because this was as close to pay based on seniority (the UFT’s official view as to why schools typically
settled on this scheme) as they could do.
    The results from this incentive experiment are informative. Providing incentives to teachers based on a
school’s performance on metrics involving student achievement, improvement, and the learning environment
did not increase student achievement in any statistically meaningful way. If anything, student achievement
declined. ITT estimates yield treatment effects of -0.018σ (0.024) in mathematics and -0.014σ (0.020) in
reading for elementary schools, and -0.046σ (0.018) in math and -0.030σ (0.011) in reading for middle

   24 The details of the program were negotiated by Chancellor Joel Klein and Randi Weingarten, along with their staffs. At the

time of the negotiation, I was serving as an advisor to Chancellor Klein and convinced both parties to agree to include random
assignment to ensure a proper evaluation.


                                                              48
schools, per year. Thus, if an elementary school student attended schools that implemented the teacher
incentive program for three years, her test scores would decline by -0.054σ in math and by -0.042σ in
reading, neither of which is statistically significant. For middle school students, however, the negative
impacts are more sizeable: -0.138σ in math and -0.090σ in reading over a three-year period.
    Consistent with Fryer (2013), Springer et al. (2012) evaluated another group incentive experiment that
took place in the Round Rock Independent School District in Texas. The study used random assignment
to investigate the impacts of a program that awarded teams of middle school teachers bonuses based on
their collective contribution to students’ test score gains. Two years after the initial randomization, Springer
et al. (2012) found no significant impacts on the attitudes and practices of teachers or on the academic
achievement of students.

Individual Incentives
    Springer et al. (2010) evaluated Tennessee’s POINT program – a three-year pilot initiative on teacher
incentives conducted in the Metropolitan Nashville School System from the 2006-07 school year through
the 2008-09 school year. 296 middle school mathematics teachers who volunteered to participate in the
program were randomly assigned to the treatment or the control group, and those assigned to the treatment
group could earn up to $15,000 as a bonus if their students made gains in state mathematics test scores
equivalent to the 95th percentile in the district. They were awarded $5,000 and $10,000 if their students
made gains equivalent to the 80th and the 90th percentiles, respectively. Springer et al. (2010) found there
was no significant treatment effect on student achievement and on measures of teachers’ response such as
teaching practices.
    In an important observation, Neal (2011) discusses how group incentives (e.g. Fryer 2013; Springer
et al. 2012) or sufficiently obtuse (e.g. Springer et al. 2010) pay schemes lead to problems when trying
to calculate the incentive effect at the individual teacher level and could be the reason these experiments
observed little to no incentive effects. For instance, calculating the expected value of a one standard deviation
increase in teacher effort when the incentive scheme depends on where a teacher lies in the overall district
distribution is a non-trivial calculation for an econometrician with loads of data and sophisticated techniques.
It would be exceedingly difficult for a teacher to perform this calculation and understand how their efforts
could translate into rewards. To circumvent this and competition issues between teachers, Barlevy and Neal
(2012) develop a “pay for percentile” method that rewards teachers according to how highly their students’
test score improvement ranks among other students from other schools with similar baseline achievement
and demographic characteristics.



                                                       49
    Although not fully using the method recommended by Barlevy and Neal (2012), Glazerman et al. (2009)
present results from a randomized experiment that ties individual teacher incentives to value-added mea-
sures. This incentive scheme is more in line with the insights in Neal (2011) than Fryer (2013) or Springer
et al (2010, 2012).
    In 2007, Chicago Public Schools implemented its own version of the national Teacher Advancement
Program (TAP). The national version of TAP was developed in the late 1990s by the Milken Family Foun-
dation as an incentive program to increase teacher quality. Teachers could earn extra pay by being promoted
to Mentor or Lead Teacher and receive annual performance bonuses based on their value-added and class-
room observations. Chicago adopted this model with some minor alterations. For example, the Chicago
TAP added principal bonuses tied to implementation benchmarks and school-wide value-added. Teacher
incentives had an expected payout of $2,000 per teacher and teachers could earn an additional $7,000 by
becoming a Mentor or an additional $15,000 by becoming a Lead Teacher. As Mentors, teachers were
expected to provide ongoing classroom support to other teachers in the school. Lead Teachers served on
the leadership team responsible for implementing TAP, analyzing student data, and developing achievement
plans. In addition, Mentors and Lead Teachers conducted weekly group meetings to foster collaboration
between teachers and provide additional professional development.
    Glazerman et al. (2009) conducted a randomized evaluation of the first year of Chicago TAP. Of the
sixteen K-8 schools that volunteered to participate in the program, eight were randomly assigned to start
treatment in the 2007-2008 school year and the other eight would delay the start of the program until the
2008-2009 school year. Glazerman et al. (2009) compared the outcomes for teachers and students in schools
randomly assigned to the two groups for the 2007-2008 school year to determine causal impacts of exposure
to one year of Chicago TAP. For their analysis, the researchers collected student achievement data and
teachers’ classroom assignments from Chicago Public Schools as well as administered surveys to teachers
and principals to collect important information that was not present in the administrative data.
    The evaluation suggests that TAP increased retention in treatment schools. Teachers in TAP schools
had a retention rate of 87.9 percent while teachers in control schools had a retention rate of 82.8 percent, a
statistically significant difference. However, teacher satisfaction and teachers’ positive attitudes toward their
principals were not statistically different between TAP and control schools.
    More importantly, the introduction of TAP did not produce any measurable impacts on student stan-
dardized test scores. The effect size for reading was -0.04σ (0.05) and the effect size for math was -0.04σ
(0.06). The test sore impacts were insignificant across all grade levels and were robust to various sensitivity
analyses.


                                                       50
Enhancing the Efficacy of Teacher Incentives Through Framing
    During the 2010-2011 and the 2011-2012 school years, Fryer et al. (2015) conducted an experiment in
nine schools in Chicago Heights, IL. At the beginning of each school year, teachers were randomly selected
to participate in a pay-for-performance program. Among those who were selected, the timing and framing
of the reward payment varied. One set of teachers – whom we label the “Gain” treatment – received “tra-
ditional” financial incentives in the form of bonuses at the end of the year linked to student achievement.25
Other teachers – the “Loss” treatment – were given a lump sum payment at the beginning of the school year
and informed that they would have to return some or all of it if their students did not meet performance tar-
gets. Teachers in the “Gain” and “Loss” groups with the same performance received the same final bonus.
Within the “Loss” and “Gain” groups, we additionally tested whether there are heterogeneous effects for
individual teacher rewards compared to awarding incentives to teams of teachers.
    In all groups, performance was incentivized according to the “pay for percentile” method developed by
Barlevy and Neal (2011), in which teachers are rewarded according to how highly their students’ test score
improvement ranks among peers from other schools with similar baseline achievement and demographic
characteristics. As Neal (2011) describes, pay for percentile schemes separate incentives and performance
measurements for teachers since this method only uses information on relative ranks of the students. Thus,
motivation for teachers to engage in behaviors (e.g. coaching or cheating) that would contaminate perfor-
mance measures of the students are minimized.
    The first year ITT results of our experiment are consistent with over three decades of psychological and
economic research on the power of framing to motivate individual behavior, though other models may also
be consistent with the data. Students who were assigned to teachers in the “Loss” treatment show large
and statistically significant gains in year one math test scores (0.455σ (0.097)). Teacher incentives that are
framed as gains demonstrate less success. In the first year of the experiment, students in the “Gain” treatment
increased their math test scores 0.245σ (0.094). Importantly, the difference between the “Loss” and “Gain”
treatments in math improvement is statistically significant at conventional levels. More generally, these
results support the view in Barlevy and Neal (2011) and Neal (2011) that properly designed incentives can
have significant effects.
    Interestingly, when looking at the sample of all students, we find little evidence of treatment effects
in the second year of the experiment. The ITT estimates for “Loss” are 0.087σ (0.088) and for “Gain”
are 0.115σ (0.109). The pooled estimates for both years of the experiment are 0.210σ (0.069) and 0.116σ

    25 Note that although math, reading, and science test scores were incentivized (the latter only for fourth and seventh grade science

teachers), the main analysis of the paper focuses on math achievement due to most students having multiple reading teachers and
the science sample being so small.


                                                                  51
(0.075) for “Loss” and “Gain”, respectively. The difference between the “Loss” and “Gain” treatments for
the pooled estimates has a p-value of 0.099.
    Although incentivizing teachers had differential impacts across both years when looking at the entire
sample, we found that kindergartners had large gains in both years of the experiment regardless of whether
their teachers were in the “Loss” or “Gain” group. In the first year of the experiment, the ITT estimates for
kindergarten students were 0.796σ (0.209) for “Loss” and 0.376σ (0.168) for “Gain”. In the second year,
the estimates were 0.574σ (0.176) and 0.714σ (0.144) for “Loss” and “Gain” respectively. Therefore, the
pooled effect size for both years and both treatments was 0.568σ (0.121) for kindergarten math scores.

Talent Transfers
    In America, inexperienced teachers are more likely to be assigned to high-minority and high-poverty
classrooms (Feng 2010). As a result, novice teachers are taking on tougher school assignments, teach-
ing multiple grades, and teaching out-of-field classes (Donaldson and Johnson 2010). To counteract this
trend, several school districts – such as Houston ISD – provide effective teachers incentives to teach in the
most troubled schools. The theory is that the marginal return for an additional effective teacher in a well-
functioning school is less than the marginal return of that teacher in a less well-functioning school. Good
teachers have the potential to change the culture of a school and provide effective pedagogical tools and
mentorship to struggling colleagues. If true, providing incentives for talented teachers to teach in troubled
schools will increase total productivity.
    Glazerman et al. (2013) used a randomized experiment in 10 districts across the nation to investigate the
impact of filling vacancies with high-achieving teachers through the Talent Transfer Initiative (TTI). In each
district, the TTI offered teachers with consistently high value-added (ranking in the top 20 percent within
their subject and grade) $20,000, paid over two years, to teach at low-achieving schools selected through
a random process. Principals of schools with low average test scores volunteered to fill vacancies at their
school using the TTI. Schools that volunteered were matched based on the grade-level and subject of the
vacancy as well as school demographics. Teacher teams (teachers grouped by grade and subject) within each
block of schools that had at least one vacancy were then randomly assigned to treatment or control. Teacher
teams assigned to treatment status were eligible to fill their vacancy with a TTI teacher and vacancies in
control teacher teams were filled using the typical process of the given school. Note that high-performing
teachers were not randomly assigned to these vacancies. After a teacher team is assigned to treatment, TTI
teachers must interview for the position, principals must extend an offer to a TTI teacher, and then a TTI
teacher must accept and voluntarily move to fill this vacancy. In order to receive the full financial incentive,



                                                      52
high-performing teachers must remain in the low-achieving school for a full two years.
    Glazerman et al. (2013) investigated the impact of teacher teams being eligible to fill their vacancies us-
ing the TTI. Across the 10 districts included in the study, 165 teacher teams from 114 schools were randomly
assigned to treatment (N= 85) or control (N=80). The transfer incentive was able to successfully attract high-
achieving teachers. Eighty-eight percent of treatment vacancies were filled with teachers through the TTI. In
order to achieve this high rate of transfer, over 1,500 high-achieving teachers were invited to participate in
TTI. The teachers hired to fill treatment vacancies were significantly more experienced than teachers hired
for control spots. Treatment teachers had on average four years more experience and were 11 percentage
points more likely to have a National Board Certification than control teachers (CM = 9 percent). Interest-
ingly, there was evidence that principals reacted to the hiring of a TTI teacher by reallocating weak teachers
to be in the same team as the incoming TTI teacher. Teachers from elsewhere in the school that joined a
treatment teacher team after the hiring of a TTI teacher had five years less experience than teachers that
moved into a control teacher team. In addition, treatment teachers were more likely to provide mentoring to
their peers (15 compared to 5 percent of the control teachers) and were less likely to receive mentoring (39
compared to 59 percent of control teachers).
    Glazerman et al. (2013) found that the above first-stage and intermediate impacts translated into large
effects on student achievement tests for elementary schools but that there were no significant impacts on the
achievement of middle school students. TTI eligible elementary classrooms increased students’ math scores
by 0.18σ and students’ reading scores by 0.10σ in the first year after randomization. In the second year, the
cumulative impacts for treatment students were 0.22σ and 0.25σ for math and reading test scores, respec-
tively. Although treatment elementary teachers had large impacts on their students, there were no spillover
effects for other teachers in their team. Elementary student achievement outcomes were not significantly
different between students assigned to other teachers in the treatment team and students assigned to other
teachers in the control team.
    Finally, there was evidence that the TTI was effective at keeping these high-performing teachers in the
low-performing schools. At the halfway point of the program, retention rates were higher for teachers that
filled TTI vacancies. Treatment teachers were 23 percentage points more likely to remain in a school after
the first year than their control counterparts (93 percent compared to 70 percent). In addition, retention rates
after the completion of the second year of the experiment were not statistically significant. Approximately
60 percent of treatment teachers returned to the low-achieving school for a third, non-incentivized school
year. In comparison, a statistically indistinguishable 51 percent of control teachers remained in the fall of
the third school year.


                                                      53
    The meta-coefficient on teacher incentives is 0.022σ (0.022) for math achievement and -0.006σ (0.012)
for reading achievement. Yet, that number seems particularly misleading in this context as many of the
schemes were quite ad hoc and inconsistent with economic theory. More experiments are needed before one
can better hazard a guess on the efficacy of teacher incentives. Future randomized trials ought to take the
insights in Barlevy and Neal (2011) and Neal (2011) seriously when designing teacher incentive schemes.

C. T EACHER P ROFESSIONAL D EVELOPMENT

General Professional Development
    The Gates Foundation states that the American education system spends $18 billion annually on pro-
fessional development (Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation 2014). For 2014, Title II of the Elementary
and Secondary Education Act, a program mostly devoted to professional development, was appropriated
$2.3 billion (U.S. Department of Education 2014). More than $450 million (approximately half) of the
Department of Education’s Investing in Innovation (i3) grant money funded professional development pro-
grams from 2010-2012 (U.S. Government Accountability Office 2014). A new report released by TNTP
estimates that three large public districts included in their study spent nearly $18,000 per teacher per year
for professional development (TNTP 2015).
    Professional development (PD) is viewed as a vital tool to increase teachers’ human capital and improve
school effectiveness (Hill 2007). However, experts have expressed concern that teachers are not receiving
enough professional development to have meaningful impacts on teachers’ practices and that the little pro-
fessional development they receive does not focus enough on subject-matter knowledge (Cohen and Hill
2001; Fletcher and Lyon 1998; Foorman and Moats 2004; Garet et al. 2001).26 Another often articulated
concern is that professional development tends to be one-time workshops scheduled on “professional devel-
opment days” or in the summer months with little relevant follow-up (Joyce and Showers 1988; Parsad et
al. 2001; Loucks-Horsley et al. 1998).
    The U.S. Department of Education commissioned two PD interventions to provide states and districts
with further information of the potential of PD programs to improve reading instruction (Garet et al. 2008).
The first intervention provided second grade teachers with a year-long research-based institute series and the
second intervention provided the same institute series plus in-school coaching. Garet et al. (2008) presented
results from the randomized evaluation of these two interventions. In their study, 90 schools across six
districts from four states were randomly assigned to one of the two treatment groups or a control group

   26 A national study revealed that over 80% of elementary and secondary teachers reported participating in 24 hours or less of
professional development over the 2005-2006 school year and summer of 2006 (U.S. Department of Education 2009).


                                                              54
such that each district had an equal number of elementary schools allocated to the three groups. Garet et al.
(2008) collected data on teacher knowledge, teacher practices, and student achievement at the completion
of the intervention and two years after randomization as a follow-up.
   On average, teachers in the first intervention reported attending 39 hours of PD and teachers in the second
intervention reported attending 47 hours of PD. In comparison, control teachers only reported attending 13
hours of PD. Garet et al. (2008) found that this exposure to PD lead to significant impacts on teachers’
knowledge and practices for both groups. Both interventions had positive impacts on second grade teachers’
knowledge of early reading content and instructional knowledge at posttest and a year after the PD programs
had completed. For both years, teachers in both interventions used explicit instruction to a much greater
extent than teachers assigned to control. However, there was no significant difference in the amount of
independent student activity incorporated into the classroom and the use of differential instruction between
either of the two treatment groups and control teachers. Although there were large impacts on teacher
knowledge and practices, there was no evidence that these changes had an impact on students’ test scores.
Test scores from the implementation year and the follow-up year revealed no statistically significant impacts
on standardized math and reading outcomes.
   Another widely used PD program is Classroom Assessment of Student Learning (CASL). The program
set consists of a primary text, DVDs, ancillary books, and an implementation handbook. CASL is designed
to be a self-executing PD program where teachers learn from the textbook and use CASL assessments
to better understand their own and their students’ progress. The program mostly emphasizes formative
assessments, but also includes lessons on how to utilize other forms of classroom assessments such as
standardized test scores. The program is typically implemented via teacher learning teams, in which teachers
can discuss and receive feedback from other teachers who are also using the program.
   In order to better understand the effects of CASL on students’ achievement, motivation to learn, and
teachers’ classroom assessment practices, Randel et al. (2011) conducted a large randomized experiment.
Due to regional needs, they decided to focus the study in mathematics classrooms.
   Almost 70 schools from 32 districts from across Colorado participated in the study. Schools volunteered
to participate and were eligible if they were large enough to have at least one fourth grade and one fifth
grade teacher. The 67 eligible schools were then randomly assigned to a treatment group (N = 33) and a
control group (N= 34). In November of 2007, treatment schools received one set of CASL PD materials
for each math teacher in fourth or fifth grade. In total, there were 178 such teachers in treatment schools
and 231 teachers in control schools. Treatment teachers participated in an introductory video conference
with the author of CASL and had access to a facilitator who had received training in the CASL program,


                                                     55
but other than this, the experiment was completely hands off. The teachers were asked to use the PD
naturally without any input or requirements from the research team. The 2007-2008 school year was used as
a training year during which teachers studied the CASL material and started integrating CASL practices into
their classrooms. The 2008-2009 year was the actual intervention year. Fidelity of treatment was assessed
using self-reported logs that 90 percent of teachers returned to the research team. In order to combat the
alternative hypothesis that any impact was just the result of the intervention schools having more resources,
control schools were given $1,000.
    In order to assess the impact of the intervention on student and teacher outcomes, Randel et al. (2011)
collected administrative and survey data from both the training and implementation year. The administrative
data came directly from the Colorado Department of Education and contained state achievement test scores
and student demographics. In order to quantify students’ motivation to learn, researchers administered a
student survey. Further, teachers’ knowledge of classroom assessments, their classroom assessment prac-
tices, and teachers’ involvement of students in assessments were all measured through self-reported teacher
surveys.
    Randel et al. (2011) found evidence that treatment had a significant impact on teacher knowledge of
class assessments. Intervention teachers on average answered 2.78 questions more (0.42σ) correctly on a
60-item test about teachers’ knowledge of classroom assessments. However, there was no evidence that this
knowledge influenced their classroom practices. There were no significant differences in classroom practices
and the extent to which they involved their students in formative assessments. Intervention teachers were
given an average rating of 1.61 for classroom assessment and control teachers had an average rating of
1.60 (where 1 represents low quality and 4 represents high quality). For student involvement, intervention
teachers self-reported average score was a 0.39 and control teachers’ average score was 0.34 (where 1
indicates that all students were involved in formative assessments everyday and 0 represents no students
were involved).
    As one would suspect from the similar practices of control and treatment teachers, average student
mathematics achievement was not statistically different between treatment and control students. The ad-
justed mean scale score for students in a treatment classroom was 502.49(2.52) and the mean scale score
for students in control classrooms was 501.91(2.44). The impacts remain statistically insignificant when
looking at effect sizes by grade level.

    The meta-coefficient for general PD is 0.019σ (0.024) for math achievement and 0.022σ (0.023) for
reading achievement. In fact, there is not a single study with significant annual pooled impacts. Ironically –



                                                     56
and perhaps sadly – Erik Hanushek argues school districts are overspending on ineffective and unmanaged
professional development and these districts refuse to veer away from practices that fail time and time again
(Layton 2015).

‘Managed’ Professional Development
   Another form of PD is one that has precise training and curriculum materials that schools and districts
can implement to increase teacher effectiveness. These programs are significantly more prescriptive. They
don’t abstractly discuss issues such as “classroom management” or endeavor to increase “rigor.” Consider
two well known examples of this approach to professional development: Success for All and Reading Re-
covery.
   Success for All is a school-level elementary school intervention that focuses on improving literacy out-
comes for all students in order to improve overall student achievement and is currently used in 1,200 schools
across the country (Borman et al. 2007). The program is designed to identify and address deficiencies in
reading skills at a young age using a variety of specific instruction strategies, ranging from cooperative
learning to data-driven instruction. Success for All is purchased as a comprehensive package, which in-
cludes materials, training, ongoing PD, and a well-specified “blueprint” for delivering and sustaining the
model. Schools that elect to adopt Success for All implement a program that organizes resources to attempt
to ensure that every child will reach the third grade on time with adequate basic skills and will continue to
build on those skills throughout the later elementary grades.
   Borman et al. (2007) use a cluster randomized trial design to evaluate the impacts of the Success for
All model on student achievement. Forty-one schools from eleven states volunteered and were randomly
assigned to either the treatment or control groups. Treatment schools implemented Success for All in grades
K-2 and control schools implemented the program in grades 3-5. Borman et al. (2007) present results three
years after randomization for the baseline cohort of kindergarten students. Although forty-one schools were
initially randomized, only thirty-five schools were included in the analysis due to six schools dropping out
over the years for various reasons. The authors conclude that these thirty-five schools are still balanced and
attrition is not a threat to their results. Using standardized test scores from three subtests of the Woodcock
Reading Mastery Test—Revised, Borman et al. (2007) find that Success for All increased student achieve-
ment by 0.36σ (0.11) on phonemic awareness, 0.24σ (0.11) on word identification, and 0.21σ (0.09) on
passage comprehension.
   Another similar professional development program is Reading Recovery (RR). RR is a short-term in-
tervention designed to help struggling readers in first grade catch up to their peers. The program consists



                                                     57
of students meeting one-on-one with a specially trained teacher every day for a 30-minute lesson over 12
to 20 weeks. The lessons are individualized by the RR teacher to fit to a student’s strengths and needs and
follow the RR model—focusing on phonemic awareness, phonics, vocabulary, fluency, and comprehension.
RR teachers undergo a year-long training procedure that takes place at designated training facilities and the
schools where they are assigned. Through this training, they learn how to design and deliver daily lesson
plans, document lessons, and to collect and effectively use different types of student progress data. All
RR teachers are overseen by a teacher leader who has attended an intensive post-graduate program where
they are expected to emerge as literary experts. Literature on RR reports that approximately 75 percent of
students enrolled in RR typically reach grade-level proficiency after participating in RR for the program’s in-
tended length of 12-20 weeks and that these students go on to maintain their progress through the remainder
of elementary school (May et al. 2013).
    Schwartz (2005) conducted the first randomized evaluation of RR in the United States. In his study,
thirty-seven first-grade teachers from across the nation identified two at-risk students in their classroom.
One student from each pair was randomly assigned to a treatment condition that received RR in the fall
and the other student was assigned to a control condition that received RR in the spring. The participating
teachers were all certified RR teachers and the program was active in their schools. The teachers gave up one
of their four 30-minute RR slots to whichever student was randomly assigned to treatment. At the end of the
first semester, Schwartz (2005) found that treatment students had large and significant impacts on various
observation survey and standardized reading measures. Effect sizes on the text level, letter identification,
concepts about print, and hearing and recording sounds in words tasks on the observation survey ranged from
0.9σ to 2.02σ and treatment had an impact of 0.94σ on scores from the Slosson Oral Reading Test—Revised.
    In 2010, the U.S. Department of Education awarded RR a $45 million i3 grant along with $10.1 million
from private sources to fund a scale-up of RR across the nation. The scale-up intends to reach over 2,000
schools and provide literary assistance to over 88,000 students. May et al. (2013) report the findings from
the first two years of this scale-up.
    628 schools from across the nation were enrolled in the i3 scale-up of Reading Recovery. These schools
were randomly assigned to three blocks and one of these blocks was randomly chosen to participate in a
RCT of Reading Recovery during the 2011-2012 school year. Of the 209 schools in this block, only 156
schools actually carried out the randomization process described below and were included in the evaluation.
Each school that participated in the RCT identified the eight lowest scoring students in their school using
the Observation Survey of Early Literacy. These eight students were matched according to their scores and
ELL status and then one student from each pair was randomly assigned to treatment and the other to control.


                                                      58
This process resulted in 628 students in the treatment group and 625 students in the control group (when
there were less than eight eligible students, odd number students were automatically assigned to treatment.
These students were omitted from the impact analysis).
   Using standardized test scores from the Iowa Test of Basic Skills and baseline demographics, May et
al. (2013) investigate the causal impact of being assigned to the RR program. They find that RR increased
student achievement by 0.60σ on the reading words subtest and 0.61σ on the reading comprehension subtest.

   The effects of these ‘managed’ PD experiments for both subjects are statistically significant and for
reading, quite large. The meta-coefficient is 0.052σ (0.016) for math achievement and 0.403σ (0.120) for
reading achievement.

Teacher Feedback
   The modernization of teacher evaluation systems, an increasingly common component of teacher pro-
fessional development, promises to reveal new, systematic information about the performance of individual
classroom teachers. Yet while states and districts race to design new systems, most discussion of how the
information might be used has focused on traditional human resource–management tasks, namely, hiring,
firing, and compensation. By contrast, very little is known about how the availability of new information, or
the experience of being evaluated, might change teacher effort and effectiveness. Dobbie and Fryer (2013)
report that teacher feedback is one of the variables most correlated with charter school success.
   In the research reported here, we study one approach to teacher feedback: practice-based assessment
that relies on multiple, highly structured classroom observations conducted by experienced peer teachers
and administrators. While this approach contrasts with principal walk-through styles of class observation,
its use is on the rise in new and proposed evaluation systems in which rigorous classroom observation is
often combined with other measures, such as teacher value-added based on student test scores.
   Proponents of evaluation systems that include high-quality classroom observations point to their poten-
tial value for improving instruction (see “Capturing the Dimensions of Effective Teaching,” Features, Fall
2012). Individualized, specific information about performance is especially scarce in the teaching profes-
sion, suggesting that a lack of information on how to improve could be a substantial barrier to individual
improvement among teachers. Well-designed evaluations might fill that knowledge gap in several ways.
First, teachers could gain information through the formal scoring and feedback routines of an evaluation
program. Second, evaluation could encourage teachers to be generally more self-reflective, regardless of
the evaluative criteria. Third, the evaluation process could create more opportunities for conversations with
other teachers and administrators about effective practices.


                                                     59
    Taylor and Tyler (2012), using a quasi-experimental design, find that teachers are more effective at
raising student achievement during the school year when they are being evaluated as opposed to previous
years, and even more effective in the years after evaluation. A student instructed by a teacher after that
teacher has been through an evaluation scored about eleven percent of a standard deviation (4.5 percentile
points for a median student) higher in math than a similar student taught by the same teacher before the
teacher was evaluated.


3.3.3   School Management

Bloom et al. (2015) identify an interesting relationship between management quality of 1,800 high schools
from eight countries and student achievement in those schools. They find a strong correlation between
higher management quality and better educational outcomes. Dobbie and Fryer (2013) use variation in the
management practices of New York City charter schools to investigate the characteristics that differentiate
those that increase student achievement (as measured by standardized test scores) and those that do not
increase achievement. Using survey and administrative data from 39 New York City charter schools, they
correlated the policies of each school with the school’s individual impact on math and reading achievement.
Dobbie and Fryer (2013) report that traditional inputs (i.e. class size, per pupil expenditure, the fraction of
teachers with no certification, and the fraction of teachers with an advanced degree) are not correlated with
school effectiveness. Instead, they found that frequent teacher feedback, the use of data to guide instruction,
high-dosage tutoring, increased instructional time, and high expectations are highly correlated with schools’
impacts on math and reading. In this section, we present studies that explore causal impacts of some of the
management practices discussed in Bloom et al. (2015) and Dobbie and Fryer (2013).

A. U SING DATA TO D RIVE I NSTRUCTION
    Carlson et al. (2011) present results from a large randomized study that investigates the impacts of data-
driven reform on student achievement in mathematics and reading. The study included over 500 schools
from 59 school districts across seven states. Districts randomly assigned to treatment implemented a 3-
year data-driven reform initiative with the support of consultants from the Johns Hopkins Center for Data-
Driven Reform in Education (CDDRE). Control districts implemented the same initiative, but one year after
random assignment. Carlson et al. (2011) utilize the delayed start to investigate the causal impacts of the
first year of the CDDRE initiative on student achievement outcomes. The first year of the CDDRE initiative
focuses on developing and evaluating quarterly benchmark assessments, reviewing all available data to better
understand the needs of the district, and conducting leadership and data interpretation training for district


                                                      60
and school leaders.
    The participating districts were selected through an extensive recruitment process. The Department of
Education of each state nominated districts with a large number of low performing schools to participate
in the study. District officials of the nominated districts were contacted and those that agreed to participate
were included in the randomization procedure. Further, for each participating district, the district officials
specified which schools in their district they wanted to participate in the experiment. Generally, low per-
forming schools were selected. Following the selection of schools, districts were stratified by recruitment
wave and state and randomly assigned to treatment or control. Treatment schools implemented CDDRE
data-driven initiative and control schools continued business-as-usual for one year and then implemented
the same initiative.
    In order to assess the impact of the intervention, results from state-administered achievement tests were
collected for each participating school. Carlson et al. (2011) found treatment had a significant impact on
student math scores but found no significant effect for reading scores – treatment schools increased students’
math scores by 0.059σ (0.029) and increased students’ reading scores by 0.033σ (0.020).
    In addition to providing constructive feedback for teachers, collecting teacher data could also be a useful
tool for leaders in managing their schools. Rockoff et al. (2012) investigate the impact of giving over 200
New York City principals objective performance evaluations of the teachers in their schools. All schools
in NYC that contained any grades four through eight were eligible to participate (over 1,000 schools); 223
signed up and completed the necessary survey to be included in the experiment. Participating principals
were stratified by grade configuration and assigned randomly to treatment or control. Treatment principals
received reports detailing the value-added of the teachers in their school relative to similar teachers in NYC
and training on how to use and interpret this data. Rockoff et al. (2012) find evidence that principals
do use this information to update their beliefs of the teachers in the school. Using baseline and post-
intervention surveys that solicited principals’ evaluation of their teachers, they find that treatment principals
update their beliefs in the direction of the teacher value-added detailed in the report. Moreover, consistent
with a Bayesian learning model, principals put more weight on the teacher value-added information when
that information is more precise than their prior beliefs and they put more weight on their prior beliefs when
the relative precision is reversed. Providing this information to principals led to an increase in turnover
for teachers with low performance estimates and had a positive impact on students’ math achievement for
students assigned to teachers that remained in the intervention throughout its entirety.

B. C LASS S IZE



                                                       61
    Project STAR was an experiment carried out in 79 Tennessee schools from 1985 to 1989 where 11,600
students in grades K to 3 were randomly assigned to small classes (13-17 students), regular classes (22-
25 students), or regular classes with a full-time aide. At the time, the statewide pupil-to-teacher ratio was
22.3, so regular classes represented close to the average classroom size in the state. At the time of the
experiment, kindergarten was not compulsory in Tennessee, so many new students entered schools in first
grade. Students who entered a participating school after the 1985-1986 school year were randomly assigned
to one of the three types of classes. Additionally, students in regular classes and in regular classes with
an aide were randomly reassigned between these two types of classes at the end of kindergarten. However,
kindergartners initially assigned to small classes remained in small classes throughout the entire experiment.
    Using a student’s initial assignment to one of the three groups, Krueger (1999) estimated the impact of
reduced class size and teacher aides on an index of scores from the math, reading, and word subtests of
the Stanford Achievement Test. Krueger (1999) found that for grades K-3, students scored about five to
seven percentile points higher on the index than students assigned to a regular class without an aide. These
results correspond to effect sizes in the range of 0.19σ-0.28σ and represent 64 to 82 percent of the white-
black test score gap in the data. Additionally, there was some evidence that regular classrooms with aides
outperformed regular classrooms without aides—the estimates for aide classrooms tended to be small and
positive, but only the first grade results were statistically significant with an impact of 1.48 percentile points.
When exploring heterogeneous treatment effects, Krueger (1999) found that smaller class sizes were more
effective for students on free lunch and black students.

C. E XTENDED T IME
    There are very few randomized trials that expose students to higher quantities of schooling. Zvoch and
Stevens (2012) show that a summer literacy program has enormous impacts on kindergarten and first grade
reading test scores. In this study, the researchers invited students to a five-week summer program that lasted
for 3.5 hours a day, four days a week. In the program, students received classroom instruction on funda-
mental literacy topics, were assigned homework, completed in-class work packets, and practiced literacy
skills in small groups with students of a similar skill level. The summer program was typically reserved
for struggling students that scored below a cutoff point on the spring standardized tests. However, for this
study, the district established upper bounds so that approximately 50 kindergartners and 50 first graders fell
in the range between the cutoff scores and the upper bound scores. These students were considered the
experimental sample and half were randomly invited to participate in the program. At posttest, Zvoch and
Stevens (2012) found that the summer program on average increased reading test scores by 0.69σ for the



                                                        62
kindergarten and first grade students.
    However, Holmes and McConnell (1990) utilized a larger sample of students to investigate the impact of
full-day versus half-day kindergarten instruction and found no significantly positive impacts. In fact, their
study provided evidence that half-day kindergarten students perform better on math achievement tests than
full-day kindergartners. The experiment randomly assigned twenty elementary schools to either a full or
half-day schedule. Holmes and McConnell found that full-day kindergartners had math scores that were
0.29σ lower and reading scores that were 0.11σ higher than the half-day students.
    An experiment that investigated extended day impacts in a slightly older sample was Meyer and Van
Klaveren (2013). This experiment randomly invited Dutch 5th, 6th, and 7th grade students to participate
in an extended school day program. The program consisted of a classroom of approximately ten students
receiving an additional two hours of language instruction, two hours of math instruction, and one hour of
excursions per week. Meyer and Van Klaveren found that assignment to treatment increased math scores by
0.087σ (0.067) and increased reading scores by 0.005σ (0.081). Neither of these effects are significant.
    Taking the treatment effects at face value, one potential explanation for the patterns in the experimental
data is that increasing the amount of time students spend in class per day is not as effective as extending the
school year. Put differently, if there are concavities in human capital production as a function of time and
students are at the point of diminishing marginal returns for a given day but not for a given year, this can
rationalize the findings.


3.3.4   Market-Based Approaches

In recent years, developed countries across the globe have increased the scope of schooling alternatives
available to students—an approach long advocated by leading economists (Friedman 1955; Becker 1995;
Hoxby 2002). Creating a competitive and active marketplace has the potential to improve educational out-
comes because schools would have more incentive to improve in response to increased market pressure. To
the extent that match quality between a school and a student is important, school choice programs may also
yield benefits simply by increasing the set of schools over which a student is able to choose.
    For these approaches to be an effective means of reform, however, it is necessary that students benefit
from the opportunity to attend sought-after schools, and that these improvements are apparent to students
and parents. The goal of this subsection is to understand the measurable achievement benefits accrued to
students when there is more flexibility and school choice.

A. VOUCHERS


                                                      63
    There have been a series of important studies that exploit randomized voucher lotteries to estimate the
effect of attending a private school for youth at various ages. The Milwaukee voucher program, offering
vouchers to a limited number of low-income students to attend one of three private nonsectarian schools in
the district, is the most prominent of these. Analyses of this program obtain sharply conflicting estimates of
the impact on achievement depending upon the assumptions made to deal with selective attrition of lottery
losers from the sample (Witte et al. 1995; Greene et al. 1999; Witte 1997; Rouse 1998). Although in theory
randomization provides an ideal context for evaluating the benefits of expanding parental choice sets, in the
Milwaukee case, less than half of the unsuccessful applicants returned to the public schools and those who
did return were from less educated, lower income families (Witte 1997).
    Rouse (1998) used a typical ITT specification to evaluate the Milwaukee voucher program. Compar-
ing lottery winners to lottery losers, she found that being selected for the choice program had significant
impacts on math achievement but insignificant impacts on reading. Students who won the lottery scored ap-
proximately 1.5-2.3 percentile points (0.08σ-0.12σ) more per year in math compared to lottery losers. This
suggests effect sizes on the order of 0.32σ-0.48σ for four years of school. The results in Rouse (1998) are
robust to various methods of imputing missing data and attrition from the sample – when imputing missing
observations, estimates remained in the range of 1.38 to 2.31 percentile points.
    The DC Opportunity Scholarship Program (OSP) is another voucher program that provides up to $7,500
to low-income families in the District of Columbia to send their children to participating private schools.
Wolf et al. (2010) use 2,300 applicants to a series of lotteries in 2004 and 2005 to evaluate the impact of the
OSP. The study found that the OSP had no impact on student achievement but increased students’ chance of
graduation. Additionally, parents of students who were offered a scholarship had a higher satisfaction with
schools and rated schools as safer. This result is significant regardless of whether a student actually used the
offered scholarship or not.
    Mayer et al. (2002) present results from the third year of a randomized evaluation of the School Choice
Scholarships Foundation Program in NYC. In 1997, the program provided scholarships of up to $1,400
annually for up to four years via lottery to low-income families with students in grades K-4. The scholarship
could be used to pay tuition at a religious or secular school of the family’s choosing. Fifty-three percent of
students who were offered scholarships used the scholarship for at least three full years. The families that
did not utilize the offered scholarship claimed they were unable to do so because they were unable to afford
the tuition and expenses that the scholarship did not cover or were unable to find a school in a convenient
location.
    Through parent and student surveys, Mayer et al. (2002) found that the private schools these students


                                                      64
elected to attend were indeed different from the public schools non-participants remained in. Parents with
students who switched to private schools reported that the schools had smaller class sizes; were more likely
to have computer laboratories, after-school programs, and tutor programs; had less incidents of students
destroying property, fighting, cheating, and racial conflict; communicated more with parents; allowed par-
ents to spend less time helping their children with homework; and this resulted in an overall higher level of
satisfaction with their students’ school. Students who switched reported that students in private school were
more likely to get along with teachers, were more proud of their school, were less likely to be put down
by teachers, and were asked to complete more homework. Additinoally, students reported that the private
schools had stricter behavior rules, and there was a lower prevalence of cheating.
    Although there was evidence that students offered a scholarship switched to better school environments,
Mayer et al. (2002) found that three years after random assignment, there was no average treatment effect
on students’ performance. Moreover, students who ever attended a private school and students who attended
for all three years did no better than students who never attended a private school. These results are robust
across grade levels, but there is evidence of heterogeneous treatment effects across races – Mayer et al.
(2002) found positive effects on the standardized test scores of black students.

    The meta-coefficient on voucher experiments is 0.024σ (0.021) for math achievement and 0.030σ (0.024)
for reading achievement. Relative to their popularity with politicians, the lack of effectiveness of voucher
programs is surprising. Rather than focusing on achievement, many use a revealed preference argument to
conclude families who make active choices – even if achievement is unaffected – are better off.
    Before one dismisses them entirely, there are two key pieces of data missing on voucher experiments.
First, in the average voucher experiment a student enrolls in a private school between grades K and 8. There
is no experiment that tests the full pre-K through high school graduation treatment. This seems essential.
    Second, although vouchers are a market-based reform, we do not know what happens if there are enough
vouchers in a concentrated area to allow the market to respond by altering the supply (and scope) of schools
available to educate disadvantaged children. Because all the experiments have been relatively small, one
cannot assess the potential general equilibrium effects.27
   27 A notable counter example is a recent experiment implemented in India. Muralidharan and Sundararaman (2015) conducted
an experiment using 180 villages from the Indian state of Andhra Pradesh in which they randomly assigned villages to treatment
or control and then awarded private school vouchers to public school applicants through random lotteries in the treatment villages.
Two and four years after randomization, they found that winning a voucher had no impact on Telugu (native language), math,
English, and science/social studies achievement. However, the program had large impacts on Hindi test scores, a subject not taught
in public schools. Since private schools are approximately a third of the cost of public schools, Muralidharan and Sundararaman
(2015) conclude that private schools are a much more cost-effective way of teaching students. Further, they found no evidence of
spillovers (negative or positive) on the achievement of public school students that did not apply to the voucher program or on non-
voucher private students. This suggests that vouchers are a cost-effective way to potentially increase student achievement without
any negative externalities.


                                                               65
    An ideal voucher experiment might take a large state with multiple school districts and randomly im-
plement voucher programs or Education Savings Accounts in half of the districts and analyze both student
achievement and the market response. The vouchers could be risk adjusted – more disadvantaged children
receive more school funding – or contain location preferences that would induce a more aggressive supply
response in blighted communities. These ideas only scratch the surface of what is possible and have not been
evaluated in a compelling way. Thus, whether the Friedman (1955) vision for public schools is effective at
producing human capital is still unknown.

B. S CHOOL C HOICE
    Cullen, Jacob, and Levitt (2006) present causal estimates of the impact of school choice on a variety
of student outcomes. Specifically, they utilize the random lotteries of oversubscribed schools in Chicago’s
open enrollment system. This system allows students to apply to public magnet schools and programs
outside of their neighborhood school.28 When oversubscribed, many Chicago Public Schools (CPS) use
random lotteries to offer admission to students. The authors obtained the results of 194 such lotteries from
19 high schools in CPS. The final sample consisted of 14,434 students who applied to these 19 choice
schools in the spring of 2000 and 2001.
    The analysis in Cullen, Jacob, and Levitt (2006) finds little evidence that winning a lottery has any
impact on traditional achievement measures such as test scores, graduation rates, attendance rates, or courses
taken. These results are robust to a variety of sensitivity analyses and are similar across student subgroups.
In an attempt to better understand the findings, the authors explored potential mechanisms that could explain
the zero-impact on academic outcomes. They found little evidence of lottery winners and losers attending
similar schools (lottery winners attended schools with higher average achievement, lower poverty rates,
and higher graduation rates), of choice schools substituting for parental involvement, or of travel costs and
disruption of peer groups interfering with academic success. Therefore, the results in Cullen, Jacob, and
Levitt (2006) seem to suggest that the measurable school inputs of these choice schools have little causal
impact on students’ academic outcomes.
    Another possibility is that students and parents apply to choice schools for non-academic reasons. Using
survey data collected by the Consortium on Chicago School Research for CPS students in grades 6-10 in
spring 2001, the authors investigated this possibility. They found evidence of some positive effects on non-
traditional outcomes, possibly supporting the hypothesis that students and parents choose choice schools for
non-academic reasons. Cullen, Jacob, and Levitt (2006) found that lottery winners report fewer incidents of
   28 Magnet schools are different from traditional public schools in that each magnet school tends to have a specific educational
theme and students can choose to enroll in a school based on their interest in a school’s theme.


                                                               66
disciplinary action, fewer arrests, and lower incarceration rates. However, lottery winners are not statistically
different from lottery losers for other outcomes such as liking school, trusting their teachers, and having high
expectations for the future.
    Another example of a school choice experiment is Connecticut’s interdistrict magnet school program.
In 1996, the Connecticut Supreme Court ruled that students in Hartford public schools were denied equal
educational opportunities due to racial and economic isolation. One of the state’s many responses was
to foster the growth of interdistrict magnet schools. A decade after the the Connecticut Supreme Court’s
ruling, there were 54 magnet schools in operation in Connecticut and 41 of these served students residing
in Hartford, New Haven, or Waterbury. Additionally, interdistrict magnets serve two or more districts and
all students residing in these districts are eligible to enroll in the school. Urban students that elect to attend
magnet schools are typically moving to schools where there are fewer students eligible for free lunch, more
white students, and higher average scores on standardized mathematics and reading tests.
    Bifulco et al. (2009) evaluated the impact of Connecticut’s interdistrict magnet schools using the ran-
dom admission lotteries of two oversubscribed magnets serving Hartford and four surrounding suburban
districts. One of these schools served grades 6-8 and the other served grades 6-12. The authors obtained
admission data for the 2003 and 2004 sixth grade lotteries at these schools as well as student-level test
scores from the Connecticut State Department of Education for the 2001-2002 to 2006-2007 school years.
The final sample for these two schools consisted of 553 students in 12 oversubscribed lotteries (both schools
conducted lotteries by district for each year), 164 of which were eventually offered admission to one of the
two magnets. Comparing the eighth grade outcomes of lottery winners to lottery losers, Bifulco et al. (2009)
find that students offered admission to the magnet schools scored 0.109σ higher on math and 0.252σ higher
on reading tests, of which only the latter was statistically significant at conventional levels.

C. C HARTER S CHOOLS
    A charter school is a school that receives public funding but operates independently of the established
public school system in which it is located. They exist (and are increasing in demand) across the developed
world – from Australia to England and Wales. Figure 2 shows the increase in the number of students
attending charter schools in the United States and England.
    When originally conceived, charter schools offered two distinct promises: First, they were to serve as
an escape hatch for students in failing schools. Second, they were to use their legal and financial freedoms
to create and incubate new educational practices that could be used to inform traditional public schools with
new ideas and fresh approaches.



                                                       67
    In America, charter schools currently enroll almost four percent of all students. Some of these schools
have shown remarkable success in increasing test scores – closing the racial achievement gap in just a few
years. For example, schools such as the Success Academy Charter Schools in New York City, YES Prep in
Houston, and charter schools in the Harlem Children’s Zone have become beacons of hope, demonstrating
the enormous potential to improve student achievement in the most blighted communities. Others, however,
have failed to increase achievement and have actually performed substantially worse than their traditional
counterparts. In this scenario, students would have been better off not attending a charter school.

Evaluating Charter Schools
    The method for evaluating charter schools is remarkably consistent across the literature.29 The literature
estimates two empirical models – ITT effects and Local Average Treatment Effects (LATEs) – which provide
a set of causal estimates of the impact of attending a charter school on outcomes. The ITT estimates measure
the causal effect of winning a charter lottery by comparing the average outcomes of students who ‘won’ the
lottery to the average outcomes of students who ‘lost’ the lottery:


                   outcomei = µ + γXi + πZi + ∑ ν j Lotteryi j + ∑ φ j Lotteryi j ∗ 1(siblingi ) + ηi                             (1)
                                                       j                    j


where Zi is an indicator for winning an admissions lottery, and Xi includes controls for student-level demo-
graphics such as gender, race, special education status, eligibility for free or reduced-price lunch, receipt of
Limited English Proficiency (LEP) services, and a quadratic in two prior years of math and ELA test scores.
Lotteryi j is an indicator for entering the lottery in year j, and 1(siblingi ) indicates whether student i had a
sibling enter the lottery in the same year.30 Equation (1) identifies the impact of being offered a chance to
attend a charter school, π, where the lottery losers form the control group corresponding to the counterfac-
tual state that would have occurred for students in the treatment group if they had not been offered a spot
in the charter school. Using this approach, the literature on charter effectiveness has quickly amassed an
interesting set of facts.
    First, the typical charter school is no more effective at increasing test scores than the typical traditional
public school (Gleason et al. 2010). Evaluations that encompass the most representative samples of charter
schools show little impact. Using lottery admissions data for 36 charter schools from around the nation,
Gleason et al. (2010) investigated the impact of charter schools on student outcomes. They found that two

   29 The national charter school studies released by the Center for Research on Education Outcomes (CREDO) are anomalous in

that they use observational data instead of randomized admissions lotteries (Center for Research on Education Outcomes 2013).
   30 In typical charter lotteries, an offer is extended to all siblings when multiple siblings enter the same lottery and one sibling

wins.


                                                                 68
years after the random lotteries, students who won the lotteries scored, if anything, lower on standardized
test scores than students who lost the lotteries.31 In addition, this national sample of charter schools had
no impact on students’ math and reading proficiency levels, number of days absent, and grade promotion.
Gleason et al. (2010) found no impact of charter schools on student behavior and school disciplinary action,
but a higher fraction of lottery winners showed up late to school five or more days. Although the average
charter school included in their study did not have any positive impacts on student outcomes, Gleason et al.
(2010) found large, positive, and statistically significant impacts – ranging from 0.07σ to 0.94σ – on every
measure of students’ and parents’ satisfaction with and perceptions of school.
    Second, an emerging body of research suggests that high-performing charter schools can significantly
increase the achievement of poor urban students. Students attending over-subscribed Boston-area charter
schools score approximately 0.4σ higher per year in math and 0.2σ higher per year in reading (Abdulka-
diroglu et al. 2011). Promise Academy students in the Harlem Children’s Zone (HCZ) score 0.229σ higher
per year in math and 0.047σ higher per year in reading (Dobbie and Fryer 2011). Students in the Knowledge
is Power Program (KIPP) schools – America’s largest network of charter schools – score 0.180σ higher per
year in math and 0.075σ higher per year in reading (Tuttle et al. 2013; Angrist et al. 2011). The SEED
urban boarding school in Washington D.C., demonstrates similar test score gains (Curto and Fryer 2014).
    Third, charter schools are more effective at increasing math scores than reading scores. Abdulkadiroglu
et al. (2011) and Angrist et al. (2011) find that the treatment effect of attending an oversubscribed charter
school is four times as large for math as reading. Dobbie and Fryer (2011) demonstrate effects that are
almost 5 times as large in middle school and 1.6 times as large in elementary school in favor of math. In
larger samples, Hoxby and Murarka (2009) report an effect size 2.5 times as large in New York City charters,
and Gleason et al. (2010) show that an average urban charter school increases math scores by 0.16σ with
statistically 0 effect on reading.
    According to the National Alliance for Public Charter Schools, the median grade served by charter
schools in the U.S. is sixth grade (usually students are 11-12 years old). However, the achievement data
necessary to conduct evaluations of charter schools is typically not available for kindergarten through sec-
ond grade students, so the average grade evaluated is most likely even higher. The theory and empirical
findings discussed above suggest that the relatively late timing of charter school “interventions” might be an
important factor in the observed differential impacts by subject.

    31 The two-year ITT impact for the pooled sample is -0.08σ (p-value = 0.032) for reading scores and -0.06σ (p-value = 0.136)

for math test scores. Note that pooling results together masks heterogeneous treatment effects described in the paper. For example,
charter schools in large urban areas had a 0.16σ impact on math scores while schools outside of large urban areas had a -0.14σ
impact. Both of these impacts were statistically significant.


                                                               69
    Another leading theory posits that reading scores are influenced by the language spoken when students
are outside of the classroom (Rickford 1999; Charity, Scarborough, and Griffin 2004). Charity, Scarborough,
and Griffin (2004) argue that if students speak nonstandard English at home and in their communities,
increasing reading scores might be especially difficult. This theory is consistent with the data and could
explain why students at an urban boarding school make similar progress on reading and math (Curto and
Fryer 2014).
    Fourth, there are important features of charter schools that seem to be correlated with their level of
student achievement. It is important to note that these analyses are non-experimental. Angrist et al. (2013)
argue that both the urbanicity of charter schools and whether they adopt the so called “No Excuses” approach
to culture and discipline are positive predictors of charter treatment effects.
    Dobbie and Fryer (2013) provide evidence on the determinants of charter school effectiveness by col-
lecting data on the inner-workings of 29 charter schools in New York City and correlating these data with
lottery-based estimates of each school’s effectiveness. Information on school practices were collected from
a variety of sources. Principal interviews asked about teacher development, instructional time, data driven
instruction, parent outreach, and school culture. Teacher interviews asked about professional development,
school policies, school culture, and student assessment. Student interviews asked about school environ-
ment, school disciplinary policy, and future aspirations. Lesson plans were used to measure curricular rigor.
Videotaped classroom observations were used to calculate the fraction of students on task throughout the
school day.
    School effectiveness is estimated by exploiting the fact that oversubscribed charter schools in New York
City are required to admit students via random lottery. The variability inherent in the set of NYC charter
schools, combined with rich measures of school inputs and lottery-based estimates of each school’s impact
on student achievement, provides an ideal opportunity to understand which inputs best explain school ef-
fectiveness. This, coupled with some of the best practices of our meta-analysis, provide the intellectual
backbone of the randomized field trial discussed below.
    Dobbie and Fryer (2013) find that input measures associated with a traditional resource-based model of
education – class size, per pupil expenditure, the fraction of teachers with no teaching certification, and the
fraction of teachers with an advanced degree – are not correlated with school effectiveness in our sample.
Indeed, our data suggest that increasing resource-based inputs may marginally lower school effectiveness.
On the surface, this evidence may seem inconsistent with the important results reported in Krueger (1999).
There are a few ways to reconcile this. First, Dobbie and Fryer (2013) analyzes charter schools in NYC,
whereas Krueger (1999) uses a sample of traditional public schools in Tennessee. Second, the variation in


                                                       70
Dobbie and Fryer (2013) comes from only 39 charter schools with relatively similar class sizes, whereas
the thousands of treatment students in Krueger (1999) are placed in classrooms that are almost 40% smaller
than control classrooms. Third, Krueger’s analysis focused on students in grades kindergarten through third
whereas the correlations in Dobbie and Fryer (2013) used third through eighth grade test scores. Fourth, and
most important, the analysis in Krueger (1999) is experimental.
    In stark contrast, Dobbie and Fryer (2013) demonstrate that an index of five policies suggested by forty
years of human capital research – frequent teacher feedback, data-driven instruction, high-dosage tutoring,
increased instructional time, and a relentless focus on academic achievement – explains roughly half of the
variation in school effectiveness in both math and reading.



4     Combining What Works: Evidence from a Randomized Field Experiment
      in Houston

Improving the efficiency of the production of human capital is of great importance across the developed
world. The United States spends $10,768 per pupil on primary and secondary education, ranking it fourth
among OECD countries (Aud et al. 2011). Yet, among these same countries, American fifteen year-olds
rank twenty-fifth in math achievement, seventeenth in science, and fourteenth in reading (Fleischman 2010).
This is not a phenomenon that is unique to the United States. Other OECD countries are unable to translate
large amounts of educational spending into educational success. For example, the two countries ranking
directly behind the United States with per pupil primary and secondary spending of $9,959 and $9,448 are,
respectively, Austria and Denmark (Aud et al. 2011). However, Austrian fifteen year-olds rank eighteenth
in math achievement, twenty-fourth in science, and thirty-first in reading and Danish fifteen year-olds rank
thirteenth in math, twentieth in science, and nineteenth in reading (Fleischman 2010).
    Traditionally, there have been two approaches to increasing educational efficiency: (1) expand the scope
of available educational options in the hope that the market will drive out ineffective schools, or (2) directly
manipulate inputs to the educational production function.32
    As our meta-analysis demonstrates, market-based reforms such as school choice or school vouchers
have, at best, a modest impact on student achievement. This suggests that these approaches – implemented
in their current form – are unlikely to significantly increase the efficiency of the public school system, subject
to the important caveats discussed in the previous section.
   32 Increasing standards and accountability reflect a third approach to education reform. There is evidence that increased account-

ability via the No Child Left Behind Act had a positive impact on math test scores (though not reading test scores) and on wages
(Dee and Jacob 2011; Deming et al. 2013).


                                                                71
   Another approach is to inject the best practices known from the set of randomized field experiments
completed to date – along with the correlates gleaned from analyzing the inner-workings of successful
charter schools – in an experiment in traditional public schools. This is precisely the goal of Fryer (2014).
   Between the 2010-2011 and 2012-2013 school years, Fryer (2014) implemented important elements of
the above education best-practices in twenty of the lowest performing schools (containing more than 12,000
students) in Houston, Texas.
   To increase time on task, the school day was lengthened by one hour and the school year was lengthened
by ten days in the nine secondary (middle and high) schools. This was 21 percent more time in school than
students in these schools spent in the pre-treatment year and roughly the same as achievement-increasing
charter schools in New York City. In addition, students were strongly encouraged and even incentivized
to attend classes on Saturday. In the eleven elementary schools, the length of the day and the year were
not changed, but non-instructional activities (e.g. twenty-minute bathroom breaks) were reduced. This is
consistent with the correlations in Dobbie and Fryer (2013) and the randomized field trial reported in Meyer
and Van Klaveren (2013).
   In an effort to improve the human capital available to teach students and lead schools, nineteen out of
twenty principals were removed and 46 percent of teachers left or were removed before the experiment
began. Some teachers left because they believed the program was too disruptive. Others were removed
because they were too resistant to the changes. Any teacher, independent of skill level, who demonstrated
a desire to implement the proposed changes with fidelity was retained. As part of the turnaround efforts,
teachers received both managed professional development and frequent feedback as a part of a more holistic
evaluation system. The managed professional development was similar to the Success for All treatment
described in Borman et al. (2007). The frequent feedback was similar to the quasi-experimental program
evaluated in Taylor and Tyler (2012).
   To enhance student-level differentiation, all fourth, sixth and ninth graders received high-dosage math
tutoring and extra reading or math instruction was provided to students in other grades who had previously
performed below grade level. Similar to the Chicago BAM experiment described above, the tutoring model
was adapted from the MATCH school in Boston – a charter school that largely adheres to the methods
described in Dobbie and Fryer (2013).
   In order to help teachers use interim data on student performance to guide and inform instructional prac-
tice, schools were required to administer interim assessments every three to four weeks and provided with
three cumulative benchmark assessments, as well as assistance in analyzing and presenting student perfor-
mance data on these assessments. Yet, as Rockoff et al. (2012) and Dobbie and Fryer (2013) demonstrate,


                                                     72
data alone is not enough. Dobbie and Fryer (2013) argue that the use of interim assessment data is only
correlated with achievement for schools who can articulate a precise plan of how they will change student
grouping or pedagogy or some other strategy in response to the data.
    Finally, to instill a culture of high expectations and college access, we started by setting clear expecta-
tions for school leadership. Schools were provided with a rubric for the school and classroom environment
and were expected to implement school-parent-student contracts. Specific student performance goals were
set for each school and the principal was held accountable and provided with financial incentives based on
these goals.
    Such invasive changes were possible, in part, because eleven of the twenty schools (nine secondary
and two elementary) were either “chronically low performing” or on the verge of being labeled as such and
subject to takeover by the state of Texas. Thus, despite our best efforts, random assignment was not a feasible
option for these schools. To round out our sample of twenty schools and provide a way to choose between
alternative quasi-experimental specifications, we randomly selected nine additional elementary schools (vis-
à-vis matched-pairs) from eighteen low – but not chronically low – performing schools. One of the randomly
selected treatment elementary schools closed before the start of the experiment so we had to drop it and its
matched pair from our experimental sample. Thus, our final experimental sample consists of sixteen schools.
    In the sample of sixteen elementary schools in which treatment and control were chosen by random
assignment, providing estimates of the impact of injecting charter school best practices in traditional public
schools is straightforward. In the remaining set of schools, we use three separate statistical approaches
to understand the impact of the intervention. Treatment is defined as being zoned to attend a treatment
school for entering grade levels (e.g. sixth and ninth) or having attended a treatment school in the pre-
treatment year for returning grade levels. “Comparison school” attendees are all other students in Houston.
We begin by using district administrative data on student demographics and, most importantly, previous
years’ achievement, to fit least squares models. We then present two empirical models that instrument for a
student’s attendance in a treatment school with original treatment assignment.
    All statistical approaches lead to the same basic conclusions. Injecting best practices from charter
schools into low performing traditional public schools can significantly increase student achievement in
math and has marginal, if any, effect on English Language Arts (hereafter known simply as “reading”)
achievement. Students in treatment elementary schools gain around 0.184σ in math per year, relative to
comparison samples. Taken at face value, this is enough to eliminate the racial achievement gap in math
in Houston elementary schools in approximately three years. Students in treatment secondary schools gain
0.146σ per year in math, decreasing the gap by one-half over the length of the demonstration project. The


                                                      73
impacts on reading for both elementary and secondary schools are small and statistically zero.
      In the grade/subject areas in which we implemented all five policies described in Dobbie and Fryer
(2013) – fourth, sixth, and ninth grade math – the increase in student achievement is substantially larger
than the increase in other grades. Relative to students who attended control schools, fourth graders in
treatment schools scored 0.331σ (0.104) higher in math, per year. Similarly, sixth and ninth grade math
scores increased 0.608σ (0.093), per year, relative to students in comparison schools.


4.1     Simulating the Potential Impact of Implementing Best Practices in Education on Wage
        Inequality

An important question is how much of the initial gaps described in the introduction to this chapter might be
eliminated if state, local, and federal governments focused on the experiments proven most effective through
randomized trials. Answering this question is, by definition, speculative – as it relies on extrapolations from
cross-sectional relationships and assumptions on how human capital propagates through an individual’s life.
Still, the exercise may be informative and we include it here as an illustrative exercise.
      Data on long-term follow-ups is sparse. Perry Preschool, the Abecedarian Project, and the Moving to
Opportunity experiments are notable exceptions. As described above, MTO revealed that despite having
no significant impacts on children’s academic outcomes, better neighborhoods had important impacts on
the adulthood outcomes of children – treatment MTO children who were younger than 13 years old at
randomization had 31% higher income, had higher college attendance rates, were less likely to be single
parents, and lived in better neighborhoods relative to similar individuals in the control group. At posttest,
the famous early childhood programs Perry Preschool and the Abecedarian Project had large impacts on
children’s achievement scores. At age 40, treatment students from Perry Preschool had higher high school
completion rates (77% vs. 60%), were more like to be employed (76% vs. 62%), had higher median annual
earnings ($20,800 vs. $15,300), were more likely to own a house (37% vs. 28%), were more likely to have a
savings account (76% vs. 50%), and had better crime outcomes, self-reported health, and family-outcomes
compared to the control group (Schweinhart et al. 2005). Similarly, at the age 30 follow-up, treatment
students from the Abecedarian Project had significantly higher levels of educational attainment (13.46 years
versus 12.31 years), were 17 percentage points more likely to hold a bachelor’s degree (CM = 6%), were 22
percentage points more likely to work full-time (CM = 53%), and were six times less likely to receive public
assistance for more than 10% of the preceding seven years than students who were assigned to control.
      In the absence of more long term outcomes for the vast majority of randomized field trials, we follow
the methods described in Winship and Owen (2013) and simulate a life-cycle model similar to the Social

                                                      74
Genome Model (SGM).33 The SGM is a useful tool to simulate how shocks in a given life-stage may carry
over to later life outcomes. For example, one can simulate how much increasing reading test scores in early
childhood by 0.4σ would impact income at age 40. We can thus use this simulation – coupled with data
on treatment effects from the meta-analysis – to investigate what sort of income benefits might accrue if
we simply implement best practices. Winship and Owen (2013) provide evidence that the SGM reasonably
replicates key adult impacts of the Perry Preschool experiment, the Abecedarian Project, and the Chicago
Child-Parent Centers program. We find similar results.


4.1.1    Interpreting the Literature Through A Simple Life-Cycle Model

The model draws from the vast literature of human capital formation and assumes that cognitive and non-
cognitive skill formation varies across an individual’s lifetime and is dependent on the stock of skills in pre-
vious stages of life. Specifically, Winship and Owen (2013) define six different life-stages: circumstances
at birth (CAB), early childhood (EC), middle childhood (MC), adolescence (AD), transition to adulthood
(TTA), and adulthood (AH). The empirical model uses linear structural equations to describe the dependen-
cies between the outcomes in a given stage and all revealed outcomes from the stages preceding it. Formally,
given a vector of circumstances at birth, CAB, for individual i, each outcome in the vector of early childhood
outcomes, EC, is modeled as
                                          EC Outcomei = βec   ec         ec
                                                         0 + βcabCABi + εi .


Similarly, each of the MC outcomes is given by


                                   MC Outcomei = βmc   mc         mc        mc
                                                  0 + βcabCABi + βec ECi + εi .



For the adolescent life-stage we have


                             AD Outcomei = βad   ad         ad        ad        ad
                                            0 + βcabCABi + βec ECi + βmc MCi + εi .



Outcomes when transitioning to adulthood would be


                      T TA Outcomei = βtta  tta        tta       tta       tta       tta
                                       0 + βcabCABi + βec ECi + βmc MCi + βad ADi + εi .


   33 Due  to there being no source code available – even upon request – and limited description in the SGM guide, we constructed
the model using our own assumptions about the cleaning, creation, and merging of the data. This leads to a final dataset used for the
simulations that is different from the one described in Winship and Owen (2013). However, when comparing the simulated impacts
reported in published papers using SGM to estimated impacts of the simulations, they are quite similar. We provide the code and
data in an online appendix.


                                                                75
And finally, adult outcomes are modeled as


             AH Outcomei = βah   ah         ah        ah        ah        ah           ah
                            0 + βcabCABi + βec ECi + βmc MCi + βad ADi + βtta T TAi + εi .



    Where βλψ are the partial correlations of realized outcomes from the ψ life-stage (“0” represents an
intercept) with the given LHS outcome in the λ life-stage.
    With a rich enough dataset, one can obtain the correlations linking all CAB, EC, MC, AD, TTA, and
AH outcomes together and investigate the indirect and direct impacts of varying one outcome on another.
Importantly, we could then use the structural equations of this model to predict how a shock in earlier
life-stages will propagate to outcomes in adulthood.


4.1.2   Simulating the Social Genome Model

Unfortunately, as discussed by Winship and Owen (2013), there is not yet a reliable dataset that follows
an individual from birth through adult outcomes. Therefore, in order to conduct simulations using the
above model, we combine two well known public datasets: the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979
(NLSY79) and the NLSY79 Child and Young Adult survey (CNLSY). From the CNLSY, we observe CAB,
EC, MC and AD outcomes. From the NLSY79, we observe TTA and AH outcomes. See Table 3 for a list of
the specific variables that were used for each life-stage. The variables include a mix of cognitive skills (e.g.
standardized test scores), non-cognitive skills (e.g. self esteem and hyperactivity indices), and important life
outcomes (e.g. teen birth, drug use, and graduation).
    Using these two datasets and the equations above, we are able to estimate the coefficients for each
outcome in a life-stage. However, an issue arises in linking the life-stages across these two data sources.
Due to the age of respondents at first interview in the NLSY79, the data from earlier life stages is not as
rich as in the CNLSY. Therefore, the NLSY79 does not contain all of the CAB, EC, MC, and AD variables
that the CNLSY has. In order to overcome this, we define a set of linking variables, LINK, that contains all
outcomes that are available in both the NLSY79 and the CNLSY. We can then estimate the following two
equations in the NLSY79 dataset to obtain coefficients for each TTA and AH outcome:


                            T TA Outcomei = βtta  tta           tta
                                             0 + βlink LINKi + εi

                             AH Outcomei = βah   ah            ah           ah
                                            0 + βlink LINKi + βtta T TAi + εi .


    Using all of the coefficients generated from these estimations and the CNLSY data, we can then build
a synthetic baseline dataset of birth to age 40 outcomes for the CNLSY sample. Given the impact of


                                                        76
an intervention at some life-stage, we can then use the same coefficients to propagate the effects of the
intervention through the life-stages of these individuals. Comparing a post-intervention estimation of an
outcome to the baseline estimation would then provide us with an estimated impact of the intervention
on the given outcome. See Winship and Owen (2013) and our Online Appendix B for a more in depth
discussion of the estimation process.


4.1.3    Simulating Impacts on Income

As mentioned, our simulations are, at best, illustrative. Relying on cross-sectional correlations, making
important (untestable) assumptions on the law of motion of human capital development, and assuming that
the variation induced by experiments would largely be consistent across groups and time are necessary for
our exercise. If, as Cunha and Heckman (2010) argue, “skills beget skills and abilities beget abilities” these
assumptions are overly restrictive and will bias our estimates downward. If on the other hand, as many
economists might find natural, there are diminishing marginal returns to interventions, then the forthcoming
estimates are too large.
    If public policy were to implement the most successful math and reading interventions when children
are in early childhood, middle childhood, and adolescence, the expected test score increase would be 1.192σ
in math and 2.449σ in reading.34          35   Using the model, the math impact would translate into a 8.28% increase
in income at age 40 and the reading impact would translate into a 25.06% increase.36 Table 4 presents the
average successful impact for each category-life-stage and the estimated impact on income at age 40 if only
an intervention with that effect was implemented.
    Whether or not the cumulative impact is enough to eliminate racial wage inequality depends on one’s
ability to “tag” (in the sense of Akerlof 1978) minorities among other things. We won’t hazard a quantitative
guess, but qualitatively it seems clear that adhering to the best practices gleaned from the literature on
randomized field trials discussed in this chapter would significantly reduce, if not eliminate, much of the
gap between racial groups in wages and other important economic and social outcomes.


    34 For the time being, there are no RCTs that estimate effects on children’s math and reading abilities during the circumstances

at birth life-stage. Potential studies that focused on infants that our search returned were mostly excluded from our meta-analysis
for not using standardized math or reading measures.
    35 As to not give too much weight in this exercise to any one study, we approximate the impact of the “most successful”

intervention for each life-stage as the average of the three largest statistically significant impacts from each category. If there were
no significant studies for a given category-life-stage, we assign an impact of zero. The cumulative impacts stated are the sum
of the five averages from the category-life-stages – early childhood, home (middle childhood), school (middle childhood), home
(adolescence), and school (adolescence). This simple approximation assumes impacts are linearly additive one-time shocks and
experiments are externally valid.
    36 Using the cross-sectional estimates generated by Chetty et al. (2014), the expected income gain at age 28 from a 1.192σ

increase in standardized math scores is 15.62% and from a 2.449σ increase in standardized reading scores is 32.08%.


                                                                  77
5    Conclusion

The review of 196 randomized field experiments designed to increase human capital production unearthed
several facts. Early childhood investments, on average, significantly increase achievement. Yet, experiments
that attempt to alter the home environment in which children are reared in have shown very little success at
increasing student achievement. Among school experiments, high-dosage tutoring and ‘managed’ profes-
sional development for teachers have shown to be effective. Ironically, high-dosage tutoring of adolescents
seems to be as effective – if not more effective – than early childhood investments. This argues against
the growing view that there is a point at which investments in youth are unlikely to yield significant re-
turns (Carniero and Heckman 2003; Cullen et al. 2013). Lastly, charter schools can be effective avenues of
achievement-increasing reform, though the evidence on other market-based approaches such as vouchers or
school choice have less demonstrated success.
    These facts provide reason for optimism. Through the systematic implementation of randomized field
experiments designed to increase human capital of school-aged children, we have substantially increased
our knowledge of how to produce human capital and have assembled a canon of best practices. And, in an
illustrative simulation exercise, we demonstrate that focusing on what we know has the potential to increase
income and reduce racial wage inequality.
    The question is: do we have the courage to implement, at scale, human capital policies based on best
practices developed from these randomized experiments?


References

 [1] Aaronson, Daniel. 1998. “Using Sibling Data to Estimate the Impact of Neighborhoods on Children’s
     Educational Outcomes.” Journal of Human Resources, 33(4): 915-946.

 [2] Aaronson, Daniel, Lisa Barrow, and William Sander. 2007. “Teachers and Student Achievement in the
     Chicago Public High Schools.” Journal of Labor Economics, 25(1): 95-135.

 [3] Abdulkadiroglu, Atila, Joshua Angrist, Susan Dynarski, Thomas Kane, and Parag Pathak. 2011. “Ac-
     countability and Flexibility in Public Schools: Evidence from Boston’s Charters and Pilots.” The Quar-
     terly Journal of Economics, 126(2): 699-748.

 [4] Administration for Children and Families. 2006. “Preliminary Findings from the Early Head Start
     Prekindergarten Followup.” Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Re-
     port.

                                                    78
 [5] Ainsworth, James. 2002. “Why Does It Take a Village? The Mediation of Neighborhood Effects on
     Educational Achievement.” Social Forces, 81(1): 117-152.

 [6] Akerlof, George. 1978. “The Economics of “Tagging” as Applied to the Optimal Income Tax, Welfare
     Programs, and Manpower Planning.” The American Economic Review, 68(1): 8-19.

 [7] Alexander, Karl, Doris Entwisle, and Linda Olson. 2001. “Schools, Achievement, and Inequality: A
     Seasonal Perspective.” Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 23(2): 171-191.

 [8] Allington, Richard, Anne McGill-Franzen, Gregory Camilli, Lunetta Williams, Jennifer Graf, Jacque-
     line Zeig, Courtney Zmach, and Rhonda Nowak. 2010. “Addressing Summer Reading Setback Among
     Economically Disadvantaged Elementary Students.” Reading Psychology, 31(5): 411-427.

 [9] Almond, Douglas, and Janet Currie. 2011. “Killing Me Softly: The Fetal Origins Hypothesis.” The
     Journal of Economic Perspectives, 25(3): 153-172.

[10] Angrist, Joshua, Eric Bettinger, Erik Bloom, Elizabeth King, and Michael Kremer. 2002. “Vouchers
     for Private Schooling in Colombia: Evidence from a Randomized Natural Experiment.” American
     Economic Review, 92(5): 1535-1558.

[11] Angrist, Joshua, Eric Bettinger, and Michael Kremer. 2006. “Long-Term Educational Consequences
     of Secondary School Vouchers: Evidence from Administrative Records in Colombia.” The American
     Economic Association, 96(3): 847-862.

[12] Angrist, Joshua, Susan Dynarski, Thomas Kane, Parag Pathak, and Christopher Walters. 2011. “Who
     Benefits From KIPP?” IZA Discussion Paper no. 5690.

[13] Angrist, Joshua, Daniel Lang, and Philip Oreopoulos. 2009. “Incentives and Services for College
     Achievement: Evidence from a Randomized Trial.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
     1(1): 136-163.

[14] Angrist, Joshua, and Victor Lavy. 2009. “The Effects of High Stakes High School Achievement
     Awards: Evidence from a Randomized Trial.” American Economic Review, 99(4): 1384-1414.

[15] Angrist, Joshua, Parag Pathak, and Christopher Walters. 2013. “Explaining Charter School Effective-
     ness.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 5(4): 1-27.




                                                  79
[16] Aronson, Joshua, Carrie Fried, and Catherine Good. 2002. “Reducing the Effects of Stereotype Threat
     on African American College Students by Shaping Theories of Intelligence.” Journal of Experimental
     Social Psychology, 38: 113-125.

[17] Attewell, Paul, and Battle, Juan. 1999. “Home Computers and School Performance.” The Information
     Society, 15: 1-10.

[18] Aud, Susan, William Hussar, Grace Kena, Kevin Bianco, Lauren Frohlich, Jana Kemp, and Kim Tahan.
     2011. “The Condition of Education 2011.” Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Education, National
     Center for Education Statistics.

[19] Avvisati, Francesco, Marc Gurgand, Nina Guyon, and Eric Maurin. 2014. “Getting Parents Involved:
     A Field Experiment in Deprived Schools.” Review of Economic Studies, 81(1): 57-83.

[20] Baker, George. 2002. “Distortion and Risk in Optimal Incentive Contracts.” Journal of Human Re-
     sources, 37(4): 728-751.

[21] Barlevy, Gadi, and Derek Neal. 2012. “Pay for Percentile.” American Economic Review, 102(5): 1805-
     1831.

[22] Barrera-Osorio, Felipe, Marianne Bertrand, Leigh Linden, and Francisco Perez-Calle. 2011. “Improv-
     ing the Design of Conditional Transfer Programs: Evidence from a Randomized Education Experiment
     in Colombia.” The American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 3(2): 167-195.

[23] Becker, Gary. 1995. “Human Capital and Poverty Alleviation.” Human Resource and Operations Pol-
     icy, World Bank, Working Paper no. 52.

[24] Behrman, Jere, Piyali Sengupta, and Petra Todd. 2001. “Progressing Through PROGRESA: An Impact
     Assessment of a School Subsidy Experiment.” Washington, D.C.: International Food Policy Research
     Institute.

[25] Behrman, Jere, Piyali Sengupta, and Petra Todd. 2005. “Progressing through PROGRESA: An Impact
     Assessment of a School Subsidy Experiment in Rural Mexico.” Economic Development and Cultural
     Change, 54(1): 237-275.

[26] Berger, Andrea, Turk-Bicakci, Lori, Garet, Michael, Song, Mengli, Knudson, Joel, Haxton, Clarisse,
     Zeiser, Kristina, Hoshen, Gur, Ford, Jennifer, Stephan, Jennifer. 2013. “Early College, Early Success:



                                                    80
     Early College High School Initiative Impact Study.” Washington, D.C.: American Institutes for Re-
     search

[27] Bettinger, Eric. 2012. “Paying to Learn: The Effect of Financial Incentives on Elementary School Test
     Scores.” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 94(3): 686-698.

[28] Bifulco, Robert, Casey Cobb, and Courtney Bell. 2009. “Can Interdistrict Choice Boost Student
     Achievement? The Case of Connecticut’s Interdistrict Magnet School Program.” Educational Eval-
     uation and Policy Analysis, 31(4): 323-345.

[29] Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation. 2014. “Teacher’s Know Best: Teachers’ Views on Professional
     Development.” Seattle, WA: Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation.

[30] Blachman, Benita. 1987. “An Alternative Classroom Reading Program for Learning Disabled and
     Other Low-Achieving Children.” In Bowler R., editor. Intimacy with Language: A Forgotten Basic
     in Teacher Education, Baltimore, MD: Orton Dyslexia Society.

[31] Blachman, Benita, Darlene Tangel, Eileen Wynne Ball, Rochella Black, and Collen McGraw. 1999.
     “Developing Phonological Awareness and Word Recognition Skills: A Two-Year Intervention with
     Low-Income, Inner-City Children.” Reading and Writing, 11(3): 239-273.

[32] Blachman, Benita, Christopher Schatschneider, Jack Fletcher, David Francis, Sheila Clonan, Bennett
     Shaywitz, and Sally Shaywitz. 2004. “Effects of Intensive Reading Remediation for Second and Third
     Graders and a 1-Year Follow-Up.” Journal of Educational Psychology, 96(3): 444-461.

[33] Bloom, Nicholas, Renata Lemos, Raffaella Sadun, and John Van Reenen. 2015. “Does Management
     Matter in Schools?” The Economic Journal, 125(584): 647-674.

[34] Borman, Geoffrey, Robert Slavin, Alan Cheung, Anne Chamberlain, Nancy Madden, and Bette Cham-
     bers. 2007. “Final Reading Outcomes of the National Randomized Field Trial of Success for All.”
     American Education Research Journal, 44(3): 701-731.

[35] Boyd, Donald, Daniel Goldhaber, Hamilton Lanjford, and James Wyckoff. 2007. “The Effect of Certi-
     fication and Preparation on Teacher Quality.” The Future of Children, 17(1): 45-68.

[36] Broh, Beckett. 2004. “Racial/Ethnic Achievement Inequality: Separating School and Non-School Ef-
     fects Through Seasonal Comparisons.” Dissertation submitted to Ohio State University, Athens, OH.



                                                   81
[37] Brooks-Gunn, Jeanne, and Greg Duncan. 1997. “The Effects of Poverty on Children.” The Future of
     Children, 7(2): 55-71.

[38] Brooks-Gunn, Jeanne, Pamela Klebanov, Judith Smith, Greg Duncan, and Kyunghee Lee. 2003. “The
     Black-White Test Score Gap in Young Children: Contributions of Test and Family Characteristics.”
     Applied Developmental Science, 7(4): 239-252.

[39] Brooks-Gunn, Jeanne, Fong-Ruey Liaw, and Pamela Kato Klebanov. 1992. “Effects of Early Interven-
     tion on Cognitive Function of Low Birth Weight Preterm Infants.” The Journal of Pediatrics, 120(3):
     350-359.

[40] Campbell, Frances, and Craig Ramey. 1994. “Effects of Early Intervention on Intellectual and Aca-
     demic Achievement: A Follow-Up Study of Children from Low-Income Families.” Child Develop-
     ment, 65(2): 684-698.

[41] Carlson, Deven, Geoffrey Borman, Michelle Robinson. 2011. “A Multistate District-Level Cluster
     Randomized Trial of the Impact of Data-Driven Reform on Reading and Mathematics Achievement.”
     Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 33(3): 378-398.

[42] Carneiro, Pedro, and James Heckman. 2003. “Human Capital Policy.” NBER Working Paper no. 9495.

[43] Center for Research on Education Outcomes (CREDO). 2013. “National Charter School Study.” Stan-
     ford, CA: Center for Research on Education Outcomes.

[44] Center, Yola, Kevin Wheldall, Louella Freeman, Lynne Outhred and Margaret McNaught. 1995. “An
     Evaluation of Reading Recovery.” Reading Research Quarterly, 30(2): 240-263.

[45] Charity, Anne, Hollis Scarborough, and Darion Griffin. 2004. “Familiarity with School English in
     African American Children and Its Relation to Early Reading Achievement.” Child Development,
     75(5): 1340-1356.

[46] Chase-Lansdale, Lindsay, and Rachel Gordon. 1996. “Economic Hardship and the Development of
     Five-and Six-Year-Olds: Neighborhood and Regional Perspectives.” Child Development, 67(6): 3338-
     3367.

[47] Chase-Landsdale, Lindsay, Rachel Gordon, Jeanne Brooks-Gunn, and Pamela K. Klehanov. 1997.
     “Neighborhood and Family Influences on the Intellectual and Behavioral Competence of Preschool and
     Early School-Age Children”In: Jeanne Brooks-Gunn, Greg Duncan, and J. Lawrence Aber, editors.

                                                  82
     Neighborhood Poverty: Context and Consequences for Children, Volume 1. 79-118. New York: Russel
     Sage.

[48] Chenoweth, Karin. 2007. ““It’s Being Done”: Academic Success in Unexpected School.” Cambridge,
     MA: Harvard Education Press.

[49] Chetty, Raj, John Friedman, Nathaniel Hilger, Emmanuel Saez, Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach, and
     Danny Yagan. 2011. “How Does Your Kindergarten Classroom Affect Your Earnings? Evidence from
     Project STAR.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(4): 1593-1660.

[50] Chetty, Raj, John Friedman, and Jonah Rockoff. 2014. “Measuring the Impacts of Teachers II: Teacher
     Value-Added and Student Outcomes in Adulthood.” American Economic Review, 104(9): 2633-2679.

[51] Chetty, Raj, Nathaniel Hendren, and Lawrence Katz. 2016. “The Effects of Exposure to Better Neigh-
     borhoods on Children: New Evidence from the Moving to Opportunities Experiment.” American Eco-
     nomic Review, forthcoming.

[52] Clark, Melissa, Hanley Chiang, Tim Silva, Sheena McConnell, Kathy Sonnenfeld, and Anastasia Erbe.
     2013. “The Effectiveness of Secondary Math Teachers from Teach for America and the Teaching Fel-
     lows Programs.” Washington, D.C.: National Center for Educational Evaluation and Regional Assis-
     tance.

[53] Cohen, David, and Heather Hill. 2001. “Learning Policy: When State Education Reform Works.” New
     Haven, CT: Yale University Press.

[54] Cohen, Geoffrey, Julio Garcia, Nancy Apfel, Allison Master. 2006. “Reducing the Racial Achievement
     Gap: A Social-Psychological Intervention.” Science, 313(5791): 1307-1310.

[55] Cohen, Geoffrey, Julio Garcia, Valerie Purdie-Vaughns, Nancy Apfel, Patricia Brzustoski. 2009. “Re-
     cursive Processes in Self-Affirmation: Intervening to Close the Minority Achievement Gap.” Science,
     324(5925): 400-403.

[56] Coleman, James, Ernest Campbell, Carol Hobson, James McPartland, Alexander Mood, Frederic We-
     infeld, and Robert York. 1966. “Equality of Educational Opportunity.” Washington, D.C.: U.S. De-
     partment of Health, Education, and Welfare.




                                                   83
[57] Constantine, Jill, Daniel Player, Tim Silva, Kristin Hallgren, Mary Grider, and John Deke. 2009. “An
     Evaluation of Teachers Trained Through Different Routes to Certification.” Washington, D.C.: Na-
     tional Center for Education Evaluation and Regional Assistance.

[58] Cook, Philip, Kenneth Dodge, George Farkas, Roland Fryer, Jonathan Guryan, Jens Ludwig, Susan
     Mayer, Harold Pollack, and Laurence Steinberg. 2014. “The (Surprising) Efficacy of Academic and Be-
     havioral Intervention with Disadvantaged Youth: Results from a Randomized Experiment in Chicago.”
     NBER Working Paper no. 19862.

[59] Cooper, Harris, Barbara Nye, James Lindsay, and Scott Greathouse. 1996. “The Effects of Summer
     Vacation on Achievement Test Scores: A Narrative and Meta-Analytic Review.” Review of Educational
     Research, 66(3): 227-268.

[60] Corcoran, Sean, William Evans, and Robert Schwab. 2004. “Changing Labor-Market Opportunities
     for Women and the Quality of Teachers, 1957-2000.” American Economic Review, 94(2): 729-760.

[61] Courtney, Mark, Andrew Zinn, Erica Zielewski, Roseana Bess, and Karin Malm. 2008. “Evaluation
     of the Early Start to Emancipation Preparation—Tutoring Program Los Angeles County, California:
     Final Report.” Washington, D.C.: The Urban Institute.

[62] Cullen, Julie Berry, Brian Jacob, and Steven Levitt. 2006. “The Effect of School Choice on Partici-
     pants: Evidence from Randomized Lotteries.” Econometrica, 74(5): 1191-1230.

[63] Cullen, Julie Berry, Steven Levitt, Erin Robertson, and Sally Sadoff. 2013. “What Can be Done to
     Improve Struggling High Schools?” The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 27(2): 133-152.

[64] Cunha, Flavio, and James Heckman. 2007. “The Technology of Skill Formation.” The American Eco-
     nomic Review, 97(2): 31-47.

[65] Cunha, Flavio, and James Heckman. 2010. “Investing in Our Young People”NBER Working Paper no.
     16201.

[66] Currie, Janet, and Duncan Thomas. 1995. “Does Head Start Make a Difference.” The American Eco-
     nomic Review, 85(3): 341-364.

[67] Curto, Vilsa, and Roland Fryer. 2014. “The Potential of Urban Boarding Schools for the Poor.” Journal
     of Labor Economics, 32(1): 65-93.



                                                   84
[68] Davis-Kean, Pamela. 2005. “The Influence of Parent Education and Family Income on Child Achieve-
     ment: The Indirect Role of Parental Expectations and the Home Environment.” Journal of Family
     Psychology 19(2): 294-304.

[69] de la Rica, Sara. 2011. “Social and Labor Market Integration of Ethnic Minorities in Spain.” In: Martin
     Kahanec, and Klaus Zimmerman, editors. Ethnic Diversity in European Labor markets: Challenges
     and Solutions. 268-282. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar Publishing.

[70] Deaton, Angus. 2010. “Instruments, Randomization, and Learning about Development.” The Journal
     of Economic Literature, 48(2): 424-455.

[71] Dee, Thomas, and Brian Jacob. 2011. “The Impact of No Child Left Behind on Student Achievement.”
     Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 30(3): 418-446.

[72] Deming, David, Sarah Cohodes, Jennifer Jennings, and Christopher Jencks. 2013. “School Account-
     ability, Postsecondary Attainment and Earnings.” NBER Working Paper no. 19444.

[73] DerSimonian, Rebecca, and Nan Laird. 1986. “Meta-analysis in Clinical Trials.” Control Clin Trials,
     7(3): 177-188.

[74] Dobbie, Will, and Roland Fryer. 2011. “Are High-Quality Schools Enough to Increase Achievement
     Among the Poor? Evidence from the Harlem Children’s Zone.” American Economic Journal: Applied
     Economics, 3(3): 158-187.

[75] Donaldson, Morgaen, and Susan Moore Johnson. 2010. “The Price of Misassignment: The Role of
     Teaching Assignments in Teach for America Teacher’s Exit from Low-Income Schools and the Teach-
     ing Profession.” Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 32(2): 299-323.

[76] Duckworth, Angela, Teri Kirby, Anton Gollwitzer, and Gabrielle Oettingen. 2013. “From Fantasy to
     Action: Mental Contrasting With Implementation Intentions (MCII) Improves Academic Performance
     in Children.” Social Psychological and Personality Science, 4: 745-753.

[77] Duckworth, Angela, and Martin Seligman. 2005. “Self-Discipline Outdoes IQ in Predicting Academic
     Performance of Adolescents.” Psychological Science, 16(12): 939-944.

[78] Duflo, Esther, Rema Hanna, and Stephne Ryan. 2012. “Incentives Work: Getting Teachers to Come to
     School.” American Economic Review, 102(4): 1241-1278.



                                                    85
[79] Duncan, Greg, Jeanne Brooks-Gunn, and Pamela Kato Klebanov. 1994. “Economic Deprivation and
     Early Childhood Development.” Child Development, 65(2): 296-318.

[80] Duncan, Greg, and Katherine Magnuson. 2005. “Can Family Socioeconomic Resources Account for
     Racial and Ethnic Test Score Gaps?” Future of Children, 15(1): 35-54.

[81] Dunstan, William. 2010. “Ancient Rome.” Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield.

[82] Evans, Gary. 2004. “The Environment of Childhood Poverty.” American Psychologist, 59(2): 77-92.

[83] Fairlie, Robert. 2005. “The Effects of Home Computers on School Enrollment.” Economics of Educa-
     tion Review, 24(5): 533-547.

[84] Fairlie, Robert, Daniel Beltran, and Kuntal Das. 2010. “Home Computers and Educational Outcomes:
     Evidence from the NLSY97 and CPS.” Economic Inquiry, 48(3): 771-792.

[85] Fairlie, Robert, and Jonathan Robinson. 2013. “Experimental Evidence on the Effects of Home Com-
     puters on Academic Achievement among Schoolchildren.” American Economic Journal: Applied Eco-
     nomics, 5(3): 211-240.

[86] Fantuzzo, John, Gwendolyn Davis, and Marika Ginsburg. 1995. “Effects of Parent Involvement in Iso-
     lation or in Combination with Peer Tutoring on Student Self-Concept and Mathematics Achievement.”
     Journal of Educational Psychology, 87(2): 272-281.

[87] Feng, Li. 2010. “Hire Today, Gone Tomorrow: New Teacher Classroom Assignments and Teacher
     Mobility.” Educational Finance and Policy, 5(3): 278-316.

[88] Fiorini, Mario. 2010. “The effect of home computer use on children’s cognitive and non-cognitive
     skills.” Economics of Education Review, 29(1): 55-72.

[89] Fleischman, Howard, Paul Hopstock, Marisa Pelczar, and Brooke Shelley. 2010. “Highlights from
     PISA 2009: Performance of U.S. 15-Year-Old Students in Reading, Mathematics, and Science Literacy
     in an International Context.” Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Education.

[90] Fletcher, Jack, and Reid Lyon. 1998. “Reading: A Research-Based Approach”in “What’s Gone Wrong
     in America’s Classrooms”Stanford, CA: Hoover Institution Press.

[91] Foorman, Barbara, and Moats, Louisa. 2004. “Conditions for Sustaining Research-Based Practices in
     Early Reading Instruction.” Remedial Special Education, 25(1): 51-60.

                                                  86
[92] Friedman, Milton. 1955. “The Role of Government in Public Education.” In: Robert Solo, editor.
     Economics and the Public Interest. New Brunswick, NJ: University of Rutgers Press.

[93] Fryer, Roland. 2010. “Racial Inequality in the 21st Century: The Declining Significance of Discrimi-
     nation.” Handbook of Labor Economics, 4(B): 855-971.

[94] Fryer, Roland. 2011. “Financial Incentives and Student Achievement: Evidence from Trials.” The
     Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(4): 1755-1798.

[95] Fryer, Roland. 2013. “Information and Student Achievement: Evidence from a Cellular Phone Exper-
     iment”NBER Working Paper no. 19113.

[96] Fryer, Roland. 2013. “Teacher Incentives and Student Achievement: Evidence from New York City
     Public Schools.” Journal of Labor Economics, 31(2): 373-427.

[97] Fryer, Roland. 2014. “Injecting Charter School Nest Practices into Traditional Public Schools: Evi-
     dence From Field Experiments.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(3): 1355-1407.

[98] Fryer, Roland. 2014. “Teacher Incentives and Student Achievement: Evidence from New York City
     Public Schools.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(3):1355-1407.

[99] Fryer, Roland, and Will Dobbie. 2013. “Getting Beneath the Veil of Effective Schools: Evidence from
     New York City.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 5(4): 28-60.

[100] Fryer, Roland, and Richard Holden. 2013. “Multitasking, Dynamic Complementaries, and Incentives:
     A Cautionary Tale.” Working Paper.

[101] Fryer, Roland, and Steven Levitt. 2004. “Understanding the Black-White Test Score Gap in the First
     Two Years of School.” The Review of Economic and Statistics, 86(2): 447-464.

[102] Fryer, Roland, and Steven Levitt. 2006. “The Black-White Test Score Gap Through Third Grade.”
     American Law and Economic Review, 8(2): 249-281.

[103] Fryer, Roland, and Steven Levitt. 2013. “Testing for Racial Differences in the Mental Ability of
     Young Children.” American Economic Review, 103(2): 981-1005.

[104] Fryer, Roland, Steven Levitt, and John List. 2015. “Parental Incentives and Early Childhood Achieve-
     ment: A Field Experiment in Chicago Heights.” Unpublished working paper.



                                                   87
[105] Fryer, Roland, Steven Levitt, John List, and Sally Sadoff. 2015. “Enhancing the Efficacy of Teacher
     Incentives Through Loss Aversion: A Field Experiment.” NBER Working Paper no. 18237.

[106] Fuchs, Thomas, and Ludger Woessmann. 2004. “Computers and Student Learning: Bivariate and
     Multivariate Evidence on the Availability and Use of Computers at Home and at School.” CESifo
     Working Paper no. 1321.

[107] Garber, Howard. 1988. “The Milwaukee Project: Preventing Mental Retardation in Children at Risk.”
     Washington, D.C.: National Institute of Handicapped Research.

[108] Garces, Eliana, Duncan Thomas, and Janet Currie. 2002. “Longer-Term Effects of Head Start.” The
     American Economic Review, 92(4): 999-1012.

[109] Garet, Michael, Stephanie Cronen, Marian Eaton, Anja Kurki, Wehmah Jones, Kazuaki Uekawa,
     and Audrey Falk. 2008. “The Impact of Two Professional Development Interventions on Early Read-
     ing Instruction and Achievement.” Washington, D.C.: National Center for Education Evaluation and
     Regional Assistance.

[110] Garet, Michael, Andrew Porter, Laura Desimone, Beatrice Birman, Kwang Suk Yoon. 2001. “What
     Makes Professional Development Effective? Results from a National Sample of Teachers.” American
     Educational Research Journal, 38(4): 915-945.

[111] Glass, Gene, and Mary Lee Smith. 1978. “Meta-Analysis of Research on The Relationship of Class-
     Size and Achievement.” San Francisco, CA: Far West Laboratory for Educational Research and De-
     velopment.

[112] Glazerman, Steven, Daniel Mayer, and Paul Decker. 2006. “Alternative Routes to Teaching: The Im-
     pacts of Teach for America on Student Achievement and Other Outcomes.” Journal of Policy Analysis
     and Management, 25(1): 75-96.

[113] Glazerman, Steven, Allixon McKie, and Nancy Carey. 2009. “An Evaluation of the Teacher Ad-
     vancement Program (TAP) in Chicago: Year One Impact Report.” Princeton, NJ: Mathematica Policy
     Research.

[114] Glazerman, Steven, Ali Protik, Bing-ru The, Julie Bruch, Jeffrey Max. 2013. “Transfer Incentives
     for High-Performing Teachers: Final Results from a Multisite Randomized Experiment.” Washington,
     D.C.: National Center for Education Evaluation and Regional Assistance.


                                                   88
[115] Gleason, Phillip, Melissa Clark, Christina Tuttle, and Emily Dwoyer. 2010. “The Evaluation of Char-
     ter School Impacts.” Washington, D.C.: National Center for Education Evaluation and Regional As-
     sistance.

[116] Glewwe, Paul, Nauman Ilias, and Michael Kremer. 2010. “Teacher Incentives.” American Economic
     Journal: Applied Economics, 2(3): 205-227.

[117] Gray, Susan, and Rupert Klaus. 1970. “The Early Training Project: A Seventh-Year Report.” Child
     Development, 41: 909-924.

[118] Greene, Jay, Paul Peterson, and Jiangtao Du. 1999. “Effectiveness of School Choice: The Milwaukee
     Experiment.” Education and Urban Society, 31(2) : 190-213.

[119] Hahn, Andrew, Tom Leavitt, and Paul Aaron. 1994. “Evaluation of the Quantum Opportunities Pro-
     gram (QOP) Did the Program Work?” Waltham, MA: Brandeis University Center for Human Re-
     sources.

[120] Halpern-Felsher, Bonnie, James P. Connell, Margaret Beale Spencer, J. Lawrence Aber, Greg P. Dun-
     can, Elizabeth Clifford, Warren E. Crichlow, Peter A. Usinger, Steven P. Cole, LaRue Allen, and Ed-
     ward Seidman. 1997. “Neighborhood and Family Factors Predicting Educational Risk and Attainment
     in African American and White Children and Adolescents.” In: Jeanne Brooks-Gunn, Greg Duncan,
     and Lawrence Aber, editors. Neighborhood Poverty, Volume I: Context and Consequences for Chil-
     dren. New York: Russel Sage Foundation.

[121] Hamilton, Gayle, Stephen Freedman, Lisa Gennetian, Charles Michalopoulos, Johanna Walter, Diana
     Adams-Ciardullo, Anna Gassman-Pines. 2001. “National Evaluation of Welfare-to-Work Strategies.”
     Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.

[122] Hanushek, Eric. 1979. “Conceptual and Empirical Issues in the Estimation of Educational Production
     Functions.” The Journal of Human Resources, 14(3): 351-388.

[123] Harrington, Michael. 1982. “The Other America: Poverty in the United States.” New York, NY:
     Touchstone.

[124] Harrison, Glenn, and John List. 2004. “Field Experiments.” The Journal of Economic Literature,
     42(4): 1009-1055.




                                                   89
[125] Hatton, Timothy. 2011. “The Social and Labor Market Outcomes of Ethnic Minorities in the UK.”
     In: Martin Kahanec, and Klaus Zimmerman, editors. Ethnic Diversity in European Labor markets:
     Challenges and Solutions. 283-306. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar Publishing.

[126] Heckman, James. 2008. “Role of Income and Family Influence on Child Outcomes.” Annals of the
     New York Academy of Sciences, 1136: 307-323.

[127] Heckman, James, Seong Hyeok Moon, Rodrigo Pinto, Peter Savelyev, and Adam Yavitz. 2009. “A
     Reanalysis of the High/Scope Perry Preschool Program.” University of Chicago, Department of Eco-
     nomics. Unpublished Manuscript.

[128] Heckman, James, Seong Hyeok Moon, Rodrigo Pinto, Peter Savelyev, and Adam Yavitz. 2010. “The
     Rate of Return to the High/Scope Perry Preschool Program.” Journal of Public Economics, 94(1-2):
     114-128.

[129] Heckman, James, and Yona Rubenstein. 2001. “The Importance of Noncognitive Skills: Lessons
     from the GED Testing Program.” The American Economic Review, 91(2): 145-149.

[130] Heckman, James, Jora Stixrud, and Sergio Urzua. 2006. “The Effects of Cognitive and Noncognitive
     Abilities on Labor Market Outcomes and Social Behavior.” Journal of Labor Economics, 24(3): 411-
     482.

[131] Heckman, James, and Tim Kautz. 2013. “Fostering and Measuring Skills: Interventions That Improve
     Character and Cognition.” NBER Working Paper no. 19656.

[132] Hedges, Larry. 1981. “Distribution Theory for Glass’s Estimator of Effect Sizes and Related Estima-
     tors.” Journal of Educational and Behavioral Statistics, 6(2): 107-128.

[133] Heyns, Barbara. 1978. “Summer Learning and the Effects of Schooling.” Orlando, FL: Academic
     Press.

[134] Heyns, Barbara. 1987. “Schooling and Cognitive Development.” Child Development, 58(5): 1151-
     1160.

[135] Hill, Hillary. 2007. “Learning in the Teaching Workforce.” The Future of Children, 17(1): 111-127.

[136] Hirst, Lois Trimble. 1972. “An Investigation of the Effects of Daily, Thirty-Minute Home Practice
     Sessions upon Reading Achievement with Second Year Elementary Pupils.” Dissertation submitted to
     the University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY.

                                                    90
[137] Holmes, Thomas, and Barbara McConnell. 1990. “Full-Day Versus Half-Day Kindergarten: An Ex-
     perimental Study.” Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Educational Research Association,
     Boston, MA.

[138] Holmstrom, Bengt, and Paul Milgrom. 1991. “Multitask Principal-Agent Analyses: Incentive Con-
     tracts, Asset Ownership, and Job Design.” Journal of Law, Economics, & Organization, 7: 24-52.

[139] Hopkins, Kenneth, and Glenn Bracht. 1975. “Ten-Year Stability of Verbal and Nonverbal IQ Scores.”
     American Education Research Journal, 12(4): 469-477.

[140] Hoxby, Caroline. 2002. “School Choice and School Productivity.” NBER Working Paper no. 8873.

[141] Hoxby, Caroline, and Andrew Leigh. 2004. “Pulled Away or Pushed Out? Explaining the Decline of
     Teacher Aptitude in the United States.” American Economic Review, 94(2): 236-240.

[142] Hoxby, Caroline, and Sonali Murarka. 2009. “Charter Schools in New York City: Who Enrolls and
     How They Affect Their Students’ Achievement.” NBER Working Paper no. 14852.

[143] Jackson, Clement. 2010. “A Stitch in Time: The Effects of a Novel Incentive-Based High-School
     Intervention on College Outcomes.” NBER Working Paper no. w15722.

[144] Jacob, Brian. 2004. “Remedial Education and Student Achievement: A Regression-Discontinuity
     Analysis.” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 86(1): 226-244.

[145] Jeynes, William. 2005. “Parental Involvement and Student Achievement: A Meta-Analysis.” Cam-
     bridge, MA: Harvard Family Research Project.

[146] Jeynes, William. 2007. “The Relationship Between Parental Involvement and Urban Secondary
     School Student Academic Achievement: A Meta-Analysis.” Urban Education, 42(1): 82-110.

[147] Joyce, Bruce and Beverly Showers. 1988. “Student Achievement Through Staff Development.” White
     Plains, NY: Longman.

[148] Kántor, Zoltán. 2011. “Ethnic or Social Integration? The Roma in Hungary.” In: Martin Kahanec, and
     Klaus Zimmerman, editors. Ethnic Diversity in European Labor markets: Challenges and Solutions.
     137-162. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar Publishing.

[149] Kane, Thomas, and Douglas Staiger. 2008. “Estimating Teacher Impacts on Student Achievement:
     An Experimental Evaluation.” NBER Working Paper no. 14607.

                                                    91
[150] Kautz, Tim, James Heckman, Ron Diris, Bas ter Weel, and Lex Borghans. 2014. “Fostering and Mea-
     suring Skills: Improving Cognitive and Non-Cognitive Skills to Promote Lifetime Success.” NBER
     Working Paper no. 20749.

[151] Kim, James. 2005. “Project READS (Reading Enhances Achievement During Summer): Results from
     a Randomized Field Trial of a Voluntary Summer Reading Intervention.” Paper presented at Princeton
     University, Education Research Section, Princeton, NJ.

[152] Klibanoff, Leonard, and Sue Haggart. “Summer Growth and the Effectiveness of Summer School.”
     Mountainview, CA: RMC Research Corporation.

[153] Kling, Jeffrey, Jeffrey Liebman, and Lawrence Katz. 2007. “Experimental Analysis of Neighborhood
     Effects.” Econometrica, 75(1): 83-119.

[154] Knudson, Eric, James Heckman, Judy Cameron, and Jack Shonkoff. “Economic, Neurobiological,
     and Behavioral Perspectives on Building America’s Future Workforce.” Proceedings of the National
     Academy of Sciences, 103(27): 10155-10162.

[155] Kohen, Dafna, Jeanne Brooks-Gunn, Tama Leventhal, and Clyde Hertzman. 2002. “Neighborhood
     Income and Physical and Social Disorder in Canada: Associations with Young Children’s Competen-
     cies.” Child Development 73(6): 1844-1860.

[156] Kremer, Michael, Edward Miguel, Rebecca Thornton. 2009. “Incentives to Learn.” The Review of
     Economics and Statistics, 91(3): 437-456.

[157] Krueger, Alan. 1999. “Experimental Estimates of Education Production Functions.” The Quarterly
     Journal of Economics, 114(2): 497-532.

[158] Layton, Lyndsey. 2015. “Study: Billions of Dollars in Annual Teacher Training is Largely A Waste.”
     The Washington Post. August 04, 2015.

[159] Layzer, Jean, Carolyn Layzer, Barbara Goodson, and Cristofer Price. 2007. “Evaluation of Child
     Care Subsidy Strategies: Findings From Project Upgrade in Miami-Dade County.” Cambridge, MA:
     Abt Associates.

[160] Levitt, Steven, and John List. 2009. “Field experiments in economics: The past, the present, and the
     future.” The European Economic Review, 53(1): 1-18.



                                                   92
[161] Lipsey, Mark, and David Wilson. 2000. “Practical Meta Analysis.” Thousand Oaks, California: Sage
     Publications.

[162] Loucks-Horsley, Susan, Susan Mundry, Peter Hewson, Nancy Love, and Katherine Stiles. 1998. “De-
     signing Professional Development for Teachers of Mathematics and Science.” Thousand Oaks, CA:
     Corwin Press.

[163] Ludwig, Jens, Greg Duncan, Lisa Gennetian, Lawrence Katz, Ronald Kessler, Jeffrey Kling, and Lisa
     Sanbonmatsu. 2012. “Neighborhood Effects on the Long-Term Well-Being of Low-Income Adults.”
     Science, 337(6101): 1505-1510.

[164] Ludwig, Jens, Lisa Sanbonmatsu, Lisa Gennetian, Emma Adam, Greg Duncan, Lawrence Katz,
     Ronald Kessler, Jeffrey Kling, Stacy Tessler Lindau, Robert Whitaker, and Thomas McDade. 2011.
     “Neighborhoods, Obesity, and Diabetes—A Randomized Social Experiment.” The New England Jour-
     nal of Medicine, 365(16): 1509-1519.

[165] Magnuson, Katherine and Greg Duncan. 2002. “Parents in Poverty.” In: Marc Bornstein, editor.
     Handbook of Parenting: Second Edition. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

[166] Malamud, Ofer, and Cristian Pop-Eleches. 2011. “Home Computer Use and the Development of
     Human Capital.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(2): 987-1027.

[167] Marshall, Helen, and Lucille Magruder. 1960. “Relations between Parent Money Education Practices
     and Children’s Knowledge and Use of Money.” Child Development, 31(2): 253-284.

[168] Mathes, Patricia, and Allison Babyak. 2001. “The Effects of Peer-Assisted Learning Strategies for
     First-Grade Readers With and Without Additional Mini-Skills Lessons.” Learning Disabilities Re-
     search and Practice, 16(1): 28-44.

[169] May, Henry, Abigail Gray, Jessica Gillespie, Philip Sirinides, Cecile Sam, Heather Goldsworthy,
     Michael Armijo, and Manrata Tognatta. 2013. “Evaluation of the i3 Scale-up of Reading Recovery.”
     Philadelphia, PA: CPRE.

[170] Mayer, Daniel, Paul Peterson, David Myers, Christina Clark Tuttle, William Howell. 2002. “School
     Choice in New York City After Three Years: An Evaluation of the School Choice Scholarships Pro-
     gram. Final Report.” Princeton, NJ: Mathematica Policy Research.




                                                  93
[171] Maynard, Rebecca, and Richard Murnane. 1979. “The Effects of a Negative Income Tax on School
     Performance: Results of an Experiment.” The Journal of Human Resources, 14(4): 463-476.

[172] McCall, William. 1923. “How to Experiment in Education.” New York: Macmillan.

[173] McLoyd, Vonnie. 1998. “Socioeconomic Disadvantage and Child Development.” American Psychol-
     ogist, 53(2): 185-204.

[174] Meyer, Erik, and Chris Van Klaveren. 2013. “The Effectiveness of Extended Day Programs: Evidence
     from a Randomized Field Experiment in the Netherlands.” Economics of Education Review, 36(C): 1-
     11.

[175] Meyers, Coby, Ayrin Molefe, Sonica Dhillion, and Bo Zhu. 2015. “The Impact of eMINTS Profes-
     sional Development on Teacher Instruction and Student Achievement.” Washington, D.C.: American
     Institutes for Research.

[176] Michalopoulous, Charles, Dough Tattrie, Cynthia Miller, Philip K. Robins, Pamela Morris, David
     Gyarmati, Cindy Redcross, Kelly Foley, and Rueben Ford. 2002. “Making Work Pay: Final Report on
     the Self-Sufficiency Project for Long-Term Welfare Recipients.” Ottowa, Canada: Social Research and
     Demonstration Corporation.

[177] Mischel, Walter, Ebbe Ebbesen, Antonette Raskoff Zeiss. 1972. “Cognitive and Attentional Mecha-
     nisms in Delay of Gratification.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 21(2): 204-218.

[178] Miyake, Akira, Lauren Kost-Smith, Noah Finkelstein, Steven Pollock, Geoffrey Cohen, and Tiffany
     Ito. 2010. “Reducing the Gender Achievement Gap in College Science: A Classroom Study of Values
     Affirmation.” Science, 330(60008): 1234-1237.

[179] Morais de Sá e Silva, Michelle. 2008. “Opportunity NYC: A Performance-based Conditional Cash
     Transfer Programme.” International Poverty Centre Working Paper no. 49.

[180] Mosteller, Frederick, and Robert Boruch. 2002. “Evidence Matters: Randomized Trials in Education
     Research.” Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press.

[181] Moynihan, Daniel. 1969. “On Understanding Poverty: Perspectives from the Social Sciences.” New
     York, NY: Basic Books.

[182] Muralidharan, Karthik, and Venkatesh Sundararaman. 2011. “Teacher Performance Pay: Experimen-
     tal Evidence from India.” Journal of Political Economy, 119(1): 39-77.

                                                   94
[183] Murnane, Richard. 1975. “The Impact of School Resources on the Learning of Inner City Children.”
     Cambridge, MA: Ballinger Publishing.

[184] National Alliance for Public Charter Schools. 2009. Public Charter Schools Dashboard, Charter
     School Market Share.

[185] National Telecommunication and Information Administration. 2011. “Exploring the Digital Nation:
     Computer and Internet Use at Home.” Washington, D.C.: National Telecommunications and Informa-
     tion Administration, U.S. Department of Commerce.

[186] Neal, Derek and William Johnson. 1996. “The Role of Premarket Factors in Black-White Wage Dif-
     ferences.” The Journal of Political Economy, 104(5): 869-895.

[187] Neal, Derek. 2011. “The Design of Performance Pay Systems in Education.” NBER Working Paper
     no. 16710.

[188] Nelson, Charles. 2000. “Neural Plasticity and Human Development: The Role of Early Experience
     in Sculpting Memory Systems.” Developmental Science, 3(2): 115-136.

[189] Nelson, Richard. 1959. “An Experiment with Class Size in the Teaching of Elementary Economics.”
     Educational Record, 4: 330-241.

[190] Nelson-Royes, Andrea. 2015. “Why Tutoring?: A Way to Achieve Success in School.” Lanham, MD:
     Rowman and Littlefield.

[191] Newport, Elissa. 1990. “Maturational Constraints on Language Learning.” Cognitive Science, 14(11):
     11-28.

[192] Nordin, Martin and Dan-Olof Rooth. 2007. “Income Gap Between Natives and Second Generation
     Immigrants in Sweden: Is Skill the Explanation?” IZA Discussion Paper no. 2759.

[193] Nye, Chad, Herb Turner, and Jamie Schwartz. 2006. “Approaches to Parental Involvement for Im-
     proving the Academic Performance of Elementary School Children in Grades K-6.” Cambridge, MA:
     Harvard Family Research Project.

[194] O‘Neill, June. 1990. “The Role of Human Capital in Earnings Differences Between Black and White
     Men.” The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 4(4): 25-45.




                                                  95
[195] Olds, David, Charles Henderson, and Robert Cole. 1998. “Long-Term Effects of Nurse Home Visita-
     tion on Children’s Criminal and Antisocial Behavior: 15-Year Follow-up of a Randomized Controlled
     Trial.” JAMA, 280: 1238-1244.

[196] Olds, David, JoAnn Robinson, and Roth O’Brien. 2002. “Home Visiting by Paraprofessionals and
     Nurses: A Randomized, Controlled Trial.” Pediatrics, 100: 486-496.

[197] Oreopoulos, Phillip. 2003. “The Long-Run Consequences of Living in a Poor Neighborhood.” The
     Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(4): 1533-1575.

[198] Parsad, Basmat, Laurie Lewis, and Elizabeth Farris. 2001. “Teacher Preparation and Professional
     Development: 2000.” Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education
     Statistics.

[199] Parsons, Craig, and Timothy Smeeding. 2008. “Immigration and the Transformation of Europe.”
     Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.

[200] Phillips, Deborah, and Jack Shonkoff. 2000. “From Neurons to Neighborhoods: The Science of Early
     Childhood Development.” Washington, D.C.: National Academies Press.

[201] Phillips, Meredith, Jeanne Brooks-Gun, Greg Duncan, Pamel Klebanov, and Jonathan Crane. 1998.
     “Family Background, Parenting Practices, and the Black-White Test Score Gap.” In: Christopher
     Jenks, and Meredith Phillips, editors. The Black-White Test Score Gap. 102-145. Washington, D.C.:
     Brookings Institution Press.

[202] Pinkner, Steven. “The Language Instinct.” New York, NY: Harper Perennial Modern Classics.

[203] Porwell, P.J. 1978. “Class size: A summary of research.” Arlington, VA: Educational Research Ser-
     vice.

[204] Powell-Smith, Kelly, Gary Stoner, Mark Shinn, Roland Good III. 2000. “Parent Tutoring in Read-
     ing Using Literature and Curriculum Materials: Impact on Student Reading Achievement.” School
     Psychology Review, 29(1): 5-27.

[205] Puma, Michael, Stephen Bell, Ronna Cook, and Camilla Heid. 2010. “Head Start Impact Study Fi-
     nal Report.” Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Administration for
     Children and Families.



                                                  96
[206] Randel, Bruce, Andrea Beesley, Helen Apthorp, Tedra Clark, Xin Wang, Louis Cicchinelli, and Jean
     Williams. 2011. “Classroom Assessment for Student Learning: Impact on Elementary School Math-
     ematics in the Central Region.” Washington, D.C.: National Center for Educational Evaluation and
     Regional Assistance.

[207] Riccio, James, Nadine Dechausay, Cynthia Miller, Stephen Nuñez, Nandita Verma, and Edith Yang.
     2013. “Conditional Cash Transfers in New York City: The Continuing Story of the Opportunity NYC-
     Family Rewards Demonstration.” New York: MDRC.

[208] Rickford, John. 1999. “African American Vernacular English: Features, Evolution, Educational Im-
     plication.” Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishers.

[209] Rivkin, Steven, Eric Hanushek, and John Kain. 2005. “Teachers, Schools, and Academic Achieve-
     ment.” Econometrica, 73(2): 417-458.

[210] Rockoff, Jonah. 2004. “The Impact of Individual Teachers on Student Achievement: Evidence from
     Panel Data.” The American Economic Review, 94(2): 247-252.

[211] Rockoff, Jonah, Douglas Staiger, Thomas Kane, and Eric Taylor. 2012. “Information and Employee
     Evaluation: Evidence from a Randomized Intervention in Public Schools.” American Economic Re-
     view, 102(7): 3184-3213.

[212] Rosenbaum, James. 1995. “Changing the Geography of Opportunity by Expanding Residential
     Choice: Lessons from the Gautreaux Program.” Housing Policy Debate, 6(1): 231-269.

[213] Rothstein, Jesse and Till von Wachter. 2016. “Social Experiments in the Labor Market.” Handbook
     of Economic Experiments, forthcoming.

[214] Rouse, Cecilia Elena. 1998. “Private School Vouchers and Student Achievement: An Evaluation of
     the Milwaukee Parental Choice Program.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113(2): 553-602.

[215] Ryan, Elizabeth McIntyre. 1964. “A Comparative Study of the Reading Achievement of Second
     Grade Pupils in Programs Characterized by a Contrasting Degree of Parent Participation.” Disserta-
     tion submitted to the School of Education, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN.

[216] Ryan, Richard. 1982. “Control and Information in the Intrapersonal Sphere: An Extension of Cogni-
     tive Evaluation Theory.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 63: 397-427.



                                                   97
[217] Sanbonmatsu, Lisa, Jens Ludwig, Larry Katz, Lisa Gennetian, Greg Duncan, Ronald Kessler, Emma
     Adam, Thomas McDade, and Stacy Tessler Lindau. 2011. “Moving to Opportunity for Fair Housing
     Demonstration Program: Final Impacts Evaluation.” Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Housing
     and Urban Development.

[218] Schmitt, John, and Jonathan Wadsworth. 2006. “Changing Patterns in the Relative Economic Perfor-
     mance of Immigrants to Great Britain and the U.S., 1980-2000.” Cambridge, MA: CEPR.

[219] Schultz, T. Paul. 2000. “Final Report: The Impact of PROGRESA on School Enrollments.” Washing-
     ton, D.C.: International Food Policy Research Institute.

[220] Schwartz, Robert. 2005. “Literacy Learning of At-Risk First-Grade Students in the Reading Recovery
     Early Intervention.” Journal of Educational Psychology, 97(2): 257-267.

[221] Schweinhart, Lawrence, H. Barnes, and D.P. Weikart. 1993. “Significant Benefits: The HighScope
     Perry Preschool Study Through Age 27.” Ypsilanti, MI: HighScope Press.

[222] Schweinhart, Lawrence, Jeanne Montie, Zongping Xiang, William Barnett, Clive Belfield, and Mi-
     lagros Nores. 2005. “Lifetime Effects: The High/Scope Perry Preschool Study Through Age 40.”
     Ypsilanti, MI: HighScope Press.

[223] Skoufias, Emmanuel. 2005. “PROGRESA and Its Impacts on the Welfare of Rural Households in
     Mexico.” Washington, D.C.: International Food Policy Research Institute.

[224] Slavin, Robert. 2010. “Can Financial Incentives Enhance Educational Outcomes? Evidence from
     International Experiments.” Educational Research Review, 5(1): 68-80.

[225] Slavin, Robert, Marshall Leavey, and Nancy Madden. 1984. “Combining Cooperative Learning and
     Individualized Instruction: Effects on Student Mathematics Achievement, Attitudes, and Behaviors.”
     The Elementary School Journal, 84(4): 409-422.

[226] Springer, Matthew, Dale Ballou, Laura Hamilton, Vi-Nhuan Le, J.R. Lockwood, Daniel F. McCaffrey,
     Matthew Pepper, and Brian M. Stecher. 2010. “Teacher Pay for Performance.” Nashville, TN: NCPI.

[227] Springer, Matthew, John Pane, Vi-Nhuan Le, Daniel F. McCaffrey, Susan Burns, Laura Hamilton, and
     Brian M. Stecher. 2012. “Team Pay for Performance.” Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis,
     34(4): 367-390.



                                                    98
[228] St. Pierre, Robert, Jean Layzer, Barbara Goodson, and Lawrence Bernstein. 1997. “National Impact
     Evaluation of the Comprehensive Child Development Program.” Cambridge, MA: Abt Associates.

[229] Sumi, W., Michelle Woodbridge, Harold Javitz, Patrick Thornton, Mary Wagner, Kristen Rouspil,
     Jennifer Yu, John Seeley, Hill Walker, Annemieke Golly, Jason Small, Edward Feil, and Herbert Sev-
     erson. “Assessing the Effectiveness of First Step to Success: Are Short-Term Results the First Step to
     Long-Term Behavioral Improvements?” Journal of Emotional and Behavioral Disorders, 21(1): 1-14.

[230] Taylor, Eric, and John Tyler. 2012. “The Effect of Evaluation on Teacher Performance.” The American
     Economic Review, 102(7): 3628-3651.

[231] The New Teacher Project (TNTP). 2015. “The Mirage: Confronting the Hard Truth About Our Quest
     for Teacher Development.” Brooklyn, NY: The New Teacher Project.

[232] Todd, Petra, and Kenneth Wolpin. 2003. “On the Specification and Estimation of the Production
     Function for Cognitive Achievement.” The Economic Journal, 113(485): F3-F33.

[233] Tucker, Marc. 2011. “Teacher Quality: What’s Wrong with U.S. Strategy?” Educational Leadership,
     49(4): 42-46.

[234] Tuttle, Christina, Brian Gill, Phillip Gleason, Virginia Knechtel, Ira Nichols-Barrer, and Alexandra
     Resch. 2013. “KIPP Middle Schools: Impacts on Achievement and Other Outcomes. Final Report.”
     Princeton, NJ: Mathematica Policy Research.

[235] U.S. Department of Education. 2009. “State and Local Implementation of the No Child Left Behind
     Act.” Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Education.

[236] U.S. Department of Education. 2014. “Fiscal Year 2015 Education Budget Summary and Background
     Information.” Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Education.

[237] U.S. Department of Education. 2015. Institute of Education Sciences, National Center for Education
     Evaluation and Regional Assistance, What Works Clearinghouse.

[238] U.S. Government Accountability Office. 2014. “K-12 Education: Characteristics of the Investing in
     Innovation Fund.” Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Accountability Office.

[239] United Nations Development Programme. “Human Development Report 2010.” New York.: United
     Nations.


                                                    99
[240] Vigdor, Jacob, and Helen Ladd. 2010. “Scaling the Digital Divide: Home Computer Technology and
     Student Achievement.” NBER Working Paper no. 16078.

[241] von Loeffelholz, Hans Dietrich. 2011. “Social and Labor Market Integration of Ethnic Minorities in
     Germany.” In: Martin Kahanec, and Klaus Zimmerman, editors. Ethnic Diversity in European Labor
     markets: Challenges and Solutions. 109-136. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar Publishing.

[242] Weikart, David, Dennis Deloria, Sarah Lawser, and Ronald Wiegerink. 1970. “Longitudinal Results
     of the Ypsilanti Perry Preschool Project.” Ypsilanti, MI: High/Scope Educational Research Founda-
     tion.

[243] Wilson, Timothy, Patricia Linville. 1982. “Improving the Academic Performance of College Fresh-
     men: Attribution Therapy Revisited.” Journal of Psychology and Social Psychology. 42(2): 367-376.

[244] Winship, Scott, and Stephanie Owen. 2013. “The Brookings Social Genome Model.” Washington,
     D.C.: Brookings.

[245] Witte, John. 1997. “Achievement Effects of the Milwaukee Voucher Program.” Paper presented at the
     1997 American Economics Association Annual Meeting, New Orleans, LA.

[246] Witte, John, Troy Sterr, and Christopher Thorn. 1995. “Fifth-Year Report Milwaukee Parental Choice
     Program.” LaFollette School Working Paper no. 1995-001.

[247] Wolf, Patrick, Babette Gutmann, Michael Puma, Brian Kisida, Lou Rizzo, Nada Elissa, and Matthew
     Carr. 2010. “Evaluation of the DC Opportunity Scholarship Program.” Washington, D.C.: National
     Center for Education Evaluation and Regional Assistance.

[248] Worrall, John. 2007. “Evidence in Medicine and Evidence-Based Medicine.” The Philosophy Com-
     pass, 2(6): 981-1022.

[249] Yeager, David, and Gregory Walton. 2011. “Social-Psychological Interventions in Education.” Review
     of Educational Research, 81(2): 267-301.

[250] Yeates, Kieth, David MacPhee, Frances Campbell, and Craig Ramey. “Maternal IQ and Home En-
     vironment as Determinants of Early Childhood Intellectual Competence: A Developmental Analysis.”
     Developmental Psychology, 19: 731-739.

[251] York, Benjamin, and Susanna Loeb. “One Step at a Time: The Effects of an Early Literacy Text
     Messaging Program for Parents and Preschoolers.” NBER Working Paper no. 20659.

                                                  100
[252] Zvoch, Keith, and John Stevens. 2012. “Summer School Effects in a Randomized Field Trial.” Early
     Childhood Research Quarterly, 28(1): 24-32.




                                                   101
                                                     Figure 1
                                              Reviewed WWC Studies




Notes: This figure presents the number of reviewed studies in the What Works Clearinghouse (WWC) by publication year of the
studies. The shaded histogram is the sample of all studies in WWC. The clear histogram is the sample of studies that met WWC’s
standards without reservation.




                                                           102
                                                     Figure 2
                                          Number of Students in “Charters”




Notes: This figure presents the number of students enrolled in charter schools (U.S.) and academies (England) for the 1999-00
to 2014-15 school years. Academies are publicly funded independent schools. Similar to the U.S. charter schools, academies
don’t have to follow the national curriculum and term lengths. The U.S. data comes from the National Alliance for Public Charter
Schools (NAPCS) and the data for England comes from the U.K. Department of Education. Note that the U.S. 2014-2015 number
is estimated (NAPCS 2015).




                                                            103
                                                      Figure 3
                            Correlation of Effect Size and Average Age of Intervention




Notes: This figures plots annual effect sizes versus average age of students in an intervention by subject. The sample includes
all studies that passed our selection criteria for the meta-analysis. Each binned scatter plot was created by separating the data for
the given subject into 8 equal-sized bins, computing the mean of the average age and effect sizes within each bin, then creating a
scatter plot of these data points. The solid lines shows the best linear fit estimated on the underlying unbinned data estimated using
a simple OLS regression.




                                                              104
                                            Table 1: Paper Accounting
                                                                    Number of Papers
                           Panel A: Titles Found                         (1)
                             From Broad Search                         ≈ 8,000
                             Selected for Further Review                 859
                             TOTAL INCLUDED                              196

                           Panel B: Reason For Exclusion
                             College Sample/Outcomes                                      42
                             Design Issues                                                96
                             Countries w/o Very High HDI                                  57
                             Insufficient Info                                            24
                             Paper Not Located                                            10
                             No Standardized Reading or Math                              356
                             Repeat Paper                                                 70
                             Sample Issues                                                 8
Notes: This table summarizes our search procedure for selecting papers for inclusion. Panel A displays the approximate number of
titles our initial broad search returned, the number selected for further review, and the final sample of papers. Of the titles selected
for further review, Panel B reports the number of papers that were excluded for the given reason. See Online Appendix A for details
on each exclusion restriction.




                                                               105
                                    Table 2: Meta-Analysis
                                        Math                              Reading
                           Unweighted Fixed Random           Unweighted      Fixed    Random
                            Average      Effects Effects      Average       Effects   Effects
Panel A: Early Childhood       (1)          (2)      (3)         (4)          (5)       (6)
  ALL                         0.120       0.111    0.111        0.202        0.106     0.189
                             (0.028)     (0.031) (0.031)       (0.027)      (0.012)   (0.027)
                                          20                                 44

Panel B: Home
  ALL                         0.039     -0.004     -0.004       0.078        0.010     0.010
                             (0.045)    (0.008)   (0.008)      (0.052)      (0.007)   (0.007)
                                         8                                   22
  Parental Involvement        0.122     -0.001     -0.001       0.143        0.009     0.034
                             (0.115)    (0.021)   (0.021)      (0.103)      (0.021)   (0.050)
                                         3                                   11
  Educational Resources      -0.060     -0.060     -0.060       0.072        0.015     0.015
                             (0.000)    (0.050)   (0.050)      (0.063)      (0.014)   (0.014)
                                         1                                    7
  Poverty Reduction           0.008      0.008     0.008        0.022        0.016     0.016
                             (0.001)    (0.029)   (0.029)      (0.011)      (0.024)   (0.024)
                                         2                                    4

Panel C: School
  ALL                         0.135      0.035     0.053        0.203        0.023     0.069
                             (0.022)    (0.004)   (0.009)      (0.028)      (0.004)   (0.011)
                                         72                                  98
  Student Incentives          0.039      0.016     0.024        0.097        0.016     0.021
                             (0.026)    (0.011)   (0.018)      (0.072)      (0.011)   (0.017)
                                         5                                    8
  High Dosage Tutoring        0.393      0.309     0.309        0.405        0.217     0.229
                             (0.095)    (0.106)   (0.106)      (0.047)      (0.030)   (0.033)
                                         6                                   25
  Low Dosage Tutoring         0.074      0.015     0.015        0.050        0.015     0.015
                             (0.045)    (0.013)   (0.013)      (0.045)      (0.015)   (0.015)
                                         3                                    4
  Teacher Certification       0.031      0.028     0.030        0.000        0.007     0.007
                             (0.036)    (0.012)   (0.030)      (0.015)      (0.028)   (0.028)
                                         5                                    3
  Teacher Incentives          0.052      0.002     0.022        -0.000       -0.006   -0.006
                             (0.033)    (0.011)   (0.022)      (0.021)      (0.012)   (0.012)
                                         7                                    4
  General PD                  0.173      0.019     0.019        0.153        0.022     0.022
                             (0.075)    (0.024)   (0.024)      (0.060)      (0.023)   (0.023)
                                         7                                    9
  Managed PD                  0.059      0.052     0.052        0.493        0.217     0.403
                             (0.009)    (0.016)   (0.016)      (0.187)      (0.029)   (0.120)


                                            106
                                                        2                                                8
    Data-Driven                          0.107          0.043        0.057              0.071           0.009        0.030
                                        (0.041)        (0.014)      (0.024)            (0.040)         (0.011)      (0.024)
                                                        4                                                4
    Extended Time                       -0.033          0.019        -0.019             0.155           0.012        0.032
                                        (0.089)        (0.026)      (0.068)            (0.136)         (0.029)      (0.048)
                                                        4                                                5
    School Choice/Vouchers               0.076          0.024        0.024              0.070           -0.010       0.023
                                        (0.035)        (0.018)      (0.018)            (0.040)         (0.012)      (0.025)
                                                        6                                                7
    Charters                             0.121          0.088        0.110              0.072           0.038        0.048
                                        (0.039)        (0.011)      (0.030)            (0.026)         (0.010)      (0.018)
                                                        9                                                9
    No Excuse Charters                   0.170          0.124        0.153              0.104           0.055        0.077
                                        (0.048)        (0.022)      (0.042)            (0.040)         (0.018)      (0.031)
                                                        5                                                5
Notes: This table reports average effects for categories of papers discussed in the main text. Columns (1)-(3) report reults for
math estimates and columns (4)-(6) report results for reading estimates. Columns (1) and (4) report the unweighted average for the
studies in a given category. Columns (2) and (5) report estimates from a fixed-effects meta-analysis. Columns (3) and (6) report
estimates from a random-effects meta-analysis using the DerSimonian-Laird model (see DerSimonian and Laird 1986). Panel A
reports results for early childhood experiments. Panel B reports results for home experiments. Panel C reports results for school
experiments. The first row of each panel reports the results for all studies included in the given panel. The sample includes all
studies found that meet our inclusion restrictions and have annual impact estimates for the given subject. See the main text and
Online Appendix A for details on our search procedure, inclusion restrictions, and the categories of papers. Standard errors are
reported in parentheses. The number of observations is reported below the standard error.




                                                             107
                                          Table 3: Variables Across Life Stages
                    Variable                Dataset                                Description
                       (1)                    (2)                                     (3)
      Panel A: Circumstances At Birth
                                           CNLSY,
        Gender                                            A binary variable indicating if a respondent is male or female.
                                           NLSY79

                                                           A mutually exclusive and exhaustive set of binary variables
                                           CNLSY,
        Race                                              indicating whether a respondent is black, Hispanic, white, or
                                           NLSY79
                                                                                     other.

                                                            A mutually exclusive and exhaustive set of binary variables
                                                           indicating whether a respondent’s mother had not completed
                                           CNLSY,
        Maternal Educational Attainment                  high school, graduated from high school, attended some college,
                                           NLSY79
                                                            or obtained a Bachelor’s degree or higher at the time of the
                                                                                respondent’s birth.




108
                                           CNLSY,        The age of a respondent’s mother at the time of the respondent’s
        Maternal Age (at Birth)
                                           NLSY79                                    birth.

                                           CNLSY,       The age of a respondent’s mother at the time of the mother’s first
        Maternal Age (at First Birth)
                                           NLSY79                                   birth.

                                                            A binary variable indicating if a respondent’s mother was
        Marital Status of Parents          CNLSY
                                                                  married at the time of the respondent’s birth.

                                                        The income of the respondent’s family as a fraction of the federal
        Family Income                      CNLSY
                                                        poverty level for that family at the time of the respondent’s birth.

                                                          A binary variable indicating if a respondent was 5.5 pounds or
        Low Birth Weight                   CNLSY
                                                                                   less at birth.
                                                    The percentile score of a respondent’s mother on an unofficial
                                                    version of the Armed Forces Qualification Test (AFQT). The
                                                       scores were normalized in three-month age groups and
        Mother’s AFQT Score                CNLSY      calculated from the Mathematical Knowledge, Arithmetic
                                                    Reasoning, Word Knowledge, and Paragraph Comprehension
                                                     tests from the Armed Services Vocational Aptitude Battery
                                                                               (ASVAB).

                                                         Score on the Home Observation Measurement of the
                                                       Environment (HOME) Inventory Cognitive Stimulation
        Cognitive Stimulation Score        CNLSY   subscale. Scores are taken from the first reported administration
                                                     of the HOME Inventory for each respondent (ages 0-6) and
                                                                    standardized by age at testing.

                                                        Score on the Home Observation Measurement of the
                                                    Environment (HOME) Inventory Emotional Support subscale.
        Emotional Support Score            CNLSY     Scores are taken from the first reported administration of the




109
                                                        HOME Inventory for each respondent (ages 0-6) and
                                                                    standardized by age at testing.

                                                    A respondent’s score on the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test
                                                   (PPVT). Scores are taken from the first reported administration
        PPVT Score                         CNLSY
                                                   of the PPVT for each respondent (ages 3-4) and standardized by
                                                                           age at testing.

      Panel B: Early Childhood (≈ Age 5)
                                                       A respondent’s score on the math subtest of the Peabody
                                                   Individual Achievement Test (PIAT). Scores are taken from tests
        Math Achievement                   CNLSY
                                                    administered between the ages of 4 and 8 and standardized by
                                                                            age at testing.
                                                     A respondent’s score on the reading recognition subtest of the
                                                     Peabody Individual Achievement Test (PIAT). Scores are taken
        Reading Achievement                  CNLSY
                                                        from tests administered between the ages of 4 and 8 and
                                                                     standardized by age at testing.

                                                      A respondent’s score on the antisocial behavior subscale from
                                                     the Behavior Problems Index (BPI). Scores are taken from tests
        Antisocial Behavior                  CNLSY
                                                      administered between the ages of 4 and 8 and standardized by
                                                                             age at testing.

                                                       A respondent’s score on the hyperactivity subscale from the
                                                       Behavior Problems Index (BPI). Scores are taken from tests
        Hyperactivity                        CNLSY
                                                      administered between the ages of 4 and 8 and standardized by
                                                                             age at testing.

      Panel C: Middle Childhood (≈ Age 11)
                                                         A respondent’s score on the math subtest of the Peabody




110
                                                     Individual Achievement Test (PIAT). Scores are taken from tests
        Math Achievement                     CNLSY
                                                      administered between the ages of 9 and 11 and standardized by
                                                                              age at testing.

                                                     A respondent’s score on the reading recognition subtest of the
                                                     Peabody Individual Achievement Test (PIAT). Scores are taken
        Reading Achievement                  CNLSY
                                                       from tests administered between the ages of 9 and 11 and
                                                                    standardized by age at testing.

                                                      A respondent’s score on the antisocial behavior subscale from
                                                     the Behavior Problems Index (BPI). Scores are taken from tests
        Antisocial Behavior                  CNLSY
                                                     administered between the ages of 9 and 11 and standardized by
                                                                             age at testing.
                                                       A respondent’s score on the hyperactivity subscale from the
                                                       Behavior Problems Index (BPI). Scores are taken from tests
        Hyperactivity                        CNLSY
                                                      administered between the ages of 9 and 11 and standardized by
                                                                             age at testing.

      Panel D: Adolescence (≈ Age 13 - 19)
                                                        A binary variable indicating if a respondent graduated high
                                             CNLSY,
        High School Grad Status                       school by age 19. Note that obtaining a GED does not count as
                                             NLSY79
                                                                        graduating in this analysis.

                                                        A respondent’s average GPA in their last year of high school.
                                                       CNLSY: This variable is reported by the respondent. NLSY79:
                                             CNLSY,
        GPA                                             Grades are gathered from official transcripts for all classes a
                                             NLSY79
                                                      respondent took. We then calculate the average grade for the last
                                                         year in which more than two graded classes were reported.

                                             CNLSY,   A binary variable indicating if a respondent was ever convicted
        Criminal Conviction




111
                                             NLSY79             or ever on probation before the age of 19.

                                             CNLSY,    A binary variable indicating if a respondent reported having a
        Teen Parent
                                             NLSY79                     child before the age of 19.

                                             CNLSY,     A binary variable indicating if a respondent reported living
        Lives Independently from Parents
                                             NLSY79         independently from their parents by the age of 19.

                                                          CNLSY: A respondent’s score on the math subtest of the
                                                       Peabody Individual Achievement Test (PIAT). Scores are taken
                                                         from tests administered between the ages of 12 and 16 and
                                             CNLSY,     standardized by age at testing. NLSY79: A respondent’s raw
        Math Achievement
                                             NLSY79   score on the Arithmetic Reasoning test from the Armed Services
                                                        Vocational Aptitude Battery (ASVAB). Scores are taken from
                                                            tests administered between the ages of 15 and 23 and
                                                                       standardized by age at testing.
                                     A respondent’s score on the reading recognition subtest of the
                                     Peabody Individual Achievement Test (PIAT). Scores are taken
                                       from tests administered between the ages of 12 and 16 and
                            CNLSY,    standardized by age at testing. NLSY79: A respondent’s raw
      Reading Achievement
                            NLSY79    score on the Word Knowledge test from the Armed Services
                                      Vocational Aptitude Battery (ASVAB). Scores are taken from
                                          tests administered between the ages of 15 and 23 and
                                                     standardized by age at testing.

                                         CNLSY: The income of the respondent’s family reported
                            CNLSY,
      Family Income                    between the ages of 12 and 15. NLSY79: The income of the
                            NLSY79
                                       respondent’s family reported between the ages of 13 and 22.

                                      CNLSY: A binary variable indicating if a respondent reported
                                       ever using marijuana by age 19. NLSY79: A binary variable
                            CNLSY,
      Marijuana Use                   indicating if a respondent reported using marijuana in the past
                            NLSY79
                                      year. Responses are taken from surveys administered between




112
                                                           the ages of 16 and 23.

                                       CNLSY: A binary variable indicating if a respondent reported
                                       yes to “Have you ever used any drugs other than marijuana or
                                         amphetamines, such as cocaine, ”crack” (”rock”) cocaine,
                            CNLSY,
      Other Drug Use                     hallucinogens, downers, sniffing glue, or something else?”
                            NLSY79
                                      NLSY79: A binary variable indicating if a respondent reported
                                     using a drug other than marijuana in the past year. Responses are
                                      taken from surveys administered between the ages of 15 and 23

                            CNLSY,   A binary variable indicating if a respondent reported having sex
      Early Sex
                            NLSY79                        before the age of 15.

                                        CNLSY: A binary variable indicating if a respondent ever
                            CNLSY,   reported being suspended or expelled from school. NLSY79: A
      Suspension
                            NLSY79    binary variable indicating if a respondent ever reported being
                                                         suspended from school.
                                               CNLSY: A binary variable indicating if a respondent reported
                                              getting in a fight at school in the past year. Responses are taken
                                                 from surveys administered between the ages of 18 and 20.
                                     CNLSY,
      Fighting                                NLSY79: A binary variable indicating if a respondent reported
                                     NLSY79
                                               getting in a fight at school or work in the past year. Responses
                                              are taken from surveys administered between the ages of 16 and
                                                                               23.

                                               A binary variable indicating if a respondent reported hitting or
                                               seriously threatening to hit someone in the past year. CNLSY:
                                     CNLSY,
      Hitting                                 Responses are taken from surveys administered between the ages
                                     NLSY79
                                                 of 18 and 20. NLSY79: Responses are taken from surveys
                                                        administered between the ages of 16 and 23.

                                                    A binary variable indicating if a respondent reported
                                               intentionally damaging property that did not belong to them in




113
                                     CNLSY,       the past year. CNLSY: Responses are taken from surveys
      Damaging Property
                                     NLSY79        administered between the ages of 18 and 20. NLSY79:
                                              Responses are taken from surveys administered between the ages
                                                                        of 16 and 23.

                                              A respondent’s score on the Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale. Raw
                                     CNLSY,       scores are calculated from responses to the 10 Rosenberg
      Self-Esteem Index
                                     NLSY79   Self-Esteem questions on tests administered between the ages of
                                                     16 and 19 and then standardized by age at testing.

                                                 A categorical variable indicating the frequency a respondent
                                              attends religious services. 0 = Not at all, 1 = Several times a year
                                              or less, 2 = About once a month, 3 = Two or three times a month,
                                     CNLSY,
      Religious Service Attendance              4 = About once a week, 5 = More than once a week. CNLSY:
                                     NLSY79
                                              Responses are taken from surveys administered between the ages
                                                  of 19 and 20. NLSY79: Responses are taken from surveys
                                                          administered between the ages of 17 and 22.
                                                                          The average score across five questions on how respondents
                                                                           view women. CNLSY: Responses are taken from surveys
                                                       CNLSY,
        Gender Role Attitudes                                               administered between the ages of 16 and 20. NLSY79:
                                                       NLSY79
                                                                        Responses are taken from surveys administered between the ages
                                                                                                of 17 and 22.

                                                                         A binary variable indicating if a respondent reported belonging
                                                                            to any clubs, teams, or activities in high school. CNLSY:
                                                       CNLSY,
        School Clubs                                                    Responses are taken from surveys administered between the ages
                                                       NLSY79
                                                                           of 15 and 19. NLSY79: Responses are taken from surveys
                                                                                  administered between the ages of 19 and 27.

      Panel E: Transition to Adulthood (≈ Age 29)
                                                                          The income of the respondent’s family reported between the
        Family Income                                  NLSY79
                                                                                              ages of 27 and 31.




114
                                                                        A binary variable indicating if a respondent received a received a
        College Completion                             NLSY79
                                                                                     Bachelor’s degree or higher by age 29.

                                                                            A binary variable indicating if a respondent reported living
        Lives Independently from Parents               NLSY79              independently from their parents. Responses are taken from
                                                                               surveys administered between the ages of 26 and 31.

      Panel F: Adulthood (≈ Age 40)
                                                                          The income of the respondent’s family reported between the
        Family Income                                  NLSY79
                                                                                              ages of 39 and 44.
             Notes: This table presents the variables that are included in the each life-stage of our adaptation of the Social Genome Model.
             Column (2) reports which datasets a given variable comes from. Variables that are reported as coming from both the CNLSY and
             the NLSY79 are used as linking variables in the simulation. See Winship and Owen (2013) and Online Appendix B for more
             information.
                                                            Table 4: Life-Cycle Model
                                                                        Math                                            Reading
                                                          Average Impact Percent Change                      Average Impact Percent Change
                                                            Top Three        Income at 40                      Top Three      Income at 40
      Panel A: Early Childhood (≈ Age 5)                       (1)                (2)                             (3)              (4)
        Early Childhood                                      0.413σ             2.27%                           0.973σ           5.58%

      Panel B: Middle Childhood (≈ Age 11)
        Home                                                   0.000σ                   0.00%                      0.138σ                  1.53%
        School                                                 0.521σ                   3.66%                      1.123σ                 13.37%

      Panel C: Adolescence (≈ Age 13 - 19)
        Home                                                   0.000σ                   0.00%                      0.000σ                  0.00%
        School                                                 0.258σ                   2.10%                      0.215σ                  2.84%

      Panel D: Cumulative
        Cumulative                                                                      8.28%                                             25.06%




115
      Baseline Average                                                                 $60,752                                            $60,752
          Notes: This table reports results from a life-cycle simulation using data from the National Longitudinal Surveys of Youth that
          follows methods described in Winship and Owen (2013). Panel A reports results for the early childhood life stage. Panel B reports
          results for the middle childhood life stage. Panel C reports results for the adolescence life stage. Columns (1) and (3) report the
          average of the three largest statistically significant effect sizes from interventions within the given life stage, category, and subject.
          If there were less than three significant effect sizes, we either report the average of the one or two significant impacts or report an
          impact of zero if there were no significant effect sizes. The sample includes all studies found that meet our inclusion restrictions
          and have impact estimates for the given subject. Note that we use cummulative impacts for each intervention instead of annual
          impacts. Columns (2) and (4) report the simulated impact that the given increase in test scores (in columns (1) and (3), respectively)
          at the given life stage would have on an individual’s income at age 40. Panel D reports the simulated impact on age-40 income of
          increasing the scores of an individual in each life stage by all amounts specified in Panels A, B, and C for a given subject. The
          average age-40 income in the baseline sample is reported at the bottom of the table. See the main text and Online Appendix A for
          details on our search procedure, inclusion restrictions, and the categories of papers. See the main text and Online Appendix B for
          details on the life-cycle simulation.
      Appendix Table 1 - Early Childhood
      Study                                                Study Design                                         Results
                                                                                                                Test Score = Pre-school Language
                                                                                                                Scale-IV edition: Auditory
                                                                                                                Comprehension subtest; Expressive
                                                           Treatment Defined = Two language and literacy        Vocabulary Test. Regression
                                                           curricula - Let’s Begin with the Letter People and   Specification = Effect sizes were
      An Evaluation of Curriculum, Setting, and            Doors to Discovery. Additionally, some of the        calculated using the average posttest
      Mentoring on the Performance of Children             treatment classroom teachers received monitoring     scores. We report the average impact
      Enrolled in Pre-Kindergarten (Assel et al., 2006).   that aided in the implementation of the curricula.   across site types and outcome measures.
      N schools = 32, N classrooms = 76, N students =      Randomization = Twenty-six Title 1                   Results = The Let’s Begin with the Letter
      603, Ages = 4 - 5, Location = Houston, TX.           pre-kindergarten classrooms, 19 universal            People curriculum with mentoring
      Treatment Groups = Two treatment conditions:         pre-kindergarten classrooms and 31 Head Start        treatment had a -0.055σ (0.607) impact on
      condition one administered the Let’s Begin with      Center classrooms were identified in Houston,        reading test scores. The Let’s Begin with
      the Letter People curriculum; condition two          TX across 32 schools sites. School sites were        the Letter People curriculum with no
      administered the Doors to Discovery curriculum.      randomly assigned to one of the two curricula or     mentoring treatment had a -0.059σ
      The control group continued with the normal          control. The classrooms in sites that were           (0.674) impact on reading test scores. The
      curriculum.                                          randomly assigned to one of the treatment            Doors to Discovery curriculum with
                                                           curricula were further randomized into receiving     mentoring treatment had a 0.045σ (0.605)
                                                           monitoring or no monitoring.                         impact on reading test scores. The Doors




116
                                                                                                                to Discovery curriculum with no
                                                                                                                mentoring treatment had a 0.184σ (0.597)
                                                                                                                impact on reading test scores.
      Beyond the Pages of a Book: Interactive Reading
                                                           Treatment Defined = Teachers in the treatment
      and Language Development in Preschool
                                                           condition were trained in interactive reading
      Classrooms (Wasik and Bond, 2001). N teachers
                                                           techniques designed to teach new vocabulary and      Test Score = Peabody Picture Vocabulary
      = 4, N students = 127, Age = 4, Location =
                                                           prompt a classroom discussion of the material.       Test. Regression Specification = Effect
      Baltimore, MD. Treatment Groups = Treatment
                                                           Books, vocabulary lists, and reading-related         sizes were calculated using the average
      classrooms incorporated book-reading into their
                                                           activities like arts and crafts were provided.       growth between post and pretest scores.
      classroom curriculum. Control classrooms
                                                           Teachers read approximately two books per            Results = Treatment had a 0.499σ (1.015)
      continued with their regular curriculum.
                                                           week. Randomization = Four teachers agreed to        impact on reading test scores.
      Ninety-five percent of the sample is eligible for
                                                           the study; half were randomly assigned to
      free or reduced lunch and 94 percent of the
                                                           treatment.
      sample is African American.
      Appendix Table 1 (continued)
      Study                                              Study Design                                          Results
                                                         Treatment Defined = Treatment families                Test Score = Peabody Picture Vocabulary
      Children At-Risk for Poor School Readiness: The
                                                         received a 15-week reading curriculum to              Test; Expressive One-Word Picture
      Effect of an Early Intervention Home Visiting
                                                         implement at home. This curriculum was                Vocabulary Test-Revised. Regression
      Program on Children and Parents (Necoechea,
                                                         augmented by approximately seven 30 to 60             Specification = Effect sizes were
      2007). N families = 52, Ages = 3 - 4. Treatment
                                                         minute home visits and eight 2 to 3 hour group        calculated using the means of posttest
      Groups = The treatment group participated in the
                                                         meetings, the goal of which was to train treatment    scores adjusted for pretest scores. We
      Home Instruction for Parents of Preschool
                                                         mothers in effective curriculum implementation        report the average effect size across all
      Youngsters (HIPPY) program. The control group
                                                         techniques. Randomization = Families were             outcome measures. Results = Treatment
      received no such intervention. Sample composed
                                                         stratified by child’s age and preschool enrollment,   had a 0.159σ (0.281) impact on reading
      entirely of low-income families.
                                                         then randomly assigned to treatment.                  test scores.
                                                                                                               Test Score = Peabody Picture Vocabulary
                                                                                                               Test. Regression Specification =
                                                                                                               Hierarchical linear model (student,
                                                                                                               classroom, site) controlling for gender,
                                                                                                               race/ethnicity, primary language, family
                                                                                                               size, whether the child came from a
      CSRP’s Impact on Low-Income Preschoolers’          Treatment Defined = The CSRP intervention             single-parent household, mother’s
      Preacademic Skills: Self-Regulation as a           was a professional development program                education, income-to-needs ratio, hours




117
      Mediating Mechanism (Raver et al., 2011). N        designed to promote self-regulation skills among      worked by the mother in the previous
      recruitment sites = 18, N classrooms = 35, N       low-income preschoolers. Treatment teachers           week, teacher’s education, teacher’s age,
      students = 543, Ages = 3 - 4. Treatment Groups     learned how to curb anti-social and dominant          teacher’s psychological status, availability
      = Treatment sites implemented the Chicago          behaviors while promoting pro-social behaviors.       of a full-time family worker at the Head
      School Readines Project (CSRP) for the entire      Randomization = Recruitment sites were paired         Start site, size of the Head Start program,
      academic year. Control sites received no such      on the basis of similar demographic                   proportion of teachers with a bachelor’s
      intervention. Sample composed entirely of Head     characteristics and one site from each pairing was    degree, proportion of teaching assistants
      Start classrooms.                                  randomly assigned to treatment.                       with at least some college education,
                                                                                                               proportion of families with at least one
                                                                                                               parent employed, and the proportion of
                                                                                                               families receiving Temporary Assistance
                                                                                                               for Needy Families. Results = Treatment
                                                                                                               had a 0.34σ (0.14) impact on reading test
                                                                                                               scores.
      Appendix Table 1 (continued)
      Study                                                 Study Design                                         Results
                                                            Treatment Defined = Treatment parents received
      Early Intervention in Low-Birth-Weight                home visits to provide information on child
      Premature Infants: Results Through Age 5 Years        health and development, as well as social support
      From the Infant Health and Development                and management strategies for self-identified
                                                                                                                 Test Score = Peabody Picture Vocabulary
      Program (Brooks-Gunn et al., 1994). N infants =       problems. Parents received home visits an
                                                                                                                 Test-Revised. Regression Specification =
      985, N years = 3. Treatment Groups = The              average of three times per month during the first
                                                                                                                 Effect sizes were calculated using posttest
      treatment group received home visits and              year, and then an average of 1.5 times per month
                                                                                                                 means. We report the average annual
      schooling for three years. The control group          in the two years to follow. Beginning at age 1,
                                                                                                                 impact. Results = Treatment had a 0.142σ
      received no such intervention. Sample composed        treatment children were expected to attend four
                                                                                                                 (0.042) impact on reading test scores.
      entirely of premature infants (born at or before 37   hours of school per day, which reinforced the
      weeks gestational age) weighing under 2,500           material introduced in the home visits.
      grams at birth.                                       Randomization = Children were stratified by
                                                            birth weight and randomly assigned to treatment.
                                                            Treatment Defined = The Tools of the Mind
                                                            curriculum focuses on the development of broad
                                                            foundational skills in reading and mathematics,
                                                                                                                 Test Score = Woodcock-Johnson: Applied
                                                            including self-regulation of social and cognitive
                                                                                                                 Math Problems and Letter Word
                                                            behaviors, purposeful recollection, symbolic




118
                                                                                                                 Identification subtests; Peabody Picture
                                                            representation, phonemic awareness, knowledge
      Educational Effects of the Tools of the Mind                                                               Vocabulary Test; Expressive One-Word
                                                            of letters, familiarity with print, counting,
      Curriculum: A Randomized Trial (Barnett et al.,                                                            Picture Vocabulary Test. Regression
                                                            one-to-one correspondence, pattern recognition,
      2008). N teachers = 18, N students = 274, Age =                                                            Specification = Two-level hierarchical
                                                            and numerical recognition. Teachers in the
      3 - 4. Treatment Groups = Treatment classroom                                                              linear model (student, classroom)
                                                            treatment condition received four days of training
      utilized the Tools of the Mind curriculum. The                                                             controlling for pretest scores, primary
                                                            prior to the start of the school year.
      control group continued with their normal                                                                  language, and age. The average (weighted
                                                            Randomization = Teachers were stratified into
      curricula.                                                                                                 by number of observations) effect across
                                                            four groups: teachers with a preschool-grade
                                                                                                                 all outcome measures is reported. Results
                                                            three license; teachers with a K-8 license;
                                                                                                                 = Treatment had a 0.105σ (0.125) impact
                                                            teachers with a N-8 license; and teachers who
                                                                                                                 on reading test scores.
                                                            transferred from another school within the
                                                            district. Teachers within these groups were then
                                                            randomly assigned to treatment.
      Appendix Table 1 (continued)
      Study                                               Study Design                                           Results
                                                          Treatment Defined = Both treatment groups
                                                          utilized the Literacy Express Preschool
      Effective Early Literacy Skill Development for
                                                          Curriculum. This curriculum focuses on oral            Test Score = Test of Preschool Early
      Young Spanish-Speaking English Language
                                                          language, emergent literacy, basic math and            Literacy: Definitional Vocabulary,
      Learners: An Experimental Study of Two
                                                          science, and socio-emotional development. It is        Phonological Awareness, and Print
      Methods (Farver et al., 2009). N students = 94,
                                                          structured around ten thematic units that are          Knowledge subtests. Regression
      Ages = 3 - 5, Location = Los Angeles, CA.
                                                          sequenced in order of complexity and the literacy      Specification = Effect sizes were
      Treatment Groups = Students in the first
                                                          demands placed upon children. The curriculum           calculated using the average growth
      treatment group received the Literacy Express
                                                          lasted for approximately 21 weeks. Students in         between pre and posttest scores. We report
      Preschool Curriculum in English-only (English
                                                          the English treatment were taught in English for       the average effect size across subtests.
      treatment). Students in the second treatment
                                                          the entire 21 weeks. Students in the Transitional      Results = The English treatment had a
      group received the Literacy Express Curriculum
                                                          treatment were taught in Spanish for the first nine    0.239σ (0.084) impact on reading test
      initially in Spanish, but transitioned to English
                                                          weeks, transitioned to English over the next four      scores. The Transitional treatment had a
      over the course of the intervention (Transitional
                                                          weeks, and then taught in English for the              0.326σ (0.085) impact on reading test
      treatment). Control students received the
                                                          remainder of the time. Randomization =                 scores.
      High/Scope Curriculum.
                                                          Balancing for gender, students were randomly
                                                          assigned to one of the three groups.
                                                          Treatment Defined = Treatment teachers




119
                                                          received a 1-semester professional development
                                                          intervention designed specifically for Head Start
                                                          teachers. Some teachers received on-site
                                                          coaching and others received remote coaching.          Test Score = Peabody Picture Vocabulary
                                                          The goal of the professional development was to        Test III: Receptive Language;
      Effects of an Early Literacy Professional
                                                          improve teachers’ use of evidence-based literacy       Woodcock-Johnson III: Letter Word
      Development Intervention on Head Start
                                                          instruction (data-driven instruction). The             Identification subtest; Concepts About
      Teachers and Children (Powell et al., 2010). N
                                                          intervention comprised of a 2-day workshop             Print; Test of Preschool Early Literacy:
      teachers = 88, N children = 759, Ages = 4 - 5.
                                                          followed by expert coaching. The intervention          Blending subtest. Regression
      Treatment Groups = The treatment group
                                                          used two different cohorts of teachers and             Specification = Hierarchical linear model
      implemented a professional development
                                                          students across two years. Randomization =             analysis (student, classroom, Head Start
      intervention, and the control group was placed on
                                                          Random assignment occurred at the teacher level        center) controlling for child race-ethnicity,
      a wait list to receive the same professional
                                                          and was stratified by whether or not the teacher’s     child gender, and year of participation.
      development the following semester.
                                                          classroom was in an urban or not urban area.           Results = Treatment had a 0.16σ (0.09)
                                                          First, teachers were randomly assigned to an           impact on reading test scores.
                                                          intervention semester (fall or spring) and a
                                                          participation year (first or second). Next, teachers
                                                          were randomly assigned to on-site or remote
                                                          coaching condition.
      Appendix Table 1 (continued)
      Study                                          Study Design                                         Results
                                                                                                          Test Score = Test of Early Reading
                                                                                                          Ability; Woodcock-Johnson: Letter Word
                                                                                                          Identification, Spelling, and Applied
                                                                                                          Problems subtests; Peabody Picture
                                                                                                          Vocabulary Test; Test of Language and
                                                                                                          Development: Grammatic Understanding
                                                                                                          subtest; Child Math assessment:
                                                                                                          Composite score; Preschool
                                                                                                          Comprehension Test of Phonological and
                                                                                                          Print Processing: Elision subtest.
                                                     Treatment Defined = Treatment entailed
                                                                                                          Regression Specification = Three-level
                                                     implementation of one of the following curricula:
                                                                                                          hierarchical linear model (student,
                                                     Bright Beginnings (BB), Creative Curriculum
                                                                                                          classroom, teacher), controlling for age,
                                                     (CC), Creative Curriculum with Ladders to
                                                                                                          gender, race/ethnicity, maternal education,
                                                     Literacy (CCwL), Curiosity Corner (CCorn),
                                                                                                          disability status indicator, curriculum, and
                                                     DLM Early Childhood Express supplemented
      Effects of Preschool Curriculum Programs on                                                         recruitment-site fixed effects. We reported
                                                     with Open Court Reading Pre-K (DLM), Doors
      School Readiness (Preschool Curriculum                                                              the average effect across outcome
                                                     to Discovery (DD), Early Literacy and Learning
      Evaluation Research Consortium, 2008). N                                                            measures. Results = The impacts for each




120
                                                     Model (ELLM), Language-Focused Curriculum
      preschools = 208, N classrooms = 315, N                                                             treatment were as follows: BB math =
                                                     (LFC), Let’s Begin with the Letter People (LB),
      children = 2,911, Ages = 4 - 5. Treatment                                                           0.182σ (0.159) and BB read = 0.182σ
                                                     Literacy Express (LE), Pre-K Mathematics
      Groups = Treatment classrooms implemented                                                           (0.147). CC math = 0.102σ (0.163) and
                                                     supplemented with DLM Early Childhood
      one of 14 possible curricula. The control                                                           CC read = 0.028σ (0.164). CCwL math =
                                                     Express Software (Pre-K Math), Project
      classrooms continued their usual curricula.                                                         0.014σ (0.258) and CCwL read = -0.163σ
                                                     Approach (PA), Project Construct (PC), or
      Eighty-eight percent of the sample came from                                                        (0.267). CCorn math = 0.041σ (0.183) and
                                                     Ready, Set, Leap! (RSL). Randomization =
      low-income families.                                                                                CCorn read = 0.021σ (0.170). DLM math
                                                     Sample teachers were stratified first by
                                                                                                          = 0.007σ (0.138) and DLM read = 0.133σ
                                                     recruitment-site and then either by classroom or
                                                                                                          (0.158). DD math = 0.069σ (0.149) and
                                                     preschool (different recruitment sites
                                                                                                          DD read = 0.130σ (0.208). ELLM math =
                                                     implemented different stratification criteria) and
                                                                                                          0.044σ (0.181) and ELLM read = 0.107σ
                                                     randomly assigned for treatment. Children were
                                                                                                          (0.176). LFC math = 0.118σ (0.141) and
                                                     randomly assigned to classes.
                                                                                                          LFC read = 0.129σ (0.159). LB math =
                                                                                                          0.025σ (0.148) and LB read = 0.022σ
                                                                                                          (0.207). LE math = 0.274σ (0.136) and
                                                                                                          LE read = 0.458σ (0.154). Pre-K Math
                                                                                                          math = 0.309σ (0.131) and Pre-K Math
                                                                                                          read = 0.121σ (0.166). PA math = 0.122σ
                                                                                                          (0.214) and PA read = 0.154σ (0.275). PC
                                                                                                          math = -0.0168σ (0.133) and PC read =
                                                                                                          -0.050σ (0.166). RSL math = 0.087σ
                                                                                                          (0.119) and RSL read = 0.049σ.
      Appendix Table 1 (continued)
      Study                                               Study Design                                          Results
                                                                                                                Test Score = Kaufman Survey of Early
                                                                                                                Academic Language Skills: vocabulary,
                                                                                                                and numbers, letters, and words subtests;
                                                          Treatment Defined = The Language for
                                                                                                                Dynamic Indicators of Basic Early
      Efficacy of a Direct Instruction Approach to        Learning curriculum is a form of direct
                                                                                                                Literacy Skills: the initial sounds fluency
      Promote Early Learning (Salaway, 2008). N           instruction that uses small group and
                                                                                                                and letter-naming fluency subtests.
      students = 61, Age = 3 - 5. Treatment Groups =      individualized instruction to develop literary
                                                                                                                Regression Specification = Effect sizes
      Students assigned to treatment classrooms used      skills. Teachers give numerous, fast-paced
                                                                                                                for each subtest were calculated using the
      the Language for Learning curriculum. The           presentations with frequent opportunities for
                                                                                                                average growth between post and pretest
      control group continued with its normal             child response. Instruction was implemented
                                                                                                                scores. Effect sizes were averaged by
      curriculum. The sample was drawn primarily          three days per week. Randomization = Children
                                                                                                                subject to estimate a total math and
      from low-income families.                           were randomly assigned to treatment or control
                                                                                                                reading impact. Results = Treatment had
                                                          classrooms.
                                                                                                                a 0.468σ (0.262) impact on math test
                                                                                                                scores and a 0.448σ (0.262) impact on
                                                                                                                reading test scores.
                                                                                                                Test Score = Test of Preschool Early
                                                          Treatment defined = The RSL curriculum uses           Literacy: definitional vocabulary,
                                                          interactive software to develop oral language         phonological awareness, and print




121
      Evaluation of Child Care Subsidies: Findings
                                                          development, phonological knowledge, and print        knowledge subtests. Regression
      from Project Upgrade in Miami (Layzer et al.,
                                                          knowledge. The BELL curriculum entails two            Specification = Three-level hierarchical
      2007). N child care centers = 180, N students =
                                                          daily 15 - 20 minute lessons designed to promote      linear model (student, classroom,
      1,523, Ages = 4, Location = Miami, FL.
                                                          language proficiency, phonological awareness,         randomization block), controlling for age,
      Treatment Groups = Three treatment groups:
                                                          shared reading skills, and print awareness. The       gender, language spoken at home,
      classrooms in the first group utilized the Ready,
                                                          BTL curriculum builds phonological knowledge          classroom-mean pretest score, and
      Set, Leap! (RSL) curriculum; classrooms in the
                                                          through a series of exercises and examinations for    dominant language of teacher. Effects are
      second group used the Building Early Language
                                                          one book per week. Randomization = Eligible           reported for an index of the three subtests.
      and Literacy (BELL) curriculum; classrooms in
                                                          child care centers were randomly assigned to one      Results = The RSL treatment had a
      the third group implemented the Breakthrough to
                                                          of the four groups. To be eligible for the study, a   0.507σ (0.118) impact on reading test
      Literacy (BTL) curriculum. The control group
                                                          child care center had to have a full class of         scores. The BELL treatment had a 0.061σ
      continued with their normal curricula.
                                                          four-year-olds predominantly from families            (0.127) impact on reading test scores. The
                                                          receiving subsidies to pay for child care.            BTL treatment had a 0.544σ (0.119)
                                                                                                                impact on reading test scores.
      Appendix Table 1 (continued)
      Study                                              Study Design                                       Results
                                                                                                            Test Score = Woodcock-Johnson Revised
                                                         Treatment Defined = The Let’s Begin with the       Tests of Achievement: Letter Word
      Evaluation of Curricular Approaches to Enhance     Letter People curriculum utilized play-centered    Identification and Dictation subtests; the
      Preschool Early Literacy Skills (Fischel et al.,   instruction to motivate students. It introduced    Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test III.
      2007). N preschools = 6, N classrooms = 35, N      early literacy, math, art, music, science, and     Regression Specification = Effect sizes
      students = 507, Age = 4, Location = Southeastern   social skills via a series of games, songs, and    for each outcome were calculated using
      NY. Treatment Groups = All classrooms used         stories. Instruction spanned a three-day period.   the average growth between pre and
      the High/Scope Education Approach curriculum.      The Waterford Early Reading Program Level 1        posttest scores. Effect sizes were averaged
      Treatment classrooms implemented either the        used computer software to provide individualized   to estimate a total impact for each
      Let’s Begin with the Letter People curriculum or   instruction and feedback in letter knowledge,      treatment. Results = The Let’s Begin with
      the Waterford Early Reading Program                print concepts, vocabulary, and story structure.   the Letter People curriculum had a 0.252σ
      curriculum. Sample drawn entirely from Head        Instruction lasted for 15 minutes daily.           (0.420) impact on reading test scores. The
      Start programs.                                    Randomization = Classrooms randomly                Waterford Early Reading Program
                                                         assigned to one of three groups.                   curriculum had a 0.079σ (0.418) impact
                                                                                                            on reading test scores.




122
      Appendix Table 1 (continued)
      Study                                             Study Design                                          Results
                                                        Treatment Defined = Head Start provides
                                                        comprehensive services (preschool education,
                                                        medical, dental, mental health care, and nutrition
                                                        services) to low-income children in hopes of
                                                                                                              Test Score = Peabody Picture Vocabulary
                                                        boosting their school readiness. Researchers
                                                                                                              Test III; Woodcock-Johnson III: Letter
                                                        investigate the impacts on two different cohorts, a
                                                                                                              Word Identification, and Applied
                                                        3-year old cohort and a 4-year old cohort. The
                                                                                                              Problems subtests. Regression
                                                        3-year old cohort was exposed to two years of the
                                                                                                              Specification = Student outcome
                                                        Head Start program and the 4-year-old cohort
                                                                                                              regressions control for student pretest
                                                        was exposed to just one. Randomization =
                                                                                                              scores, gender, age at time of assessment,
                                                        Researchers first recruited 163 Head Start
      Head Start Impact Study: Final Report (Puma et                                                          race/ethnicity, primary language at
                                                        grantee/delegate agencies from across the nation.
      al., 2010). N children = 4,667, Ages = 3 - 4.                                                           baseline, number of weeks elapsed
                                                        They then stratified eligible Head Start centers in
      Treatment Groups = Treatment children were                                                              between 9/1/2002 and fall testing, primary
                                                        these grantee/delegate agencies by program and
      offered enrollment for one to two years of the                                                          language spoke at home, primary care
                                                        student characteristics and then randomly
      Head Start program. Control children applied to                                                         giver’s age, indicator for if both biological
                                                        selected three centers from each grantee/delegate
      the Head Start program, but were not offered                                                            parents live with child, indicator for if
                                                        agency (note that small centers were combined
      enrollment.                                                                                             biological mother is a recent immigrant,
                                                        with nearby centers to create “center groups” that




123
                                                                                                              mother’s highest level of educational
                                                        were randomized together as one unit). For the
                                                                                                              attainment, mother’s marital status, and an
                                                        2002-2003 application process, these centers
                                                                                                              indicator for if mother gave birth to child
                                                        continued with their typical procedure, reviewing
                                                                                                              as a teenager. Results = Winning a lottery
                                                        applications and selecting students that they
                                                                                                              to attend Head Start had a 0.135σ (0.071)
                                                        thought would be a good fit. However, the centers
                                                                                                              impact on math test scores and a 0.188σ
                                                        selected approximately 40% more students than
                                                                                                              (0.064) impact on reading test scores.
                                                        they had spots for. From the pool of students that
                                                        each center selected, the researchers then
                                                        randomly selected students to be offered a spot at
                                                        that Head Start center.
      Appendix Table 1 (continued)
      Study                                              Study Design                                          Results
                                                         Treatment Defined = The Perry Preschool
                                                         Program consisted of children attending 2.5 hours
                                                         of preschool on weekdays during the school year
                                                         and teachers making weekly home visits. The
                                                         program practiced an active learning curriculum
                                                         where students were encouraged to plan, carry
                                                         out, and reflect on their activities. Participants
                                                         were drawn from the community served by the
                                                         Perry Elementary School in Ypsilanti, MI.
                                                         Families were recruited through surveys,
                                                         neighborhood referrals, and door-to-door
                                                         searches. The study focused on disadvantaged
                                                         children living in adverse situations. In addition,
                                                         the study only included students in the IQ range
      Longitudinal Results of the Ypsilanti Perry        70-85 and students with mental illness were           Test Score = Peabody Picture Vocabulary
      Preschool Project: Final Report (Weikart et al.,   excluded. The intervention was conducted on five      Test. Regression Specification = Effect
      1970). N children = 123, Location = Ypsilanti,     different cohorts in the mid-1960s.                   sizes were calculated from posttest means.
      MI. Treatment Groups = Treatment students          Randomization = The randomization for this            We report the average annual impact.




124
      were assigned to an early childhood program        study was as follows: 1) For later cohorts, if a      Results = Assignment to the Perry
      lasting from age 3 to age 5 and control students   child had an older sibling already participating in   Preschool Program had a 0.655σ (0.162)
      were not.                                          the study, they were assigned to the same             impact on reading test scores.
                                                         experimental status as their sibling; 2) The
                                                         remaining students were ranked by their IQ
                                                         scores. Odd and even ranked students were then
                                                         assigned to different groups; 3) Some students
                                                         were manually swapped to balance gender and
                                                         socioeconomic status between the two groups; 4)
                                                         A coin was flipped to determine which group
                                                         would be treated and which group would be
                                                         control; 5) Some children initially assigned to
                                                         treatment, who had employed mothers, were
                                                         swapped with control, who had unemployed
                                                         mothers. This was done because the researchers
                                                         believed it would be hard for working mothers to
                                                         participate in weekly home visits with teachers.
      Appendix Table 1 (continued)
      Study                                            Study Design                                          Results
                                                       Treatment Defined = The CCDP provides
                                                       physical, social, emotional, and intellectual
                                                       support to impoverished families, for the purpose
                                                       of promoting stable childhood development and
                                                       economic self-sufficiency among families.
                                                       Recruited families were either expecting a child
                                                       or had a child under the age of one. The study
      National Impact Evaluation of the                analyzed one child per family, termed the “focus
      Comprehensive Child Development Program:         child.” Randomization = Rural sites were asked
                                                                                                             Test Score = Peabody Picture Vocabulary
      Final Report (St. Pierre et al., 1997). N        to recruit 180 families; urban sites 360. In order
                                                                                                             Test. Regression Specification = Effect
      recruitment sites = 21, N families = 4,410.      for a family to be eligible, they had to (1) have
                                                                                                             sizes were calculated from posttest means.
      Treatment Groups = Treatment group took part     income below the Federal Poverty guidelines, (2)
                                                                                                             We report the average annual impact.
      in Comprehensive Child Development Program       include a pregnant woman or a child under the
                                                                                                             Results = Treatment had a 0.002σ (0.018)
      (CCDP) for five years; the control group         age of one, and (3) agree to participate in CCDP
                                                                                                             impact on reading test scores.
      continued as usual. Sample drawn from families   activities for five years. Further, each site was
      with income below the poverty line.              instructed to recruit a group of families that were
                                                       representative (in terms of ethnicity and age of
                                                       mother) of the low-income population that site




125
                                                       served. Recruited families at each site were then
                                                       randomly assigned to a treatment, a control, or a
                                                       replacement group. The replacement group was
                                                       used to replace families that dropped out of the
                                                       program and were not included in the evaluation.
      Appendix Table 1 (continued)
      Study                                             Study Design                                         Results
                                                        Treatment Defined = Treatment parents had the        Test Score = Woodcock-Johnson III:
                                                        opportunity to attend a “Parent Academy,” in         Letter Word Identification, Applied
      Parental Incentives and Early Childhood           which they learned how to effectively involve        Problems, Spelling, and Quantitative
      Achievement: A Field Experiment in Chicago        themselves with their child’s academic work.         Concepts subtests; Peabody Picture
      Heights (Fryer et al., 2015). N families = 257.   Parents also received homework assignments,          Vocabulary Test. Regression
      Treatment Groups = Two treatment conditions:      which asked them to practice the skills learned in   Specification = OLS regressions
      condition one parents received cash rewards for   the sessions. All treatment programs offered         controlling for children’s pretest scores,
      participation in treatment programs; condition    monetary incentive, such that parents could          race, gender, age, and mother’s age.
      two received the same rewards but they were       receive up to $3,500 via successful completion of    Results = The cash treatment had a
      deposited into a trust fund which would be paid   Parent Academy classes and assignments, as well      0.150σ (0.158) impact on math test scores
      upon successful enrollment of their child in      as an additional $3,400 if their child performed     and a 0.046σ (0.143) impact on reading
      college. Control parents did not receive          well on interim evaluations as well as two large     test scores. The college treatment had a
      incentives.                                       end-of-semester assessments. Randomization =         0.224σ (0.166) impact on math test scores
                                                        Families were randomly assigned to a treatment       and a 0.119σ (0.169) impact on reading
                                                        group or control.                                    test scores.




126
      Appendix Table 1 (continued)
      Study                                              Study Design                                        Results
                                                         Treatment Defined = This study investigates the
                                                         impact of the Abecedarian program on academic
                                                         test scores. The sample consisted of healthy
                                                         infants born to impoverished families in a small,
                                                         southern town. Treatment children were enrolled
                                                         in a preschool educational program that operated
                                                         year round. As an infant, they were exposed to a
                                                         curriculum that included cognitive and fine motor
                                                         development, social and self-help skills,
                                                         language, and gross motor skills. As the children
                                                         grew older, they moved into a preschool program
                                                         that placed special emphasis on language
                                                                                                             Test Score = The math and reading
                                                         development and preliteracy skills. In addition,
                                                                                                             clusters from the Woodcock-Johnson
      Poverty, Early Childhood Education, and            treatment students went through a 6-week
                                                                                                             Psycho-Educational Battery, Part 2: Tests
      Academic Competence: The Abecedarian               summer transitional classroom experience the
                                                                                                             of Academic Achievement; California
      Experiment (Ramey and Campbell, 1991). N           summer before kindergarten in order to best
                                                                                                             Achievement Test: Math and Reading
      students = 111, Ages = 0 - 8. Treatment Groups     prepare them for the classroom experience.
                                                                                                             subtests. Regression Specification =
      = Treatment children received a preschool          Treatment students continued to receive support




127
                                                                                                             Effect sizes were calculated from posttest
      intervention from infancy until they started       for the first three years of school. This support
                                                                                                             means. We report the average annual
      school (approximately age 5) and an intervention   came in the form of a home/school resource
                                                                                                             impact across outcome measures. Results
      during the first three years of primary school.    teacher (HST). The HST provided parents with
                                                                                                             = Treatment had an annual impact of
      Control students continued with the normal         activities designed for each child, served as a
                                                                                                             0.082σ (0.110) impact on math test scores
      curriculum.                                        liaison between the school and parents, and
                                                                                                             and 0.133σ (0.115) impact on reading test
                                                         helped families with non-school related problems
                                                                                                             scores.
                                                         that might affect the student’s learning.
                                                         Randomization = Eligible infants were matched
                                                         based on High Risk scores (derived from factors
                                                         such as maternal and paternal education levels,
                                                         family income, and parents’ marital status) and
                                                         then one infant from each pair was randomly
                                                         assigned to treatment and the other to control.
                                                         Upon entry into kindergarten, children within
                                                         each group were matched based on their
                                                         48-month IQ score and then the pairs were
                                                         randomly split into the new treatment and control
                                                         groups.
      Appendix Table 1 (continued)
      Study                                              Study Design                                           Results
                                                         Treatment Defined = The ERE intervention gave
                                                         students Talking Typewriters, which allowed
                                                         students to select letters of the alphabet at will,
                                                         and have the typewriter voice their selection.
                                                         When the child demonstrated sufficient mastery
                                                         of this machine, the typewriter would then ask
                                                         children to select a specific letter. The typewriter
      Project Breakthrough: A Responsive
                                                         was available everyday in class. Randomization
      Environment Field Experiment with Pre-School
                                                         = Students were paired by IQ and assigned              Test Score = Peabody Picture-Vocabulary
      Children from Public Assistance Families (Cook
                                                         randomly to either treatment or control. Note that     Test. Regression Specification = Effect
      County Department of Public Aid, 1969). N
                                                         the researchers had another parallel experiment        sizes were calculated using the mean
      students = 184, Ages = 3 - 4. Treatment Groups
                                                         where all students received intensive social work      posttest scores. Results = Treatment had a
      = Treatment students received the Edison
                                                         services and were also randomly assigned to the        0.448σ (0.253) impact on reading test
      Responsive Environment (ERE) intervention.
                                                         ERE intervention or a control group that only          scores.
      Control students continued with the normal
                                                         received the intensive social work services.
      curricula.
                                                         However, these two groups of students were
                                                         randomized at a different time than the two
                                                         groups that received normal levels of social work




128
                                                         services and therefore we cannot directly
                                                         compare them. For this reason, we only focus on
                                                         students that received normal levels of social
                                                         work services.
                                                         Treatment Defined = The intervention involved
                                                                                                                Test Score = Expressive One-Word
                                                         brief lessons, hands on extension activities and
                                                                                                                Picture Vocabulary Test; Test of Language
                                                         specific teaching strategies linked empirically
                                                                                                                Development: Grammatical
      Promoting Academic and Social-Emotional            with the promotion of both social-emotional
                                                                                                                Understanding and Sentence Imitation
      School Readiness: The Head Start REDI              competencies as well as language development
                                                                                                                subtests; Test of Preschool Early Literacy:
      Program (Bierman et al., 2008). N classrooms =     and emergent literacy skills. Take-home materials
                                                                                                                Blending, Elision, and Print Knowledge
      44, N children = 356, Age = 4 . Treatment          were provided to parents to enhance skill
                                                                                                                subtests. Regression Specification =
      Groups = The treatment group administered the      development at home. The study included two
                                                                                                                Two-level hierarchical linear model (child,
      Head Start REDI program, and the control group     cohorts of 4-year-old children that were recruited
                                                                                                                classroom) controlling for gender, race,
      continued with the normal Head Start curriculum.   across two years. Randomization = Fourty-four
                                                                                                                site, and cohort. Results = Treatment had
                                                         Head Start classrooms were either randomized
                                                                                                                a 0.16σ (0.10) impact on reading test
                                                         into an enriched intervention treatment condition
                                                                                                                scores.
                                                         or a usual practice control condition.
      Appendix Table 1 (continued)
      Study                                                Study Design                                          Results
                                                           Treatment Defined = The Early Literacy and
      Randomized Field Trial of an Early Literacy          Learning Model curriculum emphasized letter
                                                                                                                 Test Score = Test of Early Reading
      Curriculum and Institutional Support System          and sound recognition, as well as phonological
                                                                                                                 Ability. Regression specification =
      (Cosgrove et al., 2006). N recruitment sites = 3,    and print awareness. Students engaged in both
                                                                                                                 Two-level hierarchical linear model (child,
      N classrooms = 38, N students = 466, Age = 4.        large- and small-group exercises, in which they
                                                                                                                 classroom) controlling for pretest scores,
      Treatment Groups = Treatment group                   typically experienced conversation, repetition,
                                                                                                                 age, gender, urbanicity, and whether the
      implemented the Early Literacy and Learning          print exposure, and vocabulary exercises.
                                                                                                                 teacher had a bachelor’s degree. Results =
      Model curriculum. Control group continued with       Treatment teachers attended a five-day summer
                                                                                                                 The Early Literacy and Learning Model
      normal curriculum. Sample drawn from                 training session and a one-hour weekly coaching
                                                                                                                 curriculum had a 0.253σ (0.079) impact
      low-performing elementary schools with at least      seminar. Randomization = Schools were
                                                                                                                 on reading test scores.
      one pre-K program.                                   stratified by recruitment site and randomly
                                                           assigned to treatment.
      The Early Training Project for Disadvantaged
                                                           Treatment Defined = The intervention was
      Children: A Report After Five Years (Klaus and
                                                           designed to develop attitudes conducive to school
      Gray, 1968). N students = 61, Ages = 4 - 5.                                                                Test Score = Peabody Picture Vocabulary
                                                           success, including achievement motivation,
      Treatment Groups = Two treatment groups: one                                                               Test. Regression Specification = Effect
                                                           persistence, delayed gratification, and interest in
      group of students attended a 10-week summer                                                                sizes were calculated using average
                                                           school-like activities. Treatment took place
      program plus weekly meetings whenever school                                                               growth between pretest and posttest




129
                                                           during a ten-week summer school program.
      was not in session for three years; the second                                                             scores. We report the average annual
                                                           Further, treatment students received weekly
      group received the same intervention for two                                                               effect across the two treatment groups.
                                                           in-house visits to reinforce these lessons
      years. Control students received no such                                                                   Results = Treatment had a 0.250σ (0.139)
                                                           whenever school was not in session.
      intervention. Sample drawn from “culturally                                                                impact on reading test scores.
                                                           Randomization = Students were randomly
      deprived” African American families in
                                                           assigned to one of the three conditions.
      segregated schools.
                                                           Treatment Defined = Treatment teachers were
                                                           trained in the following classroom strategies:        Test Score = Peabody Picture Vocabulary
      The Effects of a Language and Literacy
                                                           asking questions – designed to promote                Test; Expressive One-Word Picture
      Intervention on Head Start Children and Teachers
                                                           classroom discussion of the text, building            Vocabulary Test. Regression
      (Wasik et al., 2006). N preschools = 2, N teachers
                                                           vocabulary, and making connections – designed         Specification = Effect sizes were
      = 16, N students = 207. Treatment Groups =
                                                           to introduce further applications of the target       calculated using the average growth
      Treatment teachers received training in book
                                                           vocabulary. Each treatment teacher also received      between post and pretest scores. Results =
      reading and oral language strategies. Control
                                                           toys/props related to the text to incorporate into    Treatment had a 0.549σ (1.442) impact on
      teachers received no such training.
                                                           the lesson. Randomization = One preschool was         reading test scores.
                                                           randomly assigned to treatment.
      Appendix Table 1 (continued)
      Study                                                Study Design                                           Results
                                                                                                                  Test Score = Metropolitan Readiness
                                                                                                                  Test: Math and Reading subtests.
      The Effects of the Home Instruction Program for      Treatment Defined = Treatment mothers                  Regression Specification = Effect sizes
      Preschool Youngsters (HIPPY) on Children’s           received a series of books to read to their children   were calculated using posttest scores
      School Performance at the End of the Program         along with a set of guided workbooks. Books and        adjusted for age, gender, family structure,
      and One Year Later (Baker et al., 1998). N           workbook activities became successively harder         and pretest scores, as well as the parent’s
      families = 182, Age = 4. Treatment Groups =          as families progressed through the program.            race/ethnicity, education, and
      Treatment families implemented the HIPPY             Treatment mothers implemented the HIPPY                public-assistance status. We report the
      intervention. Control families received no such      intervention daily. Randomization = Families           annual impact of the program. Results =
      intervention.                                        were randomly assigned to treatment.                   Treatment had a 0.133σ (0.141) impact on
                                                                                                                  math test scores and a 0.081σ (0.141)
                                                                                                                  impact on reading test scores.
                                                                                                                  Test Score = Woodcock and
                                                           Treatment defined = The Ready to Learn
                                                                                                                  Muñoz-Sandoval test: Picture Vocabulary
                                                           Television Service supported the development of
      Using Television as a Teaching Tool: The                                                                    and Letter Word Identification subtests.
                                                           children’s educational programming on the
      Impacts of Ready to Learn Workshops on                                                                      Regression specification = OLS
                                                           Public Broadcasting Service (PBS) and also
      Parents, Educators, and the Children in their Care                                                          regression controlling for parental gender,
                                                           provided public workshops to teach parents how
      (Boller et al., 2004). N sites = 20, N                                                                      race, education, attitudes toward




130
                                                           to involve themselves with the educational
      parents/caretakers = 2,319. Treatment Groups =                                                              television, English ability, whether the
                                                           content included in these programs. The goal of
      Treatment parents/caretakers attended a Ready to                                                            family lived in a rural area, and prior
                                                           these programs was to extend those lessons
      Learn workshop. Control parents/caretakers                                                                  exposure to a Ready to Learn workshop,
                                                           introduced via the television into normal family
      received no such intervention.                                                                              as well as the child’s age and gender.
                                                           life. Randomization = Families were randomly
                                                                                                                  Results = Treatment had a 0.023σ (0.062)
                                                           assigned to treatment.
                                                                                                                  impact on reading test scores.
      Appendix Table 2 - Home Environment
      Study                                                 Study Design                                          Results
                                                            Treatment Defined = Treatment parents were
      A Comparative Study of the Reading
                                                            asked to frequently read at home with their
      Achievement of Second Grade Pupils in
                                                            children. Upon completion of a book, students         Test Score = Stanford Achievement Test:
      Programs Characterized by a Contrasting Degree
                                                            were asked to share the book with the rest of their   Paragraph Meaning and Word Meaning
      of Parent Participation (Ryan, 1964). N teachers
                                                            class via a brief presentation, in which they         subtests. Regression Specification =
      = 10, N classrooms = 10, N students = 232,
                                                            named the title and author, and then read their       Effect sizes were calculated using average
      Grade = 2. Treatment Groups = Treatment
                                                            favorite passage. Ten minutes of class time were      growth between pre and posttest scores.
      classrooms incorporated specific parental
                                                            set aside daily for these presentations.              We report the average effect size across
      involvement into their reading programs. The
                                                            Randomization = Classrooms were randomly              outcome measures. Results = Treatment
      control group incorporated no such intervention.
                                                            assigned to treatment. Eight students were            had a 0.212σ (0.634) impact on reading
      Sample drawn entirely from schools serving
                                                            dropped at random to balance the treatment and        test scores.
      primarily middle-class families, as determined by
                                                            control groups on the basis of sample size, gender
      the superintendent.
                                                            distribution, and pretest scores.
      Addressing Summer Reading Setback Among
                                                            Treatment Defined = Treatment students
      Economically Disadvantaged Elementary
                                                            attended a book fair in the spring of each school     Test Score = Florida Comprehensive
      Students (Allington et al., 2010). N districts = 2,
                                                            year, where they selected 15 books, 12 of which       Achievement Test. Regression
      N schools = 17, N students = 1,713, N years = 3.
                                                            they would receive to read over the summer.           Specification = Effect size was calculated
      Treatment Groups = Treatment students




131
                                                            Available books fell into four categories: pop        using the average posttest scores. We
      received books to read over the summer. Control
                                                            culture, popular book series, culturally relevant,    report the average annual impact. Results
      students received no such intervention. Sample
                                                            and curriculum relevant. Randomization = A            = Treatment had a 0.046σ (0.033) impact
      drawn from schools with at least 65 percent of the
                                                            total of 1,082 students were randomly assigned to     on reading test scores.
      student body eligible for free or reduced price
                                                            treatment.
      lunch.
                                                                                                                  Test Score = Gates-MacGinitie Reading
      An Investigation of the Effects of Daily,
                                                            Treatment Defined = Parents acted as tutors for       Test: Vocabulary and Reading
      Thirty-Minute Home Practice Sessions Upon
                                                            30-minute after school reading sessions at home,      Comprehension subtests; Stanford
      Reading Achievement With Second Year
                                                            five days per week. Texts, lesson plans, and          Achievement Test: Word Study Skills
      Elementary Pupils (Hirst, 1972). N schools = 2,
                                                            tutoring instructions were provided by the school.    subtest. Regression Specification = OLS
      N classrooms = 2, N students = 96, Grade = 2.
                                                            The intervention included approximately 80            regression controlling for a quadratic of
      Treatment Groups = Treatment students took
                                                            sessions. Randomization = Students were               pretest scores. We report the average
      part in at-home reading instruction with their
                                                            stratified by gender and then randomly assigned       effect size across outcome measures.
      parents. Control students received no such
                                                            to treatment.                                         Results = Treatment had a 0.113σ (0.120)
      intervention.
                                                                                                                  impact on reading test scores.
      Appendix Table 2 (continued)
      Study                                                Study Design                                         Results
                                                           Treatment Defined = The First Step program has
                                                           three core components: universal screening,
                                                           classroom instruction, and parental education.
                                                           Treatment parents and teachers received training
                                                           from program coaches to learn how to teach
                                                                                                                Test Score = Woodcock-Johnson: Letter
                                                           students replacement behaviors and properly
                                                                                                                Word Identification subtest. Regression
                                                           reward students when these behaviors were used
      Assessing the Effectiveness of First Step to                                                              Specification = Two-level hierarchical
                                                           appropriately. The intervention took place
      Success: Are Short-Term Results the First Step to                                                         linear model (student, classroom)
                                                           in-class and at home for approximately three
      Long-Term Behavioral Improvements? (Sumi et                                                               controlling for pretest scores, age, grade,
                                                           months. Randomization = Schools were
      al., 2012). N recruitment sites = 5, N schools =                                                          gender, race/ethnicity, free/reduced-lunch
                                                           randomly assigned to treatment or control.
      48, N teachers = 288, N students = 287, Grades =                                                          eligibility, special education status,
                                                           Participating teachers in all schools then
      1 - 3. Treatment Groups = Treatment students                                                              self-reported teacher knowledge and skill,
                                                           identified students that demonstrated an elevated
      took part in the First Step intervention. Control                                                         as well as scores on the Maladaptive
                                                           risk for externalizing school behavior problems
      students received no such intervention.                                                                   Behavior Index. Results = Treatment had
                                                           using Stages 1 and 2 of the Systematic Screening
                                                                                                                a -0.104σ (0.092) impact on reading test
                                                           for Behavior Disorders. The three students from
                                                                                                                scores.
                                                           each classroom with the highest average scores
                                                           across three behavioral indices were invited to




132
                                                           participate in the study. Eighty-eight percent of
                                                           invited students obtained consent from their
                                                           parents and participated in the study.
                                                           Treatment Defined = Parents in condition one
                                                                                                                Test Score = National Foundation for
                                                           agreed to listen to their child as they read aloud
                                                                                                                Education Research Test A: Reading
      Collaboration Between Teachers and Parents in        and to complete a report card detailing what their
                                                                                                                comprehension subtest. Regression
      Assisting Children’s Reading (Tizard et al.,1982).   child had read. Books were supplied to the
                                                                                                                Specification = Effect sizes were
      N schools = 6, N students = 1,867, Grades = K -      student as needed – most children took home an
                                                                                                                calculated using posttest means for each
      2, Location = London, UK, N years = 2.               average of two to four books per week. Condition
                                                                                                                school. We report the average annual
      Treatment Groups = Two treatment conditions:         two mirrored condition one, except teachers
                                                                                                                effect size across schools. Results = The
      students in condition one read aloud to their        listened to children read aloud in small groups.
                                                                                                                home collaboration treatment had a
      parents at home; students in condition two read      Randomization = Schools were assigned at
                                                                                                                0.445σ (0.906) impact on reading test
      aloud to their teachers in school. The control       random to one of the two treatment conditions.
                                                                                                                scores. The teacher help treatment had a
      group did not participate.                           Within each school, one classroom was selected
                                                                                                                -0.012σ (0.930) impact on reading test
                                                           at random to receive treatment, while the
                                                                                                                scores.
                                                           remainder served as a within-school control.
      Appendix Table 2 (continued)
      Study                                                Study Design                                         Results
                                                           Treatment Defined = Treatment students were
                                                           given six reading comprehension lessons in the
                                                           spring that focused on reading activities that
                                                           would foster engagement with books during the
                                                           summer. Parents of treatment students were
      Does Reading During the Summer Build Reading         invited to an after-school family literacy event.
                                                                                                                Test Score = Iowa Test of Basic Skills:
      Skills? Evidence from a Randomized Experiment        Treatment students were mailed ten books, one
                                                                                                                Reading Comprehension subtest.
      in 463 Classrooms (Guryan et al., 2014). N           per week, during the summer. Students were
                                                                                                                Regression Specification = OLS
      districts = 7, N schools = 59, N students = 5,319,   asked to mail a trifold, that included
                                                                                                                regressions controlling for pretest reading
      Grades = 2 - 3, Location = NC. Treatment             comprehension questions, after they read each
                                                                                                                comprehension test score and classroom
      Groups = The treatment group was given reading       book. Students in the control group received no
                                                                                                                fixed effects. Results = Treatment had a
      comprehension lessons for the summer. The            books and participated in six mathematics lessons
                                                                                                                0.014σ (0.017) impact on reading test
      control group received no such intervention.         during the spring while treatment students
                                                                                                                scores.
      Sample drawn entirely from North Carolina.           participated in reading lessons. Randomization
                                                           = Student-level randomization stratified by
                                                           classroom. The teachers teaching the
                                                           intervention-related treatment and control lessons
                                                           were also randomly assigned to new classrooms




133
                                                           for the teaching portion of the intervention.
                                                           Treatment Defined = Students participating in
                                                           the Little Books intervention at home received a
                                                           new book each week to read with their parents,
      Effect of Early Literacy Intervention on
                                                           who in turn received general guidelines of how to    Test Score = Metropolitan Reading
      Kindergarten Achievement (Phillips, 1990). N
                                                           help their children read the book. Students          Readiness Test. Regression Specification
      schools = 12, N classrooms = 18, N students =
                                                           participating in the intervention in school          = Effect sizes were calculated using the
      325, Grade = K, Location = Canada. Treatment
                                                           received a lesson plan to accompany each book.       means of posttest scores. Results = The
      Groups = Three treatment conditions: students in
                                                           Those students participating in the intervention     home treatment had a 0.000σ (0.816)
      condition one participated in the Little Books
                                                           both at home and in school would read the same       impact on reading test scores. The school
      intervention at home; students in condition two
                                                           book in both locations, using the parental           treatment had a -0.025σ (0.817) impact on
      participated in it in school only; students in
                                                           intervention to reinforce the lessons of the         reading test scores. The home and school
      condition three participated in the intervention
                                                           classroom intervention. Treatment took place         treatment had a 0.337σ (0.822) impact on
      both at home and in school. Control classrooms
                                                           in-class for 24 weeks. Randomization = Schools       reading test scores.
      maintained their normal curricula.
                                                           were grouped into blocks of four based on
                                                           location (rural, rural collector, urban) and
                                                           randomly assigned to treatment or control.
      Appendix Table 2 (continued)
      Study                                               Study Design                                           Results
                                                          Treatment Defined = Treatment students had
                                                          access to eight free books over their summer
                                                          vacation. Skill-appropriate texts were selected
                                                                                                                 Test Score = Iowa Test of Basic Skills;
                                                          based on their semantic and syntactic difficulty.
      Effects of a Voluntary Summer Reading                                                                      Dynamic Indicators of Basic Early
                                                          Book selection also took into account student
      Intervention on Reading Achievement: Results                                                               Literacy Skills: Oral Reading Fluency
                                                          reading preferences, which were assessed via a
      From a Randomized Field Trial (Kim, 2006). N                                                               subtest. Regression Specification = OLS
                                                          survey. Randomization = To construct the
      schools = 10, N students = 552, Grades = 3 - 5.                                                            regression controlling for pretest scores
                                                          sample, schools were stratified by Title I
      Treatment Groups = Treatment students                                                                      and randomization block. We report the
                                                          eligibility and ranked by their percentage of black
      received access to eight free books over the                                                               average effect size across outcome
                                                          and Latino students. Researchers then selected
      summer. Control students were not granted such                                                             measures. Results = Treatment had a
                                                          the top four Title I schools and the top six
      access.                                                                                                    0.012σ (0.040) impact on reading test
                                                          non-Title I schools with the largest percentage of
                                                                                                                 scores.
                                                          minority students. Students were then stratified
                                                          by classroom and randomly assigned to
                                                          treatment.
                                                          Treatment Defined = Students in all three
                                                          groups participated in two 45 minute math
                                                          sessions per week for ten weeks. The control




134
                                                          group worked on assignments individually during
      Effects of Parent Involvement in Isolation or in
                                                          these sessions with teaching assistants available if
      Combination with Peer Tutoring on Student
                                                          necessary. The PI group also worked individually       Test Score = Stanford Diagnostic
      Self-Concept and Mathematics Achievement
                                                          during sessions, but parents of this group would       Mathematics Test III: Computation
      (Fantuzzo et al., 1995). N students = 72, Grades
                                                          receive regular updates about the level of             subtest. Regression Specification =
      = 4 - 5, Location = Large urban city in
                                                          students’ academic effort in the classroom and         Effect sizes were calculated using means
      northeastern United States. Treatment Groups =
                                                          parent-initiated celebrations of students’             adjusted for pretest scores. Results = The
      This study had two treatment groups. One group
                                                          achievement were planned. The RPT + PI group           PI treatment had a 0.351σ (0.395) impact
      received a parental involvement intervention (PI)
                                                          followed the same classroom routine and parent         on math test scores. The RPT + PI
      and the other group received both a parental
                                                          involvement intervention, but also received peer       treatment had a 0.744σ (0.406) impact on
      involvement intervention and a reciprocal peer
                                                          tutoring. Students were randomly paired with a         math test scores.
      tutoring intervention in mathematics (RPT + PI).
                                                          tutor and rewards were given to each pairing
      The control group received neither intervention.
                                                          when team goals were met. Randomization =
                                                          Participants were stratified by pretest scores and
                                                          then randomly assigned to one of the three
                                                          groups.
      Appendix Table 2 (continued)
      Study                                                Study Design                                         Results
                                                           Treatment Defined = The Fast Track program
                                                           attempts to address school and family risk factors
      Evaluation of the First 3 Years of the Fast Track
                                                           relating to a child’s behavior. The hypothesis
      Prevention Trial with Children at High Risk for
                                                           guiding the program is that improvements in
      Adolescent Conduct Problems (Bierman et al.,                                                              Test Score = Spache Diagnostic Reading
                                                           child competencies, parenting effectiveness,
      2002). N recruitment sites = 4, N schools = 54, N                                                         Scale. Regression Specification =
                                                           school context, and communications between the
      classrooms = 401, N students = 891, Grades = 1 -                                                          ANCOVA with gender, cohort, site, and
                                                           home and the school will increase gradually over
      3, N years = 3. Treatment Groups = Treatment                                                              baseline child and parent demographics as
                                                           time and lead to a reduction in antisocial
      group participated in the Fast Track intervention                                                         covariates. We report the average annual
                                                           behavior. The program content changes each year
      program. Control group did not implement such                                                             impact. Results = Treatment had a 0.02σ
                                                           to keep pace with developmental needs of
      an intervention. Sample drawn from recruitment                                                            (0.03) impact on reading scores.
                                                           children and families. This study focuses on the
      sites deemed high-risk due to crime and poverty
                                                           impact of the first three years of the Fast Track
      statistics in the surrounding neighborhoods.
                                                           program. Randomization = Schools were
                                                           randomly assigned to treatment.
                                                                                                                Test Score = California Standardized
      Experimental Evidence on the Effects of Home         Treatment Defined = Home computers are
                                                                                                                Testing and Reporting program.
      Computers on Academic Achievement among              provided to treatment students with no strings
                                                                                                                Regression Specification = OLS
      Schoolchildren (Fairlie and Robinson, 2013). N       attached. Randomization = Any student who
                                                                                                                regression controlling for sampling strata,




135
      districts = 5, N schools = 15, N students = 1,123,   reported not having a home computer at the
                                                                                                                school-year, and first quarter grades.
      Grades = 6 - 10, N years = 2. Treatment Groups       beginning of the year was eligible for the study.
                                                                                                                Results = Treatment had a -0.06σ (0.05)
      = Treatment students received computers and          Students were stratified by school and then
                                                                                                                impact on math test scores and a -0.05σ
      control students did not.                            randomly assigned to treatment or control.
                                                                                                                (0.05) impact on reading test scores.
      Appendix Table 2 (continued)
      Study                                                Study Design                                         Results
                                                           Treatment Defined = Reading instruction
                                                           entailed 30 minutes of small-group or individual
                                                           tutoring daily for two years in addition to normal
                                                           class time. The instruction utilized the Reading
                                                           Mastery and Corrective Reading curricula, both
      Fostering Development of Reading Skills              of which focus on developing fluent                  Test Score = Woodcock-Johnson Revised:
      Through Supplemental Instruction: Results for        word-recognition. Social behavior interventions      Letter Word Identification, Word Attack,
      Hispanic and Non-Hispanic Students (Gunn et          sought to reduce acting-out behaviors by teaching    Passage Comprehension, and Reading
      al., 2005). N schools = 13, N students = 299,        and reinforcing appropriate classroom behaviors.     Vocabulary subtests. Regression
      Grades = K - 3, Location = OR. Treatment             Parent instruction entailed group sessions, in       Specification = Effect sizes were
      Groups = Students in the treatment group             which parents reviewed successful child              calculated using the average posttest
      received supplemental reading instruction and a      interaction and communication strategies.            scores for each group. We report the
      social behavior intervention; parents of treatment   Randomization = To be eligible for the study,        annual impact across all subjects. Results
      students received parenting training. The control    students had to either perform below grade level     = Treatment had a 0.170σ (0.133) impact
      group did not receive such instruction.              on literacy assessments or exhibit aggressive        on reading test scores.
                                                           social behaviors. Eligible students were grouped
                                                           by community, grade, and ethnicity and then
                                                           paired by reading ability as determined by the




136
                                                           pretest. One student from each pairing was
                                                           randomly assigned to treatment.
                                                           Treatment Defined = Treatment parents attended
                                                           meetings to learn how to involve themselves with
                                                           their children’s education both at home and at
      Getting Parents Involved: A Field Experiment in      school. Parents attended at least three initial
                                                                                                                Test Score = District standardized tests.
      Deprived Schools (Avvisati et al., 2014). N          meetings, the last of which took place after
                                                                                                                Regression Specification = OLS
      schools = 34, N classrooms = 183, N families =       receipt of the end-of-term report card, and taught
                                                                                                                regressions controlling for school fixed
      970, Grade = 6, Location = Paris, France.            parents how to interpret and respond to their
                                                                                                                effects. Results = Treatment had a 0.020σ
      Treatment Groups = Treatment parents attended        child’s academic performance. After the third
                                                                                                                (0.060) impact on math test scores and a
      meetings learning how to get involved with their     session, parents could attend additional meetings
                                                                                                                -0.035σ (0.064) impact on reading test
      child’s education. Control parents were not          related to parenting strategies, use of the
                                                                                                                scores.
      invited to such meetings.                            school-related internet, or sessions designed for
                                                           non-French speakers. Randomization =
                                                           Classrooms were stratified by school and
                                                           randomly assigned to treatment.
      Appendix Table 2 (continued)
      Study                                              Study Design                                        Results
                                                         Treatment Defined = The Transition
                                                         Demonstration Project was designed as a
                                                         comprehensive follow-up to the traditional Head
                                                         Start program that focused on the environment in
                                                         which children prepare for school. The program
                                                         had three main goals: first, preparing schools to
      Head Start Children’s Entry into Public School:    meet the needs of children at varying levels of
                                                                                                             Test Score = Woodcock-Johnson: Letter
      A Report on the National Head Start/Public         development; second, preparing families to
                                                                                                             Word Identification, Passage
      School Early Childhood Transition                  support the continued growth and academic
                                                                                                             Comprehension, Mathematics
      Demonstration Study (Ramey et al., 2000). N        development of their children; and third,
                                                                                                             Computation, and Applied Problems
      sites = 31, N schools = 413, N families = 7,515,   preparing entire communities to invest in
                                                                                                             subtests. Regression Specification =
      Grades = K - 3, N years = 6. Treatment Groups      education for families and children. To meet
                                                                                                             Effect sizes were calculated using the
      = Treatment group received Transition              these goals, local coordinators were granted the
                                                                                                             average posttest scores. Results =
      Demonstration services. Control group received     freedom to adopt measures they deemed
                                                                                                             Treatment had a -0.015σ (0.131) impact
      no such intervention. Sample drawn from            appropriate within the context of their
                                                                                                             on math scores and a -0.018σ (0.131)
      families previously enrolled in the Head Start     communities. The intervention was introduced
                                                                                                             impact on reading scores.
      program.                                           after children had completed the Head Start
                                                         program and were enrolled in Kindergarten.




137
                                                         Randomization = Within each site, schools were
                                                         placed into one of two blocks based on size and
                                                         ethnic composition of their student body. One
                                                         block from each site was randomly assigned to
                                                         treatment.
      Appendix Table 2 (continued)
      Study                                               Study Design                                           Results
                                                          Treatment Defined = This study investigated the
                                                          impact of the Self-Sufficiency Project (SSP) on
                                                          child achievement. SSP offered a temporary
                                                          earnings supplement for up to three years to
                                                          individuals in British Columbia and New
                                                          Brunswick, Canada. In order to participate,
                                                          individuals had to be single parents who had been
      Making Work Pay: Final Report on the
                                                          on income assistance for at least one year and left
      Self-Sufficiency Project for Long-Term Welfare                                                             Test score = Peabody Picture Vocabulary
                                                          income assistance for full-time work. The
      Recipients (Michalopoulos et al., 2002). N                                                                 Test-Revised. Regression Specification =
                                                          supplement was given in addition to earnings
      parents = 5729, Location = British Columbia and                                                            Researchers report mean test scores for
                                                          from work. Participants continued to receive
      New Brunswick, Canada. Treatment Groups =                                                                  each experimental group. We report
                                                          payouts as long as they stayed employed
      Families assigned to treatment were given the                                                              average annual impact. Results = The
                                                          full-time (up to three-years). For full-time
      opportunity to participate in a welfare program                                                            SSP had a 0.036σ (0.058) impact on
                                                          workers making minimum wage, the supplement
      that increased their income. Control families                                                              reading test scores.
                                                          would approximately double their income.
      were not offered enrollment into this program.
                                                          Randomization = From the entire pool of
                                                          eligible single-parents, the researchers randomly
                                                          selected a sample to contact, interview, and invite




138
                                                          to be part of the SSP study. Individuals from this
                                                          sample that completed a survey and signed a
                                                          consent form were then randomly assigned to
                                                          treatment and control groups.
                                                          Treatment Defined = The LFA intervention
                                                          emphasized rapid job placement, so that                Test Score = Woodcock-Johnson-Revised:
      National Evaluation of Welfare-to-Work              treatment subjects gained exposure to the job          Broad reading and math subtests.
      Strategies (Hamilton et al., 2001). N recruitment   market and developed workplace habits and              Regression Specification = Effect sizes
      sites = 7, N families = 2,332, Ages = 3 - 5.        skills. The HCD intervention focused on                were calculated using posttest means
      Treatment Groups = Two treatment conditions:        developing education and basic skills prior to job     adjusted for baseline characteristics. We
      condition one implemented a Labor Force             placement, so that treatment subjects were more        report annual impacts. Results = The LFA
      Attachment (LFA) intervention; condition two        likely to excel at and keep their jobs.                treatment had a 0.009σ (0.041) impact on
      implemented a Human Capital Development             Randomization = In four recruitment sites,             math test scores and a 0.007σ (0.042)
      intervention (HCD). The control group               applicants were randomly assigned to one of the        impact on reading test scores. The HCD
      implemented no such intervention. Sample            three conditions. In three of the recruitment sites,   treatment had a 0.007σ (0.042) impact on
      composed entirely of welfare recipients.            the program administrators picked their treatment      math test scores and a -0.001σ (0.043)
                                                          of choice, and applicants were randomly assigned       impact on reading test scores.
                                                          to either treatment or control.
      Appendix Table 2 (continued)
      Study                                                 Study Design                                           Results
                                                                                                                   Test Score = The Woodcock - Johnson
                                                            Treatment Defined = Through a lottery for              Revised battery of tests. Regression
                                                            housing vouchers among families initially living       Specification = OLS regression of test
      Neighborhoods and Academic Achievement:
                                                            in public housing, Moving To Opportunity               score on a treatment group assignment
      Results from the Moving to Opportunity
                                                            (MTO) randomly assigned families into three            indicator and baseline covariates (child
      Experiment (Sanbonmatsu et al., 2006). N
                                                            groups. Families in an “experimental” group            demographics, child health problems,
      children = 5,074, Ages = 6 - 20. Location =
                                                            received housing vouchers eligible for use in          child education, adult and household
      Boston, Baltimore, Chicago, Los Angeles, and
                                                            low-poverty neighborhoods. Families in a               characteristics). Results = The effect of
      New York. Treatment Groups = Treatment
                                                            “Section 8” group received traditional housing         the experimental treatment was 0.006σ
      families received one of two types of housing
                                                            vouchers without neighborhood restrictions.            (0.014) on reading test scores and -0.002σ
      vouchers, “experimental” or “Section 8”. Control
                                                            Families in the control group did not receive a        (0.013) on math test scores. The effect of
      families did not receive a housing voucher.
                                                            voucher, but were still eligible for public housing.   the Section 8 group was 0.006σ (0.015) on
                                                            Randomization = Random lottery.                        reading test scores and -0.007σ (0.014) on
                                                                                                                   math test scores.
                                                            Treatment Defined =Tutor training consisted of
                                                            two 4-hour sessions in July, follow-up meetings
                                                                                                                   Test Score = Comprehensive Test of Basic
      Parent Tutoring as a Supplement to                    twice a week during the summer, and follow-up
                                                                                                                   Skills; Woodcock-Johnson
      Compensatory Education for First Grade                meetings once a month during the school year




139
                                                                                                                   Psycho-Educational Battery. Regression
      Children (Mehran and White, 1988). N students         that provided teaching methods for reading.
                                                                                                                   Specification = Effect sizes were
      = 76, Grade = 1.Treatment Groups = Mothers of         Parents were then advised to tutor children for 30
                                                                                                                   calculated using the means of posttest
      students assigned to the treatment group received     minutes twice a week during the school year.
                                                                                                                   scores adjusted for the covariance of
      tutor training. Mothers of students assigned to the   This study lasted through April of the school
                                                                                                                   pretest scores. We report the average
      control group received no training. Sample            year. Randomization = Researchers randomly
                                                                                                                   effect size across outcome measures.
      composed entirely of at-risk students as              assigned one of the two lowest scoring students
                                                                                                                   Results = The treatment had a 0.164σ
      determined by their teacher.                          to the treatment group and the other to the control
                                                                                                                   (0.281) impact on reading test scores.
                                                            group. Students with the third and fourth lowest
                                                            scores were similarly assigned, and so on.
      Appendix Table 2 (continued)
      Study                                                 Study Design                                          Results
                                                            Treatment Defined = All treatment parents
      Parent Tutoring in Reading Using Literature and       participated in a single 1-1.5 hour training
      Curriculum Materials: Impact on Student               session. For both treatment groups, parents
      Reading Achievement (Powell-Smith et al.,             conducted four 20 minute tutoring sessions with
                                                                                                                  Test Score = Test of Reading Fluency.
      2000). N students = 36, Grade = 2, Location =         students every week for 15 weeks. Parents in the
                                                                                                                  Regression Specification = ANCOVA
      rural/suburban school in the Pacific Northwest.       LB treatment group received a list of books to
                                                                                                                  was used to analyze treatment effects.
      Treatment Groups = Two treatment groups: the          read during the tutoring session. Parents in the
                                                                                                                  Results = The LB treatment had a -0.344σ
      first received literature-based home tutoring from    CB treatment group received tutoring materials
                                                                                                                  (0.411) impact on reading test scores and
      parents (LB) and the second received                  based on the reading text that students received
                                                                                                                  the CB treatment had a -0.174σ (0.409)
      curriculum-based home tutoring from parents           instruction on in the classroom. Students in this
                                                                                                                  impact on reading test scores.
      (CB). The control group received normal               group could either review the story read in class
      classroom instruction. Sample composed of low         or select a new story. Randomization = Each
      readers, as determined by their teachers.             parent/student pair was randomly assigned to one
                                                            of the three groups.
                                                            Treatment Defined = The SAFEChildren
                                                            program is designed to develop a broad support
                                                            network for children deemed at-risk of
                                                            developing anti-social behaviors due to their




140
                                                            neighborhood. Treatment parents met in groups
                                                            weekly to work on parenting skills, family
      Supporting Families in a High-Risk Setting:                                                                 Test Score = Woodcock-Johnson
                                                            relationships, understanding and managing
      Proximal Effects of the SAFEChildren Preventive                                                             Diagnostic Reading Battery. Regression
                                                            developmental and situational challenges,
      Intervention (Tolan et al., 2004). N schools = 7, N                                                         Specification = Two-level hierarchical
                                                            increasing support among parents, engaging the
      families = 424, Grade = 1, Location = inner-city                                                            linear model (year, child) controlling for
                                                            school, and managing neighborhood issues like
      Chicago. Treatment Groups = Treatment                                                                       family income, parental marriage status,
                                                            violence. Treatment students underwent
      families took part in the SAFEChildren                                                                      gender, ethnicity, and school fixed effects.
                                                            30-minute reading tutoring sessions twice
      intervention program for 22 weeks. Control                                                                  Results = Researchers found a 0.188σ
                                                            weekly. Randomization = In the spring, parents
      group received no such intervention.                                                                        (0.068) effect on reading scores.
                                                            of kindergarten students enrolled in the seven
                                                            participating schools were invited to participate
                                                            in the study the following school year. Families
                                                            that agreed to participate were stratified by their
                                                            child’s kindergarten classroom and 55 percent
                                                            were randomly assigned to treatment.
      Appendix Table 2 (continued)
      Study                                               Study Design                                         Results
                                                          Treatment Defined = The study investigated the
                                                          impact of a negative income tax program on child
      The Effects of a Negative Income Tax on School      achievement. The major features of this program      Test score = Iowa Test of Basic Skills:
      Performance: Results of an Experiment               were that participants were guaranteed a             Reading subtest. Regression
      (Maynard & Murnane, 1979). N students = 851,        minimum annual income and there was a benefit        Specification = Researchers used a
      Grades = 4 - 10, Location = Gary, IN. Treatment     reduction rate (the amount by which the negative     multiple linear regression model
      Groups = Families assigned to the treatment         income tax payment was reduced for each dollar       controlling for pretest scores, child
      group received a negative income tax and the        of income a family earned). It was therefore         baseline characteristics, family baseline
      control group families continued with the typical   expected that a negative income tax for poor         characteristics, and school characteristics.
      income tax system. All participants were            families would decrease parents’ employment          Results = Treatment had a 0.045σ (0.061)
      impoverished and black.                             and increase total family income.                    impact on reading test scores.
                                                          Randomization = Families were randomly
                                                          assigned to treatment and control.
                                                          Treatment Defined = Treatment students
                                                          received books matched to their personal
      The Effects of a Voluntary Summer Reading           preferences and reading level. Additionally, upon    Test Score = Stanford Achievement Test.
      Intervention on Reading Activities and Reading      completion of a book, children were instructed to    Regression Specification = Effect size
      Achievement (Kim, 2007). N students = 331,          send a postcard to their teachers answering          was calculated using average growth




141
      Grades = 1 - 5. Treatment Groups = Treatment        questions about the text. Children were instructed   between pre and posttest scores. Results =
      students received books to read over the summer.    to read ten books over the summer.                   Treatment had a 0.037σ (0.120) impact on
      Control students received no books.                 Randomization = Students were stratified by          reading test scores.
                                                          grade and classroom and then randomly assigned
                                                          to treatment.
                                                          Treatment Defined = Parents received training
                                                          once a week for 30 minutes over 10 weeks.            Test Score = Dynamic Indicators of Basic
      The Effects of Training Parents in Teaching         Parents taught their children for 30 minutes daily   Early Learning Skills: Phoneme
      Phonemic Awareness on the Phonemic                  over ten weeks. Randomization = Eligible             Segmentation Fluency and Nonsense
      Awareness and Early Reading of Struggling           parents came from federally-subsidized housing       Word Fluency subtests. Regression
      Readers (Warren, 2009). N parents = 10, N           and had children who scored in the bottom 20         Specification = Effect sizes were
      students = 10, Grades = K - 1. Treatment            percent of the Dynamic Indicators of Basic Early     calculated using the average difference in
      Groups = Treatment parents received instruction     Learning Skills (DIBELS) Letter-Naming               pre and posttest scores. The effect sizes
      on how to educate their child in phonemic           Fluency subtest and below ten initial sounds in      for the two subtests were averaged
      awareness. Control parents received instruction     the DIBELS Initial Sounds Fluency subtest. 30        together. Results = Treatment had a
      in reading aloud to their children.                 potentially eligible parents were identified; ten    0.233σ (0.639) impact on reading test
                                                          enrolled. Half of these parents were randomly        scores.
                                                          assigned to the treatment group.
      Appendix Table 2 (continued)
      Study                                                Study Design                                           Results
                                                           Treatment Defined = Treatment entailed
                                                           establishment of the following elements:
                                                           classroom literacy centers – quiet spaces stocked
      The Impact of a Literature-Based Program on          with roughly five to eight books per child; three
                                                                                                                  Test Score = California Test of Basic
      Literacy Achievement, Use of Literature, and         teacher-guided literature activities per week,
                                                                                                                  Skills: Language and Reading subtests.
      Attitudes of Children from Minority                  including discussion of past texts and
                                                                                                                  Regression Specification = The effect
      Backgrounds (Morrow, 1992). N schools = 2, N         composition of original written work; and an
                                                                                                                  size was calculated for each subtest using
      classrooms = 9, N students = 166, Grade = 2.         independent reading and writing period three to
                                                                                                                  the average growth between post and pre
      Treatment Groups = Two treatment groups:             five times weekly. Further, children in the
                                                                                                                  test scores. The resulting effect sizes were
      treatment group one received literature-based        reading-at-home group read at home at least
                                                                                                                  averaged across subtests. Results =
      instruction in school and participated in a          twice weekly with their parents. Randomization
                                                                                                                  Treatment one had a 0.251σ (0.820)
      reading-at-home program; treatment group two         = Eligible classrooms were randomly assigned to
                                                                                                                  impact on reading test scores and
      received just the school-based instruction. The      one of the three conditions. To be eligible,
                                                                                                                  treatment two had a 0.046σ (0.817)
      control group continued with their regular           classrooms had to meet the following criteria:
                                                                                                                  impact on reading test scores.
      curricula.                                           literature was not an integral part of the reading
                                                           curriculum, teachers had no previous training
                                                           from the district in literature-based instruction,
                                                           and none had well-designed literacy centers.




142
                                                           Treatment Defined = HELP, the parent tutor
                                                           training, consisted of methods to assist first grade
                                                           students with beginning reading. The training
                                                           consisted of a one-hour home visit where
      The Impact of Parental Training in Methods to
                                                           researchers discussed the importance of reading,
      Aid Beginning Reading on Reading Achievement
                                                           factors associated with reading, and methods to        Test Score = Gates-MacGinitie Reading
      and Reading Attitudes of First-Grade Students
                                                           aid reading at home. Randomization = Students          Test. Regression Specification = The
      (Peeples, 1996). N students = 50, Grade = 1,
                                                           in this study were chosen from a population of         effect size was calculated using average
      Location = Madison County, MS. Treatment
                                                           800 students entering the first grade for the first    posttest scores. Results = Treatment had a
      Groups = Treatment group parents received
                                                           time and who were participating in a beginning         0.949σ (0.298) impact on reading test
      Home Enrichment Learning Program (HELP) or
                                                           reading program in Madison County School               scores.
      tutor training, and control group parents received
                                                           District. Fifty students were then chosen
      no training.
                                                           randomly and independently from a population
                                                           using Cohen’s (1965) formula. They were
                                                           assigned to the control or treatment groups using
                                                           a computer-generated list of numbers.
      Appendix Table 2 (continued)
      Study                                               Study Design                                         Results
                                                          Treatment Defined = Parents in the treatment
      Towards Reduced Poverty Across Generations:                                                              Test score = New York state tests.
                                                          group were offered a set of 22 incentives ranging
      Early Findings from New York City’s Conditional                                                          Regression Specification = OLS
                                                          from 20 to 600 dollars based on
      Cash Transfer Program (Riccio et al., 2010). N                                                           controlling for characteristics of families.
                                                          education-focused conditions (e.g. children’s
      families = 4750, N students = 11,311, Grades = 4,                                                        Standard errors adjusted to account for
                                                          school attendance, test scores, attendance at
      7, and 9, Location = New York City. Treatment                                                            multiple observations per family. We
                                                          parent-teacher conferences), health-focused
      Groups = Treatment parents received incentives,                                                          report the average annual impact. Results
                                                          conditions (e.g. maintaining health insurance.
      while control parents did not. Sample drawn                                                              = Treatment had a -0.005σ (0.022) impact
                                                          going to doctor, dentist), and workforce-focused
      from districts in New York City with families at                                                         on math test scores and a 0.005σ (0.023)
                                                          conditions (e.g.working or being in job training).
      or below 130 percent of federal poverty level.                                                           impact on reading test scores.
                                                          Randomization = Random lottery.




143
      Appendix Table 3 - Schools
      Study                                              Study Design                                          Results
                                                         Treatment Defined = The Johns Hopkins Center
                                                         for Data-Driven Reform in Education (CDDRE)
                                                         worked with treatment districts to implement
                                                         quarterly student benchmark assessments and
                                                         provide district and school leaders with extensive
                                                         training on interpreting and using the data to
                                                         guide reform. Control districts did not receive       Test Score = Various state-administered
                                                         any training or consultants. Each district received   tests standardized at the state level.
      A Multistate District-Level Cluster Randomized
                                                         one year of treatment, but treatment was              Regression Specification = Two-level
      Trial of the Impact of Data-Driven Reform on
                                                         implemented in waves. Randomization = The             hierarchical linear model (school, district)
      Reading and Mathematics Achievement (Carlson
                                                         CDDRE contacted state departments of education        controlling for pretest score at the school
      et al., 2011). N states = 7, N districts = 59, N
                                                         in seven states - AL, AZ, IN, MS, OH, PA, and         level and school level demographics as
      schools = 538, N students = 31,110, Grades = 3 -
                                                         TN - and asked them to nominate districts with        well as district level demographics.
      8. Treatment Groups = The treatment group
                                                         large numbers of low-performing schools.              Results = Treatment had a 0.059σ (0.029)
      received data driven instruction lessons and the
                                                         District officials were contacted and those that      impact on math test scores. Treatment had
      control group did not receive any such lessons.
                                                         agreed were included in the randomization             a 0.033σ (0.020) impact on reading test
                                                         procedure. District officials then identified         scores.
                                                         schools within their district that they would want




144
                                                         to include in treatment. Generally, low
                                                         performing schools were chosen. After this
                                                         recruitment process, the randomization process
                                                         occurred at the district level. The randomization
                                                         was stratified by state and recruitment wave.
      Appendix Table 3 (continued)
      Study                                                 Study Design                                          Results
                                                            Treatment Defined = The Pathway Project
                                                            teaches teachers how to integrate cognitive
                                                            strategy instruction and process writing to
                                                            develop students’ text-based analytical writing
                                                            abilities. Teachers assigned to a Pathway Project
      A Randomized Experiment of a Cognitive
                                                            classroom attended a mix of full-day and
      Strategies Approach to Text-Based Analytical
                                                            after-school sessions for intensive training and      Test score = California Standards Test.
      Writing for Mainstreamed Latino English
                                                            support from Pathway Project developers over the      Regression Specification = Three-level
      Language Learners in Grades 6-12 (Kim et al.,
                                                            course of a school year (46 total hours of            hierarchical linear model (student,
      2011). N schools = 15, N teachers = 103, N
                                                            training). Each participating teacher was paid a      classroom, school randomization block)
      students ≈ 3,000, Grades = 6 - 11, Location =
                                                            $1,000 stipend to complete all research activities.   controlling for pretest scores. Results =
      Santa Ana Unified School District. Treatment
                                                            Teachers in the control group were given              Treatment had a 0.046σ (0.035) impact on
      Groups = Treatment teachers were selected to
                                                            classroom resources and received the Pathway          reading test scores.
      participate in Pathway Project professional
                                                            professional development in the third year of the
      development. Control teachers were not.
                                                            study. Randomization = Classrooms were
                                                            assigned to grade-school blocks. Within these
                                                            blocks, classrooms were randomly assigned to
                                                            either the Pathway intervention or the control




145
                                                            group.
                                                            Treatment Defined = Cooperative learning is
                                                            designed to change student attitudes toward
                                                            academic success by focusing on group
      A Study of Cooperative Learning in Mathematics,       achievement. In treatment classrooms, students
      Writing, and Reading in the Intermediate Grades:      were organized into teams of similar ability and      Test Score = Iowa Test of Basic Skills:
      A Focus Upon Achievement, Attitudes, and              completed group assignments in reading, writing,      Mathematics and Reading subtests.
      Self-Esteem by Gender, Race, and Ability Group        and mathematics following an initial presentation     Regression Specification = Posttest
      (Glassman, 1989). N schools = 2, N classrooms =       by the teacher. These treatment classes               scores adjusted for pretest scores were
      24, N students = 441, Grades = 3 - 5, Location =      supplanted normal reading, writing, and math          used to calculate effect sizes. Results =
      Bay Shore, NY. Treatment Groups = Treatment           courses for the school year. Treatment teachers       Treatment had a 0.011σ (0.408) impact on
      classrooms incorporated cooperative learning          underwent an 11-week training period prior to         math test scores and a 0.040σ (0.408)
      strategies into their curricula. Control classrooms   implementation of the experiment.                     impact on reading test scores.
      continued with their normal curricula.                Randomization = Classes were stratified by
                                                            grade and matched based on pretest performance.
                                                            One class from each pairing was assigned at
                                                            random to treatment.
      Appendix Table 3 (continued)
      Study                                               Study Design                                         Results
                                                          Treatment Defined = This study utilizes random
                                                          admission lotteries to investigate the impacts of
                                                          charter and pilot schools on students’               Test Score = Massachusetts
                                                          achievement. A charter school is a public school     Comprehensive Assessment System:
                                                          that operates fairly autonomously within             Mathematics and Reading subtests.
                                                          guidelines laid down by its state. Charter schools   Regression Specification = OLS
      Accountability and Flexibility in Public Schools:
                                                          are generally free to manage day-to-day              regressions. Charter school regressions
      Evidence from Boston’s Charters and Pilots
                                                          operations, hire teachers and let them go, choose    include dummies for (combination of
      (Abdulkadiroglu et al., 2009). N students ≈
                                                          salary schedules, and make curricular decisions.     schools applied to)*(year of application).
      11,000, Grades = K - 12, Location = Boston,
                                                          Pilot schools have some of the independence of       Pilot school regressions include dummies
      MA. Treatment Groups = Students in the
                                                          charter schools – they determine their own           for (first choice)*(year of
      charter treatment won admission lotteries to
                                                          budgets, staffing, curricula, and scheduling.        application)*(walk zone status). Results =
      oversubscribed charter schools. Students in the
                                                          However, pilots remain part of the Boston school     Winning a lottery to a charter school had a
      pilot treatment won admission lotteries to
                                                          district and their teachers are Boston Teachers      0.337σ (0.071) impact on math test scores
      oversubscribed pilot schools. Control students
                                                          Union members covered by most contract               and a 0.201σ (0.068) impact on reading
      were losers of the respective lotteries.
                                                          provisions related to pay and seniority. Pilot       test scores. Winning a lottery to a pilot
                                                          schools are subject to external review, but the      school had a -0.026σ (0.069) impact on
                                                          review process to date appears to be less            math test scores and a 0.052σ (0.067)




146
                                                          extensive and structured than the external state     impact on reading test scores.
                                                          charter reviews. Randomization = Student
                                                          admission lotteries.
                                                                                                               Test Score = Iowa Test of Basic Skills:
      Alternative Routes to Teaching: The Impacts of      Treatment Defined = This study is intended to
                                                                                                               Mathematics and Reading subtests.
      Teach for America (TFA) on Student                  estimate the impact of having a TFA teacher. The
                                                                                                               Regression Specification = The ITT
      Achievement and Other Outcomes (Glazerman et        control group consisted of those teachers who
                                                                                                               estimates are estimated using a nested
      al., 2006). N schools = 17, N classrooms = 100,     were not a member of the TFA corps at the time
                                                                                                               model with the student-level model nested
      N students = 1,800, Grades = 1 - 5, Regions =       of the study or at any time in the past.
                                                                                                               in the block-level model. The model
      Baltimore, Chicago, Compton, Houston, New           Randomization = Within each region, schools
                                                                                                               controls for student-level characteristics
      Orleans, and the Mississippi Delta Treatment        were randomly selected. Students were stratified
                                                                                                               and block fixed-effects. Results =
      Groups = Treatment students received teaching       by grades within school and randomly assigned
                                                                                                               Treatment had a 0.15σ (0.04) impact on
      from a TFA teacher. Control students received       to classrooms either taught by a TFA or non-TFA
                                                                                                               math test scores and 0.03σ (0.04) impact
      teaching from a non-TFA teacher.                    teacher.
                                                                                                               on reading test scores.
      Appendix Table 3 (continued)
      Study                                               Study Design                                          Results
                                                          Treatment Defined = The Distar program is a
                                                          professional development program designed to
      An Evaluation of a Pilot Program in Reading for     change how teachers help struggling,                  Test Score = Gates-MacGinitie Reading
      Culturally Disadvantaged First Grade Students       disadvantaged youth. The program emphasizes a         Test: Vocabulary and Comprehension
      (Bowers, 1972). N schools = 4, N students = 200,    systematic approach to decoding instruction, in       subtests. Regression Specification = For
      Grade = 1. Treatment Groups = Treatment             which children learn the standard rules of            each outcome measure, effect sizes were
      classrooms implemented the Distar reading           reading. Treatment teachers attended a one-week       calculated using the posttest means
      program. Control classrooms continued with          instructional workshop prior to the start of the      adjusted for pretest scores. We report the
      their normal curricula. Sample drawn from           school year. Randomization = Researchers              average effect across all outcome
      students eligible for Title 1 assistance, and who   randomly selected a sample of 50 eligible             measures. Results = Treatment had a
      scored below the 25th percentile on the             students from each school. Within each of these       0.257σ (0.181) impact on reading test
      Metropolitan Reading Readiness Test.                samples, students were randomly assigned to           scores.
                                                          treatment. Teachers were randomly assigned to
                                                          instruct treatment classrooms.
                                                          Treatment Defined = RR is an early intervention
                                                          for low performing students. It consists of
                                                          extensive professional development for the
                                                          teachers and one-on-one 30-minute daily lessons




147
                                                          to accelerate the literacy learning of these          Test Score = The Burt Word Reading Test
                                                          children. Randomization = Teachers in the 10          and the Neale Analysis of Reading
      An Evaluation of Reading Recovery (Center et
                                                          participating schools identified 20 students          Ability. Regression Specification = For
      al., 1995). N schools = 10, N students = 70,
                                                          whom they considered to be at the greatest risk of    each outcome measure, effect sizes were
      Grade = K - 1, Location = New South Wales,
                                                          failure. These students were tested using the Clay    calculated using the growth between
      Australia. Treatment Groups = Treatment
                                                          Diagnostic Survey. The 12 lowest scoring              pretest and posttest scores. We report the
      students participated in Reading Recovery (RR).
                                                          students from each school were randomly               average effect across all outcome
      Control students continued with
                                                          assigned to three groups: the treatment group, the    measures. Results = The impact of
      business-as-usual.
                                                          control group, or a holding group. The holding        receiving RR was 1.582σ (0.321) on
                                                          group was excluded from the analysis and solely       reading test scores.
                                                          existed to delay the entry of control students into
                                                          the RR program (when treatment students
                                                          completed/dropped out of RR, they were replaced
                                                          by a holding student).
      Appendix Table 3 (continued)
      Study                                              Study Design                                        Results
                                                         Treatment Defined = TC programs place
                                                         teachers in classrooms only after they have
                                                         completed teaching certification requirements
                                                         while AC programs place teachers in schools         Test score = The California Achievement
      An Evaluation of Teachers Trained Through          before they have completed their requirements.      Test, 5th Edition. Regression
      Different Routes to Certification: Final Report    Randomization = To be eligible, teachers had to     Specification = OLS regression that
      (Constantine et al., 2009). N districts = 20, N    (1) be relative novices (three or fewer years of    controls for student characteristics (pretest
      schools = 63, N teachers = 174, N students =       teaching experience prior to 2004–2005, five or     scores in all subjects, race, gender, and
      2,610, Grades = K - 5, Location = CA, IL, WI,      fewer years prior to 2005–2006); (2) teach in       free/reduced price lunch status), years of
      LA, GA, NJ, and TX. Treatment Groups =             regular classrooms (for example, not in special     teaching experience, and school
      Treatment students were taught by alternatively    education classrooms); and (3) deliver both         fixed-effects. Results = AC teachers had
      certified (AC) teachers. Control students were     reading and math instruction to all their own       an impact of -0.05σ (0.032) on math test
      taught by traditional certified (TC) teachers.     students. In the study schools, every grade that    scores and -0.01σ (0.050) on reading test
                                                         contained at least one eligible AC teacher and      scores.
                                                         one eligible TC teacher was included. Students in
                                                         these study grades were randomly assigned to be
                                                         in the class of an AC or a TC teacher.
                                                         Treatment Defined = TAP attempts to increase




148
                                                         school and teacher quality through incentives.
                                                         Teachers receive performance bonuses based on
                                                         value added to student achievement and
                                                         classroom observations. Principals receive          Test Score = Illinois Standards
                                                         bonuses based on school-wide value added and        Achievement Test: Mathematics and
      An Evaluation of the Teacher Advancement
                                                         quality of program implementation. Other school     Reading subtests. Regression
      Program (TAP) in Chicago: Year One Impact
                                                         staff receive incentives based on school-wide       Specification = Effect sizes were
      Report (Glazerman et al., 2009). N schools = 16,
                                                         value added. TAP also includes weekly meetings      calculated using posttest means adjusted
      N students = 3,501, Grades = K - 8, Location =
                                                         of teachers and a teacher mentor component.         for family poverty, special needs,
      Chicago, IL. Treatment Groups = Treatment
                                                         Randomization = Schools were grouped by             language, race/ethnicity, grade level, and
      schools implemented the Teacher Advancement
                                                         readiness to participate and then randomly          over normal age for a grade. Results =
      Program (TAP). Control schools continued with
                                                         assigned to treatment or control (schools with      Treatment had a -0.04σ (0.06) impact on
      business-as-usual.
                                                         higher readiness had a higher probability of        math test scores and -0.04σ (0.05) impact
                                                         selection). Analyses are weighted to account for    on reading test scores.
                                                         this. Within each group, constrained
                                                         minimization was utilized to ensure that schools
                                                         were balanced across school size, predominant
                                                         race, and geographic location.
      Appendix Table 3 (continued)
      Study                                               Study Design                                        Results
                                                                                                              Test Score = Woodcock Reading Mastery
                                                                                                              Test-Revised: Basic Reading Skills and
      An Investigation of the Effects of a
                                                                                                              Reading Comprehension subtests;
      Comprehensive Reading Intervention on the           Treatment Defined = All students followed the
                                                                                                              Dynamic Indicators of Basic Early
      Beginning Reading Skills of First Graders at Risk   district’s core curriculum. Treatment students
                                                                                                              Literacy Skills: Phoneme Segmentation
      for Emotional and Behavioral Disorders              received the Sound Partners intervention, which
                                                                                                              Fluency, Nonsense Word Fluency, and
      (Mooney, 2003). N schools = 7, N students = 47,     entails approximately 30 minutes of reading
                                                                                                              Oral Reading Fluency subtests.
      Grade = 1. Treatment Groups = Treatment             tutoring five times weekly throughout the school
                                                                                                              Regression Specification = For each
      students received the Sound Partners reading        year in addition to the normal curriculum. The
                                                                                                              outcome measure, effect sizes were
      intervention program. The control group received    intervention targets phonological awareness,
                                                                                                              calculated using the average growth
      no such intervention. Sample drawn from             letter-sound relationships, word identification,
                                                                                                              between posttest and pretest scores. We
      students at risk of developing emotional and        text reading, and writing. Randomization =
                                                                                                              report the average effect across all
      behavioral disorders as determined by both their    Students were randomly assigned to treatment.
                                                                                                              outcome measures. Results = Treatment
      teachers and a psychological screening test.
                                                                                                              had a 0.278σ (0.299) impact on reading
                                                                                                              test scores.
                                                                                                              Test Score = State math and reading tests.
                                                                                                              Regression Specification = OLS
                                                          Treatment Defined = The Promise Academy
      Are High-Quality Schools Enough to Increase                                                             regressions that control for gender, race,




149
                                                          charter schools are “No Excuses” charter schools.
      Achievement Among the Poor? Evidence from                                                               free lunch status, grade fixed effects, and
                                                          They have an extended school day and year,
      the Harlem Children’s Zone (Dobbie and Fryer,                                                           year fixed effects. The middle school
                                                          additional classes and tutoring for struggling
      2011). N students ≈ 850, Grades = K - 8,                                                                regressions additionally control for
                                                          students, high-quality teachers, and provide free
      Location = New York City. Treatment Groups =                                                            previous test scores in the same subject,
                                                          medical, dental, and mental-health services. The
      The treatment group consists of students that won                                                       special education status in previous
                                                          schools also provide student incentives for
      the lottery to attend the Promise Academy charter                                                       grades, and whether the student spoke
                                                          achievement, nutritious cafeterias meals, and
      schools in Harlem Children’s Zone. The control                                                          English as a second language in previous
                                                          support for parents in the form of food baskets,
      group consists of students that applied and did                                                         grades. Results = Winning the lottery had
                                                          meals, and bus fare. Randomization = Student
      not win the lottery.                                                                                    a 0.121σ (0.049) impact on math test
                                                          admission lotteries.
                                                                                                              scores and a 0.036σ (0.042) impact on
                                                                                                              reading test scores.
      Appendix Table 3 (continued)
      Study                                               Study Design                                        Results
                                                          Treatment Defined = The baseline of
                                                          professional development that both groups
                                                          received included a researcher-delivered summer
                                                                                                              Test Score = AIMSWeb Letter Sound
      Assessment Data - Informed Guidance to              day-long workshop on Response to Intervention
                                                                                                              Fluency; Woodcock-Johnson III: Picture
      Individualize Kindergarten Reading Instruction:     approaches and individualized instruction. ISI-K
                                                                                                              Vocabulary, Letter Word Identification,
      Findings from a Cluster-Randomized Control          training was meant to help teachers differentiate
                                                                                                              and Word Attack subtests; Dynamic
      Field Trial (Al Otaiba et al., 2011). N schools =   classroom reading instruction. The ISI-K
                                                                                                              Indicators of Basic Early Literacy Skills:
      14, N teachers = 44, N students = 556, Grade =      intervention supports teachers’ ability to use
                                                                                                              Nonsense Word Fluency and Phoneme
      K. Treatment Groups = Treatment teachers            assessment data to inform instructional amounts,
                                                                                                              Segmenting Fluency subtests. Regression
      received Individualized Student Instruction for     types, and groupings. Teachers can use A2i
                                                                                                              Specification = A hierarchical
      Kindergarten (ISI-K) and Assessment to              software to analyze students’ language and
                                                                                                              multivariate linear model. We report the
      Instruction (A2i) training. Control received        reading scores and determine recommended
                                                                                                              average impact across all outcomes.
      general professional development that the           amounts of instruction. Randomization =
                                                                                                              Results = Treatment had an impact of
      treatment teachers also received.                   Fourteen schools were matched on several
                                                                                                              0.18σ (0.10) on reading test scores.
                                                          demographic criteria as well as reading test
                                                          scores. One school from each matched-pair was
                                                          then randomly assigned to treatment.
                                                          Treatment Defined = READ 180 uses a




150
      Can a Mixed-Method Literacy Intervention                                                                Test Score = Stanford Achievement Test
                                                          combination of teacher-directed instruction,
      Improve the Reading Achievement of                                                                      10: Reading Comprehension, Vocabulary,
                                                          computer-based reading lessons, and independent
      Low-Performing Elementary School Students in                                                            and Spelling subtests; Dynamic Indicators
                                                          reading. The program allows for differentiated
      an After-School Program? Results From a                                                                 of Basic Early Literacy Skills: Oral
                                                          instruction in each of the components of reading.
      Randomized Controlled Trial of READ 180                                                                 Reading Fluency subtest. Regression
                                                          Randomization = The sample of eligible
      Enterprise (Kim et al., 2011). N students = 296,                                                        Specification = OLS regression
                                                          students included children who scored below
      Grades = 4 - 6, Location = Southeastern MA.                                                             controlling for student characteristics
                                                          proficiency on the Massachusetts Comprehensive
      Treatment Groups = Treatment students                                                                   including pretest fluency score and
                                                          Assessment System. Students in this eligible
      received READ 180 instruction during an                                                                 school-grade randomization block
                                                          sample who returned consent forms were
      after-school program. Control students were                                                             fixed-effects. Results = Treatment had an
                                                          stratified by school and grade and then randomly
      assigned to a regular district after-school                                                             impact of 0.20σ (0.09) on reading test
                                                          assigned into either the treatment or the control
      program.                                                                                                scores.
                                                          group.
      Appendix Table 3 (continued)
      Study                                               Study Design                                           Results
                                                                                                                 Test Score = Connecticut Mastery Test -
                                                          Treatment Defined = This study investigates the
      Can Interdistrict Choice Boost Student                                                                     8th grade reading test. Regression
                                                          impact of attending two inter-district magnet
      Achievement? The Case of Connecticut’s                                                                     Specification = OLS regression
                                                          schools. The goal was to promote racial and
      Interdistrict Magnet School Program (Bifulco et                                                            controlling for pretest scores (fall of
                                                          economic integration by allowing students from
      al., 2009). N students = 494, Grades = 6 - 8                                                               fourth grade, fall of sixth grade) and
                                                          different school districts to integrate. One school
      Location = near Hartford, CT. Treatment                                                                    individual covariates (age, gender,
                                                          served grades 6-8, and the other served grades
      Groups = The treatment group consisted of                                                                  ethnicity, free-lunch eligibility, and special
                                                          6-12. Randomization = Lottery-based
      students who won an admission lottery and were                                                             education status). Results = The impact of
                                                          admissions to charter schools. Admission
      assigned to magnet schools. The control group                                                              winning the lottery is 0.037σ (0.046) on
                                                          lotteries held in each of five districts for each of
      consisted of students who lost the same lottery.                                                           math test scores and 0.081σ (0.054) on
                                                          the two schools.
                                                                                                                 reading test scores.
                                                                                                                 Test Score = National Educational
                                                          Treatment Defined = Treatment students remain
                                                                                                                 Longitudinal Survey of 1988: Math and
                                                          with the same group of teachers throughout high
      Career Academies: Impacts on Students’                                                                     Reading Comprehension batteries.
                                                          school to develop stronger, supportive
      Engagement and Performance in High School                                                                  Regression Specification = Effect sizes
                                                          educational relationships. Their curriculum
      (Kemple and Snipes, 2000). N schools = 9, N                                                                were calculated using regression-adjusted
                                                          includes both academic lessons and vocational
      students = 1,764, Grade = 8 - 9, N years = 4.                                                              posttest means, controlling for
                                                          material, while the school builds relationships
      Treatment Groups = Treatment students                                                                      background characteristics. We report the




151
                                                          with local employers to provide students with
      received the Career Academy intervention.                                                                  annual impact of the program. Results =
                                                          career and work-based learning opportunities.
      Control students received no such intervention.                                                            Treatment had a 0.004σ (0.019) impact on
                                                          Randomization = Students were assigned at
                                                                                                                 math test scores and a -0.012σ (0.019)
                                                          random to treatment.
                                                                                                                 impact on reading test scores.
                                                          Treatment Defined = A charter school is a              Test Score = New York State
      Charter Schools in New York City: Who Enrolls
                                                          public school that operates fairly autonomously        Examinations. Regression Specification
      and How They Affect Their Students’
                                                          within guidelines laid down by its state. Charter      = OLS regression of student achievement
      Achievement (Hoxby and Murarka, 2009). N
                                                          schools are generally free to manage day-to-day        on charter dummy, students’ pretreatment
      schools = 42, N students = 32,551, Grade = 3 - 8,
                                                          operations, hire teachers and let them go, choose      covariates, lottery, school and grade fixed
      Location = New York City, NY. Treatment
                                                          salary schedules, and make curricular decisions.       effects. We report annual impacts. Results
      Groups = Treatment group is comprised of
                                                          This study looked at charter schools throughout        = Treatment had a 0.092σ (0.016) impact
      lottery winners to charter schools while the
                                                          New York City. Randomization = Student                 on math test scores and a 0.039σ (0.016)
      control group is comprised of lottery losers.
                                                          admission lotteries.                                   impact on reading test scores.
      Appendix Table 3 (continued)
      Study                                               Study Design                                            Results
                                                          Treatment Defined = CASL is a self-executing
                                                          professional development program in which
                                                          teachers learn from a CASL textbook and use
                                                          CASL assessments to better understand their
                                                          students’ progress. Intervention schools were
                                                          given all available CASL material as if they had
                                                          purchased it and researchers were not involved in
                                                          the implementation of CASL in any way.
                                                          Intervention schools also created teams of three
                                                          to six teachers for support and discussion of the
                                                          CASL material. Control schools were given
                                                          $1,000 in order to eliminate the alternative
                                                          hypothesis that any impact was the result of the
                                                          schools receiving more resources. The study
                                                          consisted of a training year and an
      Classroom Assessment for Student Learning:          implementation year. We only report results from        Test Score = Math scores from the
      The Impact on Elementary School Mathematics         the implementation year. Randomization =                Colorado state test. Regression
      in the Central Region (Randel et al., 2011). N      Researchers invited public schools in Colorado          Specification = Regressions controlling




152
      districts = 32, N schools = 67, N teachers = 409,   that were of sufficient size to have at least one 4th   for school-level pretest scores,
      N students ≈ 4,700, Grade = 4, Location = CO.       grade and one 5th grade teacher. For their search,      student-level pretest scores, randomization
      Treatment Groups = Treatment teachers               researchers focused on the 55 districts that had        block fixed effects, and a student’s grade.
      participated in the Classroom Assessment for        greater than six total schools and elementary           We report the average annual impact.
      Student Learning (CASL) professional                principals that had signed up to be on the              Results = Treatment had a 0.096σ (0.073)
      development program. Control teachers did not.      Mid-continent Research for Education and                impact on math test scores.
                                                          Learning’s mailing list. In order to randomly
                                                          assign the schools that volunteered to participate,
                                                          districts were first assigned to nine blocks. The
                                                          first six blocks were the six districts that had
                                                          multiple elementary schools that agreed to
                                                          participate. The final three blocks consisted of
                                                          districts that only had one elementary school that
                                                          agreed to participate. These blocks were grouped
                                                          based on locale, location in Colorado, and date
                                                          the schools elected to participate. A random
                                                          number generator was then used to randomly
                                                          assign half of the schools within each block to
                                                          treatment and the other half to control. When
                                                          there was an odd number of schools in a block,
                                                          the additional school was assigned to control.
      Appendix Table 3 (continued)
      Study                                               Study Design                                          Results
      Closing the Achievement Gap: A Structured
      Approach to Group Counseling (Campbell and          Treatment Defined = Treatment entailed group
                                                                                                                Test Score = Florida Comprehensive
      Brigman, 2005). N schools = 20, N students =        counseling for 45 minutes, once a week, for eight
                                                                                                                Achievement Test: Mathematics and
      480, Grades = 5 - 6. Treatment Groups = The         weeks, followed by four follow-up sessions over
                                                                                                                Reading subtests. Regression
      treatment group took part in group counseling       the next four months. The goal of the Student
                                                                                                                Specification = Average growth in test
      utilizing the Student Success Skills model. The     Success Skills model was to develop academic,
                                                                                                                scores was used to calculate effect sizes.
      control group did not take part in such             social, and self-management skills.
                                                                                                                Results = Treatment had a 0.490σ (0.116)
      counseling. Sample drawn entirely from students     Randomization = Students were stratified by
                                                                                                                impact on math test scores and a 0.238σ
      scoring between the 25th and 60th percentile on     school and grade and assigned randomly to
                                                                                                                (0.114) impact on reading test scores.
      the math and reading subtests of the Florida        treatment.
      Comprehensive Achievement Test.
                                                          Treatment Defined = All treatment students
                                                          worked on an individualized curriculum via a
                                                          series of instruction sheets, worksheets, and final
      Combining Cooperative Learning and
                                                          assessments. Students in the TAI group were
      Individualized Instruction: Effects on Student
                                                          assigned to four or five member teams, each with
      Mathematics Achievement, Attitudes, and
                                                          a mix of high and low mathematics achievers as        Test Score = Comprehensive Test of Basic
      Behaviors (Slavin et al., 1984). N schools = 6, N
                                                          determined by the pretest. Teams were reassigned      Skills. Regression Specification = Effect




153
      classrooms = 18, N students = 504, Grades = 3 -
                                                          after four weeks. Students asked their teammates      sizes were calculated using average
      5. Treatment Groups = Treatment schools were
                                                          for help if necessary. At the end of each week, a     growth between pretest and posttest
      assigned to one of two treatment conditions:
                                                          team score was calculated by summing the final        scores. Results = The TAI treatment had a
      condition one implemented Team-Assisted
                                                          assessment scores from each team member.              0.109σ (1.001) impact on test scores. The
      Individualization (TAI) strategies into their
                                                          Students in the individual condition received the     TAI without the team environment had a
      curriculum; condition two utilized the same
                                                          same instructions, worksheets, and final              0.102σ (1.001) impact on test scores.
      curriculum as the TAI group, but did not
                                                          assessments as the TAI group, but did not work in
      implement a team environment. The control
                                                          a team-setting. Treatment replaced the normal
      group maintained their normal curricula.
                                                          mathematics curriculum. Randomization =
                                                          Schools were assigned at random to one of the
                                                          three conditions.
      Appendix Table 3 (continued)
      Study                                               Study Design                                         Results
                                                          Treatment Defined = The School Development
                                                          Program has three program structures: the School
                                                          Planning and Management Team, the Social
                                                          Support Team, and the Parent Team. These three
                                                          structures are supposed to work together
                                                          according to three process principles: 1) adults
                                                          within the school should cooperate with each
                                                          other, always putting student needs above their
                                                          own; 2) the school should operate with a             Test Score = Maryland State Readiness
                                                          problem-solving rather than a fault-finding          Test: Math score. Regression
      Comer’s School Development Program in Prince
                                                          orientation; and 3) decisions should be reached      Specification = School-level outcome
      George’s County, Maryland: A Theory-Based
                                                          by consensus rather than vote. Comer believes        means were adjusted using MANOVA, for
      Evaluation (Cook et al., 1999). N schools = 23, N
                                                          that if the program structures operate under these   pretest scores, unreliability in these scores,
      students ≈ 12,000, Grades = 7 - 8, Location =
                                                          processes, then the processes will spread within     average school-level socioeconomic
      Prince George’s County, MD. Treatment
                                                          the school, staff will focus on attaining widely     status, enrollment size, and elementary
      Groups = Treatment schools implemented the
                                                          shared goals, trust will be shared, and staff will   school California Achievement Test
      School Development Program and control
                                                          understand and meet children’s needs.                scores. We report annual impacts. Results
      schools did not.
                                                          Randomization = Twenty one schools were              = Treatment had a 0.008σ (0.033) impact




154
                                                          paired up with regards to racial composition and     on math test scores.
                                                          previous years’ test scores. Schools within each
                                                          pair were then randomly assigned to treatment or
                                                          control using a coin toss. One school was not
                                                          paired and was assigned randomly to treatment or
                                                          control. Note that two pilot schools were
                                                          included in the treatment sample because “no
                                                          obvious differences were found when they were
                                                          or were not included in the analyses”.
      Appendix Table 3 (continued)
      Study                                               Study Design                                         Results
                                                          Treatment Defined = Students in the RR
                                                          condition received daily 30-minute lessons, in
                                                          which they read familiar texts, independently
                                                          read instructional-level texts, analyzed and
                                                          discussed these texts, composed sentences, and
      Comparing Instructional Models for the Literacy     reconstructed cut-up sentences. Students in the
      Education of High-Risk First Graders (Pinell et     RS condition took part in daily 30-minute            Test Score = The Woodcock Reading
      al., 1994). N districts = 10, N schools = 40, N     exercises designed to develop independent            Mastery Tests and the Gates-MacGintie
      students = 403, Grade = 1. Treatment Groups =       reading strategies. Students in the DI condition     Reading Test. Regression Specification =
      Four treatment conditions: condition one            received individualized tutoring in fundamental      Hierarchical linear model (student, school)
      received the Reading Recovery (RR) intervention;    reading skills. Students in the R&W condition        controlling for pretest scores. Results =
      condition two received the Reading Skills (RS)      received small-group instruction designed to         The RR treatment had a 0.484σ (0.218)
      intervention; condition three received a Direct     develop a systematic approach to reading.            impact on reading test scores. The RS
      Instruction (DI) intervention; and condition four   Randomization = Researchers selected four            treatment had a 0.154σ (0.203) impact on
      received a reading and writing (R&W)                schools from each district, one of which             reading test scores. The DI treatment had
      intervention. Control students continued with the   employed the RR program prior to the study.          a 0.190σ (0.221) impact on reading test
      normal curricula. Sample composed of those          This school was automatically assigned to the RR     scores. The R&W treatment had a 0.222σ
      students with the lowest test scores within each    condition. The remaining schools from each           (0.250) impact on reading test scores.




155
      school.                                             district were assigned at random to the other
                                                          conditions. Each school then offered a pool of ten
                                                          students with the worst test scores, and four of
                                                          these were assigned randomly to the treatment
                                                          specific to their school. The remaining six
                                                          students in each pool were considered control.
                                                          Treatment Defined = The professional
                                                          development focused on instructing teachers how
                                                          to use instructional and questioning strategies      Test Score = Comprehensive Test of Basic
      Direct Instruction in Fourth and Fifth Grade        associated with Direct Instruction.                  Skills. Regression Specification = Effect
      Classrooms (Sloan, 1993). N schools = 7, N          Randomization = The researcher first contacted       sizes were calculated using average
      teachers = 10, N students = 173, Grades = 4 - 5,    fifteen elementary schools across a district in      growth between pretest and posttest
      Location = IN. Treatment Groups = Treatment         Indiana. Fourteen principals agreed to let the       scores. Results = Treatment had a 0.090σ
      teachers received Direct Instruction training.      researcher reach out to the fourth and fifth grade   (0.633) impact on math test scores and a
      Control teachers continued business-as-usual.       teachers in their schools. Ten teachers contacted    0.090σ (0.633) impact on reading test
                                                          agreed to participate in the study. Five of these    scores.
                                                          teachers were randomly assigned to treatment
                                                          and the other five to control.
      Appendix Table 3 (continued)
      Study                                                 Study Design                                           Results
                                                            Treatment Defined = Early Colleges partner
                                                                                                                   Test score = Standardized state
                                                            with colleges and universities to offer all students
      Early College, Early Success: Early College High                                                             assessment scores in reading and
                                                            an opportunity to earn an associates degree or up
      School Initiative (ECHSI) Impact Study (Berger                                                               mathematics. Regression Specification =
                                                            to two years of college credits toward a bachelors
      et al., 2013). N students = 2,458, Grades = 9 - 12.                                                          Two-level hierarchical linear model
                                                            degree during high school at no or low cost to the
      Treatment Groups = The treatment group                                                                       (student, school) controlling for gender,
                                                            students. The underlying assumption is that
      consists of students who were offered admission                                                              race, low income, and standardized
                                                            engaging underrepresented students in a rigorous
      to an Early College from a lottery and a                                                                     achievement scores in prior reading and
                                                            high school curriculum tied to the incentive of
      comparison group that included students who                                                                  mathematics. Results = Winning the
                                                            earning college credit will motivate them and
      participated in the lottery but were not offered                                                             lottery of an Early College had a 0.14σ
                                                            increase their access to additional postsecondary
      admission.                                                                                                   (0.04) impact on reading scores and a
                                                            education and credentials after high school.
                                                                                                                   0.05σ (0.04) impact on math scores.
                                                            Randomization = Random admission lotteries.
                                                            Treatment Defined = The AM progress
                                                            monitoring system tracks student performance
      Effect of Technology-Enhanced Continuous              via regular mathematics exercises and
      Progress Monitoring on Math Achievement               assessments. The software generates practice
                                                                                                                   Test Score = The STAR Math assessment;
      (Ysseldyke and Bolt, 2007). N districts = 7, N        exercises tailored to the individual and provides
                                                                                                                   Terra Nova tests: Math subtests.
      schools = 8, N classrooms = 80, N students =          both students and teachers with immediate




156
                                                                                                                   Regression Specification = OLS
      1,880. Treatment Groups = Treatment                   feedback. Teachers are thus able to adjust their
                                                                                                                   regression controlling for pretest scores
      classrooms incorporated the Accelerated Math          classroom instruction based on individual
                                                                                                                   and school fixed effects. The average
      technology-enhanced progress monitoring system        performance. The treatment was in addition to
                                                                                                                   effect across both subtests is reported.
      (AM) for a full year. Control classrooms              normal class time. Randomization = Teachers
                                                                                                                   Results = Treatment had an impact of
      maintained normal curricula. Sample drawn from        were stratified by school and grade then assigned
                                                                                                                   0.215σ (0.114) on math test scores.
      schools who previously expressed interest in the      at random to treatment. In schools where teachers
      AM system, but had not yet implemented it.            taught multiple classes, classrooms were
                                                            stratified by school and grade then assigned
                                                            randomly to treatment.
      Appendix Table 3 (continued)
      Study                                                Study Design                                        Results
                                                           Treatment Defined = Treatment students
      Effectiveness of Paraeducator-Supplemented                                                               Test Score = Dynamic Indicators of Basic
                                                           received 30 minutes of extracurricular tutoring
      Individual Instruction: Beyond Basic Decoding                                                            Early Literacy: Oral Reading Fluency
                                                           per day, four days per week, for 15 weeks. These
      Skills (Vadasy et al., 2007). N schools = 9, N                                                           subtest; Woodcock Reading Mastery
                                                           tutoring sessions included 15 minutes of phonics
      teachers = 26, N students = 46, Grades = 2 - 3.                                                          Test-Revised: Word Attack and Word
                                                           instruction and 15 minutes of oral passage
      Treatment Groups = Treatment students                                                                    Identification subtests. Regression
                                                           reading. Target skills included letter-sound
      received extracurricular reading tutoring                                                                Specification = For each outcome
                                                           correspondences, decoding, sight word reading,
      administered by paraeducators between October                                                            measure, effect sizes were calculated
                                                           spelling, and phonics generalizations.
      and March. The control group received no such                                                            using posttest means adjusted for pretest
                                                           Paraeducators received three hours of training
      tutoring during this time. Sample drawn from                                                             scores. We report the average effect across
                                                           prior to the study, plus an additional 60 to 90
      students who scored between the 10th and 37th                                                            all outcome measures. Results =
                                                           minutes of on-site training. Randomization =
      percentile on the word identification subtest from                                                       Treatment had a 0.502σ (0.311) impact on
                                                           Students were stratified by school and assigned
      the Woodcock Reading Mastery Test-Revised.                                                               reading test scores.
                                                           randomly to treatment.
                                                           Treatment Defined = Tutors implemented a
                                                           tutoring model that included repeated reading of
                                                           familiar texts, explicit coaching in decoding and
                                                           word strategy, and reading new books for forty
                                                           15-minute sessions throughout the term. Each




157
                                                           tutor was provided with materials such as a         Test Score = Woodcock Diagnostic
                                                           guided lesson plan, checklist, and leveled books    Reading Battery: Letter Word
      Effects of a Volunteer Tutoring Model on the
                                                           to use during sessions. Tutors were university      Identification and Word Attack subtests.
      Early Literacy Development of Struggling First
                                                           students who were recruited and hired for this      Regression Specification = For each
      Grade Students (Pullen et al., 2004). N students =
                                                           study. Tutors typically were education majors       outcome measure, effect sizes were
      49, Grade = 1, Location = FL. Treatment
                                                           with limited tutoring experience. Tutors received   calculated using posttest means. We report
      Groups = Treatment group received volunteer
                                                           four hours of training and demonstrated mastery     the average effect across all outcome
      tutoring from January to April and the control
                                                           of the tutoring model prior to interacting with     measures. Results = Treatment had a
      group received normal classroom instruction.
                                                           students. Randomization = Students were tested      0.626σ (0.300) impact on reading test
                                                           using the measure of invented spelling. Those       scores.
                                                           who scored at or below the 30th percentile on the
                                                           invented spelling assessment were eligible to
                                                           participate in the study. Eligible students were
                                                           randomly assigned to a treatment or control
                                                           group.
      Appendix Table 3 (continued)
      Study                                                 Study Design                                          Results
                                                            Treatment Defined = Academic training entailed        Test Score = The math and reading
                                                            a meeting with individual tutors for 45 minutes       portions of the California Achievement
                                                            twice weekly from October to April. The social        Tests. Regression Specification = For
                                                            skill training entailed pairing a child with a more   each outcome measure, effect sizes were
                                                            popular, same-sex peer and coaching the child on      calculated using posttest means adjusted
      Effects of Academic Tutoring on the Social Status
                                                            positive behaviors before and after the               for pretest scores. We report the average
      of Low-Achieving, Socially Rejected Children
                                                            interaction; training took place in class once a      effect across all outcome measures.
      (Coie and Krehbiel, 1984). N schools = 7, N
                                                            week for six weeks. All trainers were                 Results = The academic training
      students = 40, Grade = 4, Location = Durham,
                                                            undergraduates who were coached by the authors        treatment had a 0.773σ (0.464) impact on
      NC. Treatment Groups = 3 treatment groups:
                                                            prior to treatment. Randomization = All               math test sores and a 0.472σ (0.453)
      treatment group one received academic skill
                                                            students from the sample schools completed both       impact on reading test scores. The social
      training; treatment group two received social skill
                                                            a sociometric evaluation and the California           skills training treatment had a 0.326σ
      training; treatment group three received both.
                                                            Achievement Tests. From these examinations,           (0.452) impact on math test sores and
      The control group received no such training.
                                                            researchers identified 40 students who scored         0.397σ (0.452) impact on reading test
                                                            below the 36th percentile on their reading test       scores. The combined training treatment
                                                            scores and who were ranked as unpopular by            had a 0.505σ (0.454) impact on math test
                                                            their peers. Researchers assigned these students      sores and a 0.616σ (0.458) impact on
                                                            randomly to one of the four groups.                   reading test scores.




158
                                                                                                                  Test Score = Woodcock-Johnson Mastery
                                                                                                                  Tests-Revised: Word Identification and
      Effects of Intensive Reading Remediation for                                                                Word Mastery subtests;
      Second and Third Graders and a 1-Year                 Treatment Defined = Treatment children                Woodcock-Johnson Psycho-Educational
      Follow-Up (Blachman et al., 2004). N districts =      received 50 minutes of individual reading             Battery-Revised: Calculation and Applied
      4, N schools = 11, N students = 89, Grades = 2 -      tutoring, five days per week, between September       Problems subtests ; the Gray Oral Reading
      3. Treatment Groups = Treatment group utilized        and June. These sessions replaced remedial            Tests Third Edition. Regression
      an intensive reading intervention in place of their   reading instruction that would otherwise have         Specification = For each outcome
      traditional remedial reading instruction. The         been implemented by the school.                       measure, effect sizes were calculated
      control group continued with normal remedial          Randomization = Students were stratified by           using posttest means adjusted for pretest
      reading instruction. Sample drawn from students       school, grade, and gender and then randomly           scores. We report the average effects for
      with demonstrated difficulty reading as               assigned to treatment.                                math and reading outcomes. Results =
      determined by the pretest.                                                                                  Treatment had a -0.275σ (0.243) impact
                                                                                                                  on math test scores and a 0.728σ (0.249)
                                                                                                                  impact on reading test scores.
      Appendix Table 3 (continued)
      Study                                               Study Design                                        Results
                                                          Treatment Defined = The treatment groups
                                                          incorporated three 35-minute PALS sessions per
                                                          week into their normal reading time. During
                                                          these sessions, a high-ability student was paired
                                                          with a low-ability student (ability determined by
      Effects of Peer-Assisted Learning Strategies With
                                                          the teacher), and the pair would undertake three    Test Score = Stanford Diagnostic Reading
      and Without Training in Elaborated Help Giving
                                                          activities: partner reading, paragraph              Test: Reading Comprehension subtest.
      (Fuchs et al., 1999). N classrooms = 24, Grades =
                                                          shrinking/summarization, and prediction relay.      Regression Specification = Effect sizes
      2 - 4. Treatment Groups = Two treatment
                                                          Students offered each other feedback and were       were calculated for each grade strata and
      groups: one received training in elaborated
                                                          awarded points for completing reading activities    each treatment. We report the average
      help-giving prior to implementing peer-assisted
                                                          and giving feedback. The team with the highest      effect across grades for each treatment.
      learning strategies (PALS); the other
                                                          points was recognized by the class at the end of    Results = The PALS treatment had a
      implemented PALS without such training. The
                                                          each week. Those students selected for training     0.749σ (0.517) on reading test scores and
      control group continued with its regular
                                                          in help-giving learned strategies on how to         the PALS with help-giving training
      curriculum. All classrooms included at least
                                                          identify reading difficulties and potential         treatment had a 0.355σ (0.504) impact on
      some children with chronic reading difficulties
                                                          solutions. Randomization = Classrooms were          reading test scores.
      and problematic social behaviors.
                                                          stratified by grade and half were randomly
                                                          assigned to implement the PALS program; among




159
                                                          those selected for treatment, half were again
                                                          stratified by grade and randomly assigned for
                                                          advanced instruction in help-giving strategies.
                                                                                                              Test Score = Woodcock Reading Mastery
                                                          Treatment Defined = All treatment students          Tests-Revised: Word Attack, Word
                                                          attended 30-minute tutoring sessions four days      Identification and Passage Comprehension
      Effects of Reading Decodable Texts in               per week, for 25 weeks. Each session included       subtests; Wide Range Achievement
      Supplemental First-Grade Tutoring (Jenkins et       the following components: practicing                Test-Revised: Reading subtest; Test of
      al., 2004). N schools = 11, N students = 121,       letter-sound relations, reading decodable words,    Word Reading Efficiency: Sight Word and
      Grade = 1. Treatment Groups = Two treatment         spelling, reading nondecodable words, and text      Phonetic Vocabulary subtests. Regression
      groups: one attended tutoring that included more    reading. As time went on, text reading              Specification = For each outcome
      decodable texts, the other attended tutoring with   progressively occupied more of each session. The    measure, effect sizes were calculated
      less decodable texts. The control group             sessions for the group with more-decodable texts    using posttest means. We report the
      maintained their normal curricula. Sample drawn     included tutoring on storybooks with a higher       average effect across all outcome
      from students who scored at or below the 25th       concentration of words that could be                measures. Results = The more decodable
      percentile on the Wide Range Achievement Test.      deconstructed from previous phonetic instruction.   treatment had a 0.646σ (0.282) impact on
                                                          Randomization = Students were randomly              reading test scores. The less decodable
                                                          assigned to the three groups.                       treatment had a 0.673σ (0.279) impact on
                                                                                                              reading test scores.
      Appendix Table 3 (continued)
      Study                                                 Study Design                                        Results
                                                            Treatment Defined = All teachers in the
                                                            treatment group received three hours of training
                                                            and additional implementation assistance for one    Test Score = Comprehensive Tests of
      Effects of Whole Class, Ability Grouped, and
                                                            of the following curricula: the MMP was a           Basic Skills: Mathematics Computations
      Individualized Instruction on Mathematics
                                                            whole-class, group-paced curriculum focused on      and Concepts/Applications subtests.
      Achievement (Slavin and Karweit, 1985). N
                                                            active and effective teaching in the form of        Regression Specification = Effect sizes
      classrooms = 22, N students = 480, Grades = 3 -
                                                            frequent questions and feedback; the AGAT           were calculated using posttest means for
      5, Location = Hagerstown, MD. Treatment
                                                            curriculum divided the class into small groups      each outcome. We report the average
      Groups = Three treatment groups: the first
                                                            based on skill – teachers differentiated material   effect size across the two subtests. Results
      received the Missouri Mathematics Program
                                                            and pace between the groups, and also               = The MMP treatment had a 0.180σ
      (MMP); the second received the Ability Grouped
                                                            incorporated frequent question and answer; the      (0.587) impact on math test scores. The
      Active Teaching (AGAT) curriculum; the third
                                                            TAI curriculum had children complete                AGAT treatment had a 0.751σ (0.655)
      received the Team Assisted Individualization
                                                            independent work while receiving help from          impact on math test scores. The TAI
      (TAI) curriculum. The control group maintained
                                                            peers of similar skill level, while teachers        treatment had a 0.361σ (0.641) impact on
      their normal curricula.
                                                            provided guidance and assistance as necessary.      math test scores.
                                                            Randomization = Teachers were assigned
                                                            randomly to one of the four groups.
                                                            Treatment Defined = All teachers followed the




160
                                                            district’s core curriculum. Treatment teachers
                                                            incorporated PALS exercises in class for
      Enhancing First-Grade Children’s Mathematical         30-minutes, three times weekly, for 16 weeks.
      Development with Peer-Assisted Learning               During these exercises, students worked             Test Score = The Stanford Achievement
      Strategies (Fuchs et al., 2002). N teachers = 20,     cooperatively on math games officiated by the       Test. Regression Specification = Average
      N students = 327, Grade = 1. Treatment Groups         teacher. Students were paired by mathematics        growth in test scores was used to calculate
      = Treatment classrooms incorporated                   ability for three-week cycles. The stronger         effect sizes. Results = Treatment had an
      peer-assisted learning strategies (PALS) into their   student acted first as tutor to the                 impact of 0.250σ (0.449) on math test
      curricula. The control group continued with           lower-performing student, and these roles           scores.
      normal curricula.                                     switched halfway through the cycle. Teachers
                                                            reassigned the pairings at the end of each cycle.
                                                            Randomization = Teachers were stratified by
                                                            school and assigned at random to treatment.
      Appendix Table 3 (continued)
      Study                                               Study Design                                           Results
                                                          Treatment Defined = All teachers followed the
                                                          district’s core curriculum. Treatment teachers
                                                          incorporated PALS exercises in class for
      Enhancing Kindergarteners’ Mathematical
                                                          20-minutes, twice weekly, for 15 weeks. During
      Development: Effects of Peer-Assisted Learning                                                             Test Score = Stanford Early School
                                                          these exercises, students worked cooperatively on
      Strategies (Fuchs et al., 2001). N schools = 5, N                                                          Achievement Test: Mathematics subtest.
                                                          math games officiated by the teacher. Students
      teachers = 20, N students = 228, Grade = K.                                                                Regression Specification = Average
                                                          were paired by mathematics ability for two-week
      Treatment Groups = Treatment classrooms                                                                    growth in test scores was used to calculate
                                                          cycles. The stronger student acted first as tutor to
      incorporated peer-assisted learning strategies                                                             effect sizes. Results = Treatment had a
                                                          the lower-performing student. These roles
      (PALS) into their curricula. The control group                                                             0.161σ (0.451) impact on math test scores.
                                                          switched halfway through the cycle. Teachers
      maintained normal curricula.
                                                          reassigned the pairings at the end of each cycle.
                                                          Randomization = Teachers were stratified by
                                                          school and assigned at random to treatment.




161
      Appendix Table 3 (continued)
      Study                                              Study Design                                          Results
                                                         Treatment Defined = “Loss” teachers are paid a
                                                         lump sum in advance and asked to give their
                                                         money back if their students don’t improve
                                                         sufficiently; “Gain” teachers receive financial
                                                         incentives in the form of bonuses at the end of the
                                                         year linked to student achievement; “Team Loss”
                                                         teachers are equivalent to “Loss” teachers but
                                                         their payout is also based on the improvement of
                                                         students taught by a teammate teacher in the
                                                         same school; and “Team Gain” teachers are
                                                         equivalent to “Gain” teachers but their payout is     Test Score = Illinois State Achievement
                                                         also based on the improvement of students taught      Test; Iowa Test of Basic Skills.
                                                         by a teammate teacher in the same school. The         Regression Specification = OLS
      Enhancing the Efficacy of Teacher Incentives       experiment was run two separate years,                regressions with individual level controls
      Through Loss Aversion (Fryer et al., 2015). N      randomizing teachers each year. Note that the         (gender, race, free lunch eligibility, limited
      schools = 9, N students ≈ 2,150, Grades = K - 8,   “Team Gain” treatment arm does not exist in the       english proficiency status, special
      Location = Chicago Heights, IL. Treatment          second year of the experiment. We report results      education status and baseline ThinkLink
      groups = Teachers were assigned to control or      for the pooled “Loss” and pooled “Gain”               test scores), school fixed effects, and grade




162
      one of four incentivized treatment groups -        treatments. Note that although math, reading, and     fixed effects. Results = The “Loss”
      “Loss”, “Gain”, “Team Loss” and “Team Gain”.       science test scores were incentivized (the latter     treatment had a 0.197 σ (0.071) impact on
                                                         only for fourth and seventh grade science             math test scores. The “Gain” treatment
                                                         teachers), the main analysis of the paper focuses     had a 0.097 σ (0.076) inmpact on math
                                                         on math achievement due to most students having       test scores.
                                                         multiple reading teachers and the science sample
                                                         being so small. Randomization = Participating
                                                         teachers with one homeroom class for the entire
                                                         day were randomly assigned to one of the five
                                                         groups; for teachers with classes throughout the
                                                         day, each class was randomly assigned to one of
                                                         the five groups. Note that teachers in the “team
                                                         treatments” were paired with a teacher in the
                                                         same school and treatment group who taught
                                                         similar grades, subjects, and students.
      Appendix Table 3 (continued)
      Study                                                 Study Design                                          Results
                                                                                                                  Test Score = Woodcock-Johnson: Word
                                                            Treatment Defined = The EC program recruits           Attack and Passage Comprehension
                                                            volunteers aged 55+ to mentor and tutor children      subtests; Peabody Picture Vocabulary
      Evaluation of Experience Corps: Student               who are at risk of academic failure. Volunteers       Test. Regression Specification = For each
      Reading Outcomes (Morrow-Howell et al.,               receive training focused on literacy and              outcome measure, effect sizes were
      2009). N students = 881, Grades = 1 - 3.              relationship building. Volunteers work with           calculated using posttest means adjusted
      Location = Boston, MA; New York City, NY; and         students one-on-one for about 15 hours per week.      for pretest scores, gender, site, grade, race,
      Port Arthur, TX. Treatment Groups = Treatment         Randomization = At the beginning of the school        classroom behavior, individualized
      students participated in the Experienced Corps        year, all students in need of reading assistance      education program, and limited english
      (EC) program and control students did not.            were referred to the Experience Corps program.        proficiency. The average effect size is
                                                            All referred students were then randomly              reported. Results = Treatment had a
                                                            assigned to the treatment or control group.           0.075σ (0.067) impact on reading test
                                                                                                                  scores.
                                                            Treatment Defined = QTEL is a professional
                                                            development program that prepares teachers to
                                                            instill comfort and ease with the English
                                                            language, rather than focusing on isolated and
                                                            discrete language skills. The program was




163
      Evaluation of Quality Teaching for English
                                                            originally designed for teachers that taught
      Learners (QTEL) Professional Development:                                                                   Test Score = The California Standards
                                                            English as a second language, but is available to
      Final Report (Bos et al., 2012). N districts = 8, N                                                         Test for English Language Arts.
                                                            all teachers. Participating teachers receive the
      schools = 52, N teachers = 303, N students =                                                                Regression Specification = Effect sizes
                                                            following instruction: small conferences with
      8,720, Grades = 6 - 8. Treatment Groups =                                                                   were calculated using regression-adjusted
                                                            their peers over the summer; one-on-one
      Teachers in the treatment group had access to                                                               posttest means. Results = Treatment had a
                                                            coaching sessions with QTEL staff four to six
      QTEL professional development; the control                                                                  0.01σ (0.03) impact on reading test scores.
                                                            times throughout the year; and monthly
      teachers did not have access.
                                                            lesson-design meetings with QTEL staff. We
                                                            only report results for the cohort that was exposed
                                                            to three years of the experiment. Randomization
                                                            = Schools were stratified by district and assigned
                                                            at random to the treatment group.
      Appendix Table 3 (continued)
      Study                                                Study Design                                        Results
                                                                                                               Test Score = Stanford Achievement Test
                                                                                                               9: Mathematics and Reading subtests.
                                                                                                               Regression Specification = OLS
                                                           Treatment Defined = The District of Columbia
                                                                                                               regressions controlling for student pretest
                                                           Opportunity Scholarship Program (OSP) is the
                                                                                                               scores, if a student attended a school
                                                           first federally funded private school voucher
                                                                                                               labeled as needing improvement between
                                                           program in the United States. Students who
      Evaluation of the DC Opportunity Scholarship                                                             2003 and 2005, student’s age at time of
                                                           applied and were selected by the program were
      Program: Final Report (Wolf et al., 2010). N                                                             application, student’s entering grade,
                                                           given the option to move from a public school to
      students = 2,300. Treatment groups = Treatment                                                           gender, race, special needs, mother’s
                                                           a participating private school of their choice.
      students were offered a private school voucher.                                                          education, mother’s employment,
                                                           Randomization = Students that applied to the
      Control students applied to the same program but                                                         household income, number of children in
                                                           program were randomly selected to receive
      were not offered a voucher.                                                                              household, and the number of months the
                                                           scholarship offers. Note that the program only
                                                                                                               student’s family has lived at its current
                                                           conducted a random lottery within a grade band
                                                                                                               address. We report the average annual
                                                           (K-5, 6-8, or 9-12) if that grade band was
                                                                                                               impact. Results = Winning the lottery had
                                                           over-subscribed.
                                                                                                               a 0.004σ (0.026) impact on math test
                                                                                                               scores and a 0.026σ (0.028) impact on
                                                                                                               reading test scores.




164
                                                                                                               Test Score = Woodcock-Johnson III:
                                                           Treatment Defined = Treatment students              Letter Word Identification, Calculation,
      Evaluation of the Early Start to Emancipation        received an average of 18 hours of tutoring in      and Passage Comprehension subtests.
      Preparation Tutoring Program in Los Angeles          reading or math, up to a maximum of 65 total        Regression Specification = OLS
      County, CA (Courtney et al., 2008). N students =     hours over the two years of the evaluation. The     regression controlling for student’s
      402. Treatment Groups = Treatment group              program was also designed to inform students        baseline scores, gender, race, ethnicity,
      received tutoring services from the Early Start to   about educational resources available to them, as   physical health, mental health, substance
      Emancipation Preparation (ESTEP) program.            well as create a mentoring relationship between     abuse, level of social support, whether the
      Control group continued with usual instruction.      the tutor and student. Tutors were local            student was placed in a group home,
      Note the sample consists of students aged 14 and     community-college students. Randomization =         whether the student previously ran away
      15 that are one to three years behind grade-level    Students were referred to the study by their        from foster care, and the type of foster
      reading or math skill. All students are in foster    emancipation preparation advisor. Students who      care. Results = Treatment had a 0.048σ
      care.                                                elected to participate were then assigned           (0.048) impact on math test scores and a
                                                           randomly into the treatment group.                  0.016σ (0.045) impact on reading test
                                                                                                               scores.
      Appendix Table 3 (continued)
      Study                                             Study Design                                           Results
                                                        Treatment Defined = AMSTI involves
                                                        comprehensive professional development
                                                        delivered through a 10-day summer institute and
                                                        follow-up training during the school-year; access      Test Score = Stanford Achievement Test.
                                                        to program materials, manipulatives, and               Regression Specification = Two-level
                                                        technology needed to deliver hands-on, inquiry         hierarchical linear model (student, school)
                                                        based instruction, and in-school support by            controlling for pretest score, grade level,
      Evaluation of the Effectiveness of the Alabama
                                                        AMSTI lead teachers and site specialists who           racial/ethnic minority status, eligibility for
      Math, Science, and Technology Initiative
                                                        offer mentoring and coaching for instruction.          free or reduced-price lunch, proficiency in
      (AMSTI) (Newman et al., 2012). N schools = 82,
                                                        Randomization = From the eligible schools that         English, gender, and matched pairs fixed
      N teachers ≈ 780, N students ≈ 20,000, Grades =
                                                        applied to the program, researchers made an            effects. Note that we only report the
      4 - 8, Location = AL. Treatment Groups =
                                                        effort to select a sample that was representative of   results of the first year of the experiment
      Treatment schools implemented AMSTI. Control
                                                        the population of schools in the regions involved.     because the researchers did not report
      schools continued as usual.
                                                        Pairs of similar schools were selected from the        reading impacts in the second year.
                                                        pool of applicants based on similarity in              Results = AMSTI had a 0.05σ (0.02)
                                                        mathematics achievement, the percentage of             impact on math test scores and a 0.06σ
                                                        minority students, and the percentage of students      (0.02) impact on reading test scores.
                                                        from low-income households. Within each pair,




165
                                                        schools were randomly assigned either to the
                                                        AMSTI condition or to the control condition.
      Appendix Table 3 (continued)
      Study                                             Study Design                                         Results
                                                        Treatment Defined = Reading Recovery is a
                                                        short-term intervention designed to help low
                                                        performing first grade students catch up to their
                                                        peers. Teachers involved in the Reading
                                                        Recovery program are specifically trained on how
                                                        to work with struggling students and to
                                                        implement the program’s instructional approach.
                                                        During a school year, these teachers spend
                                                        approximately half of their work day working         Test Score = The Iowa Test of Basic
      Evaluation of the i3 Scale-Up of Reading
                                                        with the same eight low-performing students.         Skills: Composite Reading score.
      Recovery: Year One Report (May et al., 2013). N
                                                        Randomization = 628 schools were enrolled in         Regression Specification = A three-level
      schools = 147, N students = 866, Grade = 1.
                                                        the i3 scale-up of Reading Recovery. These           hierarchical linear model (student,
      Treatment groups = Treatment students
                                                        schools were randomly assigned to 3 blocks. One      matched-pair, school) controlling for
      participated in the Reading Recovery program.
                                                        of these blocks was randomly chosen to               pretest scores. Results = Treatment had a
      Control students did not.
                                                        participate in a RCT of Reading Recovery during      0.47σ (0.05) impact on reading scores.
                                                        the 2011-2012 school year. Within each of these
                                                        schools, a subsample of low-performing students
                                                        was identified using the Observation Survey of




166
                                                        Early Literacy. In each school, the eight students
                                                        with the lowest scores were matched according to
                                                        pretest scores and English Language Learner
                                                        status. One student in each pair was randomly
                                                        assigned to treatment and the other to control.
      Appendix Table 3 (continued)
      Study                                                Study Design                                          Results
                                                                                                                 Test Score = Stanford Achievement Test:
                                                                                                                 Mathematics and Reading subtests.
                                                                                                                 Regression Specification = OLS
                                                                                                                 regression controlling for race, gender,
                                                                                                                 free lunch status, teacher’s race, teacher’s
                                                                                                                 experience, teacher’s education, fraction
                                                           Treatment Defined = Condition one classrooms
      Experimental Estimates of Education Production                                                             of classmates in class previous year,
                                                           reduced their class size to 13 - 17 students from a
      Functions (Krueger, 1999). N students = 11,600,                                                            average fraction of classmates together
                                                           normal level of 22 - 25 students. Condition two
      Grade = K - 3. Treatment Groups = Two                                                                      previous year, fraction of classmates on
                                                           classrooms included a teacher’s assistant to help
      treatment conditions: condition one classrooms                                                             free lunch, fraction of classmates who
                                                           manage the larger class size. Randomization =
      reduced their class size; condition two                                                                    attended kindergarten, current grade, first
                                                           Students were stratified by school and assigned at
      classrooms continued with normal class size but                                                            grade in sample, and school fixed-effects.
                                                           random to one of the three conditions. Each
      included a teacher’s assistant. Control classrooms                                                         We only report results for the small
                                                           school had at least one classroom for each
      continued with normal class size.                                                                          classroom treatment, because results for
                                                           treatment condition.
                                                                                                                 the other treatment were not reported by
                                                                                                                 math and reading. Results = Initial
                                                                                                                 assignment to small classes had a 0.107σ
                                                                                                                 (0.033) impact on math test scores and a




167
                                                                                                                 0.133σ (0.033) impact on reading test
                                                                                                                 scores.
                                                                                                                 Test Score = Massachusetts
                                                           Treatment Defined = A charter school is a             Comprehensive Assessment System.
      Explaining Charter School Effectiveness (Angrist     public school that operates fairly autonomously       Regression Specification = ITT
      et al., 2011). N schools = 22, N students = 9,141,   within guidelines laid down by its state. Charter     regression of student achievement on
      Grades = 4 - 8 and 10, Location = MA.                schools are generally free to manage day-to-day       baseline demographic characteristics and a
      Treatment Groups = Treatment group                   operations, hire teachers and let them go, choose     dummy variable set representing every
      comprised of lottery winners to charter schools      salary schedules, and make curricular decisions.      combination of charter school lotteries,
      while the control group comprised of lottery         This study looks at charter schools throughout the    year and grade effects. Results =
      losers.                                              state of Massachusetts. Randomization =               Treatment had a 0.201σ (0.042) impact on
                                                           Student admission lotteries.                          math test scores and a 0.075σ (0.035)
                                                                                                                 impact on reading test scores.
      Appendix Table 3 (continued)
      Study                                                Study Design                                          Results
                                                           Treatment Defined = The intervention is
                                                           purchased as a comprehensive package, which
                                                           includes materials, training, ongoing professional
                                                           development, and a well-specified “blueprint” for
                                                           delivering and sustaining the model. Schools that
      Final Reading Outcomes of the National               elect to adopt Success for All implement a
      Randomized Field Trial of Success for All            program that organizes resources to attempt to        Test Score = Woodcock-Johnson: Word
      (Borman et al., 2007). N schools = 35, N students    ensure that every child will reach the 3rd grade on   Attack, Word Identification, and Passage
      = 2,108, Grades = K - 2, Location = 11 states        time with adequate basic skills and will continue     Comprehension subtests. Regression
      (largely concentrated in urban Midwest locations,    to build on those skills throughout the later         Specification = Hierarchical linear model
      such as Chicago and Indianapolis, and in the rural   elementary grades. Randomization = Cluster            (student, school) controlling for average
      small town South), N years = 3. Treatment            randomized trial, with schools randomized into        school pretest scores. We report the
      Groups = Treatment schools adopted the Success       the treatment or control conditions. Note that        average annual effect across subtests.
      for All model. Control schools did not adopt this    control schools actually implemented Success for      Results = Treatment had a 0.090σ (0.060)
      model. Sample drawn from high poverty schools        All, but only in grades 3-5. Treatment schools        impact on reading test scores.
      and is a majority African American.                  implemented Success for All in grades K-2.
                                                           Comparisons were then made between the treated
                                                           K-2 students and the untreated K-2 students.




168
                                                           Researchers claim that observations for treatment
                                                           fidelity did not reveal any significant
                                                           contamination due to this research design.
      Appendix Table 3 (continued)
      Study                                               Study Design                                     Results
                                                                                                           Test Score = State assessments used by
                                                                                                           each city. Regression Specification =
                                                                                                           OLS regression controlling for reading
                                                                                                           and math achievement scores from the
                                                                                                           previous two years, race, gender,
                                                                                                           free/reduced lunch eligibility, English
                                                                                                           language learner status, the percent of
                                                                                                           black students in the school, the percent of
                                                                                                           Hispanic students in the school, and the
                                                                                                           percent of free/reduced lunch students in
                                                                                                           the school. For Dallas, regressions also
                                                                                                           include a control for whether the student
                                                          Treatment Defined = In Dallas, students were
                                                                                                           took the English or Spanish version of the
                                                          paid to read books. In New York, students were
      Financial Incentives and Student Achievement:                                                        ITBS/Logramos test in the previous year.
                                                          rewarded according to interim assessments. In
      Evidence from Randomized Trials (Fryer, 2011).                                                       For Dallas and New York City, regressions
                                                          Chicago, students were paid for classroom
      N students ≈ 27,000, Grades = 2 (Dallas), 4 and                                                      also include an indicator for being in
                                                          grades. Randomization = School-level
      7 (NYC), and 9 (Chicago). Treatment Groups =                                                         special education. For New York City,
                                                          randomization where the method employed is
      In each district, students in the treatment group                                                    regressions also include controls for the




169
                                                          called re-randomization – minimize the
      received monetary incentives for performance in                                                      number of recorded behavioral incidents a
                                                          maximum z-score from an equation regressing
      school according to a simple incentive scheme.                                                       student had in the previous year, as well as
                                                          pre-assigned treatments on race, previous year
      Control students were not incentivized.                                                              the number of recorded behavioral
                                                          test score, free lunch status and English
                                                                                                           incidents the school had in the previous
                                                          Language Learner eligibility.
                                                                                                           year. Results = Paying students to read
                                                                                                           books had a 0.079σ (0.086) impact on
                                                                                                           math test scores and 0.012σ (0.069)
                                                                                                           impact on reading test scores. Paying
                                                                                                           students for performance on standardized
                                                                                                           tests had a 0.008σ (0.041) impact on math
                                                                                                           test scores and a -0.008σ (0.025) impact
                                                                                                           on reading test scores. Rewarding ninth
                                                                                                           graders for their grades had a -0.010σ
                                                                                                           (0.023) impact on math test scores and a
                                                                                                           -0.006σ (0.028) impact on reading test
                                                                                                           scores.
      Appendix Table 3 (continued)
      Study                                              Study Design                                       Results
                                                         Treatment Defined = Treatment schools had a
                                                                                                            Test Score = California Achievement
                                                         full-day kindergarten schedule whereas control
      Full-day versus Half-day Kindergarten: An                                                             Tests. Regression Specification =
                                                         schools operated on a half-day kindergarten
      Experimental Study (Holmes and McConnell,                                                             Posttest means for the treatment and
                                                         schedule. Randomization = Ten of the
      1990). N schools = 20, N students = 637.                                                              control groups were compared using
                                                         elementary schools in the school system were
      Treatment Groups = Treatment students                                                                 Students t-tests. Results = The treatment
                                                         randomly chosen to be in the treatment group.
      attended full-day kindergarten and control                                                            had an impact of -0.290σ (0.088) on math
                                                         The randomization was stratified by whether or
      students attended half-day kindergarten.                                                              test scores and an impact of 0.112σ
                                                         not the school was a Chapter I (low
                                                                                                            (0.083) on reading test scores.
                                                         socio-economic status) school.
                                                                                                            Test Score = Iowa Test of Basic Skills:
                                                                                                            Arithmetic Concepts and Arithmetic
                                                         Treatment Defined = The first treatment group      Problem Solving subtests. Regression
      Homework in Arithmetic (Koch, 1965). N             received a daily homework assignment in            Specification = For each outcome
      teachers = 3, N classrooms = 3, N students = 85,   arithmetic that took approximately 30 minutes to   measure, effect sizes were calculated
      Grade = 6. Treatment Groups = Two treatment        complete. The second treatment group received a    using the average growth between posttest
      groups: the first received a longer daily          daily homework assignment in arithmetic that       and pretest scores. We report the average
      arithmetic assignment, while the second received   took approximately 15 minutes. All classes used    effect across all outcome measures.
      a shorter daily arithmetic assignment. The         the same arithmetic textbook. Randomization =      Results = The shorter assignment




170
      control group received no arithmetic homework.     Classes were randomly assigned to one of the       intervention had a 0.158σ (1.417) impact
                                                         three conditions.                                  on math test scores. The longer
                                                                                                            assignment intervention had a 0.261σ
                                                                                                            (1.444) impact on math test scores.
      Appendix Table 3 (continued)
      Study                                               Study Design                                          Results
                                                                                                                Test Score = Missouri Assessment
                                                                                                                Program. Regression Specification =
                                                          Treatment Defined = The eMINTS program is             Two-level hierarchical linear model
      Impact of eMINTS Professional Development on        based on inquiry based learning, high quality         (student, school) controlling for block
      Student Achievement (Brandt et al., 2013). N        lesson design, establishing a community of            fixed-effects, pretest scores, student
      schools = 60, N teachers = 191, N students =        learners, and technology integration. It provides     gender, race, free/reduced-price lunch
      3610, Grades = 7 - 8, Location = MO, N years = 2    teachers with approximately 240 hours of              status, Limited English Proficient status,
      - 3. Treatment Groups = The program consisted       professional development spanning two years and       Individualized Education Program status,
      of two treatment groups: Teachers in the first      support that includes monthly classroom visits.       teacher gender, years of teaching, and if
      treatment group received a two-year professional    The eMINTS and Intel Teach Program combines           the teacher had a graduate degree. Note
      development program, eMINTS Comprehensive.          additional professional development and Intels’       that we report the average impact across
      Teachers in the second treatment group received     suite of Web-based teaching tools to build on         both treatment groups due to the
      the same professional development program plus      what teachers learned in the first two years of the   researchers not reporting impacts
      Intel Teach Program, which adds a third year to     program. Randomization = Participating schools        separately until the third year. For similar
      the original program length. Control teachers did   were randomly assigned to one of the three            reasons, we only report results from the
      not receive eMINTS or the Intel Teach Program.      groups. Schools had to meet requirements under        first year of implementation. Results =
      Sample drawn from high poverty rural schools.       Title I or Missouri’s historical requirements for     The eMINTS treatment had a 0.067σ
                                                          Title II.D.                                           (0.044) impact on math test scores and a




171
                                                                                                                0.007σ (0.047) impact on reading test
                                                                                                                scores.
      Appendix Table 3 (continued)
      Study                                              Study Design                                          Results
                                                         Treatment Defined = New teachers at treatment
                                                         schools were provided induction services by
                                                         either the Educational Testing Service or the New
                                                                                                               Test Score = The state math and reading
                                                         Teacher Center (districts were able to select
                                                                                                               assessments that each district
                                                         which service they wanted to receive). Teachers
                                                                                                               administered. Regression Specification =
                                                         exposed to the intervention were assigned to a
                                                                                                               Researchers used a two-level linear
                                                         full-time mentor for support and training, offered
                                                                                                               hierarchical model (student, school)
                                                         monthly professional development sessions,
                                                                                                               controlling for student-level pretest scores,
                                                         opportunities to observe veteran teachers, and a
                                                                                                               student gender, student race/ethnicity,
                                                         colloquium at the end of the school year.
                                                                                                               special education status, English-language
                                                         Randomization = Researchers invited districts
                                                                                                               learner status, free/reduced-price lunch
                                                         that met certain criteria (at least 570 teachers in
      Impacts of Comprehensive Teacher Induction:                                                              status, overage for grade, teacher age,
                                                         elementary schools, at least 50 percent of
      Results from the Second Year of a Randomized                                                             teacher age squared, teacher gender,
                                                         students eligible for free/reduced-price lunch, in
      Controlled Study (Isenberg et al., 2009). N                                                              race/ethnicity, indicator showing if a
                                                         the continental U.S., and no prior exposure to
      districts = 17, N students ≈ 3,000, Grades = K -                                                         teacher’s race/ethnicity matches that of a
                                                         comprehensive induction) to participate in the
      6. Treatment Groups = Treatment schools                                                                  majority of students, teacher route into
                                                         study. In smaller participating districts, all
      implemented a comprehensive induction program                                                            teaching, teacher highest degree, teacher
                                                         elementary schools with eligible teachers (K-6




172
      for one or two years. Control schools continued                                                          holds a degree in an education-related
                                                         teacher, not in departmentalized middle schools,
      as usual.                                                                                                field, first-year teacher, teacher hired after
                                                         new to the profession, and not already receiving
                                                                                                               the school year began, teacher attended a
                                                         support) were included in the study. Larger
                                                                                                               competitive college, teacher held a
                                                         districts could elect to only provide the
                                                                                                               non-teacher job for five or more years,
                                                         researchers with a subset of elementary schools.
                                                                                                               grade fixed-effects, and district
                                                         Participating schools within each district were
                                                                                                               fixed-effects. We report average annual
                                                         randomly assigned to a treatment or control
                                                                                                               impacts. Results = Treatment had a
                                                         group using constrained minimization. Within
                                                                                                               0.000σ (0.044) impact on reading test
                                                         participating schools, all eligible teachers were
                                                                                                               scores and a -0.010σ (0.044) impact on
                                                         included in the study. Based on the school’s
                                                                                                               math test scores.
                                                         willingness to participate, treatment schools were
                                                         then placed into groups that either received one
                                                         year or two years of intervention.
      Appendix Table 3 (continued)
      Study                                                Study Design                                           Results
                                                           Treatment Defined = Students in condition one
                                                           focused on developing the following four reading
      Improving Students’ Reading Comprehension            strategies: summarizing, questioning, clarifying,
      Skills: Effects of Comprehension Instruction and     and predicting. Students in condition two focused      Test Score = Diagnostischer Test Deutsch,
      Reciprocal Teaching (Spörer et al., 2009). N        on the same reading strategies, but instruction        assessed 12 weeks after the completion of
      schools = 2, N students = 210, Grades = 3 - 6,       was carried out in small groups of 4 - 6 students      treatment. Regression Specification =
      Location = Germany. Treatment Groups =               led by an instructor. Students in condition three      ANCOVA analysis controlling for pretest
      Three treatment conditions: condition one            were first taught the four reading strategies, and     scores. Results = The RT treatment had a
      utilized traditional reciprocal teaching (RT)        then practiced them in pairs. All conditions           0.681σ (0.203) impact on reading test
      strategies; condition two utilized instructor        received two, 45-minute lessons per week.              scores. The RTP treatment had a 0.282σ
      guided reading strategies (IG); and condition        Randomization = First, one school was                  (0.179) impact on reading test scores. The
      three utilized the reciprocal teaching in pairs      randomly assigned to the traditional instruction       IG treatment had a 0.159σ (0.198) impact
      (RTP) strategies. Control students continued with    condition as control group, whereas the other          on reading test scores.
      the normal curriculum.                               school was assigned to the intervention. Second,
                                                           students from the treatment school were
                                                           randomly assigned to treatment groups.
                                                           Treatment Defined = The intervention consisted
                                                                                                                  Test Score = State test in mathematics and
                                                           of giving New York City principals reports




173
                                                                                                                  reading. Regression Specification =
                                                           detailing the value added of their teachers relative
                                                                                                                  Researchers estimated the impact of the
      Information and Employee Evaluation: Evidence        to similar teachers in NYC and training principals
                                                                                                                  intervention by regressing student-level
      from a Randomized Intervention in Public             on how to use this information. The program was
                                                                                                                  achievement gains on an indicator for if
      Schools (Rockoff et al., 2012). N principals =       offered to principals in NYC schools containing
                                                                                                                  the student was in a treatment school,
      223, N students = 1,434, Location = New York         any grade in 4-8. Principals had to sign-up and
                                                                                                                  allowing for random effects at the teacher
      City. Treatment Groups = Treatment principals        complete a survey in order to participate. Over
                                                                                                                  and school level. The main specification
      received reports detailing the teacher’s value       1,000 principals were eligible to participate, but
                                                                                                                  reported does not include any covariates,
      added of all teachers in their school and training   only 305 signed up. Out of the 305 that signed
                                                                                                                  but the researchers showed that adding in
      on how to interpret this data. Control principals    up, only 223 completed the necessary survey.
                                                                                                                  student-level or teacher-level covariates
      did not have access to these reports and went        Randomization = Principals in the study were
                                                                                                                  does not significantly alter the results.
      about business as usual.                             assigned to blocks by grade configuration of their
                                                                                                                  Results = Treatment had a 0.028σ (0.017)
                                                           schools (elementary, middle, and K-8 schools).
                                                                                                                  impact on math test scores and a 0.008σ
                                                           Principals within each block were then randomly
                                                                                                                  (0.013) impact on reading test scores.
                                                           assigned to treatment via a random number.
      Appendix Table 3 (continued)
      Study                                               Study Design                                         Results
                                                          Treatment Defined = Treatment one - students
                                                          received a cell phone (pre-loaded with 300
      Information and Student Achievement: Evidence       minutes) with daily informational text messages
      from a Cellular Phone Experiment (Fryer, 2013).     and a fixed allocation of 200 credits on a monthly
      N students = 1,907, Grades = 6 - 7, Location =      schedule. Treatment two - students received a cell
      Oklahoma City Public Schools. Treatment             phone (pre-loaded with 300 minutes), received
                                                                                                               Test Score = Oklahoma Core Curriculum
      Groups = Three groups of treatment students         daily informational text messages, and were
                                                                                                               Criterion Referenced Tests. Regression
      were provided with free cellular phones and daily   required to read books and complete quizzes to
                                                                                                               Specification = An ITT regression
      information about the link between human capital    confirm their additional understanding of those
                                                                                                               controlling for student-level demographics
      and future outcomes via text messages.              books in order to receive additional credits on a
                                                                                                               and school fixed effects. Results =
      Treatment one students received a monthly           bi-weekly basis. Treatment three - students
                                                                                                               Information had a -0.027σ (0.039) impact
      allocation of credits on their phone and received   received a cell phone (pre-loaded with 300
                                                                                                               on math test scores and a 0.040σ (0.041)
      daily informational messages. Treatment two         minutes) and were required to read books and
                                                                                                               impact on reading test scores.
      students received daily informational messages      complete quizzes about those books in order to
                                                                                                               Non-financial incentives had a -0.023σ
      and were required to read books and take quizzes    receive additional credits on a biweekly schedule.
                                                                                                               (0.047) impact on math test scores and
      to receive additional credits on their phone.       Randomization = Sixth and seventh grade
                                                                                                               0.023σ (0.050) impact on reading test
      Treatment three students were required to read      students from the 22 eligible schools in
                                                                                                               scores.
      books and take quizzes to receive additional        Oklahoma City Public Schools (all schools with




174
      credits on their phone. Control students did not    sixth and seventh grade students that were not
      receive a phone, informational messages, or         designated alternative education academies) were
      non-financial incentives.                           eligible to participate in the program. Of those
                                                          4,810 students, 1,907 returned consent forms and
                                                          were randomized into one of the four groups.
      Appendix Table 3 (continued)
      Study                                                  Study Design                                          Results
                                                             Treatment Defined = Treatment schools                 Test Score = Statewide math and reading
                                                             implemented the following five practices:             assessments developed by the Texas
                                                             increased instructional time; replacing principals    Education Agency. Regression
                                                             and teachers who failed to adequately increase        Specification = OLS regression
      Injecting Charter School Best Practices Into           student achievement; implementing daily               controlling for student gender, race,
      Traditional Public Schools: Evidence From Field        high-dosage mathematics tutoring for fourth           free/reduced price lunch status, English
      Experiments (Fryer, 2014). N schools = 20, N           graders; use of data-driven curricula; and            language proficiency, special education
      students = 39,464, Grades = K - 5, Location =          fostering a culture of high expectations.             accommodations, and enrollment in a
      Houston, TX. Treatment Groups = Treatment              Randomization = Schools were ranked by                gifted or talented program, as well as the
      schools implemented a five-pronged intervention;       aggregate reading and math scores on state            school-wide composition of student
      control schools received no such intervention.         achievement tests for grades three through five, as   gender, race/ethnicity, free/reduced price
      Sample composed entirely of low-performing             well as by Stanford 10 scores for Kindergarten        lunch, English language proficiency,
      schools.                                               through second grade. The bottom two schools          special education status, and students in
                                                             were automatically assigned to treatment. The         gifted/talented program. Results =
                                                             remaining 18 schools were placed into pairs           Treatment had a 0.066σ (0.035) impact on
                                                             based on aggregate scores and one school from         math and a 0.034σ (0.023) impact on
                                                             each pairing was assigned randomly to treatment.      reading.
                                                                                                                   Test Score = State math and reading tests.




175
                                                                                                                   Regression Specification = OLS
                                                                                                                   regression controlling for student’s age,
                                                                                                                   gender, race/ethnicity, free lunch status,
      KIPP Middle Schools: Impacts on Achievement            Treatment Defined = KIPP is a national network        individualized education program status,
      and Other Outcomes (Tuttle et al., 2013). N            of public charter schools targeting low-income        pretreatment test scores, whether the
      schools = 10, N students ≈ 1,000, Grades = 5 - 8.      families. The goal of KIPP is to prepare students     student’s primary home language is
      Treatment Groups = The treatment group                 for college and set them up to succeed in life.       English, whether the household has only
      consists of students that won a lottery to attend      Note only 10 of 53 KIPP middle schools could be       one adult, family income, mother’s
      one of the Knowledge Is Power Program (KIPP)           included in the experimental sample due to            education, school fixed-effects, grade
      charter schools. The control group consists of         schools not being over-subscribed.                    fixed-effects, and lottery year
      students that applied and did not win the lotteries.   Randomization = Student admission lotteries.          fixed-effects. We report average annual
                                                                                                                   impacts. Results = WInning the lottery
                                                                                                                   had a 0.11σ (0.04) impact on math test
                                                                                                                   scores and a 0.05σ (0.05) impact on
                                                                                                                   reading test scores.
      Appendix Table 3 (continued)
      Study                                               Study Design                                         Results
                                                          Treatment Defined = RR is an early intervention
                                                          for low performing students. It consists of
      Literacy Learning of At-Risk First-Grade            extensive professional development for the
                                                                                                               Test Score = Slosson Oral Reading
      Students in the Reading Recovery Early              teachers and one-on-one 30 minute daily lessons
                                                                                                               Test-Revised. Regression Specification =
      Intervention (Schwartz, 2005). N teachers = 37,     to accelerate the literacy learning of their
                                                                                                               The effect size was calculated using
      N students = 148, Grade = 1, Location = 14          students. Note that students initially assigned to
                                                                                                               posttest means. Results = RR had a
      states. Treatment Groups = Treatment students       the control group participated in RR after the
                                                                                                               0.934σ (0.245) impact on reading test
      participated in Reading Recovery (RR). Control      completion of the experiment. Randomization =
                                                                                                               scores.
      students did not.                                   Two of lowest scoring students from each
                                                          classroom were randomized into treatment or
                                                          control.
      Longer-Term Impacts of Mentoring, Educational       Treatment Defined = Treatment students took
      Services, and Learning Incentives: Evidence         part in an after school program designed to
                                                                                                               Test Score = Achievement tests developed
      from a Randomized Trial in the United States        develop social and employment readiness, as well
                                                                                                               by the National Education Longitudinal
      (Rodriguez-Planas, 2012). N recruitment sites =     as boost academic performance. Students
                                                                                                               Study. Regression Specification = OLS
      7, N schools = 11, N students = 1,069, Grades = 9   received $1.25 for every hour they devoted to
                                                                                                               regression controlling for gender, age,
      - 12, N years = 5. Treatment Groups =               educational activities, as well as a significant
                                                                                                               eighth-grade GPA, race/ethnicity, and
      Treatment students received the Quantum             reward if they enrolled in postsecondary




176
                                                                                                               school. We report average annual impacts.
      Opportunity Program (QOP). Control students         education. Those students who graduated on-time
                                                                                                               Results = Treatment had a 0.012σ (0.014)
      had access only to those opportunity programs       received assistance in postsecondary placement.
                                                                                                               impact on math test scores and a 0.013σ
      available locally. Sample drawn from students       Treatment lasted a total of 750 hours per year.
                                                                                                               (0.016) impact on reading test scores.
      whose eighth-grade GPA fell below the 67th          Randomization = Students were stratified by
      percentile.                                         school and assigned at random to treatment.
                                                          Treatment Defined = At the start of each week,
      Longitudinal Effects of Classwide Peer Tutoring                                                          Test Score = The Basic Battery of the
                                                          treatment students were assigned into tutor-tutee
      (Greenwood et al., 1989). N schools = 6, N                                                               Metropolitan Achievement Test.
                                                          pairs, and these pairings were assigned to one of
      students = 416, Grades = 1 - 4, N years = 4.                                                             Regression Specification = Posttest
                                                          two teams. Tutees earned points for their team by
      Treatment Groups = Treatment group                                                                       scores adjusted for pretest scores were
                                                          completing tasks set by their tutors. Teachers
      implemented Classwide Peer Tutoring (CWPT).                                                              used to calculate effect sizes. Results =
                                                          determined the content to be tutored each week.
      Control group maintained normal curricula.                                                               Treatment had a 0.106σ (0.206) impact on
                                                          Randomization = Four schools were assigned
      Sample drawn from schools serving communities                                                            math test scores and a 0.162σ (0.209)
                                                          randomly to treatment; the remaining two schools
      of low socioeconomic status.                                                                             impact on reading test scores.
                                                          were assigned to the control group.
      Appendix Table 3 (continued)
      Study                                            Study Design                                          Results
                                                       Treatment Defined = All classrooms used a
                                                       standard course of instruction composed of 26
                                                       units. Students in the mastery condition were
                                                       tested at the end of each unit to determine if they   Test Score = Comprehensive Test of Basic
      Mastery Learning and Student Teams: A            had achieved at least 80 percent mastery. Those       Skills: mathematics computations and the
      Factorial Experiment in Urban General            who did not achieve mastery received remedial         concepts and applications subtests.
      Mathematics (Slavin and Karweit, 1984). N        instruction, while those who did received             Regression Specification = Average
      schools =16, N classrooms = 44, N students =     enrichment instruction in the same unit. Students     growth in test scores was used to calculate
      1,092, Grade = 9, Location = Philadelphia, PA.   in the team-based condition were organized into       effect sizes. Results = Implementing both
      Treatment Groups = Treatment classrooms          four-member teams and quizzed each week.              mastery and team conditions had a 0.244σ
      implemented one of three curricula: a mastery    Team members’ improvement in scores were              (0.451) impact on test scores, while
      curriculum, a team-based curriculum, or both.    summed to generate a team score, and the              implementing teams alone had a 0.183σ
      The control classrooms utilized a                highest-scoring team was recognized each week.        (0.438) impact, and implementing mastery
      focused-instruction curriculum.                  In the focused-instruction condition, students        alone had a 0.015σ (0.403) impact on test
                                                       worked individually and did not receive remedial      scores.
                                                       instruction. Randomization = Teachers were
                                                       stratified by school and assigned randomly to
                                                       treatment.




177
      Appendix Table 3 (continued)
      Study                                                Study Design                                          Results
                                                           Treatment Defined = Treatment students were
                                                           taught in classrooms where teachers had applied
                                                           to the National Board for Professional Teaching
                                                           Standards (NBPTS) for certification. Note that in
                                                           order to apply for the National Board certification
                                                                                                                 Test Score = California Standards Test:
                                                           teachers have to have a minimum of three years
                                                                                                                 math and language subtests. Regression
                                                           teaching experience. The researchers therefore
                                                                                                                 Specification = Student outcome
                                                           restricted the control group to classrooms with
                                                                                                                 regressions controlled for
      National Board Certification and Teacher             teachers that had at least three years of
                                                                                                                 school-by-year-by-grade fixed effects,
      Effectiveness: Evidence from a Random                experience. Randomization = Invitations were
                                                                                                                 baseline math and reading scores
      Assignment Experiment (Cantrell et al., 2008). N     sent out to all elementary schools in the Los
                                                                                                                 interacted with grade, race/ethnicity, ever
      teachers = 198, N students ≈ 3800, Grades = 2 -      Angeles Unified School District and school
                                                                                                                 retained, Title I, eligible for free lunch,
      5, Location = Los Angeles Unified School             participation was voluntary. Teachers in
                                                                                                                 homeless, migrant, gifted and talented,
      District. Treatment Groups = Treatment               participating schools were matched to NBPTS
                                                                                                                 special education, English language
      classrooms were taught by teachers that had          records and grade 2-5 teachers that had ever
                                                                                                                 development, and the means of these
      applied for certification at any point in time and   applied for NBPTS certification were selected.
                                                                                                                 variables among all students in the class.
      control classrooms were taught by teachers that      The research team matched each of these teachers
                                                                                                                 Results = Teachers who applied to
      never applied.                                       with another teacher in the same school, grade,




178
                                                                                                                 certification had an impact of -0.015σ
                                                           and calendar track to serve as comparison.
                                                                                                                 (0.071) on math test scores and an impact
                                                           Principals were then asked to identify two classes
                                                                                                                 of -0.019σ (0.060) on reading test scores
                                                           that they would be willing to assign to either of
                                                                                                                 relative to teachers who never applied.
                                                           these paired teachers. The researchers randomly
                                                           assigned each pair of teachers to the classes that
                                                           the principals chose for them. After classroom
                                                           randomization, no further contact was made with
                                                           the schools from the research team.
      Appendix Table 3 (continued)
      Study                                              Study Design                                            Results
                                                         Treatment Defined = Students received $15 for
                                                         each test on which they scored proficient or            Test Score = Terra Nova or Ohio
                                                         better. They received more for advanced or              Achievement standardized math and
                                                         accelerated designation. Payment was given in           reading test. Regression Specification =
                                                         the form of “Coshocton children’s bucks”, gift          OLS regression controlling for grade,
      Paying to Learn: The Effect of Financial
                                                         certificates redeemable at any store in Coshocton.      school, time fixed-effects, age, gender,
      Incentives on Elementary School Test Scores
                                                         Randomization = The unit of randomization was           race, free or reduced-price lunch status,
      (Bettinger, 2012). N students = 873, Grades= 3 -
                                                         the grade level at each of four eligible elementary     pretest scores, and an indicator for
      6, Location = Coshocton, OH. Treatment
                                                         schools. Each year, eight of sixteen eligible           outcome test taken. Results are pooled
      Groups = Treatment students were incentivized
                                                         grade-school combinations were selected via             over three years. Standard errors are
      by cash to pass tests. Control students were not
                                                         lottery to receive financial incentives. First, the     clustered at the grade-school level.
      incentivized.
                                                         district randomly selected one grade per school.        Results = Treatment had a 0.1328σ
                                                         After these four drawings, Conschocton                  (0.0485) impact on math test scores and a
                                                         conducted a fifth drawing in which they chose           0.0103σ (0.0454) impact on reading test
                                                         four additional grade-school combinations from          scores.
                                                         amongst the remaining possibilities.
      Prevention and Remediation of Severe Reading                                                               Test Score = Woodcock Johnson Mastery
                                                         Treatment Defined = All treatment children
      Disabilities: Keeping the End in Mind (Torgesen                                                            Tests-Revised: Word Attack, Word




179
                                                         received 80 minutes of supplemental individual
      et al., 1997). N schools = 13, N students = 180,                                                           Identification, and Passage
                                                         instruction per week for 30 months. Children in
      Grades = K - 2, N years = 3. Treatment Groups                                                              Comprehension subtests. Regression
                                                         the PASP condition received explicit instruction
      = Three treatment conditions: condition one                                                                Specification = Average posttest scores
                                                         in how to sound-out words. Students in the EP
      entailed phonological awareness training plus                                                              were used to calculate effect sizes.
                                                         group learned words through phonics games,
      synthetic phonics instruction (PASP), condition                                                            Average annual effect across outcome
                                                         contextual definitions, sentence construction, and
      two entailed implict embedded phonics                                                                      measures is reported. Results = The PASP
                                                         reading exercises. The RCS group received
      instruction (EP), and condition three entailed a                                                           treatment had a 0.286σ (0.103) impact on
                                                         tutoring in the skills and activities currently being
      regular classroom support group (RCS). The                                                                 reading test scores. The EP treatment had
                                                         taught in their curriculum. Randomization =
      control group maintained normal curricula.                                                                 a 0.112σ (0.098) impact on reading test
                                                         Students were randomly assigned to one of the
      Sample drawn entirely from children with low                                                               scores. The RCS treatment had a 0.094σ
                                                         four conditions.
      phonological language ability.                                                                             (0.097) impact on reading test scores.
      Appendix Table 3 (continued)
      Study                                                Study Design                                         Results
                                                                                                                Test Score = The reading and math
      Private School Vouchers and Student
                                                                                                                subtests of the Iowa Test of Basic Skills.
      Achievement: An Evaluation of the Milwaukee
                                                           Treatment Defined = Treatment students               Regression Specification = OLS
      Parental Choice Program (Rouse, 1998). N
                                                           received vouchers to at least partially offset the   regression controlling for school and grade
      students = 2,258, Grades = K - 8, Location =
                                                           cost of attendance at a nonsectarian private         applying, as well as gender and family
      Milwaukee, WI, N years = 4. Treatment Groups
                                                           school of their choice. Randomization =              income. Note we only report the results
      = Treatment groups received a voucher to attend
                                                           Students were stratified by the grade and school     for one year after randomization due to the
      a private school. Control students did not receive
                                                           for which they were applying, then randomly          magnitude of attrition in later years.
      a voucher. Sample composed entirely of students
                                                           assigned to treatment.                               Results = Treatment had a 0.105σ (0.082)
      whose family income fell at least 1.75 times
                                                                                                                impact on math test scores and a 0.049σ
      below the poverty line.
                                                                                                                (0.075) impact on reading test scores.
                                                           Treatment Defined = The professional
      Putting Books in the Classroom Seems Necessary       development focused on techniques for
      But Not Sufficient (McGill-Franzen et al., 1999).    encouraging children to pick up books and read       Test Score = Peabody Picture Vocabulary
      N schools = 6, N teachers = 18, N students = 456,    them. The training covered topics such as            Test. Regression Specification = Average
      Grade = K, Location = Large urban eastern            physical design of the classroom, effective book     gains from pre to posttest scores were
      school district. Treatment Groups = Teachers in      displays, importance of reading aloud to children,   used to calculate effect sizes. Results =
      the first treatment group received training and      and small-group lessons using teacher                The training and books treatment had a




180
      books for their classroom. Teachers in the second    made-materials. Randomization = Eighteen             0.118σ (0.578) impact on reading test
      treatment group did not receive training, but        kindergarten teachers, three each from six           scores. The books treatment had a -0.465σ
      received books. Control teachers did not receive     schools, were randomly assigned into three           (0.585) on reading test scores.
      training or books.                                   groups – (a) training and books, (b) no training
                                                           and books, (c) no training and no books.
                                                                                                                Test Score = Woodcock Reading Mastery
                                                                                                                Tests-Revised: Word Reading Accuracy
                                                           Treatment Defined = The Quick Reads program
      Repeated Reading Intervention: Outcomes and                                                               subtest; Test of Word Reading Efficiency:
                                                           builds reading fluency via repeated reading
      Interactions with Readers’ Skills and Classroom                                                           Sight Word subtest; Gary Oral Reading
                                                           strategies, in which tutors first introduced a
      Instruction (Vadasy and Sanders, 2008). N                                                                 Test 4: Rate and Comprehension subtests.
                                                           passage, and then students read it approximately
      schools = 13, N students = 162, Grades = 2 - 3.                                                           Regression Specification = For each
                                                           three to four times. Tutoring sessions were
      Treatment Groups = Treatment students                                                                     outcome measure, effect sizes were
                                                           conducted in pairs four days per week for 15
      received the Quick Reads tutoring program.                                                                calculated using the average growth
                                                           weeks. Randomization = Students were
      Control group received no tutoring. Sample                                                                between posttest and pretest scores. We
                                                           stratified by grade and school and placed at
      drawn from students with demonstrated difficulty                                                          report the average effect across all
                                                           random into pairs. Pairings were then assigned at
      reading, as determined by pretest scores.                                                                 outcome measures. Results = Treatment
                                                           random to treatment.
                                                                                                                had a 0.300σ (0.158) impact on reading
                                                                                                                test scores.
      Appendix Table 3 (continued)
      Study                                                  Study Design                                         Results
      School Choice as a Latent Variable: Estimating
                                                                                                                  Test Score = The Iowa Test of Basic
      the “Complier Average Causal Effect” of
                                                                                                                  Skills. Regression Specification = OLS
      Vouchers in Charlotte (Cowen, 2008). N students        Treatment Defined = The vouchers offered
                                                                                                                  regressions controlling for family income,
      = 1,143, Grades = 2 - 8. Location = Charlotte,         grants of up to $1,700 annually to at least
                                                                                                                  mother’s education, mother’s race,
      NC. Treatment Groups = Treatment students              partially offset the cost of tuition at a private
                                                                                                                  whether both parents lived at home, and
      were offered a voucher to offset the cost of tuition   school. Treatment students could attend the
                                                                                                                  student’s gender. Results = Being offered
      at a private school. Control students applied but      private school of their choice. Randomization =
                                                                                                                  a voucher had a 0.237σ (0.131) impact on
      did not receive a voucher. Only low-income             Random lottery.
                                                                                                                  math test scores and a 0.292σ (0.134)
      applicants were considered for the voucher
                                                                                                                  impact on reading scores.
      program.
      School Choice in Dayton, Ohio after Two Years:
      An Evaluation of the Parents Advancing Choice
      in Education Scholarship Program (West et al.,
                                                                                                                  Test Score = Iowa Test of Basic Skills.
      2001). N students = 515, Grades = 2 - 9, Location
                                                             Treatment Defined = Parents Advancing Choice         Regression Specification = OLS
      = Dayton, OH. Treatment Groups = Students
                                                             in Education offered low income parents              regression controlling for pretest math and
      from the treatment group received scholarships to
                                                             scholarships to help defray the costs of sending     reading scores. We report annual impacts.
      help with the cost of private schools. Control
                                                             their children to private schools in Dayton, Ohio.   Results = Treatment had a 0.054σ (0.112)
      group comprises of students who lost lottery for




181
                                                             Randomization = Random lottery.                      impact on math test scores and a 0.078σ
      scholarships. Analysis sample consists of only
                                                                                                                  (0.112) impact on reading test scores.
      those students who were in public school at the
      time of randomization. Vouchers were also
      offered to students already in private school.
                                                             Treatment Defined = Treatment families
                                                             received $1,400 annually from the SCSF for at
                                                                                                                  Test Score = The reading and
      School Choice in New York City After Three             least three years. The scholarship was designed
                                                                                                                  mathematics subtests of the Iowa Test of
      Years: An Evaluation of the School Choice              to at least partially offset the cost of
                                                                                                                  Basic Skills. Regression Specification =
      Scholarships Program (Mayer et al., 2002). N           private-school attendance. Families could select
                                                                                                                  OLS regression controlling for prestest
      families = 1,960, Grades = 1 - 5, Location = New       the private school of their choice.
                                                                                                                  scores and whether the student came from
      York City. Treatment Groups = Treatment                Randomization = Eligible applicants were
                                                                                                                  a public school whose test scores were
      families were offered a scholarship funded by the      stratified by whether their school’s test scores
                                                                                                                  below the median. We report the average
      School Choice Scholarships Foundation (SCSF).          were above or below the city-wide median.
                                                                                                                  annual impact over three years. Results =
      Control families were not offered a scholarship.       Eighty-five percent of the treatment group was
                                                                                                                  Treatment had a 0.020σ (0.033) impact on
      To be eligible for the scholarship, students had to    selected at random from those applicants whose
                                                                                                                  math test scores and a 0.003σ (0.033)
      be eligible for free or reduced-price lunch.           schools were below the median. The remaining
                                                                                                                  impact on reading test scores.
                                                             fifteen percent was selected at random from those
                                                             applicants whose schools were above the median.
      Appendix Table 3 (continued)
      Study                                               Study Design                                           Results
                                                          Treatment Defined = The literacy program was a
                                                          five-week program that lasted for 3.5 hours a day,
                                                          four days a week. In the program, students
                                                          received classroom instruction on fundamental
                                                          literacy topics, were assigned homework,               Test Score = Dynamic Indicators of Basic
                                                          completed in-class work packets, and practiced         Early Literacy: Nonsense Word Fluency
                                                          literacy skills in small groups with students of a     subtest for kindergarten students and the
                                                          similar skill level. Randomization = In the years      Test of Oral Reading Fluency for the first
      Summer School Effects in a Randomized Field         preceding the intervention, all students below         grade students. Regression Specification
      Trial (Zvoch and Stevens, 2012). N students = 93,   certain cutoff scores on the Nonsense Word             = OLS regressions. The ITT results
      Grades = K - 1. Treatment Groups = Treatment        Fluency test or Test of Oral Reading Fluency           reported by the researchers do not contain
      students were invited to participate in a summer    were invited to participate in summer school. In       any covariates as controls. However, they
      literacy program. Control students were not.        2010, all students that fell below the cutoff scores   do note that in models that contained
                                                          were invited and not included in the analysis. The     student characteristic variables, the
                                                          district then established upper bounds so that         treatment effects remained qualitatively
                                                          approximately 50 kindergartners and 50 first           similar. Results = Treatment had a 0.691σ
                                                          graders fell in the range between the cutoff scores    (0.280) impact on reading test scores.
                                                          and the upper bound scores. Students that fell in




182
                                                          this range of scores were considered the
                                                          experimental sample and randomized into
                                                          treatment or control.
                                                          Treatment Defined = Over a period of 11 weeks,
                                                          treatment teachers were asked to increase target
                                                                                                                 Test Score = The vocabulary and reading
      Teacher Behavior and Pupil Performance:             behaviors. These target behaviors included more
                                                                                                                 comprehension subtests of the
      Reconsideration of the Mediation of Pygmalion       reading group time, maximizing “best” reading
                                                                                                                 Gates-MacGintie Reading Test.
      Effects (Alpert, 1975). N schools = 13, N           time – those periods when the teacher reported
                                                                                                                 Regression Specification = For each
      teachers = 17, N classrooms = 17, N students =      feeling most motivated to teach, covering more
                                                                                                                 outcome measure, effect sizes were
      352, Grade = 2, Location = New York City.           materials in their reading group, including fewer
                                                                                                                 calculated using the average growth
      Treatment Groups = Treatment teachers were          pupils in their reading group, and utilizing more
                                                                                                                 between posttest and pretest scores. We
      asked to increase the frequency of certain          good verbal behaviors (praising students’
                                                                                                                 report the average effect across all
      behaviors. Control teachers received no such        reading, support, reinforcement, praising
                                                                                                                 outcome measures. Results = Treatment
      intervention. Sample drawn exclusively from         students’ behavior, encouraging questions, etc.) –
                                                                                                                 had a 0.072σ (0.557) impact on reading
      Catholic schools.                                   and positive reinforcement of student success.
                                                                                                                 test scores.
                                                          Randomization = Schools were randomly
                                                          assigned to treatment.
      Appendix Table 3 (continued)
      Study                                                Study Design                                         Results
                                                           Treatment Defined = Treatment involved giving
                                                           schools financial incentives based on whether        Test Score = State math and reading test
      Teacher Incentives and Student Achievement:          they met the annual performance target set by the    scores. Regression Specification =
      Evidence from New York City Public Schools           Department of Education. Schools were free to        Regressions include test scores from
      (Fryer, 2013). N schools = 396, N students =         distribute money among teachers at their own         previous years, demographic
      185,612, Grades = K - 12, Location = New York        discretion. Randomization = Schools were             characteristics and school level controls.
      City. Treatment Groups = Treatment schools           randomly assigned based on average proficiency       We report the annual impact. Results =
      received financial incentives. Control schools did   ratings, poverty rates and student demographic       Treatment had a -0.030σ (0.019) impact
      not.                                                 characteristics. Final experimental sample           on math test scores and a -0.018σ (0.021)
                                                           consisted of 233 treatment schools and 163           impact on reading test scores.
                                                           control schools.
                                                                                                                Test Score = Tennessee Comprehensive
                                                                                                                Assessment Program. Regression
                                                                                                                Specification = Linear models controlling
                                                           Treatment Defined = POINT was open to
                                                                                                                for pretest scores, race/ethnicity, gender,
                                                           middle school mathematics teachers. POINT
                                                                                                                English Language Learner status, special
                                                           allowed for treatment teachers to receive an
                                                                                                                education status, free/reduced-price lunch
      Teacher Pay for Performance: Experimental            incentive for sufficiently high value added. All
                                                                                                                status, number of days of suspension and




183
      Evidence from the Project on Incentives in           treatment and control teachers received a stipend
                                                                                                                unexcused absences, teacher’s
      Teaching (Springer et al., 2010). N teachers =       of $750. Randomization = Schools were
                                                                                                                value-added from the year before the
      296, N students = 23,784, Grades = 5 - 8.            stratified into ten groups based on student scores
                                                                                                                experiment, and the average pretest score
      Treatment Groups = Treatment teachers                in prior years. Randomization was done within
                                                                                                                of students in a teacher’s class. The
      participated in the Project on Incentives in         strata. Clusters of teachers were then assigned to
                                                                                                                models also include block fixed effects
      Teaching (POINT) and control teachers did not.       treatment or control status. Clusters were defined
                                                                                                                and cluster random effects. We report the
                                                           based on course groups. Assignments to
                                                                                                                average annual impact across three years.
                                                           treatment and control were permanent for the
                                                                                                                Results = Treatment had an impact of
                                                           duration of the project.
                                                                                                                0.017σ (0.023) on math test scores and an
                                                                                                                impact of 0.003σ (0.012) on reading test
                                                                                                                scores.
      Appendix Table 3 (continued)
      Study                                                Study Design                                          Results
                                                                                                                 Test Score = Woodcock Diagnostic
                                                           Treatment Defined = Treatment entailed a              Reading Battery: Oral Vocabulary,
      Teacher Study Group: Impact of the Professional      professional development program designed to          Reading Vocabulary, Passage
      Development Model on Reading Instruction and         integrate research-based comprehension and            Comprehension, Letter Word
      Student Outcomes in First Grade Classrooms           vocabulary instruction into the classroom.            Identification, and Word Attack subtests;
      (Gersten et al., 2010). N recruitment sites = 3, N   Teachers in treatment schools read and discussed      Dynamic Indicators of Basic Early
      schools = 19, N teachers = 84, N students = 575,     instructional methods in small groups and             Literacy Skills: Oral Reading Fluency
      Grade = 1. Treatment Groups = Treatment              designed curricula to incorporate these strategies.   subtests. Regression Specification =
      teachers took part in a teacher study group (TSG)    Treatment occurred over sixteen 75-minute             Two-level hierarchical linear model
      intervention. Control teachers utilized the          sessions held twice a month from October to           (student, teacher) controlling for pretest
      district’s normal professional development           June. Randomization = Schools were assigned           scores, as well as teacher and school fixed
      program. Sample drawn from schools already           at random to treatment. Seven students from each      effects. We report the average effect
      utilizing the Reading First program.                 classroom were selected at random for the             across all outcome measures. Results =
                                                           student sample.                                       Treatment had a 0.225σ (0.205) impact on
                                                                                                                 reading test scores.
                                                           Treatment Defined = Performance awards were
                                                           distributed to teams of teachers based on their
                                                                                                                 Test Score = Texas Assessment of
                                                           collective contribution to student test score gains




184
                                                                                                                 Knowledge and Skills; Stanford
      Team Pay for Performance: Experimental               in the four core subjects. Team performance was
                                                                                                                 Achievement Test. Regression
      Evidence From the Round Rock Pilot Project on        based on a value-added measure of student
                                                                                                                 Specification = Two-level hierarchical
      Team Incentives (Springer et al., 2012). N           performance or standardized test scores. Teams
                                                                                                                 linear model (student, team) controlling
      schools = 9, N teacher teams = 159, N students =     were predefined by the district and were
                                                                                                                 for pretreatment test scores and
      17,383, Grades = 6 - 8, Location = Round Rock        organized such that each team had at least one
                                                                                                                 demographics. We report the average
      Independent School District in Texas. Treatment      teacher for each core subject. Each team typically
                                                                                                                 impact across years and outcomes.
      Groups = Treatment teachers received monetary        oversaw the learning experience of 100-140
                                                                                                                 Results = Treatment had an impact of
      awards based on their students’ performance and      students. Randomization = In each year of the
                                                                                                                 0.000σ (0.020) on math test scores and an
      control teachers did not.                            2-year study, teams were randomized to either the
                                                                                                                 impact of -0.002σ (0.017) on reading test
                                                           awards intervention or control condition using
                                                                                                                 scores.
                                                           block-randomization design. Blocks were defined
                                                           by grades within school.
      Appendix Table 3 (continued)
      Study                                               Study Design                                         Results
                                                                                                               Test Score = EXPLORE and PLAN tests,
                                                                                                               developed by ACT Inc. Regression
      The (Surprising) Efficacy of Academic and           Treatment Defined = BAM included in-school           Specification = An OLS regression
      Behavioral Intervention with Disadvantaged          programming that exposes youth to pro-social         controlling for age, grade, prior math and
      Youth: Results from a Randomized Experiment         adults, and provides them with social-cognitive      reading test scores, Individualized
      in Chicago (Cook et al., 2014). N students = 106,   skill training that follows the principles of        Education Plan status, previous year GPA,
      Grades = 9 - 10, Location = South Side of           cognitive behavioral therapy. Students in            absences, suspensions and disciplinary
      Chicago. Treatment Groups = Students in             treatment two also received high-dosage, small       incidents, and free lunch eligibility.
      treatment one participated in “Becoming a Man”      group tutoring. Randomization = From the             Results = Treatment one had a 0.611σ
      (BAM). Students in treatment two participated in    student population, 106 high-risk males were         (0.227) impact on math test scores and a
      BAM and received tutoring. Control students         chosen to participate based on an “academic risk     -0.071σ (0.319) impact on reading test
      continued business as usual. The sample             index.” These students were stratified by grade      scores. Treatment two had a 0.425σ
      consisted entirely of male students.                and then randomly assigned to the three groups.      (0.226) impact on math test scores and a
                                                                                                               -0.043σ (0.262) impact on reading test
                                                                                                               scores.
                                                                                                               Test Score = Reading subtest of the Test
                                                                                                               of Academic Proficiency. Regression
                                                                                                               Specification = OLS regression




185
                                                          Treatment Defined = This study uses
      The Effect of School Choice on Participants:                                                             controlling for race, pretest scores, age,
                                                          randomized lotteries that determine high school
      Evidence from Randomized Lotteries (Cullen et                                                            free-lunch eligibility, special education,
                                                          admission in Chicago Public Schools to
      al., 2006). N districts = 1, N schools = 19, N                                                           bilingual education, living with biological
                                                          investigate the impact of school choice. The
      students = 14434, Grade = 8, Location =                                                                  parent, attending assigned eighth grade
                                                          authors exploit the fact that Chicago’s public
      Chicago, N years = 2. Treatment Groups =                                                                 school, census tract characteristics
                                                          school students can apply to gain access to public
      Treatment students received an offer of admission                                                        (fraction Black, fraction Hispanic, poverty
                                                          schools outside of their neighborhood school
      to a school of their choice. Control students did                                                        rate, fraction high school graduates,
                                                          (this is known as an open enrollment system).
      not receive admission. Sample composed of                                                                fraction homeowners, fraction not in labor
                                                          Randomization = Oversubscribed schools
      oversubscribed high schools that determined                                                              force, crime index, fraction of high school
                                                          stratify applicants by gender and race, and offer
      admission via random lottery.                                                                            students attending private schools), and
                                                          admission via a random lottery.
                                                                                                               lottery fixed-effects. Results = Winning a
                                                                                                               lottery to any school had a -0.038σ
                                                                                                               (0.015) impact on reading test scores.
      Appendix Table 3 (continued)
      Study                                              Study Design                                         Results
      The Effective Instruction of Comprehension:
                                                         Treatment Defined = The KEEP intervention is         Test Score = The Gates-MacGintie
      Results and Description of the Kamehameha
                                                         a small-group program designed to boost reading      Reading Test and the Metropolitan
      Early Education Program (Tharp and Roland,
                                                         comprehension among at-risk students. The            Achievement Test. Regression
      1982). N schools = 2, N classrooms = 8, Grade =
                                                         program utilizes face-to-face student-teacher        Specification = Effect sizes were
      1, Location = HI. Treatment Groups =
                                                         interaction to teach comprehension instruction, as   calculated using the average posttest
      Treatment classrooms implemented the
                                                         well as sight vocabulary and analytic phonics.       scores. We report the average effect across
      Kamehameha Early Education Program (KEEP)
                                                         The intervention took the place of normal class      all tests. Results = Treatment had a
      intervention. Control classrooms received no
                                                         time. Randomization = Students were randomly         0.300σ (0.141) impact on reading test
      such intervention. Sample drawn entirely from
                                                         assigned to treatment.                               scores.
      semi-rural public schools.
                                                                                                              Test Score = Standardized tests typically
      The Effectiveness of Extended Day Programs:        Treatment Defined = The extended day program         used in Dutch elementary schools.
      Evidence from a Randomized Field Experiment        consisted of an additional two hours of language     Regression Specification = OLS
      in the Netherlands (Meyer and Klaveren, 2013).     instruction, two hours of math instruction, and      regressions controlling for math pretest
      N schools = 7, N students = 188, Grades = 5 - 7,   one hour of excursions per week. The                 scores, gender, minority status, parents’
      Location = Netherlands. Treatment Groups =         intervention was conducted at one of the             education, family structure, and class size.
      Treatment students received an offer to            participating schools, and classes were composed     Results = Assignment to treatment had a
      participate in an extended school day program.     of 10 students. Randomization = Students were        0.087σ (0.067) impact on math test scores




186
      The control group received no such offer.          randomly assigned to treatment or control.           and a 0.005σ (0.081) impact on reading
                                                                                                              test scores.
      Appendix Table 3 (continued)
      Study                                                Study Design                                          Results
                                                           Treatment Defined = TFA and Teaching Fellows
                                                           programs take a distinctive approach to
                                                           addressing the need for high-quality teachers of
                                                           hard-to-staff subjects in high-poverty schools.
                                                                                                                 Test Score = For middle school students,
      The Effectiveness of Secondary Math Teachers         TFA and the Teaching Fellows programs have
                                                                                                                 authors obtained scores on state-required
      from Teach for America and the Teaching              highly selective admissions criteria designed to
                                                                                                                 assessments. For high school students,
      Fellows Programs (Clark et al., 2013). N states =    admit only applicants who have demonstrated a
                                                                                                                 authors administered end-of-course math
      11, N districts = 15, N schools = 82, N teachers =   high level of achievement in academics or other
                                                                                                                 assessments developed by the Northwest
      287, N students = 12,699, Grades = 6 - 12.           endeavors and who possess characteristics that
                                                                                                                 Evaluation Association. Regression
      Treatment Groups = Two treatment groups:             the programs view as being associated with
                                                                                                                 Specification = OLS regressions that
      Students in treatment one were taught by teachers    effective teaching. Randomization = In each
                                                                                                                 controlled for students’ pretest scores,
      from the Teach for America (TFA) program.            participating school, authors identified
                                                                                                                 baseline characteristics, and classroom
      Students in treatment two were taught by teachers    “classroom matches”—two or more classes
                                                                                                                 match indicators. Results = Assignment
      from the The New Teacher Project Teaching            covering the same middle or high school math
                                                                                                                 to TFA teachers had a 0.07σ (0.02) impact
      Fellows program. Control students were taught        course at the same level, with at least one class
                                                                                                                 on math test scores. Assignment to
      by teachers who did not enter teaching through       taught by a teacher from the program being
                                                                                                                 Teaching Fellows had a 0.00σ (0.02)
      either of these programs.                            studied (TFA or Teaching Fellows) and at least
                                                                                                                 impact on math test scores.
                                                           one class taught by another teacher, referred to as




187
                                                           a comparison teacher, who did not enter teaching
                                                           through a highly selective alternative route.
                                                           Students were randomly assigned to these classes.
                                                           Treatment Defined = The TAI program creates a
                                                           competitive classroom environment, in which
      The Effectiveness of Team-Accelerated
                                                           teams of students earn points by completing           Test Score = Iowa Test of Basic Skills:
      Instruction on High Achievers in Mathematics
                                                           common goals. Students progress through the           math concepts and math computation
      (Karper and Melnick, 1993). N classrooms = 12,
                                                           program’s subject matter as rapidly as they are       subtests. Regression Specification =
      N students = 247, Grades = 3 - 5, Location =
                                                           able. Randomization = Four classrooms per             Effect sizes were calculated using the
      Hershey, PA. Treatment Groups = Treatment
                                                           grade were included in the study, and two             average growth between posttest and
      classrooms implemented the Team-Accelerated
                                                           classrooms within each grade were assigned to         pretest scores. Results = Treatment had a
      Instruction (TAI) math program. Control
                                                           the treatment condition. Students were stratified     -0.037σ (0.227) impact on math scores.
      classrooms continued with their normal curricula.
                                                           by grade and randomly assigned to treatment or
                                                           control classrooms.
      Appendix Table 3 (continued)
      Study                                               Study Design                                      Results
                                                          Treatment Defined = Treatment teachers
                                                          underwent a comprehensive staff development
                                                          training program using Mississippi Teacher
      The Effects of A One-Year Staff Development
                                                          Assessment Instrument modules as training         Test Score = Math and reading scores
      Program on the Achievement Test Scores of
                                                          materials. The 14 Mississippi Teacher             from the Stanford Achievement Test.
      Fourth-Grade Students (Cole, 1992). N schools =
                                                          Assessment Instrument teacher (pedagogical)       Regression Specification = Effect sizes
      1, N teachers = 12, N students = 268, Grade = 4,
                                                          behavior competencies include topics such as      were calculated using average posttest
      Location = MS. Treatment Groups = Treatment
                                                          planning instruction to achieve selected          score adjusted for pretest scores. Results
      teachers received the Mississippi Teacher
                                                          objectives, organizing instruction to take into   = Treatment had a 0.508σ (0.586) impact
      Assessment Instrument staff development
                                                          account individual differences among learners,    on math test scores and a 0.566σ (0.589)
      program. Control teachers continued
                                                          and obtaining and using information about the     impact on reading test scores.
      business-as-usual.
                                                          needs and progress of individual learners.
                                                          Randomization = Teachers were randomly
                                                          assigned to the treatment or control group.
      The Effects of ‘Brain Gym’ as a General             Treatment Defined = Brain Gym is a movement       Test Score = The math and reading
      Education Intervention: Improving Academic          based program designed to promote whole-brain     subtests of the Texas Assessment of
      Performance and Behaviors (Nussbaum, 2010).         learning. It is derived from the fundamental      Knowledge and Skills. Regression
      N students = 364, Grades = 2 - 6, Location = East   premise that learning occurs as humans receive    Specification = Effect sizes were




188
      TX. Treatment Groups = Treatment students           sensory stimuli and initiate movement.            calculated from the growth between pre
      were assigned to classrooms that used the ‘Brain    Randomization = Students were randomly            and posttest means. Results = Brain Gym
      Gym’ curriculum. Control students were              assigned to classrooms and then classrooms were   had a 0.130σ (0.105) impact on math test
      assigned to classrooms that continued with their    randomly assigned to treatment and control        scores and a 0.188σ (0.106) impact on
      normal curricula.                                   groups.                                           reading test scores.
      Appendix Table 3 (continued)
      Study                                              Study Design                                         Results
                                                         Treatment Defined = During PALS sessions,
                                                         higher-ability students were paired with
                                                         lower-ability students as determined by the
                                                         teacher. These pairings would earn points by         Test Score = The Woodcock Reading
      The Effects of Peer-Assisted Literacy Strategies   completing assigned tasks. These 35-minute           Mastery Tests-Revised. Regression
      for First-Grade Readers With and Without           sessions occurred three times per week for 14        Specification = For each outcome
      Additional Mini-Skills Lessons (Mathes and         weeks. Students in the mini-lesson group were        measure, effect sizes were calculated
      Babyak, 2001). N schools = 5, N teachers = 30,     placed into groups of three and received 15 to 20    using the average growth between posttest
      N students = 130, Grade = 1. Treatment Groups      minutes of fluency instruction from their teachers   and pretest scores. We report the average
      = Two treatment groups: one incorporated           three times weekly for six weeks. All                effect across all outcome measures.
      Peer-Assisted Learning Strategies (PALS) into      interventions took the place of normal classtime     Results = The PALS treatment had a
      their curricula, the other incorporated PALS and   instruction. Randomization = Schools were            0.779σ (0.465) impact on reading test
      small-group mini-lessons. Control group            stratified by demographic similarity. Researchers    scores. The PALS and mini-lessons
      maintained their normal curricula.                 determined the number of teachers to recruit from    treatment had a 0.854σ (0.499) impact on
                                                         each type of school in order to create a             reading test scores.
                                                         representative stratified sample. Volunteer
                                                         teachers were randomly assigned to the three
                                                         groups.




189
                                                         Treatment Defined = Tutoring was done as a
      The Effects of Structured One-on-One Tutoring
                                                         part of the Edmark Reading Program, where            Test Score = Woodcock Reading Mastery
      in Sight Word Recognition of First-Grade
                                                         America Reads volunteers were trained for two        Tests-Revised: Word Identification and
      Students At-Risk for Reading Failure (Mayfield,
                                                         hours either individually or in small groups by      Passage Comprehension subtests.
      2000). N students = 60, Grade = 1, Location =
                                                         the researcher. Randomization = Principals and       Regression Specification = Effect sizes
      LA. Treatment Groups = Treatment students
                                                         teachers selected a sample of students from the      were calculated using average posttest
      received 15 minutes per day of one-on-one
                                                         bottom 20 to 30% of first grade readers. Students    scores. Results = Treatment had a 0.346σ
      tutoring and control students were read to aloud
                                                         in the selected sample were then randomly            (0.184) impact on reading test scores.
      in small groups for 15 minutes per day.
                                                         assigned to treatment or control groups.
      Appendix Table 3 (continued)
      Study                                                Study Design                                         Results
                                                           Treatment Defined = All interventions took
                                                           place outside of normal class for 40 minutes per
                                                           day, five days per week, in groups of three.
                                                           Proactive Reading systematically built reading
                                                           skills to develop fluency. As the intervention       Test Score = The Woodcock-Johnson
                                                           progressed, words gradually became more              reading battery. Regression Specification
      The Effects of Theoretically Different Instruction   complicated and texts became more difficult.         = For each outcome measure, effect sizes
      and Student Characteristics on the Skills of         Responsive Reading had teachers tailor daily         were calculated using the posttest means.
      Struggling Readers (Mathes et al., 2005). N          lessons to student needs. Teachers offered           We report the average effect across all
      schools = 6, N students = 298, Grade = 1.            explicit instruction in reading and gradually let    outcome measures. Results = The
      Treatment Groups = Treatment one students            students become more independent as the              Proactive Reading treatment had a
      participated in the Proactive Reading program.       intervention progressed. All schools in the study    -0.067σ (0.157) impact on math test
      Treatment two students participated in the           used an enhanced curriculum that built upon the      scores and a 0.283σ (0.158) impact on
      Responsive Reading program. Control students         district’s normal curriculum by offering             reading test scores. The Responsive
      did not participate in any such program.             assessment measures to help teachers identify if     Reading treatment had a -0.133σ (0.156)
                                                           and how students were struggling with reading.       impact on math test scores and a 0.250σ
                                                           Randomization = The sample was drawn from            (0.156) impact on reading test scores.
                                                           students at risk of developing persistent reading




190
                                                           difficulty, as determined by the pretest. Eligible
                                                           students were stratified by school and then
                                                           assigned at random to one of the three groups.
                                                                                                                Test Score = Woodcock Johnson-
                                                                                                                Revised: Word Identification, Word
                                                           Treatment Defined = College students                 Attack, and Passage Comprehension
                                                           administering the tutoring to treatment group        subtests; Test of Word Reading Efficiency:
                                                           students received three one-hour group training      Real Word and Nonword subtest;
      The Efficacy of an Early Literacy Tutoring
                                                           sessions and additional assistance on site. Each     Dynamic Indicators of Basic Early
      Program Implemented by College Students (Allor
                                                           student was tutored on average 2 to 3 times per      Literacy Skills: Phoneme-Segmentation
      and McCathren, 2004). N students = 137, Grade
                                                           week for 15-20 minutes per session.                  Fluency and Nonsense-Word Fluency
      = 1. Treatment Groups = Treatment group
                                                           Randomization = At-risk students were                subtests. Regression Specification =
      received tutoring and control group received no
                                                           identified by low test scores and teacher            Effect sizes were calculated using average
      tutoring.
                                                           recommendations. Eligible students were then         posttest scores. We report the average
                                                           randomly selected for either the treatment or        effects size across cohorts and outcome
                                                           control group.                                       measures. Results = Treatment had a
                                                                                                                0.422σ (0.222) impact on reading test
                                                                                                                scores.
      Appendix Table 3 (continued)
      Study                                               Study Design                                         Results
                                                          Treatment Defined = This study investigated the      Test Score = State math and reading tests.
                                                          impact of charter schools on students’               Regression Specification = OLS
                                                          achievement. The researchers focused on charter      regressions controlling for pretest reading
                                                          schools with 4th-7th grade entry grades and that     and math achievement, disciplinary
      The Evaluation of Charter School Impacts: Final
                                                          were at least two years old. Thirty-six charter      measures, student demographics, family
      Report (Gleason et al., 2010). N schools = 36, N
                                                          schools (from multiple states) were eligible and     characteristics, school enrollment, and
      students = 2,330. Treatment Groups = The
                                                          willing to participate with 2005-2006 or             application history. We report the average
      treatment group were students that won lotteries
                                                          2006-2007 entry cohorts. Randomization =             annual impact of winning a lottery to one
      to attend charter schools. The control group were
                                                          Student admission lotteries. In order to be          of these 36 charter schools. Results =
      students that lost those same lotteries.
                                                          considered in the experimental sample, students      Admission to a charter school had a
                                                          had to apply to one of the 36 charter schools        -0.03σ (0.03) impact on math test scores
                                                          during an experimental lottery and give consent      and a 0.04σ (0.03) impact on reading test
                                                          to participate in the study.                         scores.
                                                          Treatment Defined = The enhanced program
                                                          entailed 45 minutes of structured instruction at
                                                                                                               Test Score = Stanford Achievement Test:
                                                          the start of the two- to three-hour after-school
                                                                                                               Mathematics and Reading subtests.
                                                          program; this formal instruction took the place of
                                                                                                               Regression Specification = The
                                                          passive academic support like homework help or




191
                                                                                                               standardized difference of means was
                                                          tutoring. The goal of this enhanced instruction
      The Evaluation of Enhanced Academic                                                                      calculated for each outcome measure. The
                                                          was the development of new skills, as opposed to
      Instruction in After-School Programs: Final                                                              means were adjusted for pretest scores,
                                                          the completion of assignments. All after-school
      Report (Black et al., 2009). N schools = 27, N                                                           gender, race/ethnicity, free or
                                                          programs were offered four days per week.
      students = 1,218, Grades = 2 - 5. Treatment                                                              reduced-price lunch status, age, whether
                                                          Schools had their choice of implementing either
      Groups = Treatment group incorporated                                                                    the student is from a single-parent
                                                          the reading or math programs based on student
      enhanced academic instruction into their                                                                 household, whether the student was
                                                          needs, but were limited to one. Randomization =
      after-school programs. Control group maintained                                                          over-age for their grade, and mother’s
                                                          To be eligible for the study, students had to
      their regular after-school programs. All schools                                                         education level. We report the average
                                                          perform at most two years below grade-level in
      had preexisting after-school programs.                                                                   effect across outcome measures and
                                                          reading or math. Eligible students who applied to
                                                                                                               cohorts. Results = Treatment had a 0.09σ
                                                          the program were then stratified by after-school
                                                                                                               (0.04) impact on math test scores and a
                                                          center and by grade and then assigned at random
                                                                                                               -0.04σ (0.05) impact on reading test
                                                          to treatment. All participants were either already
                                                                                                               scores.
                                                          enrolled in after-school programs or referred to
                                                          such programs based on their poor performance.
      Appendix Table 3 (continued)
      Study                                             Study Design                                        Results
                                                                                                            Test Score = The Standards of Learning
                                                        Treatment defined = Coaches attended five
                                                                                                            assessment (the standardized state
                                                        mathematics courses in numbers and operations,
                                                                                                            assessment of Virginia). Regression
                                                        geometry and measurement, algebra and
                                                                                                            Specification = Three-level hierarchical
                                                        functions, and probability and statistics before
      The Impact of Elementary Mathematics Coaches                                                          linear model (student, class, school)
                                                        entering their designated school. Coaches also
      on Student Achievement (Campbell and Malkus,                                                          controlling for age, gender,
                                                        attended a leadership training course one year
      2011). N districts = 5, N schools = 36, N                                                             english-proficiency status, special
                                                        after entering their school. Coaches worked with
      classrooms = 1,169, N students = 24,759, Grades                                                       education status, free/reduced-lunch
                                                        teachers to design both curricula and assessments
      = 3 - 5, Location = VA, N years = 3. Treatment                                                        status, minority status, whether the teacher
                                                        as well as facilitate classtime instruction.
      Groups = Treatment schools received a                                                                 had a masters degree, teacher’s experience
                                                        Randomization = Each district sorted its schools
      mathematics coach to work with their teachers.                                                        at the school, Title I eligibility, school
                                                        into groups of three based on their demographic
      Control schools received no such intervention.                                                        size, and indicators for past academic
                                                        composition and history of performance on
                                                                                                            performance. We report the average effect
                                                        mathematics assessments. Two schools from
                                                                                                            across all cohorts and grades. Results =
                                                        each group of three were selected randomly for
                                                                                                            Treatment had a 0.049σ (0.090) impact on
                                                        treatment.
                                                                                                            math test scores.




192
      Appendix Table 3 (continued)
      Study                                             Study Design                                         Results
                                                        Treatment Defined = In 2008, the Indiana
                                                        Department of Education introduced the
                                                        Diagnostic Assessment Tools. This program
                                                        consisted of two commercial products, mCLASS
                                                        (grades K-2) and Acuity (grades 3-8). With           Test Score = For grades 3-8, the
                                                        mCLASS, teachers are provided with detailed          mathematics and reading ISTEP+
                                                        diagnostic measures of their K-2 students in         (Indiana’s state test). In grades K-2, the
                                                        literacy and numeracy. Acuity provides teachers      math and reading portions of Terra Nova.
      The Impact of Indiana’s System of Interim         with multiple-choice online assessments in           Regression Specification = A two-level
      Assessments on Mathematics and Reading            reading and mathematics for Grades 3-8. The          hierarchical linear model (student, school)
      Achievement (Konstantopoulos et al., 2013). N     assessments are approximately 30 minutes long,       controlling for gender, age, race,
      schools = 57, N students ≈ 20,000, Grades = K -   typically completed in groups in class, and          socioeconomic status, special education
      8, Location = IN. Treatment Groups =              aligned to the state standards. When a school        status, limited English proficiency status,
      Treatment schools participated in Indiana’s       adopts these products, their teachers are provided   and school-level percentages of females,
      Diagnostic Assessment Tools. Control schools      with training on how to effectively use them.        minorities, lower socioeconomic status,
      continued as usual.                               Randomization = The pool of eligible schools         and limited English proficiency students.
                                                        were placed into 4 blocks based on locales. From     Results = Treatment had an impact of
                                                        these blocks, 70 schools were randomly drawn.        0.127σ (0.069) on math test scores and




193
                                                        Eleven of these schools were dropped due to          0.078σ (0.050) impact on reading test
                                                        previous use of products from the vendors in the     scores, respectively.
                                                        study or a school closure. The remaining 59
                                                        schools were randomized into an intervention
                                                        group or a control group in an unbalanced
                                                        manner (35 treatment and 24 control).
      Appendix Table 3 (continued)
      Study                                                Study Design                                           Results
                                                           Treatment Defined = Teachers in both treatment
                                                           groups participated in a teacher institute series
                                                           that began in the summer and continued through
                                                           the school year. Throughout the course of the
      The Impact of Two Professional Development
                                                           year, treatment teachers attended eight seminar        Test Score = The reading state test scores
      Interventions on Early Reading Instruction and
                                                           days that each consisted of 6 hours of instruction     used in a given district. Regression
      Achievement (Garet et al., 2008). N states = 4, N
                                                           for a total of 48 hours of professional                Specification = Regressions controlling
      districts = 6, N schools = 90, N teachers = 270, N
                                                           development. On top of this, teachers in               for school level pretest scores,
      students ≈ 5, 000, Grade = 2. Treatment Groups
                                                           treatment two also received approximately 60           student-level gender, age, race/ethnicity,
      = Two treatment groups: Teachers in treatment
                                                           hours of in-school coaching. Randomization =           and a separate poverty measure provided
      one participated in a reading content-focused
                                                           Schools were randomly assigned to treatment            by each district. Results = The
      professional development program. Teachers in
                                                           one, treatment two, or control such that there         professional development treatment had a
      treatment two participated in the same
                                                           were equal numbers of schools assigned to each         0.08σ (0.08) impact on reading test scores.
      professional development and additionally
                                                           group in a given district. In five of the districts,   The professional development plus
      received in-school coaching. Control teachers did
                                                           schools were grouped into blocks of similar            coaching treatment had a 0.03σ (0.09)
      not receive any professional development or
                                                           characteristics (percentage of minority students       impact on reading test scores.
      coaching.
                                                           or geographic region, depending on the district)
                                                           and then one-third of each block was randomly




194
                                                           assigned to each treatment group. The remaining
                                                           district was just randomly split into thirds.
                                                           Treatment Defined = Students received rewards
                                                           during remedial reading sessions in the form of
                                                           verbal praise; students reported the number of
      The Influence of Massive Rewards on Reading          times they received such praise daily. Teachers in
                                                                                                                  Test Score = Science Research Associates
      Achievement in Potential Urban School Dropouts       the treatment group were asked to at least double
                                                                                                                  Reading Test, Intermediate Form.
      (Clark and Walberg, 1968). N classrooms = 9, N       the amount of verbal praise rendered to each
                                                                                                                  Regression Specification = Effect sizes
      students = 110, Ages = 10 - 13. Treatment            student. Randomization = To be eligible for the
                                                                                                                  were calculated using posttest means of
      Groups = The treatment group increased the           study, students had to score one to four years
                                                                                                                  the outcome measure. Results =
      amount of verbal praise rendered to each student.    behind grade level on nationally-standardized
                                                                                                                  Treatment had a 0.588σ (0.685) impact on
      The control group maintained its normal level of     achievement tests – ranking them as potential
                                                                                                                  reading test scores.
      verbal praise.                                       dropouts. These students were assigned randomly
                                                           to one of nine after-school remedial reading
                                                           programs. Five of these classrooms were
                                                           assigned at random to treatment.
      Appendix Table 3 (continued)
      Study                                               Study Design                                            Results
                                                          Treatment Defined = SEED schools are
                                                          five-day-a-week urban boarding schools that have
                                                          an extended school day, provide extensive
                                                          after-school tutoring, utilize data-driven curricula,   Test Score = The DC CAS test.
      The Potential of Urban Boarding Schools for the     and maintain a culture of high expectations. The        Regression Specification = OLS
      Poor: Evidence from SEED (Curto and Fryer,          middle schools focus on developing basic math           regression controlling for student pretest
      2014). N students = 221. Treatment Groups =         and reading skills, while high schools utilize a        scores, gender, free lunch eligibility,
      Treatment students received admission to a SEED     college-preparatory curriculum that requires            special education status, and English
      school; control students applied but did not        students to take the SAT or ACT, as well as apply       language learner status. Results =
      receive admission to a SEED school. All students    to at least five colleges. This study utilizes the      Winning the lottery had a 0.218σ (0.082)
      included in the sample were black.                  fact that when a SEED school is oversubscribed,         impact on math test scores and a 0.201σ
                                                          it determines admission via a random lottery.           (0.086) impact on reading test scores.
                                                          Randomization = Admission to an
                                                          oversubscribed SEED school is determined by
                                                          random lottery stratified by gender.
                                                          Treatment Defined = Students selected for
      The Prevention, Identification, and Cognitive
                                                          treatment received extra math tutoring                  Test Score = Woodcock-Johnson III:
      Determinants of Math Difficulty (Fuchs et al.,
                                                          immediately following their normal mathematics          Applied Problems and Computation




195
      2005). N schools = 10, N classrooms = 41, N
                                                          instruction. Tutoring occurred in small groups          subtests. Regression Specification =
      students = 127, Grade = 1. Treatment Groups =
                                                          three times per week for 16 weeks in addition to        Average growth in test scores was used to
      Treatment group received math tutoring in
                                                          regular class time. The purpose of this tutoring        calculate effect sizes. The average effect
      addition to normal class time. The control group
                                                          was to curb mathematics difficulty before it            across both subtests is reported. Results =
      continued with their normal curricula. Sample
                                                          developed. Randomization = Students were                Treatment had a 0.300σ (0.179) impact on
      drawn from students deemed at-risk of
                                                          stratified by classroom and assigned at random          math test scores.
      developing mathematics difficulty.
                                                          for treatment.
                                                          Treatment Defined = The Reading Connection
      The Reading Connection: A Leadership Initiative
                                                          program is an early intervention designed to curb
      Designed to Change the Delivery of Educational
                                                          reading difficulty before it leads to persistent
      Services to At-Risk Children (Compton, 1992).
                                                          failure in school. The intervention entailed            Test Score = The Iowa Test of Basic
      N students = 483, Grade = 1, Location =
                                                          individual tutoring for 30 minutes per day, five        Skills. Regression Specification = Effect
      Kalamazoo, MI. Treatment Groups = Treatment
                                                          days per week, for 12 - 16 weeks. The goal of           sizes were calculated using posttest
      group implemented the Reading Connection
                                                          this tutoring was to both build reading fluency         means. Results = Treatment had a 0.216σ
      program. Control group maintained traditional
                                                          and develop self-monitoring skills so that              (0.092) impact on reading test scores.
      remedial reading services. Sample drawn from
                                                          students can assess and resolve their own
      students already enrolled in small-group remedial
                                                          difficulties in the future. Randomization =
      reading instruction.
                                                          Students were assigned at random to treatment.
      Appendix Table 3 (continued)
      Study                                               Study Design                                           Results
                                                          Treatment Defined = Talent Transfer Initiative
                                                                                                                 Test Score = Math and reading state tests.
                                                          (TTI) allows for the highest-performing teachers
                                                                                                                 Regression Specification = Regression
                                                          in each district to receive a pay raise to move into
                                                                                                                 model controlling for pretest scores,
      Transfer Incentives for High-Performing             schools serving the most disadvantaged students.
                                                                                                                 race/ethnicity, gender, English Language
      Teachers: Final Results from a Multisite            Teachers ranking in roughly the top 20 percent
                                                                                                                 Learner status, special education status,
      Randomized Experiment (Glazerman et al.,            within their subject and grade were offered
                                                                                                                 free/reduced-price lunch status,
      2013). N states = 7, N districts = 10, N students   $20,000 if they transferred and remained in a set
                                                                                                                 over-age-for-grade status, an indicator of
      ≈ 7,000. Treatment Groups = Treatment               of designated schools. Randomization =
                                                                                                                 whether the student belonged to a study
      students were taught by high-quality teachers       Researchers first identified low-achieving schools
                                                                                                                 team that had at least one
      who filled vacancies through a transfer incentive   that had a vacancy within a teaching team.
                                                                                                                 retention-stipend teacher, grade dummies,
      program. Teaching vacancies in control schools      Whenever possible, schools were matched within
                                                                                                                 and block dummies. Results = Treatment
      were filled as usual, without incentives.           district based on the grade and subject of the
                                                                                                                 had a 0.120σ (0.070) impact on math test
                                                          vacancy and student demographics. Within these
                                                                                                                 scores and a 0.058σ (0.050) impact on
                                                          matched blocks, schools were randomly assigned
                                                                                                                 reading test scores.
                                                          to either treatment or control status.
                                                          Treatment Defined = The treatment workshop
                                                          helped teachers learn how children develop
                                                          addition/subtraction skills, focusing on cognitive




196
                                                          processes applied to different word problems.
                                                                                                                 Test Score = Iowa Test of Basic
      Using Knowledge of Children’s Mathematics           Teachers then developed strategies to build math
                                                                                                                 Skills-Level 7: Computation and
      Thinking in Classroom Teaching: An                  skills utilizing these processes. The workshop
                                                                                                                 Mathematics Problems subtests.
      Experimental Study (Carpenter et al., 1989). N      met five hours a day, four days a week for the first
                                                                                                                 Regression Specification = Effect sizes
      schools = 24, N teachers = 40, N students ≈ 480,    four weeks of the teachers’ summer vacation.
                                                                                                                 were calculated for the two subtests using
      Grade = 1, Location = Madison, WI. Treatment        Control workshops focused on nonroutine
                                                                                                                 means adjusted for pretest scores. We
      Groups = Treatment group attended a 4-week          problem solving. Randomization = Stratified by
                                                                                                                 report the average effect size on these two
      workshop; control group attended two 2-hour         school, teachers were randomly assigned to
                                                                                                                 tests. Results = Treatment had a 0.396σ
      workshops.                                          treatment or control. Six male and six female
                                                                                                                 (0.319) impact on math test scores.
                                                          students were randomly selected from each class
                                                          for the analysis. In two instances, there were less
                                                          than 12 total students in a class, in which case the
                                                          entire class was used.
      Appendix Table 3 (continued)
      Study                                              Study Design                                       Results
                                                         Treatment Defined = Tutors received a 1-2 hour
                                                         training session either at the beginning of the
                                                                                                            Test Score = Woodcock Reading Mastery
                                                         school year or anytime throughout. Treatment
                                                                                                            Tests-Revised: Word Identification, Word
                                                         group students attend tutoring sessions for 30
      When Less May Be More: A 2 Year Longitudinal                                                          Comprehension and Passage
                                                         minutes twice a week during the school year.
      Evaluation of a Volunteer Tutoring Program                                                            Comprehension subtests. Regression
                                                         Students were tested at the beginning of first
      Requiring Minimal Training (Baker et al., 2000).                                                      Specification = Effect sizes were
                                                         grade, the end of first grade, and the end of
      N students = 84, Grades = 1 - 2. Treatment                                                            calculated using posttest means adjusted
                                                         second grade. Randomization = Eligible
      Groups = Students in the treatment group                                                              for pretest scores. We report the average
                                                         students were referred by teachers. They were
      received one-on-one tutoring and the control                                                          annual impact across all outcome
                                                         students with poor reading skills and little
      group received normal classroom instruction.                                                          measures. Results = Treatment had a
                                                         academic experiences with adults at home or
                                                                                                            0.184σ (0.156) impact on reading test
                                                         otherwise. Eligible students were randomly
                                                                                                            scores.
                                                         assigned to treatment and control groups through
                                                         a process called Rapid Letter Naming.
                                                         Treatment Defined = 21st Century Community
                                                         Learning Centers ran an after-school program for
      When Schools Stay Open Late: The National
                                                         treatment students. Centers offered homework
      Evaluation of the 21st Century Community                                                              Test Score = Stanford Achievement Test.
                                                         sessions, academic activities, and enrichment




197
      Learning Centers Program (James-Burdumy et                                                            Regression Specification = Regression
                                                         activities. Randomization = Random assignment
      al., 2005). N districts = 12, N centers = 26, N                                                       model controlling for student
                                                         was conducted at the center level. Applicants to
      students = 2,308. Treatment Groups =                                                                  characteristics. Results = Treatment had a
                                                         each of the centers were randomized into
      Treatment students were able to enroll in 21st                                                        -0.021σ (0.046) impact on math test
                                                         treatment and control. For seven sites, random
      Century after-school centers. Control students                                                        scores and a 0.008σ (0.046) impact on
                                                         assignment took place at the beginning of the
      were unable to enroll in these centers for two                                                        reading test scores.
                                                         2000-2001 school year and for the other five
      years after randomization.
                                                         sites, random assignment took place at the
                                                         beginning of the 2001-2002 school year.
      Appendix Table 4 - Curriculum
      Study                                               Study Design                                         Results
                                                          Treatment Defined = The New Heights program
                                                          builds reading fluency via repeated reading
                                                          strategies with audio assistance. Students select
      A Mixed-Method Multi-Level Randomized               their own book from the interventions’ reading
                                                                                                               Test Score = Dynamic Indicator of Basic
      Evaluation of the Implementation and Impact of      list, the teacher gives a brief introduction to
                                                                                                               Early Literacy Skills; Test of Word
      an Audio-Assisted Reading Program for               introduce new vocabulary or skills, and then the
                                                                                                               Reading Efficiency. Regression
      Struggling Readers (Lesnick, 2006). N districts =   student reads through the text once. Students then
                                                                                                               Specification = MANCOVA analysis
      2, N schools = 9, N classrooms = 59, N students     elect to re-read the book with or without the
                                                                                                               controlling for pretest scores, gender,
      = 233, Grades = 3 and 5. Treatment Groups =         audio assistance, complete a worksheet
                                                                                                               race/ethnicity, free/reduced lunch status,
      Treatment classrooms implemented the New            connected to the text, or conference with the
                                                                                                               and English-language-learner status.
      Heights reading intervention. Control classrooms    teacher. The intervention lasted approximately 20
                                                                                                               Effect sizes were averaged across outcome
      continued with their normal curricula. Sample       to 30 minutes per day, five days per week for
                                                                                                               measures. Results = Treatment had a
      drawn from students who were at least nine          eighteen weeks. Randomization = Students were
                                                                                                               -0.028σ (0.108) impact on reading test
      months below grade level in reading, as             sorted into blocks by school, grade, classroom,
                                                                                                               scores.
      determined by the pretest.                          and gender. Half the students in each block (up to
                                                          a maximum of six) were assigned randomly to
                                                          treatment. The remainder from each block were
                                                          assigned to the control group.




198
                                                          Treatment Defined = The OCR curriculum
                                                          provides textbooks, workbooks, decodable texts,
                                                          and anthologies to develop reading fluency. The
                                                          core components of the curriculum include:
                                                          preparing to read – which builds phonemic
      A Multisite Cluster Randomized Field Trial of       awareness, sound and letter familiarity, phonics,    Test Score = TerraNova Comprehensive
      Open Court Reading (Borman et al., 2008). N         fluency, and word knowledge; reading and             Test of Basic Skills V: Reading
      schools = 6, N classrooms = 57, N students =        responding – which builds textual-thinking skills,   Comprehension and Vocabulary subtests.
      1,099, Grades = 1 - 5. Treatment Groups =           vocabulary, reading proficiency, as well as          Regression Specification = Effect sizes
      Treatment classrooms implemented the Open           comprehension, inquiry, and investigation            were calculated using average postest
      Court Reading (OCR) curriculum. Control             strategies; and language arts – which develops       scores. Results = Treatment had a 0.187σ
      classrooms continued with their normal curricula.   writing skills, spelling, grammar usage and          (0.288) impact on reading test scores.
                                                          mechanics, vocabulary, penmanship, and
                                                          listening. Randomization = Classrooms were
                                                          placed into blocks by school and grade. Within
                                                          each block, classrooms were randomly assigned
                                                          to treatment.
      Appendix Table 4 (continued)
      Study                                              Study Design                                          Results
                                                         Treatment Defined = Odyssey Math is a
                                                         computer-based math curriculum developed by
                                                         CompassLearning Inc. to improve math learning
                                                         for K–12 students. The software consists of a
      A Multisite Cluster Randomized Trial of the
                                                         web-accessed series of learning activities,
      Effects of CompassLearning Odyssey Math on
                                                         assessments, and math tools. CompassLearning
      the Math Achievement of Selected Grade 4
                                                         professional development trainers presented the       Test Score = TerraNova Basic Battery:
      Students in the Mid-Atlantic Region: Final
                                                         learning activities, math tools, and assessments as   Math subtest. Regression Specification =
      Report (Wijekumar et al., 2009). N schools = 32,
                                                         available options to intervention teachers during     Multilevel hierarchical linear model
      N teachers = 122, N students = 2,854, Grade = 4,
                                                         the summer professional development session.          (student, teacher, school) controlling for
      Locations = DE, NJ, and PA. Treatment Groups
                                                         Five days of Odyssey Math professional                pretest scores. Results = Treatment had a
      = Treatment teachers received the
                                                         development were purchased for each treatment         0.02σ (0.03) impact on math test scores.
      CompassLearning Odyssey Math program.
                                                         teacher, consisting of two large group
      Control teachers continued with business as
                                                         presentations and three in-class coaching
      usual.
                                                         sessions. Randomization = A volunteer sample
                                                         of teachers and their classrooms were randomly
                                                         assigned to treatment and control conditions
                                                         within schools.




199
                                                         Treatment Defined = The Accelerated Reader
                                                         program is a software-based curriculum, in which
                                                         students select a book of their choice and
      A Randomized Experimental Evaluation of the
                                                         complete reading comprehension quizzes. The
      Impact of Accelerated Reader/Reading
                                                         program identifies weaknesses in reading              Test Score = The STAR Reading test.
      Renaissance Implementation on Reading
                                                         comprehension and suggests texts to redress           Regression Specification = Effect size
      Achievement in Grades 3 to 6 (Nunnery et al.,
                                                         these difficulties. The Reading Renaissance           was calculated using the average growth
      2006). N teachers = 44, N students = 1,023,
                                                         program is a professional development program,        between pre and posttest scores. We report
      Grades = 3 - 6. Treatment Groups = Treatment
                                                         which suggests teachers incorporate 30 to 60          the average effect across all grades.
      teachers incorporated both the Accelerated
                                                         minutes of reading time in-class. It also trains      Results = Treatment had a 0.182σ (0.302)
      Reader program and the Reading Renaissance
                                                         teachers in the appropriate use of the Accelerated    impact on reading test scores.
      program. Control teachers maintained their
                                                         Reader software. Randomization = Teachers
      normal curricula.
                                                         were randomly assigned to pairs within grade
                                                         level, and then one teacher from each pairing was
                                                         assigned randomly to treatment.
      Appendix Table 4 (continued)
      Study                                              Study Design                                          Results
                                                         Treatment Defined = Fast ForWord Language is
                                                         an adaptive computer program for language
                                                                                                               Test Score = Comprehensive Test of Basic
                                                         instruction. It is designed to build oral language
      A Randomized Field Trial of the Fast ForWord                                                             Skills V: Language and Reading
                                                         comprehension skills and other critical skills
      Language Computer-Based Training Program                                                                 Comprehension subtests. Regression
                                                         necessary to become a better reader.
      (Borman et al., 2009). N schools = 8, N students                                                         Specification = OLS regression
                                                         Randomization = Students were deemed eligible
      = 415, Grades = 2 and 7, Location = Baltimore,                                                           controlling for pretest scores, teacher
                                                         for the intervention if they scored below the 50th
      MD. Treatment Groups = Treatment students                                                                rating of students’ abilities, demographic
                                                         percentile on the Total Reading outcome for the
      received supplemental Fast ForWord program                                                               controls, and school fixed effects. Results
                                                         district administered Comprehensive Test of
      instruction. Control students did not.                                                                   = Treatment had a 0.088σ (0.168) impact
                                                         Basic Skills, Fifth Edition. Eligible students were
                                                                                                               on reading test scores.
                                                         stratified by school and grade level and assigned
                                                         randomly to treatment or control.
                                                         Treatment Defined = The Journeys program is a
      A Study on the Effects of Houghton Mifflin
                                                         comprehensive reading and language arts
      Harcourt’s Journeys Program: Year 1 Final                                                                Test Score = Iowa Test of Basic Skills.
                                                         curriculum. The program includes reading,
      Report (Resendez and Azin, 2012). N schools =                                                            Regression Specification = Three-level
                                                         writing, and grammar exercises segmented into
      6, N teachers = 44, N students = 1,046, Grades =                                                         hierarchical linear model (changes over
                                                         thematic units. Weekly lessons focused on one
      K - 2. Treatment Groups = Treatment                                                                      time, student, teacher). Results =
                                                         unit for five weeks, creating continuity among




200
      classrooms implemented the Journeys program.                                                             Treatment had a 0.175σ (0.049) impact on
                                                         lesson content. Randomization = Teachers were
      Control classrooms continued with their normal                                                           reading test scores.
                                                         stratified by school and randomly assigned to
      curricula.
                                                         treatment.
      Action Research: Implementing Connecting           Treatment Defined = The CMC curriculum
                                                                                                               Test Score = The National Achievement
      Math Concepts (Snider and Crawford, 1996). N       develops multiple math skills within each lesson,
                                                                                                               Test. Regression Specification = Effect
      classrooms = 2, N students = 46, Grade = 4.        stressing the relationship between skills. Students
                                                                                                               size was calculated using the average
      Treatment Groups = Treatment classrooms            thus learn to develop complex mathematical
                                                                                                               growth between posttest and pretest
      implemented the Connecting Math Concepts           procedures with simple math skills.
                                                                                                               scores. Results = Treatment had a 0.258σ
      (CMC) curriculum. Control classrooms               Randomization = Students were assigned at
                                                                                                               (0.296) impact on math test scores.
      continued with their normal curricula.             random to the treatment or control classrooms.
      Appendix Table 4 (continued)
      Study                                               Study Design                                         Results
                                                          Treatment Defined = The Reading Street
                                                          Program provides reading materials and a
                                                          curriculum designed to develop critical reading      Test Score = Gates-MacGintie Reading
      An Efficacy Study on Scott Foresman’s Reading
                                                          skills: phonemic awareness, phonics, vocabulary,     Test, Fourth Edition; Dynamic Indicators
      Street Program: Year One Report (Wilkerson et
                                                          comprehension, and fluency. Teachers administer      of Basic Early Literacy: Oral Reading
      al., 2006). N districts = 3, N schools = 5, N
                                                          the program for at least 90 minutes in-class. The    Fluency subtest. Regression
      teachers = 48, N students = 944, Grades = 1 - 3.
                                                          program also recommends that students needing        Specification = A two-level hierarchical
      Treatment Groups = Teachers in the treatment
                                                          additional help receive up to 30 minutes of          linear model (student, school) controlling
      group included the Reading Street Program in
                                                          small-group tutoring, and those students who         for gender, ethnicity, special education
      their curriculum. The control group did not alter
                                                          continue to struggle after such intervention         status, grade, and school. Results =
      their curriculum. No teachers had previously
                                                          receive individualized attention outside of normal   Treatment had a -0.095σ (0.103) impact
      used Reading Street materials.
                                                          class time. Randomization = Teachers were            on reading test scores.
                                                          stratified by school and grade and then assigned
                                                          randomly to treatment or control.
                                                          Treatment Defined = The computer-assisted
                                                          instruction software presents the material,
      An Evaluation of the Effects of Paired Learning
                                                          evaluates the student response, and progressively
      in a Mathematics Computer-Assisted-Instruction
                                                          adjusts the material based on these responses.




201
      Program (Turner, 1985). N teachers = 4, N                                                                Test Score = Comprehensive Test of Basic
                                                          Instruction lasted for fifteen minutes, three days
      classrooms = 12, N students = 275, Grades = 3 -                                                          Skills: Mathematics subtests. Regression
                                                          per week in lieu of normal class time. Students
      4, Location = Goodyear, AZ. Treatment Groups                                                             Specification = Average growth in test
                                                          working in pairs helped each other find the
      = Classrooms in the first treatment group had                                                            scores was used to calculate effect sizes.
                                                          correct answer. Pairings were rotated so that, by
      students take part in                                                                                    Results = The individual treatment had a
                                                          the end of the experiment, all students in a class
      computer-assisted-instruction individually.                                                              0.278σ (0.711) impact on math scores.
                                                          had worked together at some point. Students in
      Classrooms in the second treatment group had                                                             The paired treatment had a 0.395σ (0.714)
                                                          the individual treatment worked alone and
      students take part in                                                                                    impact on math scores.
                                                          directed questions toward the teacher.
      computer-assisted-instruction in pairs. Control
                                                          Randomization = Classrooms were stratified by
      classrooms continued with their normal curricula.
                                                          teacher and assigned at random to one of the
                                                          three conditions.
      Appendix Table 4 (continued)
      Study                                                Study Design                                        Results
                                                           Treatment Defined = The Accelerated Reader
      An Experimental Study of the Effects of the
                                                           program is designed to turn reading into a game.    Test Score = Stanford Achievement Test:
      Accelerated Reader Program and a Teacher
                                                           Upon completion of a book, a computer program       Vocabulary and Reading Comprehension
      Directed Program on Reading Comprehension
                                                           tests students on reading comprehension and         subtests. Regression Specification =
      and Vocabulary of Fourth and Fifth Grade
                                                           awards points based on these tests. The program     Effect sizes were calculated for each
      Students (Knox, 1996). N schools = 1, N students
                                                           also offers feedback based on these test results.   outcome measure using means adjusted
      = 77, Grades = 4 - 5. Treatment Groups = All
                                                           Students select their own books. Rewards were       for pretest scores. The researchers report
      students received the same reading list. The
                                                           awarded when a student reached a specific           the results by grade and subtests. We
      treatment group reviewed their books with both
                                                           point-threshold. Randomization = Students were      report the weighted average of the effects
      the researcher and the Accelerated Reader
                                                           stratified by grade and then paired across          for subtests and grades. Results =
      computer program. The control group reviewed
                                                           classrooms according to their pretest score. One    Treatment had a -0.115σ (0.324) impact
      their books with their teachers. No student had
                                                           student from each pair was assigned randomly to     on reading test scores.
      previously used the Accelerated Reader program.
                                                           the treatment group.
                                                           Treatment Defined = Scott Foresman Science is
                                                           a year-long science curriculum. The curriculum
                                                           provides materials for both students and teachers
      Comparative Effectiveness of Scott Foresman          aimed at developing independent investigative
                                                                                                               Test Score = Northwest Evaluation
      Science: A Report of a Randomized Experiment         skills. In addition to science instruction, the




202
                                                                                                               Association Test: Reading achievement
      in Five School Districts (Miller and Jaciw, 2007).   curriculum features Leveled Reader. These are
                                                                                                               subtest. Regression Specification = The
      N districts = 5, N teachers = 92, N students =       student readers designed to provide the teacher
                                                                                                               effect size was calculated using posttest
      2,638, Grades = 3 - 5. Treatment Groups =            with an easy way to differentiate instruction and
                                                                                                               means adjusted for pretest scores. Results
      Treatment teachers used the Scott Foresman           provide reading support at, below, and above
                                                                                                               = The impact of treatment on reading tests
      Science curriculum. Control teachers continued       grade level. Treatment teachers were provided a
                                                                                                               was 0.05σ (0.04).
      with their normal curricula.                         one-half day workshop with the materials for the
                                                           curriculum. Randomization = Volunteer
                                                           teachers within each district were assigned to
                                                           treatment or control by coin toss.
      Appendix Table 4 (continued)
      Study                                              Study Design                                        Results
                                                         Treatment Defined = For six months, treatment
                                                         students received 10 minutes of CAI instruction
      Computer Assisted Instruction as an Enhancer of    for mathematics daily in addition to their normal
                                                                                                             Test Score = Comprehensive Test of Basic
      Remediation (Hotard and Cortez, 1983). N           math lab instruction. Each lesson had students
                                                                                                             Skills. Regression Specification = Effect
      students = 190, Grades = 3 - 6. Treatment          solve a variety of problems based on the material
                                                                                                             size was calculated using the average
      Groups = Treatment students incorporated 10        currently being taught in class. The software
                                                                                                             growth between pre and posttest scores.
      minutes daily of computer-assisted-instruction     automatically adjusted the difficulty of its
                                                                                                             Results = Treatment had a 0.193σ (0.145)
      (CAI) into their curricula. Control classrooms     problems based on student performance.
                                                                                                             impact on math test scores.
      continued with their normal curricula.             Randomization = Students were matched by
                                                         their pretest scores and then one student from
                                                         each pairing was assigned randomly to treatment.
                                                                                                             Test Score = Comprehensive Test of
                                                                                                             Phonological Processing; Woodcock
                                                         Treatment Defined = The interventions were          Reading Mastery Test- Revised: Word
      Computer-Assisted Instruction to Prevent Early     implemented over four, 50-minute sessions per       Identification, Word Attack, and Passage
      Reading Difficulties in Students at Risk for       week from October through May. The first half of    Comprehension subtests; Test of Word
      Dyslexia: Outcomes from Two Instructional          each lesson was devoted to direct reading           Reading Efficiency: Word Efficiency and
      Approaches (Torgesen et al., 2009). N students =   instruction from teachers, and the remaining time   Phonemic Decoding subtests. Regression




203
      112, Grade = 1. Treatment Groups = Two             was devoted to practicing these skills on the       Specification = Effect sizes were
      treatment conditions: condition one implemented    computer. Students in condition one received        calculated using posttest means. We report
      the Read, Write, and Type program; condition       lessons in alphabetic reading skills, while         the average impact across all outcome
      two implemented the Lindamood Phoneme              students in condition two received explicit         measures. Results = The Read, Write, and
      Sequencing Program for Reading, Spelling, and      instruction in phonemic awareness.                  Type program had a 0.459σ (0.238)
      Speech. Control students received no such          Randomization = Students were stratified by         impact on reading test scores. The
      intervention.                                      school and then randomly assigned to one of the     Lindamood Phoneme Sequencing
                                                         three groups.                                       Program for Reading, Spelling, and
                                                                                                             Speech program had a 0.702σ (0.240)
                                                                                                             impact on reading test scores.
      Appendix Table 4 (continued)
      Study                                             Study Design                                         Results
                                                        Treatment Defined = Third-grade treatment
                                                        students used the Milliken Math Sequences
                                                        software to practice mathematics skills
      Costs, Effects, and Utility of Microcomputer      introduced in class for an average of 12 minutes
                                                                                                             Test Score = Canadian Test of Basic
      Assisted Instruction (Fletcher et al., 1990). N   per day, five days per week. Fifth-grade treatment
                                                                                                             Skills. Regression Specification = Effect
      schools = 1, N classrooms = 4, N students = 60,   students utilized the software for mathematics
                                                                                                             sizes were calculated using posttest scores
      Grades = 3 and 5, Location = Saskatchewan,        practice, drilling up to 15 minutes, four days per
                                                                                                             adjusted for prettest scores. We report the
      Canada. Treatment Groups = Treatment              week. All computerized mathematics practice
                                                                                                             average effect across grades. Results =
      classrooms utilized microcomputer assisted        took the place of normal class time.
                                                                                                             Treatment had a 0.421σ (0.322) impact on
      mathematics instruction. Control classroom        Randomization = One classroom from each
                                                                                                             math test scores.
      continued with their normal curricula.            grade was designated the treatment classroom,
                                                        while the other served as control. Students were
                                                        assigned at random to the treatment or control
                                                        classrooms in their grade.
                                                        Treatment Defined = All students included in
      Does Rainbow Repeated Reading Add Value to        the study were classified as low-progress readers
      an Intensive Intervention Program for             and were attending a literacy program focused on
      Low-progress Readers? An Experimental             repeated reading. The treatment students




204
                                                                                                             Test Score = The Burt Word Reading
      Evaluation (Wheldall, 2000). N sites = 2, N       supplemented this program with the Rainbow
                                                                                                             Test. Regression Specification = Effect
      students = 40, Grades = 2 - 7, Location =         Reading Program – a repeated reading program
                                                                                                             sizes were calculated using the average
      Australia. Treatment Groups = All students        where students read along with an audio tape.
                                                                                                             growth between pre and posttest scores.
      were participating in an intensive literacy       Randomization = Within each site, students
                                                                                                             Results = Treatment had a 0.018σ (0.105)
      intervention. Treatment students received a       were ranked by baseline reading accuracy and
                                                                                                             impact on reading test scores.
      supplemental literacy program, the Rainbow        were paired with a student of comparable reading
      Reading Program. Control students continued       ability. One student of each pair was randomly
      with their normal curricula.                      assigned to treatment and the other was assigned
                                                        to control.
      Appendix Table 4 (continued)
      Study                                                Study Design                                          Results
                                                                                                                 Test Score = Each district’s nationally
                                                                                                                 normed tests. If a district did not
                                                                                                                 administer a standardized test, they used
                                                                                                                 Stanford Achievement Test. Only
                                                                                                                 administered tests to one randomly
                                                                                                                 selected treatment and control classroom
                                                           Treatment Defined = Treatment classrooms
      Effectiveness of Reading and Mathematics                                                                   per school. Regression Specification =
                                                           were given the following software products: First
      Software Products: Findings From Two Student                                                               Two-level hierarchical model (student,
                                                           grade reading: Destination Reading, Waterford
      Cohorts (Campuzano et al., 2009). N districts =                                                            classroom) controlling for pretest scores,
                                                           Early Reading Program, Headsprout and Plato
      27, N schools = 105, N teachers = 347, N                                                                   age, gender, teachers’ years of experience,
                                                           Focus; Fourth grade reading: LeapTrack and
      students = 9,392, Grades = 1, 4, and 6.                                                                    education level, and school fixed effects.
                                                           Academy of Reading; Sixth grade math: Larson
      Treatment Groups = The eight treatment groups                                                              Results = The impacts for each software
                                                           Pre-Algebra and Achieve Now. Randomization
      all used different software products. Teachers in                                                          product are as follows: Destination
                                                           = Districts volunteered and identified schools.
      the control group continued using their normal                                                             Reading = 0.091σ (0.082); Headsprout =
                                                           Then teachers volunteered and were assigned to
      curricula.                                                                                                 0.014σ (0.052); Plato Focus = 0.024σ
                                                           treatment and control.
                                                                                                                 (0.066); Waterford Early Reading
                                                                                                                 Program = 0.020σ (0.068); Academy of
                                                                                                                 Reading = -0.008σ (0.050); LeapTrack =




205
                                                                                                                 0.094σ (0.036); Larson Pre-Algebra =
                                                                                                                 0.113σ (0.076); Achieve Now = -0.028σ
                                                                                                                 (0.069).
                                                                                                                 Test Score = Group Reading Assessment
                                                           Treatment Defined = The four reading
                                                                                                                 and Diagnostic Evaluation. Regression
                                                           comprehension curricula were Project CRISS,
                                                                                                                 Specification = OLS regression model
                                                           ReadAbout, Read for Real, and Reading for
                                                                                                                 that controls for student pretest scores,
      Effectiveness of Selected Supplemental Reading       Knowledge. Districts involved in the study were
                                                                                                                 English language learner status,
      Comprehension Interventions: Impacts on a First      required to have at least 12 Title I schools and
                                                                                                                 race/ethnicity, teacher race, school
      Cohort of Fifth-Grade Students (James-Burdumy        schools must not already have been using any of
                                                                                                                 urbanicity, and district fixed effects.
      et al., 2009). N districts = 10, N schools = 89, N   the four curricula. Randomization = Schools
                                                                                                                 Results = Project CRISS had a -0.04σ
      teachers = 268, N students = 6,350, Grade = 5.       were randomly assigned to one of the four
                                                                                                                 (0.04) impact on reading test scores.
      Treatment Groups = The four treatment groups         treatment groups or control group within each
                                                                                                                 ReadAbout had a -0.07σ (0.05) impact on
      all used different software products. Control        district. When possible, schools in a district were
                                                                                                                 reading test scores. Read for Real had a
      schools continued with their normal curricula.       blocked into groups with similar pretest scores
                                                                                                                 -0.06σ (0.04) impact on reading test
                                                           and then randomization occurred within each
                                                                                                                 scores. Reading for Knowledge had a
                                                           block. When blocks were not possible, a Chromy
                                                                                                                 -0.11σ (0.04) impact on reading test
                                                           selection procedure was implemented.
                                                                                                                 scores.
      Appendix Table 4 (continued)
      Study                                                Study Design                                        Results
                                                                                                               Test Score = Metropolitan Achievement
                                                                                                               Tests: Language and Reading subtests.
      Effects of Health-Related Physical Education on                                                          Regression Specification = Effect sizes
      Academic Achievement: Project SPARK (Sallis          Treatment Defined = Physical education classes      were calculated using the average growth
      et al., 1999). N schools = 7, N students = 759,      were administered to fourth graders three days a    between pre and posttest scores. We report
      Grades = 4 - 5, Location = Southern CA.              week throughout the school year; classes were       the average effect across subtests. We only
      Treatment Groups = In the first treatment,           designed to promote independent physical            report results from the first cohort because
      specialists conduct physical education programs.     activity via weekly fitness goals and family        there appears to be an error in the results
      In the second treatment, a specialist trains         involvement. The classes continued through fifth    reported for the second cohort in the
      classroom teachers to conduct physical education     grade. Randomization = Schools were stratified      published article. Results = The specialist
      classes. The control group continues with its        by the percentage of ethnic minority students and   treatment had a -0.006σ (0.456) impact on
      current physical education program. All              then randomly assigned into one of the three        math scores and a 0.101σ (0.458) impact
      participating schools did not employ physical        groups.                                             on reading scores. The trained teacher
      education specialists prior to the study.                                                                treatment had a 0.000σ (0.456) impact on
                                                                                                               math scores and a 0.103σ (0.458) impact
                                                                                                               on reading scores.
                                                                                                               Test Score = Woodcock Reading Mastery
                                                                                                               Test-Revised: Word Identification, Word




206
                                                                                                               Attack, and Passage Comprehension
      Effects of Targeted Intervention on Early Literacy
                                                           Treatment Defined = The authors developed           subtests; Dynamic Indicators of Basic
      Skills of At-Risk Students (Wang and Algozzine,
                                                           their own intervention targeted at the following    Early Literacy Skills: Phoneme
      2008). N schools = 6, N students = 139, Grade =
                                                           skills: phonemic awareness, letter-sound            Segmentation Fluency and Nonsense
      1. Treatment Groups = Treatment students
                                                           correspondence, reading phonetically, fluency       Word Fluency subtests. Regression
      replaced their remedial reading instruction with a
                                                           building, and sight-word practice. Instruction      Specification = For each outcome
      targeted literacy intervention. Control students
                                                           lasted approximately 10 to 15 minutes daily         measure, effect sizes were calculated
      continued with their normal remedial instruction.
                                                           in-class. Randomization = Randomly selected         using the average growth between posttest
      Sample drawn from students at risk of persistent
                                                           two schools to serve as control schools.            and pretest scores. We report the average
      reading failure, as determined by the pretest.
                                                                                                               effect across all outcome measures.
                                                                                                               Results = Treatment had a 0.303σ (0.873)
                                                                                                               impact on reading test scores.
      Appendix Table 4 (continued)
      Study                                                Study Design                                           Results
                                                           Treatment defined = The CSR intervention
                                                           teaches students to reflect upon their
                                                           comprehension of the text. The intervention
      Efficacy of Collaborative Strategic Reading with     follows a set strategy: first, students reviewed the
      Middle School Students (Vaughn et al., 2011). N      topic of the text prior to reading; second, students
                                                                                                                  Test Score = The Gates-MacGintie
      recruitment sites = 2, N schools = 6, N teachers =   read the text, noting where they had difficulty;
                                                                                                                  Reading Test. Regression Specification =
      17, N classrooms = 61, N students = 866, Grades      third, students assessed how they were able to
                                                                                                                  Effect size was calculated using the
      = 7 - 8. Treatment Groups = Treatment                overcome those difficulties; fourth, students
                                                                                                                  average growth between pre and posttest
      classrooms implemented the Collaborative             worked in small groups to discuss the text and
                                                                                                                  scores. Results = Treatment had a 0.073σ
      Strategic Reading (CSR) intervention. Control        any unresolved difficulties. The intervention took
                                                                                                                  (0.072) effect on reading test scores.
      classrooms did not implement such an                 place in class for 50 minutes per day, twice
      intervention.                                        weekly, over 18 weeks. Randomization =
                                                           Students were randomly assigned to classes, and
                                                           classes were stratified by teacher and randomly
                                                           assigned to treatment.
                                                           Treatment Defined = The Read Naturally
                                                           program utilizes computer software to build
                                                           reading fluency via the following three strategies:    Test Score = Dynamic Indicators of Basic




207
                                                           repeated reading, reading with a model, and            Early Literacy Skills; Test of Word
      Empirical Evaluation of Read Naturally Effects       progress monitoring with feedback. The program         Reading Efficiency; Gray Oral Reading
      (Christ and Davie, 2009). N districts = 4, N         also builds vocabulary via reading-for-meaning         Tests IV: Reading Fluency and Accuracy
      schools = 6, N students = 109, Grade = 3.            strategies. Randomization = To be eligible for         measures; Woodcock Reading Mastery
      Treatment Groups = The treatment group used          the study, students had to fall below the 40th         Test-Revised: Word Identification subtest .
      Read Naturally software for 30 minutes daily         percentile on both a standardized test of oral         Regression Specification = Effect sizes
      in-class. The control group engaged in               fluency (either the Dynamic Indicators of Basic        were calculated for each outcome measure
      non-reading activities during the same time. No      Early Literacy Skills or the AIMSweb Test of           using posttest means adjusted for pretest
      school had previously used the Read Naturally        Early Literacy) and a measure of reading               covariates. We report the average effect
      program.                                             comprehension (Measures of Academic Progress)          across all outcome measures. Results =
                                                           administered at the end of second grade. Eligible      Treatment had a 0.248σ (0.197) impact on
                                                           students who agreed to participate were stratified     reading test scores.
                                                           by classroom and assigned at random to the
                                                           treatment group.
      Appendix Table 4 (continued)
      Study                                               Study Design                                        Results
                                                          Treatment Defined = Fluency Formula builds
                                                          oral fluency by focusing on the following units:
                                                          partner reading, choral reading, expressive
                                                          reading, reading theater, repeated reading, and
      Evaluation Research on the Effectiveness of
                                                          expert reading. In-class instruction lasts for at
      Fluency Formula: Final Report (Sivin-Kachala                                                            Test Score = Woodcock-Johnson III:
                                                          least 15 minutes per day, five days per week;
      and Bialo, 2005). N districts = 2, N classrooms =                                                       Passage Comprehension subtest.
                                                          15-minute take-home assignments are also given
      12, N students = 128, Grade = 2. Treatment                                                              Regression Specification = The effect
                                                          once per week. Students requiring additional
      Groups = The treatment group implemented the                                                            size was calculated using the growth
                                                          instruction receive small-group tutoring in-class
      Fluency Formula reading curriculum. The control                                                         between pre and posttest means. Results
                                                          for at least 15 minutes. Randomization =
      group maintained their normal classroom                                                                 = Treatment had a -0.271σ (0.178) impact
                                                          Numerous teachers from each district volunteered
      curricula. No classrooms had access to Fluency                                                          on reading test scores.
                                                          for the study; researchers matched pairs of
      Formula materials beforehand.
                                                          classrooms with similar reading ability, ethnic
                                                          composition, and teacher characteristics. One
                                                          classroom from each pair was randomly assigned
                                                          to treatment.
                                                          Treatment Defined = Treatment classrooms
                                                                                                              Test Score = Gates-MacGintie Reading
      Fostering the Development of Vocabulary             incorporated into their curricula




208
                                                                                                              Tests IV: Vocabulary and Reading
      Knowledge and Reading Comprehension                 contextually-based multiple meaning vocabulary
                                                                                                              Comprehension subtests. Regression
      Through Contextually-Based Multiple Meaning         instruction, which taught students to derive the
                                                                                                              Specification = Effect sizes were
      Vocabulary Instruction (Nelson and Stage, 2007).    meanings of words from a given context. The
                                                                                                              calculated for each outcome measure
      N classrooms = 16, N students = 283, Grades = 3     treatment was designed to boost vocabulary and
                                                                                                              using the growth between pre and posttest
      and 5. Treatment Groups = Treatment                 reading comprehension. Instruction lasted
                                                                                                              means. We report the average effect across
      classrooms altered their curricula to include       approximately 20 - 30 minutes per day during
                                                                                                              subtests. Results = The treatment had a
      contextual vocabulary instruction. Control          each school day. Randomization = Classrooms
                                                                                                              0.205σ (0.502) impact on reading test
      classrooms continued with their normal curricula.   were stratified by grade and then randomly
                                                                                                              scores.
                                                          assigned for treatment.
      Appendix Table 4 (continued)
      Study                                                 Study Design                                         Results
                                                                                                                 Test Score = Gates-MacGintie Reading
      Impact of Thinking Reader Software Program on
                                                                                                                 Tests: Vocabulary and Reading
      Grade 6 Reading Vocabulary, Comprehension,            Treatment Defined = Thinking Reader is
                                                                                                                 Comprehension subtests. Regression
      Strategies, and Motivation (Drummond et al.,          software in which students read novels on
                                                                                                                 Specification = Multilevel hierarchical
      2011). N schools = 32, N teachers = 92, N             computers and respond to prompts from animated
                                                                                                                 linear model (student, teacher, school)
      students = 2,140, Grade = 6, Locations = CT,          coaches. Treatment teachers received two, 6-hour
                                                                                                                 controlling for students’ pretest scores,
      MA, and RI. Treatment Groups = Treatment              training sessions in the fall and three individual
                                                                                                                 English language learner status, special
      teachers received three Thinking Reader digital       coaching sessions throughout the school year (≈8
                                                                                                                 education status, teachers’ education and
      novels to read with their students and participated   hours). Randomization = Within each school,
                                                                                                                 years of experience, school poverty, and
      in professional development to learn how to use       sixth grade reading/ELA teachers were randomly
                                                                                                                 school size. Results = Treatment had a
      the software. Control teachers used the schools’      assigned to treatment or control.
                                                                                                                 -0.005σ (0.053) impact on reading test
      regular curricula.
                                                                                                                 scores.
                                                            Treatment Defined = PACT is a program
                                                            designed to improve text comprehension and
                                                            content learning. The model has 5 key
                                                            components: 1) A comprehension canopy that
                                                            contains a motivational springboard and an           Test Score = Gates-MacGinitie: Reading
      Improving Reading Comprehension and Social            overarching issue or question, 2) essential words    Comprehension subtest. Regression




209
      Studies Knowledge in Middle School (Vaughn et         or key vocabulary related to the unit, 3)            Specification = A multilevel,
      al., 2013). N schools = 2, N teachers = 5, N          knowledge acquisition (appropriate text-based        multiple-group structural equation model
      classes = 27, N students = 419, Grade = 8.            instruction and reading) 4) team-based learning      was used to create latent estimates for
      Treatment Groups = Treatment classrooms               comprehension check, and 5) team-based               student outcomes. The effect size was
      adopted a Promoting Acceleration of                   learning knowledge application. Students in an       calculated using the constructed latent
      Comprehension and Content Through Text                intervention class received instruction during       estimates for each group and their
      (PACT) model. Control classrooms continued            their regularly scheduled social studies classes.    corresponding variances. Results =
      with their normal curricula.                          Teachers implemented PACT instruction for 30         Treatment had a 0.195σ (0.077) impact on
                                                            full class periods (six to eight weeks).             reading test scores.
                                                            Randomization = In participating schools,
                                                            students were first randomly assigned to classes.
                                                            Classes were then randomly assigned to
                                                            treatment or control.
      Appendix Table 4 (continued)
      Study                                               Study Design                                           Results
                                                          Treatment Defined = Treatment students used            Test Score = Dynamic Indicators of Basic
                                                          the Read Naturally software for 30 to 45 minutes       Early Literacy Skills: Oral Reading
      Improving Reading Fluency and Comprehension         daily, five days per week, for eight weeks. The        Fluency subtest; Expressive Vocabulary
      in Elementary Students Using Read Naturally         software offered children their choice of 12 texts.    Tests; Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test;
      (Arvans, 2009). N schools = 1, N students = 82,     The software offered pronunciation and                 and the cognitive and achievement
      Grades = 2 - 4. Treatment Groups = Treatment        vocabulary help as needed. Students could move         batteries of the Woodcock-Johnson III.
      students utilized the Read Naturally software.      on to the next story only if they independently        Regression Specification = Effect sizes
      Control students received no such intervention.     read the story out loud with no more than three        were calculated using the average growth
      Sample drawn from students in need of additional    errors. Randomization = Students were paired           between pre and posttest scores. We report
      reading help as determined by the pretest.          by race, grade, gender, and pretest score and then     the average effect across all outcomes.
                                                          one student from each pairing was randomly             Results = Treatment had a 0.096σ (0.221)
                                                          assigned to treatment.                                 impact on reading test scores.
                                                          Treatment Defined = The ITSS software builds
                                                          reading comprehension by reading passages of
                                                          increasing difficulty with students before asking
                                                          them to read by themselves. The program aims to
      Individualizing a Web-Based Structure Strategy      build familiarity with the following text
      Intervention for Fifth Graders’ Comprehension of    structures: comparison, problem-and-solution,




210
      Nonfiction (Meyer et al., 2011). N schools = 2, N   cause-and-effect, sequence, and description.           Test Score = The Gray Silent Reading
      students = 131, Grade = 5, Location = PA.           Students in the treatment condition received           Test. Regression Specification = The
      Treatment Groups = All students used the            remediation or enrichment lessons depending on         effect size was calculated using the
      Intelligent Tutor Structure Strategy (ITSS)         their demonstrated proficiency. Remediation            average growth between pre and posttest
      computer software. Treatment students received      lessons had students read texts of similar or easier   scores. Results = Treatment had a 0.266σ
      individual lessons from the program. Control        complexity, while enrichment lessons had               (0.265) impact on reading test scores.
      students utilized the program’s normal              students read the most complex text suited to
      curriculum.                                         their ability. The intervention occurred in-class
                                                          over three, 30-minute blocks per week.
                                                          Randomization = Students were stratified by
                                                          pretest scores and elementary school and then
                                                          randomly assigned to treatment.
      Appendix Table 4 (continued)
      Study                                               Study Design                                         Results
                                                          Treatment Defined = Treatment group received
                                                          the structure strategy though ITSS. Structure
                                                          strategy is an approach to improving reading
      Large-Scale Randomized Controlled Trial with        comprehension that focuses on common patterns
      4th Graders Using Intelligent Tutoring of the       used by writers to organize texts and organize       Test Score = The Gray Silent Reading
      Structure Strategy to Improve Nonfiction Reading    main ideas. ITSS was designed to deliver             Test. Regression Specification =
      Comprehension (Wijekumar et al., 2012). N           instruction within existing ELA curriculum for       Multilevel hierarchical linear model
      teachers = 130, N students = 2,643, Grades = 4.     one class period a week and provide one on one       (student, classroom, school) controlling
      Treatment Groups = Treatment teachers had           tutoring. Randomization = Classrooms were            for pretest scores, gender, and school
      access to professional development and a            randomly assigned to treatment and control           locale. Results = Treatment had a 0.10σ
      web-based intelligent tutoring system (ITSS).       within each school. If a school did not have         (0.06) impact on reading test scores.
      Control teachers continued with normal curricula.   enough classrooms, schools with similar
                                                          characteristics were grouped and then
                                                          randomized within that group. All schools
                                                          volunteered to participate.
                                                          Treatment defined = All interventions took place
                                                          for 50 minutes, five days per week, in groups of
                                                                                                               Test Score = Woodcock Reading Mastery
                                                          three students. The intervention replaced normal




211
                                                                                                               Test-Revised: Word Attack, Word
      National Assessment of Title I Interim Report:      reading instruction. The Spell Read program
                                                                                                               Identification, and Passage
      Volume II: Closing the Reading Gap: First Year      builds phonemic awareness via specific sound
                                                                                                               Comprehension subtests; Test of Word
      Findings from a Randomized Trial of Four            tasks as well as reading and writing activities.
                                                                                                               Reading Efficiency: Phonemic Decoding
      Reading Interventions for Striving Readers          The Corrective Reading program uses scripted
                                                                                                               and Sight Word subtests; The Group
      (Torgesen et al., 2006). N districts = 27, N        lessons and rapid exercises to build word
                                                                                                               Reading and Diagnostic Evaluation.
      schools = 50, N students = 772, Grades = 3 and 5.   identification and fluency. The Wilson Reading
                                                                                                               Regression Specification = Two-level
      Treatment Groups = Four treatment groups:           program uses direct, multi-sensory, structured
                                                                                                               hierarchical linear model (student, school)
      group one implemented the Corrective Reading        reading to build understanding of the structure of
                                                                                                               controlling for grade, pretest scores, and
      program, group two implemented the Failure          language. The Failure Free program builds
                                                                                                               block. Results = The Corrective Reading
      Free Reading program, group three implemented       vocabulary through a combination of
                                                                                                               program had a 0.148σ (0.148) impact on
      the Spell Read P.A.T. program, and group four       computer-based lessons, workbook exercises, and
                                                                                                               reading test scores. The Failure Free
      implemented the Wilson Reading program. The         teacher-led instruction. Randomization =
                                                                                                               Reading program had a 0.048σ (0.137)
      control group continued with their normal           Schools were sorted into blocks based on the
                                                                                                               impact on reading test scores. The Spell
      curricula. Sample drawn from students at-risk of    percentage of students eligible for free/reduced
                                                                                                               Read P.A.T. program had a 0.179σ (0.137)
      developing reading difficulty as determined by      lunch. Schools were then stratified by block and,
                                                                                                               impact on reading test scores. The Wilson
      pretest scores.                                     within each block, were randomly assigned to
                                                                                                               Reading program had a 0.176σ (0.147)
                                                          one of the four treatment conditions. Within each
                                                                                                               impact on reading test scores.
                                                          school, students were randomly assigned to
                                                          treatment or control.
      Appendix Table 4 (continued)
      Study                                                 Study Design                                        Results
                                                            Treatment Defined = Students in the TBE
                                                            condition received reading instruction in Spanish
      Reading and Language Outcomes of a Multiyear                                                              Test Score = Peabody Picture Vocabulary
                                                            for their Kindergarten year. The intervention
      Randomized Evaluation of Transitional Bilingual                                                           Test; Woodcock-Johnson: Word
                                                            focused on developing knowledge of the letter
      Education (Slavin et al., 2011). N districts = 6, N                                                       Identification, Word Attack, and Passage
                                                            sounds, phonics, vocabulary, and concepts of the
      schools = 6, N students = 482, Grade = K.                                                                 Comprehension subtests. Regression
                                                            Spanish language. Most treatment students
      Treatment Groups = Treatment students                                                                     Specification = Effect sizes were
                                                            transitioned to English-language reading classes
      participated in a transitional bilingual education                                                        calculated using posttest means adjusted
                                                            in second grade. Control utilized the same
      program (TBE). Control students utilized a                                                                for pretest scores. We report the average
                                                            curriculum as treatment, however all classes were
      Structured English Immersion (SEI) program.                                                               annual impact across all subtests. Results
                                                            taught in English. All students received regular
      Sample composed entirely of students who were                                                             = Treatment had a -0.046σ (0.070) impact
                                                            ESL instruction. Randomization = Students
      Spanish dominant as determined by the pretest.                                                            on reading test scores.
                                                            were stratified by school and randomly assigned
                                                            to treatment.
      Segmentation / Spelling Instruction as Part of a                                                          Test Score = Woodcock Reading Mastery
                                                            Treatment Defined = All classrooms in the study
      First-Grade Reading Program: Effects on Several                                                           Tests: Word Attack and Word
                                                            used the same vocabulary lists. Treatment
      Measures of Reading (Uhry and Shepherd, 1993).                                                            Identification subtests; the Gray Oral
                                                            students were trained to spell phonetically via a
      N classrooms = 2, N students = 22, Grade = 1,                                                             Reading Tests. Regression Specification
                                                            series of segmentation, dictation, and computer
      Location = New York City, NY. Treatment                                                                   = For each outcome measure, effect sizes




212
                                                            exercises. The intervention took place over two
      Groups = The treatment classroom incorporated                                                             were calculated using the average growth
                                                            20-minute sessions per week from October to
      phonetic segmentation and spelling techniques                                                             between postest and pretest scores. We
                                                            May in place of normal reading instruction.
      into their curriculum. The control classroom                                                              report the average effect across all
                                                            Randomization = Students were stratified by
      retained a reading-based curriculum. Sample                                                               outcome measures. Results = Treatment
                                                            gender and reading ability as determined by the
      drawn from predominately white, middle class,                                                             had a 1.413σ (0.594) impact on reading
                                                            teacher, then randomly assigned to treatment.
      and college educated families.                                                                            test scores.
      Appendix Table 4 (continued)
      Study                                               Study Design                                         Results
                                                          Treatment defined = The ST Math curriculum
                                                          utilizes software to present mathematical
                                                          concepts through a series of pictures and games.
      Spatial Temporal Mathematics at Scale: An           The goal of this curriculum is to develop spatial
                                                                                                               Test Score = California Standards Test:
      Innovative and Fully Developed Paradigm to          reasoning skills and problem solving techniques.
                                                                                                               Math subtest. Regression Specification =
      Boost Math Achievement Among All Learners           The program was administered for 45 minutes in
                                                                                                               OLS regression controlling for grade,
      (Rutherford et al., 2010). N schools = 34, Grades   class twice weekly. Randomization = To be
                                                                                                               percent of English Language Learners in
      = 2 - 5, Location = CA. Treatment Groups =          eligible for the study, schools had to be in the
                                                                                                               each school, percent of students on
      Treatment group implemented the Spatial             lowest three deciles of the Academic
                                                                                                               free/reduced lunch, and the mean test
      Temporal Math (ST Math) curriculum. The             Performance Index - a weighted composite of
                                                                                                               scores of the same grade from the
      control group continued their regular curricula.    student standardized test scores. Eligible schools
                                                                                                               previous year. Results = Treatment had a
      No schools had previous experience with the ST      who applied to participate were assigned at
                                                                                                               0.290σ (0.140) impact on math test scores.
      Math curriculum.                                    random to one of two groups: one implemented
                                                          treatment for second and third graders, the other
                                                          implemented treatment for fourth and fifth
                                                          graders.
                                                                                                               Test Score = Test of Word Reading
                                                          Treatment Defined = In schools implementing a        Efficiency: Significant Word Efficiency




213
                                                          repeated-reading treatment, teachers introduced      subtest; the Gray Oral Reading Test;
      Teaching Children to Become Fluent and              and discussed a text in class at the start of the    Wechsler Individual Achievement Test:
      Automatic Readers (Kuhn et al., 2006). N            week. Students then read the same text               Reading Comprehension subtest.
      schools = 8, N classrooms = 24, N students =        approximately four to seven times throughout the     Regression Specification = Effect sizes
      396, Grade = 2. Treatment Groups = Two              week between class time and homework. In             were calculated for each outcome measure
      treatment groups: one implemented a                 schools implementing a wide-reading curriculum,      using posttest means. We report the effect
      repeated-reading curriculum; the other              teachers introduced and discussed approximately      across all outcome measures. Results
      implemented a wide-reading curriculum. The          three texts per week, with students re-reading the   =The repeated-reading curriculum
      control group continued its normal curricula.       texts approximately twice between class time and     treatment had a 0.145σ (0.501) impact on
                                                          homework. Randomization = Schools were               reading test scores. The wide-reading
                                                          randomly assigned to one of the three groups.        curriculum treatment had a 0.163σ (0.501)
                                                                                                               impact on reading test scores.
      Appendix Table 4 (continued)
      Study                                                Study Design                                         Results
                                                           Treatment Defined = The study uses a group of
                                                           computer programs known as I Can Learn. The
                                                           system is comprised of a software computer
                                                           package that is designed to deliver instruction
                                                           through technology on a one-on-one basis to
                                                           every student. The curricula is designed to meet
      Technology’s Edge: The Educational Benefits of       the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics
                                                                                                                Test score = State math tests. Regression
      Computer-Aided Instruction (Barrow et al.,           standards as well as each individual district’s
                                                                                                                Specification = OLS regressions
      2009). N districts = 3, N schools = 17, N students   course objectives for pre-algebra and/or algebra.
                                                                                                                controlling for pretest scores,
      = 3,451. Treatment Groups = Treatment                In addition, the software package also includes a
                                                                                                                randomization pools, and demographic
      classrooms used computer-aided instruction.          classroom management tool for educators, and
                                                                                                                characteristics. Results = Treatment had a
      Control classrooms continued with traditional        the company provides on-site support for
                                                                                                                0.137σ (0.111) impact on math test scores.
      curricula.                                           administrators and teachers. Randomization =
                                                           All pre-algebra and algebra classes in
                                                           participating schools were grouped into 60
                                                           randomization pools. These pools were defined
                                                           within a school and typically represent a class
                                                           period. Within each pool, classes were randomly




214
                                                           assigned to treatment and control groups.
                                                           Treatment Defined = Computer-assisted
                                                           instruction is a method of using computers as a
                                                           tool to present individualized instructional
                                                           material. Students in the treatment group used the
      The Effect of Computer Assisted Instruction in
                                                           same textbook as control students. Treatment
      Improving Mathematics Performance of Low
                                                           students also used software that assisted them in    Test Score = Test of Achievement and
      Achieving Ninth Grade Students (Bailey, 1991).
                                                           learning mathematics skills of concepts,             Proficiency: Math subtest. Regression
      N schools = 1, N teachers = 4, N classes = 4, N
                                                           computations, and problem solving.                   Specification = Effect size was calculated
      students = 46, Grade = 9, Location = Urban high
                                                           Randomization = The sample of students was           using the average growth between posttest
      school in Hampton, VA. Treatment Groups =
                                                           identified from students scoring below the 30th      and pretest scores. Results = Treatment
      Treatment students were taught the standard
                                                           percentile on the Iowa Test of Basic Skills          had a 0.728σ (0.304) impact on math test
      curriculum augmented with computer-assisted
                                                           mathematics subtest in the previous year and         scores.
      instruction in their math class. Control students
                                                           receiving a D or F in their 8th grade mathematics
      were taught the standard curriculum.
                                                           course. Consent forms were sent to the parents of
                                                           eligible students. Students who returned the
                                                           consent form were randomly assigned to
                                                           treatment or control.
      Appendix Table 4 (continued)
      Study                                              Study Design                                          Results
                                                         Treatment Defined = The treatment group
                                                         received French instruction by the audio-lingual
                                                                                                               Test Score = California Achievement
      The Effect of Second-Language Instruction on       method for 15 minutes daily over the course of
                                                                                                               Test. Regression Specification = Effect
      the Reading Proficiency and General School         the school year. The control group was given
                                                                                                               size was calculated using the posttest
      Achievement of Primary-Grade Children (Potts,      dance instruction during this time period.
                                                                                                               means adjusted for language mental age
      1967). N classrooms = 4, N students = 80, Grade    Randomization = Students (stratified by gender)
                                                                                                               and nonlanguage mental age as found on
      = 1 and 2, Location = NY. Treatment Groups =       and teachers were randomly assigned to the
                                                                                                               the California Test of Mental Maturity.
      Treatment students received instruction in         classrooms. Each classroom was then randomly
                                                                                                               Results = Treatment had a 0.04σ (0.22)
      French, control students did not.                  divided in half. Half of the class was assigned to
                                                                                                               impact on reading test scores.
                                                         treatment and the other half was assigned to
                                                         control.
                                                         Treatment Defined = K-PAVE is built around
                                                         three components that support the acquisition of
                                                         vocabulary in young students: (1) instruction on a
                                                         large set of thematically related target words; (2)
                                                         interactive book reading to build vocabulary and
                                                         comprehension skills; and (3) adult-child
      The Effectiveness of a Program to Accelerate       conversations to build vocabulary and oral




215
      Vocabulary Development in Kindergarten             language skills. The K-PAVE program was               Test Score = The Expressive Vocabulary
      (VOCAB) (Goodson et al., 2010). N districts =      designed as a 24 week supplement to the core          Test-2. Regression Specification =
      35, N schools = 65, N teachers = 130, N students   language arts program used in each school.            Researchers used a three-level linear
      = 1,319, Grade = K, Location = Mississippi Delta   Randomization = Participating schools were            hierarchical model (student, teacher,
      region. Treatment Groups = Treatment students      placed in three blocks based on previous              school) controlling for student and school
      participated in K-PAVE, a kindergarten             participation in reading initiatives. Within the      baseline demographics. Results =
      curriculum designed to enhance students’           blocks, schools were matched on school                Treatment had a 0.141σ (0.052) impact on
      vocabulary knowledge. Control students             performance classification, percentage of free or     reading test scores.
      continued with their normal curricula.             reduced-price meal students, percentage of
                                                         African American students, locale, and region.
                                                         After being matched, schools were randomly
                                                         assigned to treatment or control. Furthermore, the
                                                         researchers randomly selected two consenting
                                                         kindergarten teachers from treatment schools to
                                                         collect data from.
      Appendix Table 4 (continued)
      Study                                               Study Design                                          Results
      The Effectiveness of Computer Assisted
                                                          Treatment Defined = Treatment students
      Instruction of Chapter I Students in Secondary
                                                          completed mathematics practice problems on a          Test Score = Metropolitan Achievement
      Schools (Davidson, 1985). N schools = 1, N
                                                          computer for at least 20 minutes per day for 13       Test Battery: Mathematics Instructional
      students = 67, Grades = 9 - 12. Treatment
                                                          weeks. This intervention used time that would         subtest. Regression Specification =
      Groups = Treatment classes implemented a
                                                          otherwise have been allocated to in-class             Effect size was calculated using posttest
      computer-assisted learning intervention. Control
                                                          mathematics exercises. Randomization =                means adjusted for pretest scores. Results
      classrooms received no such intervention.
                                                          Students were sorted into five classes by school      = Treatment had a 0.121σ (1.119) impact
      Sample drawn from Chapter I students – those
                                                          administrators and then classes were randomly         on math test scores.
      who failed to achieve 80 percent of grade-level
                                                          assigned to treatment.
      objectives on local or state standardized tests.
                                                          Treatment Defined =The SRA software offers
                                                          practice with immediate feedback in basic
                                                          arithmetic skills. The MicroSystem80 software         Test Score = California Achievement
      The Effects of Computer Assisted Instruction as a
                                                          introduces students to the basic rules of logic and   Test. Regression Specification = Effect
      Supplement to Classroom Instruction in Reading
                                                          drills students on critical reasoning skills.         sizes were calculated using average
      Comprehension and Arithmetic (Easterling,
                                                          Treatment students worked for a total of four         growth between pre and posttest scores.
      1982). N schools = 3, N students = 72, Grade = 5.
                                                          hours on the computer in addition to normal class     Results = The math instruction treatment
      Treatment Groups = Two treatment conditions:
                                                          time. Randomization = Six boys and six girls          had a 0.318σ (0.301) impact on math test




216
      condition one students utilized the SRA Computer
                                                          were randomly selected from each school. These        scores and a -0.099σ (0.299) impact on
      Drill and Instruction: Mathematics program;
                                                          were matched to another student in the same           reading test scores. The reading
      condition two utilized the MicroSystem80 reading
                                                          school on the basis of gender and pretest scores.     instruction treatment had a 0.179σ (0.299)
      program. The control group continued with their
                                                          In two randomly selected schools, pairings were       impact on math test scores and a -0.010σ
      normal curricula.
                                                          stratified by gender and assigned at random to        (0.299) impact on reading test scores.
                                                          one of the two treatments. Pairings from the third
                                                          school served as the control group.
      Appendix Table 4 (continued)
      Study                                                Study Design                                       Results
                                                           Treatment Defined = The goal of both of the
                                                           reading interventions is to help struggling
                                                           adolescent readers develop the strategies and
      The Enhanced Reading Opportunities (ERO)
                                                           routines used by proficient readers. To do so,
      Study Final Report: The Impact of Supplemental                                                          Test Score = State test scores. Regression
                                                           each program supports instruction in the
      Literacy Courses for Struggling Ninth-grade                                                             Specification = OLS regressions
                                                           following areas: (1) student motivation and
      Readers (Somers et al., 2010). N districts = 10, N                                                      controlling for students’ baseline test
                                                           engagement; (2) reading fluency; (3) vocabulary;
      schools = 34, N students = 5,595, Grade = 9.                                                            scores, whether students were overage at
                                                           (4) comprehension; (5) phonics and phonemic
      Treatment Groups = Treatment one students                                                               the start of ninth grade, and randomization
                                                           awareness; and (6) writing. Randomization =
      participated in the Reading Apprenticeship                                                              block fixed-effects. Results = The ERO
                                                           Within each district, high schools were randomly
      Academic Literacy (RAAL) intervention.                                                                  program had a 0.07σ (0.035) impact on
                                                           assigned to use one of the two supplemental
      Treatment two students participated in the                                                              math test scores and a 0.11σ (0.037)
                                                           literacy programs. Eligible students within each
      Xtreme Reading intervention. Control students                                                           impact on reading test scores.
                                                           of the participating high schools were randomly
      remained in regularly scheduled elective classes.
                                                           assigned either to enroll in the ERO class or to
                                                           take one of their school’s regularly offered
                                                           elective classes.
                                                           Treatment Defined = Project M2 gave treatment
                                                           students challenging geometry and measurement




217
                                                           units. The purpose is to help primary students
      The Impact of Challenging Geometry and
                                                           learn more complex geometry and measurement        Test Score = Iowa Test of Basic Skills:
      Measurement Units on Achievement of Grade 2
                                                           concepts in depth. Teachers in treatment group     Mathematics Concepts subtest.
      Students (Gavin et al., 2013). N schools = 11, N
                                                           attended a 4-day summer institute and received     Regression Specification = Two-level
      teachers = 24, N students = 380, Grade = 2,
                                                           an additional day of professional development      hierarchical linear model (student, class)
      Location = CT, KY, SC, and TX. Treatment
                                                           prior to the implementation of each unit. This     controlling for pretest scores. Results =
      Groups = Treatment teachers implemented
                                                           was a three year intervention. Randomization =     Treatment had an impact of 0.071σ
      Project M2 in their classrooms. Control teachers
                                                           Participants were recruited from both lower and    (0.112) on math test scores.
      did not.
                                                           higher socioeconomic districts. Teachers were
                                                           stratified by school and randomly assigned to
                                                           either treatment or control.
      Appendix Table 4 (continued)
      Study                                               Study Design                                         Results
                                                          Treatment Defined = CSR is a set of
                                                          instructional strategies designed to improve the
                                                          reading comprehension of students with diverse
                                                          abilities. Teachers implement CSR at the             Test Score = The Group Reading
      The Impact of Collaborative Strategic Reading on
                                                          classroom level using scaffolded instruction to      Assessment and Diagnostic Evaluation.
      the Reading Comprehension of Grade 5 Students
                                                          guide students in the independent use of four        Regression Specification = Two-level
      in Linguistically Diverse Schools (Hitchcock et
                                                          comprehension strategies; students apply the         hierarchical linear model (student,
      al., 2011). N districts = 5, N schools = 26, N
                                                          strategies to informational text while working in    classroom) controlling for student-level
      students = 1,355, Grade = 5, Location = OK and
                                                          small cooperative learning groups. The goals are     pretest scores, English language learner
      TX. Treatment Groups = Treatment students
                                                          to improve reading comprehension and                 status, teachers’ Spanish fluency, and
      participated in Collaborative Strategic Reading
                                                          conceptual learning so that academic                 school fixed-effects. Results = Treatment
      (CSR). Control students continued with their
                                                          performance also improves. Treatment teachers        had an impact of 0.05σ (0.03) on reading
      normal curricula.
                                                          received a two day training session on CSR.          test scores.
                                                          Randomization = Classrooms in participating
                                                          schools were randomly assigned to CSR
                                                          treatment or control.
                                                          Treatment Defined = Treatment teachers used a
                                                          mathematics curriculum that the researchers




218
                                                          found successful in a previous correlational
                                                          study. The curriculum emphasized student
      The Missouri Mathematics Effectiveness Project:     practice and teacher presentations through a daily
      An Experimental Study in Fourth-Grade               teaching routine the teachers were expected to       Test Score = Science Research Associates
      Classrooms (Good and Grouws, 1979). N schools       follow. Treatment teachers attended two              Mathematics test. Regression
      = 27, N teachers = 40, Grade = 4, Location =        90-minute training sessions and received a           Specification = Effect size was calculated
      Tulsa Public School system. Treatment Groups        curriculum manual that they were instructed to       using average growth between pre and
      = Treatment teachers used a new mathematics         read before the start of the experiment. Control     posttest scores. Results = Treatment had a
      curriculum. Control teachers continued with their   teachers received similar training and materials     0.648σ (0.395) impact on math test scores.
      normal curricula.                                   after the completion of the experiment.
                                                          Randomization = Schools were matched by
                                                          student socioeconomic status and then one school
                                                          from each pair was randomly assigned to
                                                          treatment and the other to control.
      Appendix Table 4 (continued)
      Study                                               Study Design                                         Results
                                                          Treatment Defined = Both treatment programs
                                                          focused on teaching addition, subtraction,
                                                          multiplication, division, and problem solving.
      The Relationship Between Supplemental               The lessons were differentiated among students
                                                                                                               Test Score = California Test of Basic
      Computer Assisted Mathematics Instruction and       by pretest and Cognitive Skills Index test scores.
                                                                                                               Skills: Mathematics subtest. Regression
      Student Achievement (Manuel, 1987). N schools       The CCC software progressively adjusted the
                                                                                                               Specification = Average growth in test
      = 3, N students = 190, Grades = 3 - 6, Location =   difficulty of its assessments based on student
                                                                                                               scores was used to calculate effect sizes.
      Omaha, NE. Treatment Groups = Classrooms in         performance, and it included limited graphics and
                                                                                                               Results = The CCC software treatment
      treatment one incorporated Computer Curriculum      no gaming techniques. The Apple software had
                                                                                                               had a 0.066σ (0.161) impact on math test
      Corporation (CCC) software into their curricula.    teachers set the difficulty of assessments, and it
                                                                                                               scores. The Apple software treatment had
      Classrooms in treatment two incorporated Apple      incorporated extensive graphics and some gaming
                                                                                                               a -0.118σ (0.230) impact on math test
      software into their curricula. The control          techniques. Treatment is in addition to normal
                                                                                                               scores.
      classrooms continued with their normal curricula.   class time. Randomization = Students were
                                                          stratified by grade, gender, and ability (as
                                                          determined by the Cognitive Skills Index) and
                                                          then assigned randomly to treatment or control.
                                                          Treatment Defined = The 4R’s program
                                                                                                               Test Score = New York State standardized
                                                          combines academic instruction in language arts




219
                                                                                                               assessments of math and reading.
                                                          with emotional development. The goal of the
      Two-Year Impacts of a Universal School-Based                                                             Regression Specification = Three-level
                                                          program is to curb aggression via
      Social-Emotional and Literacy Intervention: An                                                           hierarchical linear model (time, student,
                                                          anger-management, listening, assertiveness,
      Experiment in Translational Developmental                                                                school) controlling for socioeconomic
                                                          cooperation, negotiation, mediation,
      Research (Jones et al., 2011). N schools = 18, N                                                         status, community risk factors, student
                                                          community-building, countering bias, and
      students = 1,184, Grades = K - 3, Location = New                                                         behavioral risk, gender, race, teacher
                                                          celebration of differences. Randomization = 24
      York City, NY. Treatment Groups = Treatment                                                              experience, class size, a survey measure of
                                                          schools agreed to participate and were matched in
      group implemented the 4R’s (“Reading, Writing,                                                           how burnt out a teacher is, and school
                                                          pairs based on similar demographics. The nine
      Respect, and Resolution”) Program. The control                                                           fixed-effects. We report annual effects.
                                                          best matched pairs of schools were selected for
      group continued the regular curriculum.                                                                  Results = Treatment had an impact of
                                                          the study and the other three pairs were reserved
                                                                                                               -0.051σ (0.169) on math test scores and
                                                          as backups. One school from each pairing was
                                                                                                               -0.012σ (0.184) on reading test scores.
                                                          assigned at random to treatment.
      Appendix Table 4 (continued)
      Study                                              Study Design                                        Results
                                                         Treatment Defined = SEM-R is an enrichment
      Using Enrichment Reading Practices to Increase     reading program where curriculum is customized      Test Score = Iowa Test of Basic Skills:
      Reading Fluency, Comprehension, and Attitudes      based on students’ learning styles, needs, and      Reading Comprehension subtest.
      (Reis et al., 2008). N schools = 2, N students =   interests. Treatment students participated in one   Regression Specification = Two-level
      558, Grades = 3 - 5. Treatment Groups =            hour of the school’s normal reading program and     hierarchical linear model (student,
      Treatment teachers incorporated the Schoolwide     one hour of the SEM-R intervention. Control         classroom) controlling for oral fluency and
      Enrichment Reading (SEM-R) program into their      students received two hours of the school’s         school fixed-effects. Results = Treatment
      curricula. Control teachers continued with their   normal reading program. Randomization =             had an impact of 0.28σ (0.25) on reading
      normal curricula.                                  Students and teachers were randomly assigned to     test scores.
                                                         treatment or control.




220
