                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           MEASURING OPENNESS TO TRADE

                                      Michael E. Waugh
                                       B. Ravikumar

                                     Working Paper 22147
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w22147


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    April 2016




We thank Raphael Auer, Mario Crucini, Harris Dellas, Jonathan Eaton, Ray Riezman, and the
participants at the 2015 Conference on International Economics at the Study Center in Gerzensee
for useful comments. The views expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, the Board of Governors,
the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Michael E. Waugh and B. Ravikumar. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Measuring Openness to Trade
Michael E. Waugh and B. Ravikumar
NBER Working Paper No. 22147
April 2016, Revised July 2016
JEL No. E1,F11,F40,F62,F63

                                          ABSTRACT

In this paper we derive a new measure of openness—trade potential index—that quantifies
potential gains from trade as a simple function of data. Using a standard multicountry trade
model, we measure openness by a country’s potential welfare gain from moving to a world with
frictionless trade. In this model, a country’s trade potential depends on only the trade elasticity
and two observable statistics: the country’s home trade share and its income level. Quantitatively,
poor countries have greater potential gains from trade relative to rich countries, while their
welfare costs of autarky are similar. This leads us to infer that rich countries are more open to
trade. Our trade potential index correlates strongly with estimates of trade costs, while both the
welfare cost of autarky and the volume of trade correlate weakly with trade costs. Thus, our
measure of openness is informative about the underlying trade frictions.


Michael E. Waugh
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West Fourth Street, Suite 7-160
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
mwaugh@stern.nyu.edu

B. Ravikumar
Research Division
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis
P.O. Box 442
St. Louis, MO 63166-0442
b.ravikumar@wustl.edu
1. Introduction
How open is a country to trade? And, how large are the welfare gains from trade? These
questions typically have been answered by computing the welfare cost of autarky—the change
in real income due to a change from the observed equilibrium to autarky. Arkolakis, Costinot,
and Rodriguez-Clare (2012) show that this calculation in a large class of models takes a simple
form: a country’s home trade share raised to the power of the inverse of the trade elasticity.1

In this paper, we deliver a measure of openness that quantifies the potential gains from trade.
Our “trade potential” measures how much each country can gain by moving from a current
world with trade costs to a frictionless world. We define a country’s trade potential as the
change in real income per worker due to a change from the observed equilibrium to the fric-
tionless trade equilibrium. Within a standard model of trade, we show that a country’s trade
potential takes a simple form: It is proportional to
                                                              1
                                                             1+θ
                                                      λii
                                                                    ,                                        (1)
                                                      Yi

where λii is country i’s observed home trade share, Yi is country i’s observed real gross domestic
product (GDP), and θ is the trade elasticity.2 Relative to the standard welfare cost of autarky
calculation, the key feature of our measure is that it encodes how a country’s potential depends
on its technology and endowments as summarized by its observed GDP. This distinction is
important because two countries may have the same welfare cost of autarky but vastly different
potentials. Empirically, this is the pattern in the data. We show that the welfare cost of autarky
is similar across countries, but poor countries have greater potential gains from trade.

We derive our measure by embedding the multicountry trade model developed by Eaton and
Kortum (2002) (hereafter EK) into a neoclassical growth model. Each country is endowed with
a stock of capital and a labor force. Both factors are immobile across countries. There is a con-
tinuum of tradable goods. The distribution of productivity over the continuum belongs to the
Fréchet family; countries differ in the centering parameter but have a common shape param-
eter. International trade is subject to barriers in the form of iceberg trade costs. All markets
are competitive. The amount of trade between any two countries, in equilibrium, depends on
technologies and trade costs.

Operationally, measuring trade potential requires computing the change in real GDP per worker
from its current observed level to a new level in the frictionless world. To compute the change,
   1
     A country’s home trade share is 1 minus the fraction of the country’s expenditures on goods from all other
countries.
   2
     The constant of proportionality is a cross-country-weighted average of the expression in (1), is not country
specific, and ensures that the trade potential is unit free.



                                                            2
we proceed in three steps. We first provide a closed-form expression for a country’s real GDP
per worker, regardless of the trade costs. This expression depends on the country’s home trade
share, technology parameter, labor and capital endowments, and two non-country-specific
parameters—the trade elasticity and capital’s share in production. This expression shows how a
country with a larger technology parameter or capital endowment per worker will be relatively
richer. We can use this expression for real GDP per worker in the frictionless world, but each
country’s home trade share in the frictionless world requires knowledge of the country-specific
technology parameters.

In the second step, we measure the country-specific technology parameters. With the closed-
form expression from the first step, we derive each country’s technology parameter as a simple
function of three observables for the country—real GDP per worker, capital per worker, and the
home trade share. Our measurement of the technology parameter is similar to the measurement
of total factor productivity (TFP) in the development accounting literature (see, for instance,
Hall and Jones (1999), Caselli (2005)).

In the third step, we note that each country’s home trade share in the frictionless world is equal
to the country’s share in world GDP in the frictionless world. Knowing the technology parame-
ter from the second step and the closed-form expression from the first step, we determine each
country’s GDP in the frictionless world as a function of observables and infer the country’s
trade potential.

Our approach yields the surprising result that a country’s trade potential is completely summa-
rized by its observed home trade share and GDP, as shown in (1). Details such as its capital stock,
labor endowment, technology, and so on are not necessary to calculate the trade potential.

The important qualitative prediction of our measure of openness is how a country’s trade po-
tential depends on its current level of income. As (1) makes clear, holding all else constant, a
country whose observed real GDP is relatively low has relatively more to gain from trade. In
other words, the poorest countries have the highest potential gains from trade.

This prediction highlights our contribution relative to measures of openness based on the stan-
dard welfare cost of autarky. The welfare cost of autarky calculation implies that if a rich coun-
try and a poor country have the same home trade share, then both countries experience the
same loss from a move to autarky—that is, the welfare cost is the same across countries. Miss-
ing from this inference, however, is the possibility that the poor country could have more to
gain from trade—that is, a greater trade potential. Put differently, the observed equilibrium
for a poor country might be close to autarky but far from frictionless trade, while the observed
equilibrium for a rich country might be close to autarky but also close to frictionless trade. If
poor countries indeed have greater trade potentials we infer that they are more closed relative
to rich countries.


                                                3
                                 Table 1: Top 10 Most Open Countries
                   Imports/GDP                  Welfare Cost of Autarky       Trade Potential Index
        Luxembourg*                          Luxembourg*                      Luxembourg*
        Antigua and Barbuda                  Antigua and Barbuda              Netherlands*
        Estonia*                             Estonia*                         Germany
        Malta                                Malta                            Estonia*
        Iceland                              Iceland                          Hungary
        Suriname                             Suriname                         Austria
        Fiji                                 Fiji                             Switzerland
        Netherlands*                         Netherlands*                     United States
        Jamaica                              Jamaica                          Denmark
        St. Vincent and the Grenadines       St. Vincent and the Grenadines   United Kingdom
      Note: Asterisks indicate a country appears in both lists.



We quantify our measure of openness using data on trade shares, endowments, and GDP di-
rectly from the Penn World Tables (PWT). We find two important results. First, poor countries
have greater trade potential relative to rich countries, while the welfare cost of autarky of poor
countries is similar to that of rich countries. The feature of the data delivering this pattern is
that home trade shares do not vary strongly with the level of GDP. This observation and our
simple formula in (1) immediately imply greater trade potential for poor countries.

An implication of this result is that relative to their potential, rich countries are more open.
We formalize this by constructing a trade potential index that maps each country’s observed
position into the 0 − 1 interval, with 0 being autarky and 1 being frictionless trade. Because
poor countries have greater trade potential, they are closer to autarky relative to rich countries.
Table 1 illustrates this. The U.S., the U.K., and Germany are not in the top 10 list of open
countries when openness is measured by the welfare cost of autarky (or by the volume of trade
such as the imports-to-GDP ratio), but they are in the top 10 according to our trade potential
index.

Second, our trade potential index correlates strongly with estimates of trade costs, unlike the
welfare cost of autarky (or the aggregate volume of trade). We show this result in two ways.
One, we calibrate the trade costs in our model to deliver the observed home trade share and
observed distribution of income. The correlation between these trade costs and our trade po-
tential index is −0.94. Even after conditioning on income level, this correlation remains high at
−0.88. In contrast, the correlation between these trade costs and the welfare costs of autarky,
conditional on income, is only −0.28. Two, we compare our measure of openness with trade
costs estimated using a gravity equation, as in Simonovska and Waugh (2014). The correlation
is −0.75. Since the trade costs in Simonovska and Waugh (2014) are neither calibrated using
our model nor estimated using our data, the high correlation strongly suggests that the simple


                                                        4
statistic in (1) is indeed a good measure of openness.


2. Model
We outline the environment of the multicountry Ricardian model of trade introduced by EK.
We consider a world with N countries, where each country has a tradable final-goods sector.
There is a continuum of tradable goods indexed by j ∈ [0, 1].

Within each country i, there is a representative consumer of size Li . This consumer supplies
labor inelastically in the domestic labor market and also owns physical capital Ki , which is in-
elastically supplied to the domestic capital market. This consumer also enjoys the consumption
of a CES bundle of final tradable goods with elasticity of substitution ρ > 1:
                                                                             ρ
                                         Z       1            ρ−1
                                                                           ρ−1
                                  Ui =                xi (j)    ρ    dj           .              (2)
                                              0


To produce quantity xi (j) in country i, a firm employs a Cobb-Douglas production function
combining capital and labor with factor shares α and 1 − α and productivity zi (j). Country i’s
productivity for good j is, in turn, the realization of a random variable (drawn independently
for each good j) from its country-specific Fréchet probability distribution:

                                    Fi (zi ) = exp(−Ti zi−θ ).                                   (3)

The country-specific parameter Ti > 0 governs the location of the distribution; higher values
of it imply that a high productivity draw for any good j is more likely. The parameter θ > 1 is
common across countries and, if higher, generates less variability in productivity across goods
in each country.

Having drawn a particular productivity level, a perfectly competitive firm from country i in-
curs a marginal cost of riα wi1−α /zi (j) to produce good j, where wi is the wage rate and ri is the
rental rate of capital in country i. Shipping the good to destination n requires a per-unit ice-
berg trade cost of τni > 1 for n 6= i, with τii = 1. We assume that cross-border arbitrage forces
effective geographic barriers to obey the triangle inequality: For any three countries, i, k, n,
τni ≤ τnk τki .

Below, we describe equilibrium prices, trade flows, real GDP per worker, and the welfare cost
of autarky.

Prices. Perfect competition implies that the price of good j from country i to destination n,




                                                          5
pni (j), is equal to the marginal cost of production and delivery:

                                                           τni riα wi1−α
                                          pni (j) =                      .                             (4)
                                                               zi (j)

So, consumers in destination n would pay pni (j), should they decide to buy good j from i.
Consumers purchase good j from the least-cost supplier; thus, the actual price consumers in n
pay for good j is the minimum price across all sources ℓ:
                                                                            
                                        pn (j) = min                  pnℓ (j) .                        (5)
                                                     ℓ=1,...,N


The pricing rule and the productivity distribution allow us to obtain the following CES exact
price index, Pn , for each destination n:
                                                                  " N                           #
                                −1
                                                                   X
                       Pn =   γΦn θ ,    where        Φn =                  Tℓ (τnℓ rℓα wℓ1−α )−θ .    (6)
                                                                      ℓ=1

                                                1
                                    θ+1−ρ
                                            1−ρ
In the above equation, γ = Γ          θ
                                                      is the gamma function, and parameters are restricted
such that θ > ρ − 1.

Trade Flows. To calculate trade flows between countries, let Xn be country n’s expenditure on
tradable goods, of which Xni is spent on goods from country i. Since there is a continuum of
goods, the fraction of income spent on imports from i, Xni /Xn , can be shown to be equivalent to
the probability that country i is the least-cost supplier to country n given the joint distribution
of productivity levels, prices, and trade costs for any good j. In the equations below, we do
not include proportionality constants that are not country specific since such constants will not
enter into our welfare gain calculations or our measure of openness.

The expression for the share of expenditures that n spends on goods from i or, as we call it, the
trade share, λni , is

                                         Xni     Ti (τni riα wi1−α )−θ
                                λni :=       = PN                        .                             (7)
                                         Xn     ℓ=1  Tℓ (τ nk r α 1−α −θ
                                                                 w
                                                                ℓ ℓ    )

Expressions (6) and (7) allow us to relate trade shares to trade costs and the price indices of each
trading partner by the following equation:
                                                                   −θ
                                            λni            Pi τni
                                                =                           ,                          (8)
                                            λii             Pn

where λii is country i’s expenditure share on goods from country i, or its home trade share.



                                                              6
While well known, it is worth reiterating that expression (8) is not particular to EK’s model.
Several popular models of international trade relate trade shares, prices, and trade costs in the
same manner. These models include Anderson (1979); Krugman (1980); Bernard, Eaton, Jensen,
and Kortum (2003); and Melitz (2003) when parameterized as in Chaney (2008).

Real GDP per Worker. A feature of this model (and other trade models) is that real GDP
per worker can be expressed in a form similar to that in a standard one-sector growth model.
The expression in trade models and in the one-sector growth model contains a TFP term and
a capital-labor ratio raised to a power term. The key difference is that measured TFP in trade
models is endogenous and depends on the country’s home trade share.

To arrive at this representation of GDP per worker, a couple of steps are needed. First, with
competitive factor markets, the rental rate on capital is pinned down by the following rela-
                 α
tionship: ri = 1−α  wi ki−1 , where k is the aggregate capital-labor ratio. Second, combining this
relationship with (7) yields an expression for each country’s home trade share:
                                                                    −θ
                                                          ki−α wi
                                                      
                                                                          Ti
                                      λii = PN                   −α
                                                                                .                           (9)
                                                                        −θ
                                                    ℓ=1 Tℓ (τiℓ kℓ wℓ )


Third, using (6) and a rearrangement of (9) provides an expression for the real wage:

                                         wi            1  −1
                                            = (1 − α)Tiθ λiiθ kiα ,                                        (10)
                                         Pi

in which wages, deflated by the aggregate price index, are a function of each country’s technol-
ogy parameter, its home trade share, and its capital-labor ratio.3

Finally, using balanced trade and equating production of the aggregate commodity with total
factor payments, we get

                                                    w i ri k i
                                             yi =      +       .                                           (11)
                                                    Pi   Pi

Then, using (10) and the observation above that the wage-rental ratio is proportional to the
capital-labor ratio gives
                                                                           1   −1
                                 yi = Ai kiα ,   where         Ai = Tiθ λiiθ .                             (12)

Real GDP per worker in the model is expressed in the same way as in the standard one-sector
growth model. The key difference is that measured TFP in (12) contains an endogenous trade
   3
   Other than the role of capital, (10) is the same expression discussed extensively in Arkolakis, Costinot, and
Rodriguez-Clare (2012) that relates home trade shares and the real wage.




                                                           7
         −1                                                1
factor, λiiθ , and an exogenous domestic factor, Tiθ .4

Several comments are in order regarding (12). First, the balanced trade assumption may seem
strong, but it is not. A similar expression, but with an additive term representing trade imbal-
ance, is easily derivable. We abstract from trade imbalances this paper.

Second, since the expressions for trade shares are not specific to the EK model, there is nothing
unique about (12) and its association with the EK model. Many trade models share the same
“gravity equation” (i.e., equation 7), so inverting the home trade share (as we did from (9) to
(10)) delivers the same expression for the real wage irrespective of the micro details of trade.
In some ways, this observation is the essence of the isomorphism result in Arkolakis, Costinot,
and Rodriguez-Clare (2012).

Third, the expression in (12) is closely connected to the use of the one-sector growth model
in (closed-economy) accounting exercises such as those of Hall and Jones (1999) and Caselli
(2005) to measure TFP. This connection provides a method to identify a country’s technology
parameter. Identifying a country’s technology parameter is important because, as we will show
later, the set of technology parameters and observed endowments are sufficient to completely
characterize the cross-country distribution of income per worker in the frictionless economy.

Welfare Cost of Autarky. Given the representation of real GDP per worker in (12), it is straight-
forward to compute the change in real income due to a change from an observed equilibrium to
autarky (i.e., the welfare cost of autarky). In autarky, country i purchases all goods from itself,
implying that λii = 1. Since technology and endowments are fixed, the change in real income
from an observed equilibrium y to autarky y AU is

                                               yiAU    1
                                                    = λiiθ ,                                             (13)
                                                yi

which is the same formula derived in Arkolakis, Costinot, and Rodriguez-Clare (2012).

The power of (13) is its simplicity. Give a researcher two statistics—the home trade share and
the trade elasticity—and he can compute the welfare cost of autarky. The weakness is that
countries with the same home trade shares are considered identical. That is, conditional on an
observed level of trade, the distance in welfare terms is the same for all countries, regardless
of the other differences between them. If the home trade shares look similar across countries,
then a natural inference on openness based on (13) would be that rich and poor countries are
similar. For instance, the home trade share for the U.S. is 0.81 and that for Malawi is 0.80, so a
measure of openness using the welfare cost in (13) would rank the U.S. and Malawi similarly.

Missing from this inference is the role of technology and endowments in determining a coun-
   4
   This “openness-adjusted” measure of TFP has been noted previously in Waugh (2010) and in Finicelli, Pagano,
and Sbracia (2013).

                                                       8
try’s possibilities. That is, a country’s “distance to the frictionless frontier” will differ depend-
ing on its technology and endowments, even after conditioning on an observed level of trade.
Understanding these possibilities is important because while two countries may have the same
welfare cost of autarky, one may be more or less closed compared with its potential.

The next section derives a measure of openness—trade potential—and shows how to compute
it using easily available data.


3. Trade Potential
In this section, we first derive an expression for each country’s income level in the frictionless
trade economy as a function of the unobservable technology parameters. We then combine (12)
with observables to infer the technology parameters. This allows us to measure each country’s
trade potential as a function of observables. Finally, we derive a trade potential index that
maps the observed equilibrium of a country to a point between autarky and the frictionless
trade equilibrium.

A few observations allow us to compute a country’s income level in frictionless trade. First, in
frictionless trade, prices across countries are the same, so a country’s home trade share equals
the share of its real GDP in world real GDP. Country i’s home trade share is

                                                         Li y FT
                                              λFii T = PN i FT ,                                    (14)
                                                        ℓ=1 Lℓ yℓ


where yiFT is a country’s real GDP per worker in frictionless trade. Second, combining (14)
with the general representation of real GDP per worker in (12) allows us solve for a country’s
income level in frictionless trade. Appendix A provides a detailed derivation; Proposition 1
summarizes this result.


Proposition 1 (GDP per Worker in a Frictionless Economy) Real GDP per worker in the friction-
less trade economy, yiFT, is
                                                                        1
                                                                       1+θ
                                                                 Ti              αθ
                                     yiFT   = Ω(L, T, k)                       ki1+θ ,              (15)
                                                                 Li

where

                                                  N                      1
                                                                        1+θ             ! 1θ
                                                  X               Tℓ               αθ
                                Ω(L, T, k) =             Lℓ                    kℓ 1+θ
                                                                                                .   (16)
                                                   ℓ=1
                                                                  Lℓ

(Each bold letter describes the vector of the relevant variable for all countries.)


                                                         9
Proposition 1 states that a country with a larger technology parameter or capital endowment
will have larger GDP per worker in a frictionless economy. This is intuitive: A country’s posi-
tion in the distribution of income will reflect its advantages in technology or capital.5

The Ω term in (16) summarizes the effects of all other countries on the income level of a country.
It is essentially a weighted sum of each country’s income term in (15). Because Ω is common to
all countries, it does not affect a country’s relative position in the cross-country distribution of
income—it simply scales all incomes up or down.

Finally, a country’s potential income level is measurable from readily available data (e.g., the
PWT). Equation (12) provides estimates of a country’s technology parameter. Specifically, we
measure the technology parameter T as
                                                                θ
                                                Ti = yi ki−α         λii .                                   (17)

The term in the first set of brackets is the standard “Solow residual.” Take the Solow residual
to the power of the trade elasticity θ and scale it by a country’s home trade share and one has a
measure of a country’s technology parameter. Substitution of (17) into (15) provides a country’s
income level in a frictionless world as a function of data. The potential change in real income
a country could experience from moving to the frictionless trade economy—trade potential—
directly follows from this expression. Proposition 2 summarizes this result.

Proposition 2 (Trade Potential) A country’s GDP per worker in the frictionless trade economy is
                                                                        1
                                                                       1+θ
                                                           λii
                                         yiFT   = Ω̃(Y, λ)                    yi                             (18)
                                                           Yi

with

                                                     N                      1
                                                                           1+θ ! θ1
                                                     X              λℓℓ
                                     Ω̃(Y, λ) =            Yℓ                          .                     (19)
                                                     ℓ=1
                                                                    Yℓ

The change in real income from a country’s observed income to that in the frictionless trade economy is
                                                               1
                                          yiFT
                                                            1+θ
                                                           λii
                                               = Ω̃(Y, λ)         .                                          (20)
                                           yi              Yi

Equation (18) expresses a country’s income level in the frictionless economy as a function of its
   5
     Equations (15) and (16) are closely related to equation (23) in Eaton and Kortum (2002). The key distinctions
are that we (i) abstract from an input-output relationship among intermediates and (ii) include capital. These
distinctions are not crucial for our purpose since our main contribution is to compute each country’s income in a
frictionless trade economy even though each country’s technology parameter is unobservable.


                                                       10
current home trade share, total GDP, and GDP per worker. A richer country with less trade will
have a higher income level in the frictionless trade economy.
                                                                        1+θ1

The Ω̃ term is (essentially) a GDP-weighted sum of each country’s term λYiii   . This ensures
that the trade potential in (20) is unit free.

An interesting feature of (18) is that capital and labor endowments do not appear in the equa-
tion; only the home trade share and GDP matter. This indicates that the reason a country is
rich or poor does not matter; what matters is simply that it is rich or poor. The importance
of a country’s endowments for computing its trade potential is completely summarized by its
current income level.

Current income acts as a summary statistic in (18) partly because the factors of production, cap-
ital and labor, are assumed to remain the same as the economy moves from the observed equi-
librium to the frictionless trade equilibrium. If capital is accumulated as the economy moves
to the frictionless trade equilibrium, as in Mutreja, Ravikumar, and Sposi (2014), then income
in the frictionless trade equilibrium would include the effect of the change in capital stock in
addition to the change in the home trade share.

Equation (20) provides a welfare metric regarding how far a country is from the frictionless
frontier as a function of observables. The key insight from (20) is the influence of the current
income level on a country’s distance to the frontier. Holding fixed the volume of trade, the
poorer a country is, the greater its trade potential. Thus, two countries with the same home
trade shares are not considered identical in our measure of openness, unlike measures of open-
ness based on the welfare cost of autarky.

3.1. Trade Potential Index

Using our openness measure (20) and the welfare cost of autarky in (13), we construct a statistic
Λi that summarizes a country’s position between autarky and frictionless trade. Proposition 3
summarizes the result.

Proposition 3 (Trade Potential Index) A country’s position between autarky and frictionless trade is
summarized by

                                                             1/θ
                                                       1 − λii
                                        Λi =             1+θ 1        ,                               (21)
                                                         λii        1/θ
                                               Ω̃(Y, λ) Yi       − λii

where this statistic has the following properties: (i) it lies between 0 and 1, (ii) equals 0 in autarky, and
(iii) equals 1 in frictionless trade.

The trade potential index in Proposition 3 is useful for putting into perspective the relative

                                                       11
magnitudes of the welfare cost of autarky in (13) and the trade potential in (20). Our statistic
in (21) places a country’s welfare cost of autarky in the context of its trade potential. While a
country may have a relatively high welfare cost of autarky, it may still be far from frictionless
trade. Conversely, a country might be close to autarky but also close to frictionless trade.


4. Quantifying Trade Potential
The key feature of (20) and (21) is that the only data required to compute a country’s trade
potential and its trade potential index are its GDP and home trade share and the estimate of
trade elasticity. Below we discuss the country-specific data and the trade elasticity that we use.

4.1. Cross-Country Data and Trade Elasticity

Output per worker and the number of workers are standard measures used in development
and growth accounting exercises. In our computations, we use the expenditure side of the
output measure because this measure of real GDP treats trade balances in the same way as we
treat them in the model—that is, exports and imports are deflated together and not separately
as in production-side measures of GDP. See, for example, Feenstra, Heston, Timmer, and Deng
(2004) and Waugh (2010) for a more detailed explanation.

We measure a country’s home trade share, λii , as 1 minus a country’s ratio of imports to GDP
at current prices. An issue with our measure of home trade share is that imports are largely in-
termediates and measured in gross terms, while GDP is a value added measure. One approach
to correct this mismatch is to “gross up” GDP by a multiplier that represents the intermedi-
ates’ share in value added. If this multiplier is constant across countries, the quantitative effect
would be on the level of potential gains for each country and not on the relative gain of the
country in the cross-country distribution of gains. Another alternative would be to explicitly
model intermediates directly as in EK, Alvarez and Lucas (2007), or Waugh (2010) and construct
measures of home trade shares using gross production rather than value added. Measures of
home trade shares using gross production would affect the level of gains and the relative gain
in the cross-country distribution only if the differences in measures of home trade shares varied
systematically across countries.

We focus on the year 2005, which is the the benchmark year for the PWT 8.1. We exclude any
countries with missing data. We also exclude the few countries with an imports-to-GDP ratio
larger than 1 (e.g., Belgium, Panama). This leaves 160 countries in the sample.

As a baseline we set θ equal to 4. This is consistent with the estimates from Simonovska and
Waugh (2014), who provide an extensive discussion on other estimates from the literature. A
short summary is that a variety of different methods and estimation procedures point to a


                                                12
                                                                                      STP
                                                                            COM
                                                            LBR         GNB
                                                                           GMB           CPV                  VCT
Ratio of Potential GDP Per Worker to Data

                                             8                 CAF                                 DJI
                                                                                                 BTN        LCAMDV
                                                         BDI         SLE                                    BLZ
                                                                RWATGO      LSO                                   MNE            BMU
                                                              MWINER GIN BEN          MRT
                                                                                KGZ TJK                  SWZ
                                                                    BFA   MLI LAO       MDA MNG
                                                                                       COG         FJI
                                                                                                 ARM NAM
                                                                                                           SUR        GNQ BRB
                                                                                                                     ATG
                                                     COD     MOZ MDG KHM  ZMB
                                                                                SENTCD HNDPRY GEO               MUSMKD GAB
                                                                                                          ALB BWA            BHS       MAC    BRN
                                                                       NPL
                                                                       UGA                  BOL                     TTO       MLT
                                                           ETH     TZA            CMR
                                                                                   ZWE
                                                                                 CIV
                                                                                 GHA      AZE     JAM     TKM PANURY
                                                                                                                   BIH
                                                                                                                 LVA            CYPISL
                                                                            KEN       AGOSDN YEMGTM SYR   JOR
                                                                                                            CRI
                                                                                                          DOM          LBN                BHR
                                                                                                  LKA ECU     SRB                     OMN
                                             4                                                 UZB     IRQBGR TUN
                                                                                                            BLR       LTUHRV                               QAT
                                                                                               MAR          KAZ
                                                                                                           PER               SVN
                                                                                                                             NZL             KWT
                                                                               BGD                                    EST
                                                                                                                    CHL   SVK
                                                                                 VNMNGA
                                                                                              PHL UKR
                                                                                             PAK     EGY COLROU VEN        PRT  ISR
                                                                                                                               GRCFIN IRL
                                                                                                                                 DNK
                                                                                                                                         NOR
                                                                                                                ZAFARG     CZE
                                                                                                                         HUN
                                                                                                                        POL
                                                                                                                        MYS       SWE
                                                                                                                                  CHEAUT
                                                                                                                                     SAU
                                                                                           IDN       THA               IRN
                                                                                                                         TUR          AUS LUX
                                                                                                                                     TWN
                                                                                                        BRA      RUSMEX       KORESP
                                                                                                                                  NLDCAN
                                                                                     IND                                            ITA
                                                                                                                                     FRA
                                                                                                                                   GBR
                                             2                                                                                   JPN
                                                                                                                                  DEU
                                                                                              CHN
                                                                                                                                         USA


                                             1




                                            1/2
                                             1/128         1/64         1/32        1/16        1/8          1/4           1/2          1              2
                                                                                    GDP Per Worker (Data, USA = 1)


                                                                       (a) Trade Potential Versus GDP Per Worker
Ratio of Autarky GDP Per Worker to Data




                                             8




                                             4




                                             2




                                             1                  RWA
                                                               CAF
                                                     COD BDIETHMWI  BFA
                                                                   TZA
                                                                  NER  NPL
                                                                       UGA   BEN
                                                                            GMB BGD
                                                                               LAO
                                                                                 K   TCD
                                                                                    CMR
                                                                                   GZ   IND
                                                                                      ZWE
                                                                                       NGA
                                                                                       TJK   SDN
                                                                                              IDN UZB
                                                                                                PAK
                                                                                                 CHN
                                                                                               BOLYEMLKA EGY
                                                                                                          SYR TKM
                                                                                                            BRA
                                                                                                             COL
                                                                                                               PER   RUS
                                                                                                                       ARG
                                                                                                                      VEN  IRNGAB JPN       USA KWT
                                                             MOZ MDG
                                                            LBR
                                                                     SLE
                                                                   TGO  GNB
                                                                        KHM
                                                                       GIN   KEN
                                                                           MLI
                                                                           ZMB
                                                                             COM   GHA
                                                                                 SEN STP
                                                                                   VNM
                                                                                   CIV   AGO
                                                                                          COGAZE
                                                                                             PRY
                                                                                           MDA
                                                                                                 MNG
                                                                                                 GEO
                                                                                                 PHL
                                                                                                  MAR UKR
                                                                                                    BTN
                                                                                                    ARM    IRQ
                                                                                                          ECU
                                                                                                         THA
                                                                                                         NAM  DOM
                                                                                                                KAZ
                                                                                                              ALB   ZAF
                                                                                                                    PAN
                                                                                                                  TUN
                                                                                                                  SRB
                                                                                                                BLR
                                                                                                                 ROU URY
                                                                                                                   BWA
                                                                                                                    MUS
                                                                                                                      MNEGNQ
                                                                                                                        CHL
                                                                                                                        MEX
                                                                                                                        MKD  TUR
                                                                                                                            POL
                                                                                                                           LBN    KOR
                                                                                                                                   GRC  SAU
                                                                                                                                         OMN
                                                                                                                                         AUS
                                                                                                                                       ITA
                                                                                                                                     ESP    NOR
                                                                                                                                          MAC
                                                                                                                                        FRA
                                                                                                                                       GBR
                                                                                                                                                 BRN       QAT
                                                                                         MRTCPV GTM
                                                                                           HND        DJI      BGR
                                                                                                             SWZCRIMDV
                                                                                                                     LVATTO
                                                                                                                       BIH    HRV
                                                                                                                            MYS
                                                                                                                          LTU
                                                                                                                                 NZL
                                                                                                                               PRT
                                                                                                                                 BRB
                                                                                                                               CZE ISR
                                                                                                                                        CAN
                                                                                                                                        TWN
                                                                                                                                      FIN
                                                                                                                                      DEU
                                                                                                                                      SWE
                                                                                                                                      CHE IRLBHR
                                                                             LSO                                BLZ
                                                                                                              JOR             SVK    DNK
                                                                                                                                    CYP
                                                                                                                                     BMUAUT
                                                                                                                LCA              SVN NLD
                                                                                                                             HUNBHS
                                                                                                     JAM
                                                                                                       FJI     SURVCT             MLT ISL
                                                                                                                       EST
                                                                                                                      ATG
                                            1/2
                                             1/128         1/64         1/32        1/16        1/8          1/4           1/2          1              2
                                                                                                                                            LUX
                                                                                    GDP Per Worker (Data, USA = 1)


                                                                           (b) Autarky Versus GDP Per Worker




                                                     Figure 1: GDP Per Worker: Potential and Autarky Versus Data
                                                                                              13
plausible range of θ between 3 and 5.

4.2. Trade Potential

Figure 1(a) plots the trade potential versus the logarithm of observed GDP per worker. Below
we make several observations.

First, the trade potential for each country is large—the average across countries is almost 4. For
the median country in the observed income distribution, the trade potential is 5.

These potentials are larger than the gains reported in EK for their sample of 19 OECD countries.
The difference is mainly due to the size of our sample (160 countries) and the trade elasticity we
use. Note that the Ω̃ term in (20) is a GDP weighted sum, so as we add more countries, trade
potential increases. If we compute our trade potential using only the 19 countries in EK, the
average trade potential decreases to 2. If we use EK’s estimate of 8.28 for the trade elasticity,
then the average trade potential is only 1.4. Together, these two differences account for most of
the differences between our gains and those in EK.

Second, as shown in Figure 1(a), there is a negative relationship between trade potential and
economic development. Poor countries have substantially higher potential than rich countries.
The trade potential for Malawi is five times that of the U.S.

Our third observation is that the losses from autarky are minimal (as in Arkolakis, Costinot,
and Rodriguez-Clare (2012)). For example, the welfare cost of autarky for the median country
in the observed income distribution is only 0.98, which implies that the GDP per worker in au-
tarky is almost the same as the observed GDP per worker for the median country (see equation
(13)). Figure 1(b) provides a comparison with the trade potentials in Figure 1(a). The vertical
axis in Figure 1(b) plots each country’s autarky GDP relative to its observed GDP, per worker.
The welfare costs are tiny compared with the trade potential in Figure 1(a). This observation
suggests that relative to the potential gains from moving to frictionless trade, the observed
world is close to autarky. Our trade potential index in (21) quantifies this observation.

4.3. Trade Potential Index

Recall that our trade potential index maps each country’s observed position as a value between
0 and 1. If a country’s value is near 1, then the country is close to the frictionless trade frontier;
if a country’s value is near 0, then it is close to autarky.

Figures 2(a) and 2(b) both plot the trade potential index but on different scales; Figure 2(a) plots
the index over the entire range 0 to 1 and Figure 2(b) zooms in.

Figure 2(a) shows the world is essentially in autarky. The values for many countries lie near 0
with notable exceptions (Germany and the Netherlands). The average trade potential index is

                                                 14
                                                                                        1


                               Trade Potential Index (0 = Autarky, 1 = Frictionless)
                                                                                       0.9

                                                                                       0.8

                                                                                       0.7

                                                                                       0.6

                                                                                       0.5

                                                                                       0.4

                                                                                       0.3
                                                                                                                                                                                       LUX
                                                                                       0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                  NLD
                                                                                                                                                                     EST          DEU
                                                                                                                                                                        HUN
                                                                                       0.1                                                                             MYS        CHE
                                                                                                                                                                                 DNK AUT USA
                                                                                                                                                                                   GBR
                                                                                                                                                                                  SWE
                                                                                                                                                JAM                 ATG  SVKSVN
                                                                                                                                                                          CZEMLT     FRA
                                                                                                                                                                                     CAN
                                                                                                                                                                                   ISL
                                                                                                                                                                                 ESP TWN
                                                                                                                                                                                    ITAIRL
                                                                                                                                                  FJITHAJOR
                                                                                                                                                         SUR         LTU
                                                                                                                                                                   MEX    PRT KOR
                                                                                                                                                                             BHS  FIN
                                                                                                                                                                                ISR
                                                                                                                                                                                CYP        BHR
                                                                                                                       LSOSENVNM            CHN
                                                                                                                                              GTM
                                                                                                                                             MAR
                                                                                                                                            PHL           BGR
                                                                                                                                                           CRI
                                                                                                                                                             VCT
                                                                                                                                                           LCA
                                                                                                                                                            ROU
                                                                                                                                                           BLZ    BIH
                                                                                                                                                                LVATTO
                                                                                                                                                                   CHL POL
                                                                                                                                                                         HRV
                                                                                                                                                                        TUR NZL  JPN
                                                                                                                                                                               GRC
                                                                                                                                                                                 BMU  AUS
                                                                                                                                                                                     SAU NOR
                                                                                                      MOZ
                                                                                                     LBR MWI     GIN ZMB
                                                                                                                   KHM KEN
                                                                                                                     MLI  BGDCIV
                                                                                                                             GHA   INDHND
                                                                                                                                    MRT
                                                                                                                                      MDA
                                                                                                                                    AGO
                                                                                                                                  NGA  CPV
                                                                                                                                     COG IDN
                                                                                                                                        PRY
                                                                                                                                        AZE GEO
                                                                                                                                             YEM
                                                                                                                                           PAK
                                                                                                                                            MNG
                                                                                                                                          BOL    UKR
                                                                                                                                                 DJI
                                                                                                                                                LKA
                                                                                                                                               ARM  NAM
                                                                                                                                                    EGY SWZ
                                                                                                                                                       BRA
                                                                                                                                                      ECU
                                                                                                                                                      IRQ  BLR
                                                                                                                                                           KAZ
                                                                                                                                                         ALB
                                                                                                                                                         DOM
                                                                                                                                                        COL
                                                                                                                                                      SYRPER   ZAF
                                                                                                                                                             TUN
                                                                                                                                                             SRB
                                                                                                                                                               MUS
                                                                                                                                                              BWA  MKD
                                                                                                                                                                 MNE
                                                                                                                                                                RUS
                                                                                                                                                              MDVVEN
                                                                                                                                                               PANARG
                                                                                                                                                                URY   LBN
                                                                                                                                                                      IRN
                                                                                                                                                                     GNQ     BRB       MAC
                                                                                                                                                                                      OMN      BRN QAT
                                                                                                                                                                                             KWT
                                                                                         0    COD   ETH
                                                                                                  BDI    CAFMDG
                                                                                                          RWATZA
                                                                                                             TGO
                                                                                                            NERSLE
                                                                                                              BFAUGA
                                                                                                                   GNB
                                                                                                                  NPL  COM
                                                                                                                       BEN
                                                                                                                      GMB  K  CMR
                                                                                                                             GZ
                                                                                                                         LAO STP
                                                                                                                               TCDTJK
                                                                                                                                ZWE     SDN  UZBBTN      TKM             GAB
                                                                                        1/128       1/64        1/32         1/16           1/8            1/4           1/2             1        2
                                                                                                                             GDP Per Worker (Data, USA = 1)


                                                                                                           (a) Trade Potential Index Λi Versus GDP Per Worker




                                                                                       0.3
Trade Potential Index (0 = Autarky, 1 = Frictionless)




                                                                                                                                                                                       LUX
                                                              0.25




                                                                                       0.2

                                                                                                                                                                              NLD

                                                              0.15                                                                                                            DEU
                                                                                                                                                                  EST

                                                                                                                                                                     HUN
                                                                                       0.1                                                                  AUT
                                                                                                                                                         CHE
                                                                                                                                           ATGMYS
                                                                                                                                                SVK
                                                                                                                                                 CZE      GBR USA
                                                                                                                                                    SVN DNK
                                                                                                                                                         SWEFRA
                                                                                                                                                            CAN
                                                                                                                                                     MLT  ISL
                                                                                                                                                        ESP TWN
                                                                                                                                                           ITA
                                                                                                                       JAM                               FIN IRL
                                                                                                                                            LTU BHS KORISR
                                                              0.05                                                       FJITHAJOR
                                                                                                                                SUR       MEX PRT      CYP       BHR
                                                                                                                   CHN                   BIH
                                                                                                                                       LVA    POL
                                                                                                                                                HRV     JPN
                                                                                               LSO                               BGR
                                                                                                                                  CRI
                                                                                                                                    VCT
                                                                                                                                  LCA
                                                                                                                                   ROU         TUR   GRC
                                                                                                                                                    NZL BMU  AUS
                                                                                                   VNM               GTM
                                                                                                                    MAR
                                                                                                                   PHL            BLZ
                                                                                                                                  BLR     TTO
                                                                                                                                          CHL               SAUNOR
                                                                                                    CIV MRT  HND
                                                                                                             MDA        UKR    SWZ    ZAF
                                                                                                                                    TUN
                                                                                                                                    SRB
                                                                                                                                      MUS MKDLBN BRB          MAC
                                                                              MOZ                 SEN     IND CPV
                                                                                                                IDN     DJINAMBRA
                                                                                                                             ECU
                                                                                                                             IRQ  KAZ
                                                                                                                                ALB     MNE
                                                                                                                                       RUS
                                                                                                                                     MDV                     OMN           QAT
                                                                             LBR         GIN ZMB
                                                                                           KHM KEN
                                                                                             MLICOMGHA
                                                                                                 BGD       AGO
                                                                                                         NGA   PRY
                                                                                                            COGAZE GEO LKA
                                                                                                                      ARM
                                                                                                                    YEM
                                                                                                                  PAK           DOM
                                                                                                                               COL
                                                                                                                             SYRPER  BWAVEN
                                                                                                                                      PANARG
                                                                                                                                       URY   IRN
                                                                                                                                            GNQ                    KWT
                                                                                                                                                                     BRN
                                                                      COD BDIETHMWI MDG
                                                                                     TZA
                                                                                     TGO
                                                                                    NERSLE
                                                                                      BFAUGA
                                                                                           GNB  LAO
                                                                                               BEN
                                                                                              GMB   CMR
                                                                                                  KGZ STPTJK SDN
                                                                                                       ZWE         MNG
                                                                                                                 BOL   BTNEGYTKM                GAB
                                                                 0               CAF
                                                                                  RWA     NPL         TCD           UZB
                                                                1/128       1/64        1/32        1/16           1/8            1/4           1/2            1         2
                                                                                                   GDP Per Worker (Data, USA = 1)


                                                                                                                                  (b) Zoomed In




                                                                                                Figure 2: Trade Potential Index Λi Versus GDP Per Worker

                                                                                                                                        15
only 0.03. Or, on average, the world is 97 percent away from the frictionless trade frontier.

Figure 2(b) shows that rich countries are more open compared with poor countries. The cor-
relation between log GDP per worker and our trade potential index is 0.57. Rich countries are
closer to their potential than poor countries. To put this in perspective, the correlation between
log GDP per worker and the welfare cost of autarky is only 0.38.

The U.S. and Malawi are good examples of this pattern. Autarky income for the U.S. is almost
the same as its observed income and the same is true for Malawi. The frictionless-trade income
for the U.S. is 1.5 times its observed income but the frictionless-trade income for Malawi is 7.5
times its observed income. The U.S. is not exceptional in the magnitude of its welfare cost of
autarky, yet the U.S. is among the top 10 most open countries in the world according to our
trade potential index. Our insight is that the low cost of autarky for the U.S. might tempt one
to conclude that U.S. is mostly closed, but when compared with its potential, it is very open.

Table 1 illustrates this point further. The second column reports the top 10 most open countries
as measured by the welfare cost of autarky. Many of these countries are small, island countries
with large trade volumes. The third column reports the top 10 most open countries as measured
by our trade potential index. By our metric, many of the most open countries are developed,
with reputations for liberal trade policies. Per our discussion above, the important observation
is that while these countries might have relatively lower trade volumes, compared with their
potential they are very open.


5. Trade Frictions and Trade Potential
This section asks a follow-up question: How does our trade potential measure relate to the
underlying frictions that impede trade? The difficulty in answering this question is that we
must now take an explicit stand on the underlying frictions in order to calibrate or estimate
them using the model in Section 2.

5.1. Calibration

Calibrating trade models of this type presents a challenge because there are many trade costs
and technology parameters to discipline. This is not a challenge in the welfare cost of autarky
calculations in (13), which are model consistent yet do not require explicit stands on (poten-
tially) hard-to-infer parameters.

Our objective is to have a parsimonious description of the trade costs and add as little data as
necessary to the data used so far. To achieve this objective, we reduce the parameter space such
that each country faces only one trade cost, τi , to import from all other countries. We assume
that this one cost succinctly summarizes the trade frictions each country faces.


                                               16
                                Table 2: Calibrated Trade Costs

                                                 Mean τ         Median τ

                             All countries         6.99           6.59

                             Rich                  4.92           4.64

                             Poor                  9.06           8.44
                          Note: Rich is the set of countries above the median
                          GDP per worker. Poor is the set below.



To calibrate these trade costs, we use the following procedure. First, we infer the technology
parameters using equation (8). Unlike our results in Proposition 2, we must use data on capital
stocks and capital shares to invert the technology parameters. Recall that this was not necessary
in Proposition 2 as a country’s total GDP was a sufficient statistic for the role of endowments.

We use the capital stock measures for the year 2005 from the PWT 8.1. Given the structure
in equation (12), we want α to be consistent with the exercises in the development accounting
literature. To do so, we set α equal to 1/3. Gollin (2002) provides an argument for setting α
equal to 1/3 by calculating labor’s share for a wide cross section of countries and finds it to be
around 2/3 with no systematic variation across income levels.

We then choose the τ s to be such that the model in equilibrium exactly fits each country’s
observed home trade share. Appendix B describes the algorithm used. This procedure results
in the model exactly matching the observed cross-country distribution of GDP per worker and
each country’s home trade share. This result also implies that the frictionless trade equilibrium
of our calibrated economy will be the same as the quantitative results presented in Section 4.

5.2. Trade Costs Correlate with the Trade Potential Index

Table 2 presents statistics summarizing the calibrated trade costs. There are several notable
observations. First, the calibrated trade costs are large. The mean and the median trade cost are
about 7 and 6.5, respectively. This is not an abnormal result relative to other estimates using
trade models with a gravity structure (see, for instance, the discussion in Anderson and van
Wincoop (2004) on inferences of trade costs from theories with a gravity structure).

Second, the trade costs are substantially larger for poorer countries. Table 2 illustrates this
point by reporting the trade costs for poor countries, which are defined as countries with GDP
per worker below the median, while rich countries are those with it above the median. Poor
countries in our sample have trade costs almost twice as large as those for rich countries.

The intuition for both these observations lies in Section 4. Relative to the frictionless frontier,

                                                  17
the observed levels of trade are small. Thus, to reconcile the small trade levels, the model needs
large frictions. Moreover, poor countries have a higher trade potential relative to rich countries,
so poor countries require even larger frictions to reconcile their relatively larger distance to
frictionless trade. The next observation makes this connection between our trade potential
index and the trade costs even tighter.

Third, the calibrated trade costs correlate highly with our trade potential index in (21). In
fact, they move almost one-for-one with each other. Figure 3 illustrates this by plotting the
log of our trade potential index versus the log of the calibrated trade costs. Countries with a
higher trade potential index have lower trade costs and vice versa. The correlation between the
trade potential index and the trade cost is −0.94. This correlation is not spurious or mechanical
(for example, trade potential is correlated with GDP as are trade costs and so on). Even after
conditioning on income level, the correlation is −0.88.

In contrast, the calibrated trade costs are only modestly correlated with the welfare cost of
autarky with a correlation of −0.48. Conditional on income, the correlation is only −0.28. The
U.S. illustrates this point well. The U.S. has a low welfare cost of autarky, yet our calibrated
trade cost for the U.S. is also small. This incongruence disappears with our trade potential
index: The U.S. is one of the most open countries and has one of the lowest trade costs.

These results provide a resolution to some puzzling findings in EK. In their data, Japan appears
to be one of the most closed economies with a relatively low import share. But their estimates of
bilateral trade frictions imply that Japan is one of the most open countries. In contrast, Greece
appears to be a very open economy with a very high import share, yet they estimate Greece to
be one of the most closed countries in terms of trade frictions. Our explanation is that Japan
and Greece have different trade potentials.

The tight connection between trade costs and the trade potential index is not specific to our cal-
ibration procedure. To illustrate this, we compare the trade costs from Simonovska and Waugh
(2014) with our trade potential index. Simonovska and Waugh (2014) estimate trade costs us-
ing the model-implied gravity equation and bilateral trade data for 119 of our 160 countries for
the year 2004. Because their trade costs are bilateral, we average across all import and export
pairs for each country to compute one trade cost per country. The correlation between our trade
potential index and their average trade cost is high at −0.75. Because Simonovska and Waugh
(2014) use different data and a different estimation procedure, there is no mechanical reason for
their trade costs to correlate so strongly with our trade potential index.

Furthermore, average trade costs from Simonovska and Waugh (2014) have very little correla-
tion with a country’s home trade share (in their sample or ours). In their sample, the correlation
between average trade costs and a country’s home trade share is −0.14. The implication is that
the welfare cost of autarky says little about the underlying frictions to trade and that the simple


                                                18
                                    1/2


                                    1/4    LUX
                                           NLD
                                          DEU            EST
                                    1/8              HUN
                                                      AUT
                                                       CHE
                                                 USAGBR MYS
                                                          DNK
                                                         SWE   SVN
                                                             SVK
                                                           CZE              ATG
                                                     FRA
                                                      CANTWN IRL      ISL
      Log Trade Potential Index




                                                        ESP
                                                       ITA              MLT
                                                                       JAM
                                   1/16                    KORFINISR
                                                                 PRT LTUJOR BHS FJISUR
                                                               THA
                                                             MEX          CYP
                                                                          BHR
                                                             JPNPOL GRC
                                                            CHN         HRV  BIH
                                                                            LVA
                                                                    TUR NZLBGR
                                                                    AUS ROU CRI         LSO
                                                                                          BMU  VCT
                                                                                             LCA
                                   1/32                                SAUVNM
                                                                          NOR
                                                                          PHLMARGTMTTO        BLZ
                                                                            CHL  BLRLBN
                                                                            ZAF    TUN HND BRB
                                                                                UKR SRBCIVMKD
                                                                                           MUS
                                                                                           MAC  MRT
                                                                                                SWZ DJI
                                                                                              MDA
                                                                             BRAIDN QAT  OMN  NAM
                                                                                            SEN
                                                                                             MOZ     CPV
                                                                                                   MNEMDV
                                   1/64                                          RUS KAZ
                                                                               IND        ECU
                                                                                         IRQ AGOALB
                                                                                                 ZMB
                                                                                     IRNVEN
                                                                                       ARG
                                                                                         COL  DOM BWA
                                                                                                 URY
                                                                                                KEN
                                                                                              SYR
                                                                                            KWT      GIN LBR
                                                                                                    GNQ
                                                                                                  PRY
                                                                                           NGA LKA
                                                                                             PER    GEO
                                                                                                   PAN
                                                                                                 GHA
                                                                                                   AZEARM
                                                                                                       COG
                                                                                              BGDYEM
                                                                                            PAK      KHM
                                                                                                     BRN
                                                                                                       MLI
                                                                                              EGY     BOL
                                                                                                      ETH MNG
                                                                                                           MWI
                                                                                                         MDG
                                                                                                       TZA COD
                                  1/128                                                                  CMR
                                                                                                       SDN     TGO
                                                                                                             KGZ
                                                                                                              BFA
                                                                                                               LAO
                                                                                                             GAB  BTNCOM
                                                                                                                  SLE
                                                                                                                NER
                                                                                                            UGATJK
                                                                                                             ZWEBEN     GNB STP
                                                                                                                       GMB
                                                                                                                 TKM   BDI
                                  1/256                                                                         UZBNPL
                                                                                                                        RWACAF


                                  1/512
                                                                                                                              TCD


                                          2                         4                        8                       16
                                                                            Trade Cost



                                                  Figure 3: Trade Potential and Trade Costs

statistic in (21) summarizes well the underlying frictions that a country faces (in addition to
measuring how open a country is).


6. Concluding Remarks
In this paper, we developed a measure of how much a country could potentially gain from
trade. This measurement took a simple form and depended only on the country’s observed
home trade share, its level of GDP, and the trade elasticity.

This measurement provided new insights about which countries are open and which are closed.
By traditional measures of openness to trade, such as the volume of trade or the welfare cost of
autarky, highly developed economies such as the U.S., the U.K., and Germany look less open
than Malta, Iceland, and Suriname. In contrast, our measure takes into account that different
countries have different potential gains from trade based on their technology and endowments.
And, according to our measure of openness, the U.S., the U.K., and Germany are among the top
10 most open countries.

There are limitations to this exercise. In particular, we derived a closed-form solution to the
income in the frictionless trade economy and our trade potential was measured relative to this
benchmark. Without the closed-form solution, the simplicity of our measurement would be


                                                                             19
lost. However, its simplicity provides a guide to more nuanced quantitative counterfactual
exercises (such as reducing the trade frictions instead of completely eliminating them). Crucini
and Kahn (1996), for instance, compute changes in factors of production and output due to
observed changes in tariffs instead of due to the limit point of frictionless trade.

A second limitation is that we abstracted from various embellishments of the model, such as
non-homothetic preferences as in Fieler (2011) or multisector extensions as in Caliendo and
Parro (2015) or Levchenko and Zhang (2011). Extensions in these directions would certainly be
useful for future research.

A final limitation is the treatment of capital. Capital was treated as an endowment and—
surprisingly—vanished from our measure of openness. The role of capital and labor was taken
into account entirely by observed GDP, which appears in our measure of openness. Under-
standing capital’s response in a model where investment is a function of traded goods (e.g., as
in Crucini and Kahn (1996) or Mutreja, Ravikumar, and Sposi (2014) ) could be an interesting
extension to pursue.




                                              20
References
A LVAREZ , F., AND R. J. L UCAS (2007): “General Equilibrium Analysis of the Eaton-Kortum
  Model of International Trade,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 54(6), 1726–1768.

A NDERSON , J., AND E.       VAN   W INCOOP (2004): “Trade Costs,” Journal of Economic Literature,
  42(3), 691–751.

A NDERSON , J. E. (1979): “A Theoretical Foundation for the Gravity Equation,” American Eco-
  nomic Review, 69(1), 106–16.

A RKOLAKIS , C., A. C OSTINOT,      AND   A. R ODRIGUEZ -C LARE (2012): “New Trade Models, Same
  Old Gains?,” American Economic Review, 102(1), 94–130.

B ERNARD , A., J. E ATON , J. B. J ENSEN , AND S. K ORTUM (2003): “Plants and Productivity in
   International Trade,” American Economic Review, 93(4), 1268–1290.

C ALIENDO , L., AND F. PARRO (2015): “Estimates of the Trade and Welfare Effects of NAFTA,”
  Review of Economic Studies, 82(1), 1–44.

C ASELLI , F. (2005): “Accounting for Cross-Country Income Differences,” in Handbook of Eco-
  nomic Growth, ed. by P. Aghion, and S. Durlauf, vol. 1. Amsterdam: Elsevier.

C HANEY, T. (2008): “Distorted Gravity: The Intensive and Extensive Margins of International
  Trade,” American Economic Review, 98(4), 1707–1721.

C RUCINI , M. J.,   AND   J. K AHN (1996): “Tariffs and Aggregate Economic Activity: Lessons from
  the Great Depression,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 38(3), 427–467.

E ATON , J., AND S. K ORTUM (2002): “Technology, Geography, and Trade,” Econometrica, 70(5),
   1741–1779.

F EENSTRA , R. C., A. H ESTON , M. P. T IMMER , AND H. D ENG (2004): “Estimating Real Produc-
   tion and Expenditures Across Nations: A Proposal for Improving the Penn World Tables,”
  NBER Working Paper 10866.

F IELER , A. C. (2011): “Nonhomotheticity and Bilateral Trade: Evidence and a Quantitative
  Explanation,” Econometrica, 79(4), 1069–1101.

F INICELLI , A., P. PAGANO , AND M. S BRACIA (2013): “Ricardian Selection,” Journal of Interna-
   tional Economics, 89(1), 96–109.

G OLLIN , D. (2002): “Getting Income Shares Right,” Journal of Political Economy, 110(2), 458–474.



                                                  21
H ALL , R., AND C. J ONES (1999): “Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much More Output Per
  Worker Than Others?,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114(1), 83–116.

K RUGMAN , P. (1980): “Scale Economies, Product Differentiation, and the Pattern of Trade,”
  American Economic Review, 70(5), 950–959.

L EVCHENKO , A. A., AND J. Z HANG (2011): “The Evolution of Comparative Advantage: Mea-
   surement and Welfare Implications,” NBER Working Paper 16806.

M ELITZ , M. J. (2003): “The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate
  Industry Productivity,” Econometrica, 71(6), 1695–1725.

M UTREJA , P., B. R AVIKUMAR ,   AND   M. J. S POSI (2014): “Capital Goods Trade and Economic
  Development,” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Working Paper 2014-012A.

S IMONOVSKA , I., AND M. E. WAUGH (2014): “The Elasticity of Trade: Estimates and Evidence,”
  Journal of International Economics, 92(1), 34–50.

WAUGH , M. E. (2010): “International Trade and Income Differences,” American Economic Re-
 view, 100(5), 2093–2124.




                                                 22
                                                Appendix

A. Trade Potential
Below, we walk through the derivation of some of the relationships that we exploit. Our goal
is to find an expression for each country’s trade potential.

First, the balanced trade condition, in general, is

                                                 N
                                                 X
                            Li (wi + ri ki ) =         Lk (wk + rk kk )λki ,                    (22)
                                                 k=1


which states that total income in country i must equal the total purchases of i’s goods made
by all countries. These country-specific purchases equal the income in country k times the
expenditure share that country k spends on goods from country i, i.e., λki . Note the right-hand
side of (22) includes purchases of country i from itself.

In frictionless trade, all countries purchase the same amount from country i. That is, λFkiT =
λFii T . Then (22) implies that, in frictionless trade, the home trade share of country i must equal
country i’s share in world GDP:

                                             Li (wiF T + riF T ki )
                                  λFii T = PN          FT      FT
                                                                    .                           (23)
                                            k=1 Lk (wk + rk kk )


Note that the relevant terms on the right-hand side of (23) can be replaced with real GDP since
with frictionless trade the price index is the same in each country. Thus, we have

                                            Li y FT   Y FT
                                 λFii T = PN i FT = PN i FT ,                                   (24)
                                           k=1 Lk yk k=1 Yk


where YiFT is country i’s total real GDP.

Then, from equation (17) we note that
                                         θ                               θ
                                                                YiFT −α
                                                           
                                 Yi −α
                                   k          λii = Ti =            k          λFii T .         (25)
                                 Li i                            Li i

Eliminating the common terms and substituting for λFii T from equation (24), we get

                                           θ     YiFT
                                    YiFT        PN     FT
                                                            = (Yi )θ λii .                      (26)
                                                 k=1 Yk




                                                       23
Thus,
                                                              1
                                                           ! 1+θ
                                              N                                   1
                                              X                             θ
                                  YiFT =            YkFT            (Yi ) 1+θ λii1+θ .                    (27)
                                              k=1


                                                                                              PN     FT
Summing the left-hand side as well as the right hand side helps us solve for                   k=1 Yk     and
arrive at the trade potential in equation (20).



B. Algorithm for Calibrating the Model
Below we describe the procedure for calibrating the model. Our strategy is to pick one T and
one τ per country to exactly replicate the observed distribution of real income per worker, yi ,
and home trade shares, λii .

We use our development accounting results to recover the T s. So
                                                              θ
                                                         yi
                                              Ti =                  λii .                                 (28)
                                                         kiα

This is straightforward.

With the assumption of one trade cost per country, the home trade share is

                                           Ti (riα wi1−α )−θ
                                   λii = PN           α 1−α −θ
                                                               .                                          (29)
                                          ℓ=1 Tℓ (τi rℓ wℓ   )

Notice that we can reexpress the home trade share as
                                                  PN           α 1−α −θ
                                               −θ   ℓ6=i Tℓ (rℓ wℓ   )
                                  λii = 1 −   τi PN              α 1−α −θ
                                                                          .                               (30)
                                                   ℓ=1  Tℓ (τi r  w
                                                                 ℓ ℓ   )

Rearranging equation (30) yields the following relationship between trade costs:
                                  (                 PN                                !) −1
                                                                                         θ
                                                          Tℓ (τi rℓα wℓ1−α )−θ
                           τi =    (1 − λii )       Pℓ=1
                                                      N          α 1−α −θ
                                                                                                          (31)
                                                      ℓ6=i Tℓ (rℓ wℓ     )

We then use the relationship in (31) to find the vector of trade costs that matches the home trade
shares exactly using the following algorithm.

  1. Guess a vector of trade costs and compute equilibrium prices (r and w) and home trade
     shares.


                                                       24
  2. Given equilibrium prices, use (31) to generate a new/updated vector of trade costs.

  3. Stop if the updated trade costs are close to the previous values. If not, return to Step 1
     with the new guess being the updated values. Iterate until convergence.

The benefit of this procedure is that it is faster and more robust than using a nonlinear solver
to find the trade costs that best fit home trade shares. Moreover, many different initial guesses
always generated the same set of trade costs.




                                               25
