NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

A CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK FOR UNDERSTANDING CRITICAL
TRANSITIONS
Lee J. Alston
Marcus André Melo
Bernardo Mueller
Carlos Pereira
Working Paper 22144
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22144

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2016

This paper draws on material in Alston et al., Brazil in Transition: Beliefs, Leadership,
and Institutional Change (Princeton University Press, forthcoming 2016). The larger book
project got off the ground thanks to the Rockefeller Foundation hosting us as residents in
Bellagio. We received valuable comments provided by the anonymous reviewers for
Princeton University Press and from a book conference at Northwestern University, funded by
President Schapiro at Northwestern University and Princeton University Press. Joel
Mokyr and Marlous van Waijenburg organized the conference, and the participants deserve
to be named: Hoyt Bleakley, Alan Dye, Joseph Ferrie, Brodwyn Fischer, Regina Grafe,
Stephen Haber, David D. Haddock, Anne Hanley, Daniel Immerwahr, John Londregan, Noel
Maurer, Joel Mokyr, Aldo Musacchio, Nicola Persico, Frank Safford, William Summerhill,
Marlous van Waijenburg, John Wallis, and Sam Williamson. Sonja Opper kindly organized an
earlier book conference at Lund University in November 2013. We thank the discussants—
Thomas Brambor, Christer Gunnarsson, and Carl Hampus-Lytkens—and the participants.
We benefitted greatly from lengthy discussions and correspondence at critical times of our
journey with Alan Dye, Thráinn Eggertsson, Avner Greif, Murat Iyigun, Douglass North, James
Robinson, Ken Shepsle, John Wallis, and Barry Weingast. We thank William Summerhill for a
discussion about the substance of our afterword. From a variety of people we received helpful
comments on drafts: Eric Alston, Martin Andersson, Andy Baker, Robert Bates, Michael
Bordo, Eric Brousseau, David Brown, Charles Calomiris, Victor Fleischer, Patrick François,

Steven Haber, Joseph Jupille, John Londregran, Thomas Mayer, Tomas Nonnenmacher,
Sonja Opper, Samuel Pessoa, Laura Randall, Hugh Rockoff, Jerome Sgard, Kenneth
Shepsle, Richard Sicotte, Stefan Voigt, Steven Webb, and Eugene White. Throughout the
project and for suggestions for a title we thank Robert Higgs. Presenting seminars and
receiving comments at the following conferencesand universities clarified where we were
going astray: Getulio Vargas Foundation; a conference at Washington University honoring
Douglass North’s ninetieth birthday; the Economic History Association Annual
Meetings (Boston and Washington, DC); the workshop on Legal Order, the State, and Economic
Development in Florence, Italy; the International Society for the New Institutional Economics
Annual Meeting; and seminars at Columbia University, Indiana University, Rutgers University,
University of British Columbia, University of Chicago, University of Colorado (Institutions
Program and School of Law), and the University of Hamburg (Institute of Law and Economics).
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Lee J. Alston, Marcus André Melo, Bernardo Mueller, and Carlos Pereira. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission, provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

A Conceptual Framework for Understanding Critical Transitions
Lee J. Alston, Marcus André Melo, Bernardo Mueller, and Carlos Pereira
NBER Working Paper No. 22144
April 2016
JEL No. N4,O10
ABSTRACT
Critical transitions for a country are historical periods when the powerful organizations in a
country shift from one set of beliefs about how institutions (the formal and informal rules of the
game) will affect outcomes to a new set of beliefs. Critical transitions can lead a country toward
more openness politically and economically or toward a more exclusionary society. Economic
and political development is contextual; that is, there is no recipe. Periods of relative persistence
are the norm with changes in institutions at the margin. We develop a framework consisting of
several interconnected relatively unexplored concepts that we first define in a static context and
then utilize to show how they produce a dynamic of institutional change or persistence. The key
concepts include: windows of opportunity, beliefs, and leadership. Our major contribution is
wedding the concepts of windows of opportunity, beliefs, and leadership to the dominant
network, institutions, and economic and political outcomes to form a dynamic. We apply the
framework illustratively to understand economic and political development in Argentina over the
past 100 years.
Lee J. Alston
Ostrom Workshop and Department of Economics
Indiana University
513 N. Park Avenue
Bloomington, IN 47408-3895
and NBER
ljalston@indiana.edu
Marcus André Melo
Federal University of Pernambuco
marcus.melo@uol.com.br

Bernardo Mueller
Department of Economics
University of Brasilia
bmueller@unb.br
Carlos Pereira
Getulio Vargas Foundation
carlos.pereira@fgv.br

March 29, 2016
A Conceptual Framework for Understanding Critical Transitions
Lee J. Alston, Marcus André Melo, Bernardo Mueller, and Carlos Pereira

Introduction
Critical transitions for a country are historical periods when the powerful organizations in a
country shift from one set of beliefs about how institutions (the formal and informal rules of the
game) will affect outcomes to a new set of beliefs. Critical transitions can lead a country toward
more openness politically and economically or toward a more exclusionary society. Economic
and political development is contextual; that is, there is no recipe. 1 Periods of relative persistence
are the norm with changes in institutions at the margin. At one level, it is a puzzle that a greater
number of middle-income countries have not embarked toward (or embarked toward and failed
to achieve) a critical transition to higher income status, given that there are role models they
could emulate. 2 By emulate, we do not mean that institutions can be directly imported but only
that the leaders of countries have a good idea of some of the key ingredients that today’s
developed societies possess: for example, rule of law; clear, secure, and impersonally enforced
property rights; competent and honest bureaucracies; and open and competitive economic and
political systems. 3 We develop a framework consisting of several interconnected relatively
unexplored concepts that we first define in a static context and then utilize to show how they
1

By contextual, we mean that there are many multiple paths to sustainable development, though
ultimately the extant success stories entail economic and political openness. We do not believe that it is
best to first open up economically and then politically or vice versa. History has examples of either path
as well as a relative balanced path between economic and political openness. Our book (Alston et al.
forthcoming 2016) provides a detailed case study of Brazil from 1964 to 2014, which allows us to
establish the importance of context and the heavy hand of historical institutional dependence. Our book
complements and augments the recent literature on development and institutions by proposing a
framework for understanding Brazilian development along with a detailed case study. In this regard, we
are following in the footsteps of many: Acemoglu and Robinson (2006, 2012); Eggertsson (2005); Greif
(2006, 2012); Mokyr (2009); North, Wallis, and Weingast (2009); North et al. (2012); and Schofield
(2006). There are also scores of articles on institutions and development. We differ from much of the
literature, which relies on historical examples of today’s developed countries.
2
We return to the issue of role models when we discuss leadership. Greif (2006: 195–96) recognizes the
importance of role models: “Such comprehensive changes are more likely to be attempted if there is a role
model, a known alternative institution with better outcomes.”
3
We are not arguing that there is a recipe for development. There is not; the institutions of open societies
emerged out of a process of changing beliefs over time, and each country transitioned in a different way
depending on their historical antecedents and political and economic endowments at the time.

1

produce a dynamic of institutional change or persistence. 4 The key concepts include: windows of
opportunity, beliefs, and leadership. Our major contribution is wedding the concepts of windows
of opportunity, beliefs, and leadership to the dominant network, institutions, and economic and
political outcomes to form a dynamic.

Understanding Critical Transitions
Today the primary role of institutions as defining countries that are on a sustainable trajectory of
economic and political openness is now widely accepted in the literature (North, Wallis, and
Weingast 2009; Acemoglu and Robinson 2012; inter alia). By sustainable development, we mean
that economic growth is seldom negative and there is relatively little fluctuation in growth rates;
this coupled with political development of real competition in elections in which ex ante the
outcome is not known, the process is transparent, and ex post society accepts the outcome
without violence. 5 But, though we know the differences in institutions between the most
developed and the rest, we do not have a recipe for countries on how to make the critical
transition from less open to more open economic and political institutions. We have analytical
narratives on how the pioneer countries like France, the United Kingdom, and the United States
made their transitions. 6 But, the developmental paths of these countries differed even though
they ended up with more or less the same set of institutions. In short, transitional paths are
contextual, and institutional change is embedded in different belief structures that define and
limit the feasible set of institutions that any country can implement at a certain time. But, if
beliefs define and limit institutional changes, what changes beliefs in ways that allow a country
to embark on a new trajectory? In our framework, when economic and political outcomes differ
from expectations, it creates a window of opportunity for changing institutions. Beliefs about the
relationship between institutions and outcomes held by some organizations in the dominant

4

Eggertsson (2005) analyzes the factors that can account for “imperfect institutions,” by which he means
that actors are aware of alternative institutions that would produce more economic growth. He lays the
major blame on social models. We will return to this in our section on beliefs. Eggertsson (2005: 151),
Greif (2006), and Schofield (2006) are closest to us in arguing that experience and shocks shape
beliefs/mental models.
5
Of course, other attributes are also important and are captured in the term “open access” as used by
North, Wallis, and Weingast (2009).
6
North et al. (2012) present an analysis of the developmental paths of countries that have not yet
transitioned (with the possible exceptions of Chile and South Korea). The paths taken by all countries
vary enormously.

2

network become malleable. Moreover, this malleability creates an opportunity for leadership to
coordinate institutional change. Why? Because beliefs about how the world works change when
outcomes deviate from expectations. In such situations, coordination among the dominant
organizations in society is critical for moving to a new trajectory because the dominant
organizations may differ in their beliefs on how to change or maintain institutions to get desired
outcomes. The dominant network may become fragile and porous, and leadership during such
windows of opportunities could be decisive for whether a country embarks on a new path and,
moreover, whether it can stay on the path. 7 It is one thing to “give it a go” and quite another to
stick to it.
Our framework enables us to understand the fundamental transition that has been
underway in Brazil from a closed, corrupt, clientelistic society to one that is driven by a belief in
fiscally sound social inclusion, which has significantly decreased inequality and promoted
democratic stability over the past twenty years (Alston et al. forthcoming 2016). 8 Generally,
social inclusion ends up in populism with too few restraints on government spending. This was
Brazil from 1985 to 1994. On the other hand, fiscally sound policies alone, for example, the
“Washington Consensus,” are not politically sustainable in a democracy that has not yet
transitioned to developed country status. Brazil embarked on its transition toward a more
sustainable developmental path by wedding social inclusion with orthodox monetary and fiscal
policies. The hallmarks of making the transition include: (1) the organizations in society agree to
play by the rules, (2) politics are open and competitive, (3) macroeconomic stability as well as
social inclusion dominate decision making, and (4) the state should play a significant role in
ensuring the playing field becomes more level. This set of beliefs has driven institutional change
in Brazil since 1994.
7

Our use of the terms “organization” and particularly “dominant network” builds on the work of Wallis
(2016), whose purpose differs from our analysis. Wallis is interested in explaining the existence of
government(s) and the role of impersonal rules.
8
Given the current economic and political turmoil in Brazil over the past year, this may seem like an
outrageous claim, but so far the participants, though pursuing corruption and impeachment of the
president, have been playing by the rules. There is little violence, no serious talk of military involvement,
and, for the most part, peaceful protests. To the extent that there are altercations, they are between PT
supporters of the president and the supporters favoring impeachment and pursuing corruption. The decline
in the economy is the result of a sharp reduction in commodity prices coupled with some flight due to the
Petrobrás scandal. All commodity-dominant countries have faced downturns, and the degree of the
downturn has been dampened (Australia and Canada) or exacerbated by domestic politics (Brazil and
Russia).

3

How Does Our Framework Fit in the Literature?
The framework presented here aids our understanding of developmental outcomes in general.
Our framework relies on windows of opportunity as a crucial part of its dynamics. Although
endogenous incremental change is an important part of the dynamics, so too are relatively abrupt
endogenous or exogenous shocks. Equally important, continual supporting institutional changes
must follow in the wake of the window of opportunity in order to buttress the new beliefs and
maintain the society on the road to sustainable development. 9
Compared to the pioneer countries that have transitioned to open societies, there is a
greater comprehension today of what is going on and a wider offering of tried and tested
institutional alternatives. To stress this difference, we use the term “window of opportunity”
rather than “critical junctures” to refer to the shocks that initiate a process of change. 10 Although
the difference may appear subtle, “window of opportunity” implies that there is a role for leaders
to purposefully react to the new circumstances to change institutions by coordinating other
organizations in the dominant network to a focal core belief, which forms an umbrella over
institutions. 11 In addition, most decision makers in the past acted to solve current problems
without seeing that solving a particular problem (e.g., corruption in banking in the nineteenthcentury United States) could have downstream positive (or negative) effects. In our framework,
leaders are both backward looking (in the sense of solving a current problem) and forward
looking—they can foresee (never perfectly) downstream consequences. 12 We view the inability
to foresee downstream events not as probabilistic but in terms of uncertainty in the way that
Frank Knight viewed uncertainty; that is, the downstream consequences are unknowable (Knight
1921).

9

Our focus on the importance of repeated supporting institutional changes has much in common with the
formal model of Bidner and François (2013), who stress the role of repeated virtuous actions by leaders in
order to transition to a democracy. We come back to this point in our sections on beliefs and leadership.
10
Acemoglu and Robinson (2012) use the term “critical juncture” to describe a discrete change in a
country’s trajectory.
11
On core beliefs, see Greif (2006) and Schofield (2006).
12
Eggertsson (2005), Greif (2006), and North, Wallis, and Weingast (2009) are closest to our concept of
window of opportunity in that the process is not a “big bang” and must be sustained over a period of time
sufficiently long to affect beliefs in the general population about how the “new” world works. We differ
in our stress on the forward-looking ability of today’s decision makers because of the role models played
by the pioneer countries.

4

A critical juncture, on the other hand, conveys the notion of a shock in the more distant
past to which rulers and citizens reacted with less understanding of all that was involved and a
weaker notion of what could possibly be done. This does not mean that windows of opportunity
will always be seized or that they will lead to sustained development, as leadership may be
absent or the dominant network is such that growth-enhancing change is blocked. Also, whereas
it is relatively easy to look back at history and recognize a critical juncture, it is not
straightforward to sort out which of the myriad events in a country’s current life are
consequential and may turn out to be realized windows of opportunity, and which are just full of
sound and fury but will signify nothing tomorrow. The difference is the combination of a
decisive action taken at time t when the window is recognized and the necessary downstream
supporting institutional changes taken to affect outcomes and in turn beliefs. All societies face
numerous windows of opportunity, some big and some small, and most are not seized. As social
scientists, we can look back and identify missed windows of opportunity. 13
Given that windows of opportunity are a chance that can be seized, who will do the
seizing? In many instances, realizing the opportunity requires leadership to perceive the
situation, propose what must be done, coordinate the effort, and persuade the dominant network
to take the leap of faith. Many windows of opportunity go by undetected or unrealized because
of a lack of leadership (which might be an individual or a group) to provide the necessary
elements of change. The role of leaders is typically absent in the literature on institutions and
political science, but is often overplayed by historians and business/public administration
scholars. 14 We see a circumscribed, yet often crucial, role for leaders as the catalysts during
windows of opportunity.
13

In the empirical sections of our book, we highlight examples of missed windows of opportunity for
Brazil (Alston et. al. forthcoming 2016).
14
Peele (2005) argues that there is a big, but not insuperable, hiatus separating leadership studies from
political science; whereas the former explicitly attempts to identify personal qualities that individuals
possess and how they deploy those skills in a particular context and situation, the latter mostly derives
explanatory power from the analysis of political structures and institutions, thus marginally exploring the
difference made by key political actors. Peele (2005: 188) states, “For those who study leadership—
whether it is political leadership or leadership in some other organizational or societal environment such
as a school, a company or a gang—the specific way the leaders interact with their followers is what needs
to be isolated. The exploitation and strategic use of authority in a range of different settings by individuals
or elites is a necessary building block to understanding. But it is not the whole story; and approaches to
leadership like approaches to politics reflect the intellectual and social environment of their times.” We
differ from Peele in that our leaders do not so much have “followers,” but instead coordinate the dominant
network to a new core belief. More on this below.

5

The final distinguishing characteristic of our framework is the central role played by
beliefs in the dynamics between institutions and outcomes. A central question in the literature on
institutions has always been why all countries don’t put in place good institutions given that they
are widely recognized as the key to long-term growth. The standard answer is: new institutions
have redistributive consequences that cannot be renegotiated owing to transaction costs and
commitment problems, such that those in the dominant network prefer to block change and retain
a larger expected share of a smaller pie. Such social conflict issues are essential for
understanding the process of development. However, this explanation requires that all economic
agents calculate the impact of each set of new institutions and rationally pick the ones that
maximize the discounted present value of the inherent rental streams. In the absence of such
unrealistic powers of rationality, beliefs arise out of the need to interpret the way the world
works. When assessing whether to pursue or block changes in institutions, those in power have a
rough map in their heads of how each set of institutions leads to different outcomes. Beliefs are
those maps or instructions, though they lack the specifics of a technical manual. They provide an
interpretation of cause and effect between how different institutions translate into economic and
political outcomes. If the world were such that those maps varied little across different groups
and circumstances, and that beliefs had a natural tendency to reflect reality very closely (when
there even is a “true” relationship between institutions and outcomes), then beliefs would not be
very consequential. However, the diversity of human experience shows that interpretation of how
the world works has varied dramatically across societies, so that understanding why particular
institutions have emerged and persisted in specific countries requires careful and explicit
attempts at understanding the country-specific core beliefs of those who are in power. In many
societies, there is not a widely held consensus across all organizations on core beliefs. But what
matters for the establishment of formal institutions are the core beliefs of those in power.
Whether these become a consensus depends in large part on the outcomes that the institutions
produce; for example, in democracies, if the institutions produce outcomes that benefit more
organizations, they will gravitate toward the belief of those in power. Even in autocratic
societies, many organizations may not like the outcomes, but those in power have the ability to
maintain the formal institutions and dominant organizations in society so that other marginalized
organizations and citizens at large realize that “this is how their world works.”

6

The Building Blocks of Our Conceptual Framework
Windows of Opportunity
Windows of opportunity are historical occasions when there is a chance to change the trajectory
of a country’s economic and political outcomes by changing beliefs and institutions. We stress
that windows of opportunity are not just decisive moments, but rather a series beginning with an
opportunity and ending with a change in the dominant core belief held by the dominant network
and most citizens. Windows of opportunity begin when (1) the rental streams fall short, or
exceed the expectations of members of the dominant network; (2) a new member or organization
enters the configuration of power because of an unanticipated economic or political shock; and
(3) the beliefs of some members in the dominant network change either because of the change in
the economic and political outcomes or because of an exogenous event. 15 All crises are windows
of opportunity, but windows of opportunity do not require a crisis. 16 There are undoubtedly
many windows of opportunity, but it is the interaction among windows of opportunity, beliefs,
and leadership that matters. Windows of opportunity are not only “windows” for changing
institutions; they are windows through which leaders can initiate a transition toward a society
that is more or less open, economically or politically. 17
Dominant Network
In our framework, political power means the ability to change formal institutions (e.g., the laws
of a society), and during windows of opportunity, the potential to influence changes in beliefs. In
15

For example, the financial crisis of 2008 and its aftermath has affected the beliefs of many actors in the
sanctity of the existing relative prices of securities or housing to reflect long-run values. In short, many
(but not all) economists now believe that bubbles can and do happen. This is no surprise to economic
historians, several of whom have stressed financial bubbles (see, in particular, Aliber and Kindleberger
2015; Neal 1993).
16
The window of opportunity may be open for some time and awaiting a leader to seize the moment. This
was the case of hyperinflation in Brazil, which exceeded 100 percent/year from 1980 until 1995, peaking
at more than 30,000 percent in 1990. Cardoso seized the window of opportunity in 1994 and, as a result,
started a transition to a new belief in fiscally sound social inclusion. This also appears to have been the
case in the dramatic changes in institutions put in place by President Rafael Correa in Ecuador. Bidner
and François (2013) similarly do not rely on a crisis for a transition to democracy to begin. See Higgs
(1987) for a convincing discussion of the important role of crises in the United States prompting and
sustaining the growth of government.
17
The emphasis here is on a transition path toward sustainable development. This concept of a window of
opportunity is consistent with Eggertsson (2005: 151): “opportunities for reform are created by real
factors that upset the political balance, by real shocks and exogenous impulses that induce actors to revise
their models.”

7

Figure 1, we show how the nature of the dominant network becomes more complex as
development progresses. Panel A depicts an early stage of development, when there are few
organizations (X, Y, and Z) headed by elites (superscript E) and their clients (superscript C). 18
The elites in each organization possess some form of violence potential that they use to control
their clients and possibly to appropriate wealth from other organizations. A group of kingdoms is
an example of this scenario.
(Figure 1 about here)
The potential for increased productivity and economic gain from peace might prompt the
organizations to establish a pact where each refrains from violence. The dotted line demarcates
the dominant network formed by the elites across organizations. By refraining from violence,
each is able to reap greater rents than would accrue when violence was endemic. The dominant
network is an adherent organization that will function only as long as the rents make compliance
incentive compatible. Each individual organization, on the other hand, is a contractual
organization that benefits from the third-party enforcement provided by the dominant network,
making it easier for each organization to control its own clients. The third-party enforcement also
allows for anonymous exchange among members of different organizations. The gains in
specialization and productivity that can be achieved are limited, however, by the fact that the
creation of rents, which keeps the dominant network together, requires entry into economic and
political markets to be restricted. The barriers to creation of new organizations restrict
investment and innovation with deleterious consequences for long-term economic growth.
Furthermore, periods of peace and cooperation are often precarious, as shocks that change the
violence potential of any of the organizations may cause peace to break down until a new
network can be formed through a new configuration of rents. Many countries remain endlessly
stuck in cycles of this nature in what North, Wallis, and Weingast (2009) term a limited access
society.
While some countries have been able to achieve considerable progress under limited
access, historical experience suggests that there is a limit to how much growth can be achieved

18

Panel A is an adaptation and extension of figure 1 in Wallis (2011). We also borrow some terms, such
as “violence specialists” and “adherent and contractual organizations,” from Wallis (2011). We borrow
the term “dominant network” from Wallis (2016). Network, rather than coalition, stresses the multitude of
relationships among those in the network. Not all the members of the network are directly connected, but
they have a stake in sustaining the network to sustain their rents.

8

under such arrangements. A few countries, however, are able to develop an increasingly complex
social organization that expands access into a dominant network, allowing for even further
specialization and trade. This situation is represented in panel B of Figure 1. Note that not only
have new (economic, political, religious, and educational) organizations emerged, including a
central government, but access to the rents in each organization has become more widespread.
While in panel A the proportion of the population that is in the elite (parameters ε, η, and
π) is extremely small, in panel B greater numbers have been granted access to rents and to the
creation of new organizations. This incorporation can take place as a strategic decision by the
current dominant network during times of upheaval as a means to preempt unrest and revolution
(as in Acemoglu and Robinson 2000, 2006). Alternatively, greater access may take place when
the creation of new organizations increases productivity and growth in ways that expand the
rents that the current dominant network appropriates (as in North, Wallis, and Weingast 2009).
In this process, the rule of law and impersonal exchange may emerge within the elite network,
creating a society where rents and privilege, while still present, are increasingly dissipated by
economic and political competition among this extended dominant network. 19
As development proceeds, the plethora of organizations “at the table” increases, which in
turn expands the dominant network. Organizations in the dominant network may include
political, economic, social, or religious organizations. We are not concerned with the factors
determining what is in an organization’s “interest” but simply that some organizations have
power and others do not; power is a matter of the access to influence or shape institutions. 20
In functioning democracies, citizens also matter because they vote. Politicians listen to
public opinion because disregarding it could mean being voted out of office. All these forces
combine to produce a de jure and de facto configuration of political power. It is this set of
organizations and their relative power that defines and enforces the formal institutions in a
society. The institutions in a society are shaped by those in the dominant network (and their
beliefs, which we come to shortly) and their preferences, that is, the outcomes that they would
like to see; but there is uncertainty about the precise impact of institutions on outcomes. The
19

Brazil is at this stage in the development process. By granting open access to the creation of new
organizations to increasing proportions of its population, Brazil has created circumstances for the
Schumpeterian process of creative destruction that underlie the growth trajectory of most developed
nations.
20
Wallis (2011) argues cogently that preferences, the range of choices, relative prices, and beliefs
determine “interests.”

9

organizations differ in their beliefs about the cause-and-effect relationships between institutions
and economic and political outcomes. It is the beliefs of the organizations in the dominant
network, rather than their preferences, that ultimately constrain and shape the institutions of
societies.

Beliefs
By beliefs, we follow North (2005), who defines them as the subjective views of actors about the
way the world works. Beliefs are very different from preferences, which are views about what
organizations would like to see transpire, whereas beliefs are about perceived outcomes from
institutional change or maintenance, though, because the world is non-ergodic, there will also be
some degree of unintended consequences. In equilibrium, institutions are consistent with beliefs.
But, we are most interested in beliefs during windows of opportunity. Most of the time, societies
operate on a “core” set of beliefs, but during “constitutional quandaries,” core beliefs become
fragile (Schofield 2006). It is the fragile moments that enable societies to change their
trajectories.
Ultimately, beliefs about how the world works will shape the institutions that those
leaders/organizations implement to achieve a desired, expected set of political and economic
outcomes. 21 But it is not obvious which institutions will lead to the outcomes they want, given
the constraint of beliefs about how others will act. This is important in the transition from one set
of core beliefs to another. If there were some comprehensive manual mapping institutions to
outcomes, those in the dominant network could look it up and see exactly which institutions they
need to put in place to get the outcomes they want. But there is no manual; there is uncertainty
about how things work and about the causal mechanisms between institutions and outcomes. As
shown in Figure 2, a given set of institutions can lead to many different expected political and
economic outcomes. The outcomes, which are expected to emerge from a given set of
institutions, will depend on the beliefs of how institutions affect outcomes.
(Figure 2 about here)
For the leader(s)/organizations in power, formal institutions are a choice variable during
windows of opportunities, although the choice process is quite complex. In addition, during some
21

This is consistent with Greif’s definition of “internalized beliefs.” He argues that internalized beliefs of
those with power can motivate them to change institutions consistent with their beliefs.

10

windows of opportunity, beliefs can also be somewhat endogenous to those in power. It depends
on the size of the window of opportunity and the fragility of the ex ante beliefs. Figure 3 shows
the full set of expected outcomes that can emerge from the full set of conceivable institutions.
(Figure 3 about here)
There are j=1, . . . J possible set of institutions, k=1, . . . K different sets of beliefs, and
expected outcomes xkj for each combination of institutions and beliefs. If it were clear how the
world worked, then it would be easy to choose the institutions that lead to the best outcomes. But
given the uncertainty, it is not clear which branch bk society is on. So, those in power need some
way to map—even though always imperfectly—from institutions to outcomes. Institutions shape
choices that people make because they influence incentives. But, formal institutions are not the
only influence on the choices that people make that determine outcomes. In addition to the
unintended consequences from changing formal institutions, there are unintended consequences
from informal institutions; and internal and external shocks, which all play a role in the ultimate
outcomes.
Beliefs emerge from history, experience, interaction, and serendipity, though those in
power have a greater scope to act on their beliefs. 22 Once beliefs emerge, the choice in
institutions becomes tractable. Given belief bk emerges, the group in power will choose
Institutionsj, where j is the set of institutions that leads to the best expected outcome for them. If,
for example, given beliefs b3, E(outcomes33) > E(outcomes3i) for every i ≠ 3, then in Figure 4
institutions j=3 would be chosen as they maximize the expected outcomes for the group in
power. We stress that institutions never map directly into outcomes, but rather those in power
can choose the institutions that they believe will give the best expected outcomes.
(Figure 4 about here)
Once those leaders/organizations with power choose and implement institutions, the
outcomes that emerge have to match their expectations at least approximately; otherwise, the
divergent outcomes will change the organizations in the dominant network, or the beliefs of
those in the dominant network, or both. The degree to which new formal institutions change
outcomes depends on the extent to which they are compatible with the beliefs and norms of the
22

When outcomes are very different from expectations, beliefs change, at least for those in power, and a
window of opportunity emerges for leadership. Schofield (2006) argues that Benjamin Franklin, acting on
news that the French would support the colonies in their independence struggle with Great Britain,
convinced the elite in the colonies to draft and sign the Declaration of Independence.

11

economic and political organizations in society. If the beliefs of a sufficient number of
organizations are firmly held and are inconsistent with the new incentives, the expected outcome
for those in power will not materialize. The incompatibility of possible new institutions with the
extant beliefs held by actors at large is a significant part of the explanation for institutional
persistence (Greif 2006). This is persuasive; however, if beliefs are malleable during windows of
opportunity, institutions will have a bigger impact on outcomes because behavioral beliefs by
organizations outside the dominant network may also change with repeated behavior and
institutional deepening. 23
When expected outcomes do not materialize, there will eventually be a revision of the
beliefs of those in the dominant network, or the dissatisfaction with the outcomes might, given a
window of opportunity, lead to a punctuated change in the dominant network, beliefs, and
institutions. We argue that experiences (political and economic outcomes) are the main factor
shaping and changing beliefs of leaders/organizations in the dominant network as well as
shaping the beliefs of citizens at large. 24
We are not proposing a full theory of the determinants of beliefs. Our goal is more
modest. Like North, Wallis, and Weingast (2009: 262), we argue that “the cultural
environment—the political, economic, social context—fundamentally influences beliefs.” It is
the beliefs of those in the dominant network that matter because those in power face windows of
opportunity and make the formal institutions (laws). Nevertheless, the beliefs of citizens do
matter in many countries. Indeed, the beliefs held by the citizens are a constraint on those in
power. Those in power have preferences over outcomes, but it is their beliefs that determine their
actions. Our view on the role of beliefs matches Mokyr’s view of the role of enlightenment in
enabling the British Industrial Revolution:
To sum up: Britain became the leader of the Industrial Revolution . . . thanks to the great
synergy of the Enlightenment: the combination of the Baconian program in useful
knowledge and the recognition that better institutions created better incentives. (Mokyr
2009: 122)

23

Repeated play by the dominant network is what drives changes in beliefs by citizens about the actions
(and motives) of those in power. Repeat play is at the heart of the model in Bidner and François (2013).
24
Our view is very similar to Eggertsson’s (2005: 26) definition of a policy model: “Policy models are the
operational models that guide decision makers, whether in the private or public sphere. Policy models
define for the actor his or her choice set, rank the elements in the choice set, and describe relationships
between means and ends (instruments and targets).”

12

According to Mokyr (2009: 40), “Enlightenment beliefs followed in the footsteps of Bacon’s
idea of understanding nature in order to control her.” It was a belief that with the application of
useful knowledge, a country could progress over the status quo. The application of knowledge in
turn needed institutions that promoted “progress.” At the time, this was a new belief as well as a
belief not shared by all powerful actors. It is the very nature of subjectivity of beliefs that gives
rise to different views about the impact of institutions on outcomes. For a modern example,
following the financial crisis of 2008, there is a lively debate among economists, politicians, and
other interest groups about the impact of a stimulus plan versus an austerity plan for promoting
recovery. 25 The actions that get taken result from the relative power of the organizations in the
dominant network and beliefs of those with the power, as well as the role of leadership.
An even more forceful account of the centrality of beliefs for promoting prosperity comes
from Deidre McCloskey in her two volumes: Bourgeois Virtues (2006) and Bourgeois Dignity
(2010). 26 McCloskey views “ideas” and not institutions, geography, natural resources, or other
determinants as the catalyst of modern economic growth starting in Europe in the mid-eighteenth
century. In particular, the idea that started the “Great Enrichment” was the change in the belief
about the dignity of commercial pursuits. Once commercial and mercantile activities stopped
being viewed with contempt and dishonor—as opposed to the pursuits of warriors, noblemen,
and the clergy—trade, commerce, exchange, and innovation flourished, unleashing the
unprecedented explosion of prosperity. 27
In today’s modern world, political and economic actors can have a more forward-looking
view of beliefs because there are role models. Whereas the pioneer countries were trying to solve
problems in light of their past experiences, today’s countries can draw on the experiences of the
already-developed world for some of their beliefs. Not only can those in power draw from these
experiences, but in some instances they do so inappropriately for a particular country. This was

25

This is written in 2016 in the shadow of the “euro crisis” and still persistent high unemployment across
many countries in Europe.
26
Obviously, the locus classicus for the notion that ideas matter is Max Weber’s work. Hall (1989)
provides a more recent treatment of the role of ideas in economic policy making.
27
Although we share McCloskey’s position on the centrality of ideas/beliefs in economic growth and
development, we do not go as far as she does in downplaying the role of institutions. In our framework,
beliefs are important because they affect which institutions get put in place, and, by affecting outcomes,
institutions feed back into beliefs. For this reason, it makes little sense to argue whether institutions or
beliefs matter the most: they are both crucial parts of the dynamics.

13

the problem with blindly relying on the “Washington Consensus.” 28 The failure of the consensus
to work in certain countries was a result of the incompatibility of the rules/incentives with the
beliefs held by citizens. We stress that learning from other countries does not mean that the
implementation will have the same effect, but nevertheless, it can affect not only their “belief”
but the depth of their belief, which determines how long those in the dominant network hold on
to the cause-and-effect relationship. For example, if those in power want to control inflation,
there is a consensus among many analysts that this is easier to accomplish if the central bank has
independence from political pressure. So far, we have simply posited that beliefs shape actions;
but if beliefs shape institutions, it is paramount to posit how beliefs change, at least on the
margin. We will do so later when we discuss the dynamics of the framework. For now, we posit
that belief deepening depends on outcomes and the actions taken by others, including the support
of citizens. 29 Belief deepening is also iterative between the institutions established by those in
power and the perception of the outcomes by organizations and citizens.30
Leadership
Leadership is a relatively absent concept in most frameworks of institutional change, though its
importance has seen resurgence. 31 By leadership, we mean that certain individuals at certain

28

On the incentive compatibility problem of policy advice, see Acemoglu and Robinson (2013).
For examples of how belief deepening depends on the outcomes being consistent with the prediction of
those in power, who first held the belief, see Bates, de Figueiredo, and Weingast (1998), who examine
Zambia and the former Yugoslavia; Eggertsson (2005), who analyzes the persistence and eventual change
in beliefs in Iceland; Rakove, Rutten, and Weingast (2004), who examine beliefs in the colonies leading
to the Revolutionary War between the North American colonies (United States) and Great Britain; and
Greif (2006), who examines beliefs in the context of medieval trade.
30
On the importance of the dynamics for belief deepening, we are consistent with Bidner and François
(2013).
31
We thank Avner Greif, Patrick François, and Barry Weingast for discussions on the roles of leadership
and beliefs. For an excellent analytical survey of recent contributions to the literature on leadership, see
Ahlquist and Levi (2011). As examples of the resurgent importance of leadership in frameworks of
institutional change, see Bidner and François (2013), who model the interaction of leaders and citizens in
transitioning to democracy; Greif (2006: 201–2), who discusses the importance of “institutional
entrepreneurs”; Jones and Olken (2005), who use deaths of leaders as an exogenous change in leadership
and find that leaders matter for economic growth; and Schofield (2006), who argues that during
“constitutional quandaries” leaders can influence the shift to a new core belief. Schofield posits that
Benjamin Franklin, James Madison, Thomas Jefferson, Abraham Lincoln, and Lyndon Johnson were
“architects of change” (leaders). Earlier scholars recognizing the importance of leadership include
Harberger (1998), who strongly argues that leadership mattered enormously for the economic reforms in
Latin America; and Higgs (1987) and North (1981), who discuss “ideological entrepreneurs” (for Higgs
in times of crisis). Leadership has been recognized by the “Austrian” school as entrepreneurship, but for
29

14

moments in a country’s history make a difference because of their actions. The counterfactual
situation is that if someone else or another group of people were in the same position of power
with the same beliefs, the forthcoming institutions could have been different. 32 Our view is akin
to the “structural theories” of leadership and most similar to leadership as espoused by Schofield
(2006). Ahlquist and Levi cogently describe Schofield’s concept of leadership:
For Schofield, pivotal moments in history—what he calls “constitutional quandaries”—
occur when core beliefs no longer conform to reality or, slightly more formally, when
there is extreme variation in individual assessments of the appropriate action relative to
the common, shared understanding. When these moments occur, small shifts in the
beliefs of a few may trigger a cascade that results in an entirely different configuration of
beliefs.
A leader is the agent most likely to trigger such a cascade. According to
Schofield, “architects of change” must do two things: (a) communicate a model of the
world in which there are specific outcomes associated with differing courses of action
and (b) convincingly advocate a specific outcome. (Ahlquist and Levi 2011: 8)
We differ from Schofield in that we do not believe that beliefs change in a “cascade” but
rather deepen, depending on outcomes consistent with the beliefs initially held by a “few.” We
agree that leaders start the process because they hold beliefs about institutional changes that can
set the country on a new trajectory. This change in trajectory is just a start and must be
reinforced over time. We are not arguing that leaders simply impose beliefs from the top down
but rather leaders sense, articulate and convince others of the new belief. Not mutually exclusive
is the view that the belief is latently held by many.
As noted in chapter 2 of Alston et al. (forthcoming 2016), the fact that history is replete
with the mention of individuals lends considerable anecdotal weight and circumstantial evidence
to the argument that certain individuals did make a difference. Leadership comprises several
concepts that are not mutually exclusive: (1) cognition, (2) heresthetics or coordination, (3)

the most part has been applied to business organizations, not political organizations. See Wagner (1966)
and Frohlich, Oppenheimer, and Young (1971) for a role for political entrepreneurship. Political scientists
have elaborated on leadership, but mostly in the context of principal/agent models. See Fiorina and
Shepsle (1989) for a discussion of formal theories of leadership in which they discuss the strengths and
weaknesses of principal/agent models. For an earlier discussion of the coordinative role of leadership, see
Neustadt (1990) and Riker (1983, 1996). We draw most heavily on Ahlquist and Levi (2011), Greif
(2006), Riker (1996), and Schofield (2006).
32
Ellis (2015) maintains that “The Quartet” of Washington, Jay, Hamilton, and Madison were critical in
transitioning the US states into a nation.

15

adaptability, (4) imagination, and (5) moral authority. 33 Before one can be a leader, she has to
cognitively be aware that a window of opportunity exists. In addition, that person must know
how to take advantage of the window of opportunity. In short, cognition entails being able to
address two questions: What is the problem or opportunity that we face? How can we solve the
problem or take advantage of the situation? This should not be construed that leaders perfectly
foresee all downstream consequences, but only that they see the problem and have a provisional
“game plan” on how to both correct the problem at time t and understand that they will have to
react to downstream consequences in unforeseen ways to sustain the solution to the problem at
time t + n. Reacting to downstream consequences requires adaptability. 34 Indeed, without
downstream institutional deepening, the initial “big bang” would not produce long-run benefits.
It is the combination of the initial institutional change that, if successful, affects beliefs in a way
that will enable later institutional deepening. Leaders also never act alone; it is the orchestration
of other powerful organizations in the dominant network that allows the initial change and
subsequent institutional deepening to take place. Another way of putting it is: if the initial
institutional changes produce outcomes that benefit extant organizations or create new
organizations that win, the beneficiary organizations now have a stake in sustaining and
deepening the new institutions.
Political entrepreneurship to overcome the collective-action problem is another way to
portray leadership (Wagner 1966). We refer to political entrepreneurship, following William
Riker (1996: 9), as heresthetics, which Riker defined as: “the art of setting up situations—
composing the alternatives among which political actors must choose—in such a way that even
those who do not wish to do so are compelled by the structure of the situation to support the
heresthetician’s purpose.” Heresthetics involves strategy, especially dynamically in the course of
decision making. 35 There are two aspects of “dynamic”: (1) the art of compromise in the interest
of getting most of what you want and (2) staying the course temporally in order to solidify
beliefs. Heresthetics is the “art” of policy making and is not justified by ex post rational choice
and could certainly not be designed ex ante by a mechanism design approach. Successful

33

See Greif (2012, esp. chap. 3) for the leadership roles of cognition, moral authority, and coordination.
Knowing ex ante that there will be unforeseen consequences that need to be met is consistent with what
North (1990) called “adaptive efficiency.”
35
Riker (1983, 1996) applied heresthetics to the establishment of the electoral college and the ratification
of the US Constitution.
34

16

leadership entails cognitive ability of knowing what to do along with the coordinative ability of
getting others in power to go along.
Leadership frequently entails imagination, that is, making an off-the-path move that no
one could have anticipated, though it carries the day. 36 In a sense, imagination entails seeing
further down the game tree than others in the dominant network. Hamilton is an excellent case of
a leader with imagination. In January 1786, the confederacy agreed to meet in Annapolis in
September of 1786 to discuss revising an article pertaining to interstate trade. The meeting was a
non-starter because only five states showed up and you needed unanimity to amend an article. In
a final meeting of the delegates, Hamilton rose and
claimed there was unanimous support within the Annapolis delegation for “a future
Convention” with a roving mandate to address all the most salient issues, scheduled to
meet in Philadelphia on the second Sunday in May 1787. . . . It was as if a prizefighter,
having just been knocked out by a journeyman boxer, declared his intention to challenge
the heavyweight champion of the world. (Quoted from Ellis 2015: 100)
Against all odds, thanks to careful planning by Madison in particular, all states save Rhode
Island sent delegations to Philadelphia.
Leadership can be in leaders’ and their supporters’ narrowly construed self-interest, but
leaders at times take reputation or “moral” rents into account (Greif 2008). Some leaders try to
do “the right thing” for their country by “playing for the history books.” Harberger (1998)
maintains that several Latin American leaders from the 1960s to the 1990s took courageous steps
to help their economies with unselfish motives driving them. In addition to seeking “moral”
rents, some leaders have moral authority either because of their past or because they earned it.
Moral authority does not necessarily make heads of state “leaders” but it gives them legitimacy,
which in turn can induce a public to trust their motives, which may lead more readily to
accepting new beliefs during windows of opportunity. 37
Leadership can change the trajectory of a society for better or worse. Leadership is an
important concept only when there are windows of opportunity. For much of the time, countries
36

We thank Ken Shepsle for insights during conversations. Imagination plays an important role in
Shepsle (2016).
37
Because of leading the Revolutionary War, George Washington earned moral authority that crucially
helped Hamilton, Jay, and Madison to push for nationhood on which the United States embarked with the
Constitution and the Bill of Rights (Ellis 2015). Nelson Mandela in South Africa or Václav Havel in the
Czech Republic commanded moral authority because of their time spent in prison. On the use of
parliament for legitimacy of kings in England, see Greif and Ruben (2014).

17

are on “autopilot,” such that the rental streams are within a tolerable band for those in power so
that there is no reason to rock the boat by changing institutions in a big way. It is not the case
that all you need for development are “great” leaders but rather that individuals and certain
organizations during windows of opportunity made a difference. For example, if this were not
the case, there would be no need to discuss France without Napoleon; the United States without
George Washington; Great Britain absent Churchill; China after Mao and with Deng; Argentina
after Perón; or Brazil after Cardoso. We believe that these individuals, along with their allies,
made a difference. Similarly, today there are discussions about Cuba after Castro; Korea after
Kim Jong I; and Egypt after Mubarak. If individuals did not matter, then these discussions would
be pointless. 38

Institutions
We follow in the now standard tradition of North (1990) by defining institutions as the formal
and informal “rules of the game,” along with enforcement for noncompliance, that shape
behavior. Formal institutions include the laws of society and how they are enforced. Informal
institutions include the norms of behavior within a society. A critical difference between formal
rules/laws and norms is enforcement. Formal rules mean that there are recognized formal
sanctions, even if only in a probabilistic sense. Norms do not have a specified enforcer but are
typically enforced through some form of societal sanction, ostracism being such a form. The
sanctions emanate from the shared belief by most members of society in the norm. 39 In
legitimate democracies with checks and balances, laws are passed under the shadow of the
Supreme Court. 40 Together, formal rules/laws and informal norms provide the incentive structure
for economic, political, and social actions. By the incentive structure, we mean the perceived
reward structure faced by all individuals in political activity, in market activities, and within
firms and other internal organizations. The perceived rewards vary enormously across
38

We recognize that the exit of certain individuals may simply be a tipping point and that many other
underlying economic and political organizations may have already changed. This appears to be the case
for Cuba, which has now embarked on reforms. As of this writing, the exit of Mubarak has not produced
significant changes in the powerful economic or political organizations controlling Egypt.
39
We draw on Alston, Mueller, and Nonnenmacher (forthcoming, esp. chap. 2).
40
The size of the shadow of the court varies from country to country. For example, in Argentina, from
1946 to 2010, every administration but one (de la Rúa) has either impeached Supreme Court justices,
forced resignations, or added justices (Alston and Gallo 2010). This has led to little if no constraints on
the executive and legislative branches.

18

individuals in political and economic activities. The perceived rewards and the actions
undertaken produce economic and political outcomes, some of which may be consistent with the
underlying beliefs of cause and effect as expected by those in power and others inconsistent with
the beliefs of the designers of the formal institutions. Deep-seated behavioral and internalized
(core) beliefs (as defined by Greif 2006) may often be the cause for why the outcomes deviate
from the belief of policy makers. In short, the set of beliefs held by those in power about how a
new institutional change will affect expected outcomes deviates from the actual outcome because
the actors in society hold onto their set of behavioral beliefs, which differs from those in power
who can change the rules.
The laws that countries pass will frequently entail political or economic side payments.
When the side payments are transparent, we call the process lobbying or “pork.” When the
process is not transparent, we label the process as “corrupt.” Whether it is pork or bribes, many
policy makers condemn these practices, but, as North, Wallis, and Weingast (2009) point out,
they are the glue that prevents the entire system from unraveling into violence in less mature
societies. For advanced societies, the pork may enable welfare-enhancing measures, and
eliminating pork may make policy change impossible (Alston and Mueller 2006) or
dysfunctional (Pereira and Mejía Acosta 2010).
Economic and Political Outcomes
Institutions generate incentives for economic and political activity that in turn produce economic
and political outcomes. Again, we recognize that it is not simply formal institutions that
determine the full set of incentives; norms also matter, as well as the differing relative prices or
costs of taking certain actions—which in turn depend on institutions—and the perception of
actors of the outcomes from choices. It matters for those in power if the outcomes are consistent
with their beliefs because they enact institutions to change incentives, which in turn will produce
outcomes that they perceived as beneficial for their goals. Political outcomes include both
narrow outcomes (e.g., politicians want to get reelected) and broad outcomes (e.g., the degree of
personal freedoms in a society). Economic outcomes, as well, are narrow (e.g., Did import
protection increase the profits of a particular industry?) or broad (e.g., How did policies impact
unemployment levels, economic growth per capita, or income inequality?). The economic and
political outcomes can have two effects. If they are sufficiently different from expectations or

19

repeatedly different from the expectations, they can affect the beliefs of those in power. 41 In
addition to affecting beliefs, the political and economic returns can change the relative power of
the economic and political organizations in the dominant network. It is the change in beliefs or
the change in power that generates the dynamics in our framework, producing either incremental
institutional changes or more discrete large institutional changes when a window of opportunity
opens along with the necessary leadership.

Dynamics
Now that we have the elements, we can discuss in broad terms the dynamics of the framework
that we summarize in Figure 5. At time t, a society is at the left side of the figure in “autopilot”
mode. This is the situation in societies in most periods. There is a set of core beliefs held by the
dominant network as well as other organizations and citizens. The core beliefs shape laws and
their enforcement, and we see only incremental changes because the economic and political
outcomes match the expectations of the dominant network. In this state of the world, there is no
role for leadership as we defined it. The world that the players face is never static, so they always
take some actions to change some institutions on the margin, though others they leave as fixed.
(Figure 5 about here)
Most institutions remain fixed because the incentives that the institutions generate lead to
outcomes that produce a sufficient rental stream to the organizations such that they see no reason
to “rock the boat.” 42 For other institutions, the dominant network tinkers on the margin. They
make decisions, for example, pass laws, issue decrees, and render judicial decisions, inter alia.
All these institutional modifications change incentives on the margin but do not fundamentally
affect beliefs. We are in a world in which Greif (2006) argues that the institutions are consistent
with the beliefs of economic and political organizations.
Beliefs about the impact that the institutional changes will have on incentives and in turn
outcomes determine the institutions that are put in place, though the institutions also produce

41

This is consistent with Eggertsson’s (2005) argument that experiences affect social/policy models.
Eggertsson (2005) argues that for centuries, Iceland held onto “imperfect institutions” because they
benefited the agricultural elite. He argues that they held a misguided partial equilibrium social model. The
landed elite feared that fostering fishing would drive agricultural wages up. They neglected to see that “a
rising tide raises all boats,” that is, that reaping the benefits from fisheries would foster economic growth
sufficiently to increase the rent for landowners as well.

42

20

some unintended consequences, sometimes small and sometimes large. 43 To the extent that the
overall outcomes produce adequate rents to the players in the configuration of power, we will not
see “big” institutional changes, and societies may cruise along in this “autopilot” mode for
decades. 44 Societies function and operate under a belief system of “this is the way our world
works.” The system is meeting the expectations of those in power as well as citizens; it is like a
tide that washes over society. The belief system is predictable and is sustained by the social
fabric of society, that is, familial, religious, social, and cultural relationships. In such a world,
outcomes are consistent with expectations, so there is no organization sufficiently powerful (or
with the incentive) to push for big changes.
But, at some historical moment, the cumulative effect of small changes reaches a tipping
point, or there is an exogenous shock, either internal or external to a country, that shocks the
system. This is shown as the shaded area moving to the right in Figure 5. The lines from each
element in the “autopilot” part of the figure indicate whether that element (i.e., beliefs, dominant
network, institutions, and so on) stays the same—horizontal line—or changes over time—slopes
up or down. At this level of generality, we are not interested if the change was positive or
negative, but simply whether something “big” has changed or not.
When a shock takes place, the only thing that changes in a first moment are the outcomes,
which now no longer match expectations; see (1) in Figure 5. If this effect is large enough, it
may create pressure for change, leading to a window of opportunity. As shown in Figure 5,
during a window of opportunity there is the potential for leadership to initiate a critical transition.
If leadership does not emerge, most societies will cycle back to the ex ante shock world with
changes initiated to patch up the repercussions from the shock. 45 But, if the shock is sufficiently
large to shake the beliefs of many in the dominant network and someone (or some organization)
takes on a leadership role, “constitutional-level” changes are possible that can set a country on
the path to a critical transition. The wavy lines after point (2) in the figure indicate that the old
beliefs have been lost and have not yet been substituted by new beliefs.
43

Unintended outcomes result from a myriad of forces: formal institutions alone do not feed directly into
outcomes; norms matter as well as the relative prices of choices faced by organizations (see Wallis 2011).
44
This is analogous to how most of us live our lives. Most of us operate according to certain routines, and
it takes something out of the ordinary, for example, a heart attack, to cause us to fundamentally change
our way of life, though again we tinker on the margin.
45
The fallout from the Arab Spring could be considered a potential window of opportunity, but no leader
took charge, most likely because it was not in the interest of the dominant network whose belief did not
change.

21

The way these changes take place depends on the country and the situation, and there are
infinite possibilities. As drawn in Figure 5, at point (3) leadership steps in to catalyze new beliefs
of those in the dominant network, or some organizations with differing beliefs gain or lose power
within the dominant network. Change does not happen simultaneously. It takes time for
leadership to coordinate organizations within the network to “make a leap of faith,” and
sometimes, if the shock is sufficient, the rents to the dominant network have fallen sufficiently
that they have little to lose. 46
In the period leading to constitutional-level changes, leadership can emerge from either
within or outside the current dominant network of power. In the United States during the
building of a nation with the Constitution from 1783 to 1789, Washington, Jay, Hamilton, and
Madison formed a quartet of leadership (Ellis 2015). All four were by then part of the dominant
network, but in a minority at the beginning. For Brazil, the leadership of Cardoso in 1993 took
place while he was in the dominant network. But, as discussed below, Perón in Argentina
emerged outside the dominant network. To solidify a “constitutional moment” will take years of
institutional deepening where the new beliefs shape new laws that have the expected outcome
that in turn feed back to organizations and citizens within and outside the dominant network. 47
Leadership over time is instrumental for institutional deepening because the dominant
network needs to be coordinated and rents need to flow to its members under the new belief
system. In rare cases, the new beliefs simply emerge as a result of the shock, but in others,
leaders can purposefully influence them. 48 Not everyone changes their set of beliefs
simultaneously, and some organizations in power may never change their beliefs. But if leaders
can exercise cognitive and coordinative roles, a big institutional change affecting the trajectory
of a country is possible. Schofield (2006) argues that Madison and Hamilton played this role in
the ratification of the US Constitution in writing the majority of the Federalist Papers, which

46

This was the case for Brazil during the hyperinflationary period just prior to the Plano Real. Tipping
points seem most likely in the case of mass movements, for example, the demise of the Soviet Union, as
successfully negotiated transitions to an extremely different dominant network are not common. We do
not discuss this possibility, but it is compatible with our framework. On tipping points, see Kuran (1995).
47
For Brazil, in 2003, Lula being from the opposition party sustained the transition to the new set of
beliefs set in motion by Cardoso. Bidner and François (2013) stress that changes in beliefs require a
change in leadership to affirm that governments are now different.
48
In some situations, the shock may be sufficiently large that no matter who is in power, the actions taken
will be similar. As an example, after 9/11, every conceivable president in the United States would have
vowed to “hunt down” Bin Laden.

22

swayed voters in their belief for a larger role for the federal government at the expense of the
power of states. Ellis argues that Washington and Jay were also critical in the convention and
ratification process. Washington brought moral authority with his endorsement, and Jay brought
legitimacy because of his role in negotiating the Treaty of Paris as well as being head of the
confederacy. The critical transition happens ultimately because beliefs about the way the world
works have changed. This takes time and continued reaffirmation of the nascent beliefs.
The change in beliefs leads to new formal institutions, that is, both the constitutionallevel institutions and the laws/enforcement (points 4 and 5 in Figure 5). These changes in turn
affect the incentives faced by individuals and organizations, affecting in turn their choices. This
leads to a new trajectory toward new outcomes (initiating at point 6 in Figure 5). If outcomes
now once again match expectations, this society reaches a new autopilot, on the right-hand side
of the figure. For a fortunate few societies, this leads to a critical transition to a more open
economic and political society. However, the outcomes in the new autopilot might be better or
worse than before. Yet, they are stable in the sense that they accord with what is expected. The
outcomes will naturally vary over time as they are affected by small internal and external shocks,
leading to incremental changes in beliefs and organizations in power. Occasionally, large shocks
or endogenous tipping points lead to new windows of opportunity, and the process may repeat,
though within a different context and with different details. Note, however, that there is no
reason to expect that with each new cycle the country will move ever closer to a critical
transition to being more developed. On the contrary, historical experiences suggest that such
trajectories are rare, and countries are more likely to shift from one underperforming state to
another or to cycle forward and back without much overall long-term improvement.
The key element in the dynamic is the change in beliefs. When beliefs become uncertain,
some leaders can sway which beliefs get acted on in terms of the institutions that get established.
This can come about through the “art of policy making.” If the new institutions produce
incentives that in turn generate outcomes that are viewed as “good” or consistent with the
subjective view of the way the world works, as expounded by the organizations that
implemented the institutional change, then beliefs about the causal role of institutions on
incentives and on outcomes deepen. For example, Rakove, Rutten, and Weingast (2004) argue
that prior to the Revolutionary War between Britain and her North American colonies, only a
minority of those in power in the New England colonies “believed” that Britain would take away
23

the liberties of the colonists. Actions taken by the British, including the quartering of troops in
New England and the disbandment of the Massachusetts legislature, gave credence to the beliefs
of the New Englanders, and over time this belief that “the British will take away our freedoms”
propelled the colonists to take up arms against the British.
The beliefs in the benefits from change do not happen in a vacuum: those in the dominant
network (and at times, citizens at large) view the expected impact of new institutions (and their
resulting incentive structure) based partially on institutions around the globe, for example, an
independent judiciary, or secure property rights. In addition, many in the dominant network may
have acquired part of their education in wealthy countries, which shaped their beliefs and their
perceived benefits of importing institutions, though with modifications to suit their needs. 49 This
is true for many in the dominant network in South America as well as in Asia today. Knowledge
of institutions from the outside world also allows leaders more conviction “to stay the course”
when there are up-front costs for downstream benefits from institutional change.
During a window of opportunity, it is the competing and incompatible beliefs among
organizations within the dominant network, either the new organizations or old organizations
with new beliefs, that bring about the potential for new institutions that change incentives and (at
times beliefs) and move a society toward a critical transition. 50 In such a situation, competing
powerful organizations are constrained by the beliefs of each other and their relative power. A
new set of institutions emerges through leadership (which could be a consensual group of
organizations) in the Riker sense of coordinative activity that enables a new belief system to take
hold among a winning network of organizations.
Leadership entails orchestrating powerful groups to react to the perception of a problem
and that the perceived solution to the problem is shaped by the beliefs of leaders about the likely
consequences of the new incentives emerging from the new institutions. In this sense, our actors

49

The recurrent problem with transplants, however, is the incongruence between institutions and beliefs.
Competition over beliefs brings about only the “potential” for moving to a more open society. The
result depends on the beliefs of those who win the competition for power. Our concept of “windows of
opportunity” is similar to that of Acemoglu et al. (2008), who argue that economic growth does not
necessarily lead to democracy and whether it does they label a critical juncture. They reach this
conclusion after an econometric exercise that convincingly demonstrates that country-specific effects
make the difference. As discussed earlier, the difference between a critical juncture and a window of
opportunity is that in a window of opportunity, the actors realize the potential and are forward looking as
well as solving current problems.

50

24

are both forward and backward looking. 51 Here is where today’s threshold countries can learn
from the experiences of countries that have already made the critical transition. Of course, those
in power can’t perfectly foresee the outcomes of their actions, but they can make an educated
prediction. 52 In addition, today’s leaders recognize that a “big bang” (e.g., the dissolution of the
former Soviet Union) is not sufficient for development, though it may be necessary. As we
stressed earlier, the “big bang” must be sustained with complementary changes in beliefs along
with further downstream institutional deepening. All that leaders can foresee is that putting in
place certain incentives—through institutional change—will have some likely foreseen outcomes
and some unforeseen outcomes. Leaders must be responsive to unanticipated downstream
consequences. North (1990) referred to this process as “adaptive efficiency.” 53 Of course,
knowing what to do differs from having the incentive to change. In many countries, it is in the
economic and political interests of the dominant network in power not to initiate changes to a
critical transition. Not everyone wins during a critical transition. Today, it is less likely a
cognitive issue than 150 years ago when the pioneer countries began their critical transitions.
A critical transition is problematic because the future has uncertainty. Some groups will
lose. Moreover, generally opening up the economy entails considerable up-front costs; for
example, stabilization policies typically have short-run costs with long-run benefits. This means
giving up political and economic rents in the short run for some unknowable but perceived ex
ante increase in rents in the future for society as a whole, though with unforeseen distributional
consequences. Part of the solution to development is recognition that a winning political network
of organizations foresees more advantages from promoting openness than the extant status quo.
This is why windows of opportunity are so important. In Brazil in 1993, a stabilization plan
quelling hyperinflation (the Plano Real) succeeded in part because after a series of
hyperinflationary periods and failed stabilization plans, those in the dominant network in Brazil
51

This differs from the North, Wallis, and Weingast (2009) view, where the actors are primarily solving
extant problems and not as forward looking as today’s leaders/organizations can be. But, we agree with
North, Wallis, and Weingast that actors are solving current problems; the difference is that today’s leaders
can be more forward looking because of the experiences of other countries.
52
Of course, this does not dismiss the role for unintended consequences of which history redounds.
53
In this sense, our actors are forward looking, similar to the Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2005)
versions of England and Spain responding differentially to oceanic trade. In other versions of Acemoglu
and Robinson (2006, 2012), the elites are forced by citizens to give up rents. We believe that today,
citizens have a greater role to play in the developmental process in proportion to the extent that the rule of
law pertains to a greater percentage of citizens. As of this writing, there are large, peaceful street protests
in Brazil hoping to bring down the Dilma Rousseff government.

25

believed that taming inflation was the number one priority for Brazil in the early 1990s. Enacting
political and economic institutional changes requires some risks to those in power, and this is
where the leadership of Cardoso and his economic team mattered. Opportunities present
themselves, but not all potential leaders take advantage of the opportunity because they lack the
perception to see the opportunity; they perceive an opportunity but lack the knowledge of what
to do; or they lack adaptability, the art of policy making in the dynamic sense expounded by
Riker (1984, 1996).
Recognizing a role for leadership is a departure from the standard economic and political
rational-choice models consisting of “representative agents.” We recognize that this leads to a
certain degree of arbitrariness, which is why we are proponents of case studies that entail thick
description in the same way that courtrooms need to rely on circumstantial evidence when there
is not a “smoking gun.” 54 Windows of opportunity allow leaders to affect institutional changes
that can lead to incentives that produce less or more political or economic openness than the
previous order. Windows of opportunity are not unidirectional in proceeding from less to more
openness; the reverse is equally likely.
At times, leaders enact “big” institutional changes that lead to incentives producing
outcomes consistent with expectations and also lead to a critical transition because a greater
number of organizations in the dominant network see a higher expected gain from the new
institutions. This requires a complementary change in the way the world now works. For
example, in the political arena, if the electorate rewards politicians for increasing political and
economic openness within a framework of rule of law, there is a tendency for the dynamic to
become virtuous with institutional deepening; that is, successive smaller institutional changes
buttress the initial “big” institutional change. Belief deepening must accompany institutional
deepening (Greif 2006; Bidner and François 2013). Institutional deepening is necessary for
countries to reach a critical transition—the big institutional change is neither sufficient nor
sustainable without a belief deepening. Moreover, many seemingly “big” institutional changes
are never sustained because they are not buttressed with other supporting smaller institutional
changes and are not accompanied by changing beliefs among the dominant network in society.
Whether institutional changes are really “big” can be judged only ex post.
54

On the role of circumstantial evidence in history, see Fogel (1982). See also Collier (2011) for the
distinctions between “smoking gun” and other types of explanations in political science.

26

In the empirical chapters of Alston et al. (forthcoming 2016), we demonstrated that in
Brazil the Plano Real led to taming inflation, but it was the subsequent smaller but important
institutional changes from 1994 through the two terms of Lula and early part of Rousseff’s term
that produced a very different Brazil from the one in 1994, or 1985, the end of the military
regime (Alston et al. forthcoming 2016). Politicians found it in their interest over time to provide
public goods to secure votes, and citizens in a competitive political system tolerated less
corruption in society. Increasingly, the rule of law evolved and applies to political rulers in the
sense that they are not above the law; impeachments are a sign that leaders are not above the
law. 55 In the economic system, regulation and loans can be used preferentially or in patron-client
fashion, but politicians came to realize that such treatment no longer delivers the same political
support nor generates economic growth for consumers. In Brazil, the movement to a critical
transition produced a more impersonal and open society. 56
From the lenses of history, we know that reaching a critical transition is not an easy task
and is not inevitable. Indeed, those countries that have made the critical transition are the
exception rather than the rule (North, Wallis, and Weingast 2009; Acemoglu and Robinson
2012). The answer appears to be so highly country-specific that generalizations can take the form
of only very broad frameworks such as the one we present here based on the Brazilian
experience. Whether the inductive framework developed here will be helpful in understanding
development in general will come from its successful application to other case-study countries.
In the next section, we present an illustrative overview of how our framework can be applied to
Argentina, a country that in the early twentieth century was seen as on a trajectory to sustainable
development.

55

In the early years of democratization, Collor, the first elected president in Brazil, was impeached for
corruption, and yet the transition of the vice president to the presidency was peaceful, and the process
evolved according to the formal institutions put in place in the constitution. There was never a hint that
the military would take over the government. Currently, President Rousseff is being considered for
impeachment. The news of a possible impeachment bolstered both the exchange rate and stock market,
suggesting a peaceful transition to a more market-friendly president.
56
The prosecution on corruption charges associated with the Petrobrás scandal of high-level corporate
executives as well as the past and current presidents in Brazil is testimony that they are moving to a
situation where no one is above the law.

27

Argentina: An Illustrative Use of the Framework
From 1890 until 1950, Argentina ranked between 7th and 30th in its GDP per capita (Alston and
Gallo 2010: 180). 57 In 2015, it ranked 52nd, clearly a fall from grace (IMF, World Economic
Outlook Database 58). What happened? At the dawn of the twentieth century, Argentina had a
relatively good endowment of natural resources coupled with little or no ethnic tensions or
indigenous issues. The country had fertile land in the Pampas especially suited for wheat and
cattle. It was an attractive destination for immigrants. Using our framework, we will discuss the
development of Argentina in three periods: (1) 1912–1930, (2) 1930–1946, and (3) 1946–2016. 59
We will devote most of our attention to the period 1930–1946, which was the crucial period for
understanding the condition of Argentina today.

The Camelot Years: 1912–1930
From the late nineteenth century until 1914, the dominant network consisted of the rural
agricultural landowners and the educated elites of Buenos Aires. The dominant network stayed in
power through their control of the electoral process, which conforms to being on an autopilot
dynamic. The lack of political voice sparked three failed armed revolts in 1890, 1893, and 1905,
consisting of some factions of the military and the rising class of laborers in Buenos Aires and
the countryside. The rising discontent also led to the formation of political parties to champion
the voice of laborers. But, this was for naught until the election of Sáenz Peña in 1910. Sáenz
Peña saw the protests and the increasing power in the streets held by the Radical Civil Union
Party as a window of opportunity for change. Though part of the ruling elite, Sáenz Peña
believed that to be a modern nation required open elections. He made his intentions known of
moving to open elections in his speech before Congress in 1910. By 1912, his leadership had
57

We stress that this section is illustrative and we can certainly not capture the nuances of Argentine
development over the period discussed. Our hope is that the illustration will motivate scholars of
Argentina to more fully develop a case study using the framework that in turn will inductively help make
our framework more generalizable. This material draws extensively on Gallo and Alston (2008), and
Alston and Gallo (2010). We single out Alan Dye, along with an anonymous reviewer, for giving us
detailed comments on this section.
58
http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2010/02/weodata/download.aspx.
59
We are taking some liberties in classifying 1946–2016 as one period. We do so for two reasons: (1) the
period opens with a window of opportunity seized by Juan Perón and ends in December with Mauricio
Macri seizing a window of opportunity by his abrupt switch to fiscal orthodoxy following almost
immediately after assuming the presidency in December 2015; and (2) we view Argentina’s oscillations
between populism and conservative military regimes until the military budget was stripped in 1983 as a
form of autopilot. Except for Menem’s tenure, populism has reigned except for the newly elected Macri.

28

convinced a majority to support his law calling for a secret ballot. The law giving universal
suffrage to males, enforcing compulsory voting, and, most importantly, instituting the secret
ballot passed in 1912 and bears his name, the Sáenz Peña Law. The Sáenz Peña Law called for
stricter monitoring for electoral fraud and also promoted naturalization of immigrants and the
granting of citizenship to the children of immigrants. The Sáenz Peña Law changed the trajectory
of Argentina because it initiated a change in the beliefs toward a democracy that believed in
checks and balances.
Prior to the secret ballot, the Conservatives, dominated by the agricultural producers in
the Pampas, controlled the legislative and executive branches and appointed relatively
conservative Supreme Court justices. Hipólito Yrigoyen, a leader in the Radical Party, won the
first presidential election in 1916 following the introduction of the secret ballot. The Radical
Party controlled the presidency and the House of Deputies, with the Conservatives having a
majority in the Senate. Divided governance held throughout the 1920s. Alston and Gallo (2010)
refer to this as the Camelot period for Argentina, one in which the players (for the most part)
respected the nascent system of checks and balances. 60
Argentina in many ways considered itself “different” from the rest of South America. The
increased openness in the political arena represented a belief in democracy and a prominent role
for checks and balances. The belief in checks and balances was a budding belief from below and
fragile within the dominant network, though firmly held by the Radical Party. During this period,
the dominant network was relatively large with several constituencies having a voice—urban and
rural workers who tended to vote for the Radical Party, and the urban and rural elite who tended
to vote for the Conservative Party. One measure of transparency was the dramatic increase in the
number of roll call votes following 1916 and continuing through the 1920s. In addition, the
number of voters went up dramatically, and even more importantly, the Supreme Court exercised
a degree of independence overturning laws favored by the legislature and the president. The
losers respected the judgment of the court. Much of the legislation during the period dealt with
issues of concern to the working class, for example, rent control for tenants and rural workers.
Overall, the period brought high growth with GDP/P averaging 4.2 percent over the period. Both
the elite and the workers benefitted during this robust period of growth. But, as we noted earlier,
60

We note that Yrigoyen resorted to executive interventions relatively frequently during his two terms in
office in order to circumvent legislation proposed by the Conservatives. We thank Sebastian Saeigh for
this insight.

29

“development” is about more than economic growth. Its hallmarks are transparency, rule of law,
and economic and political competition, inter alia. For these reasons, this period in Argentine
history represented true “development.” Unfortunately, this fourteen-year run on the path to a
“critical transition” came to a hiatus with a military coup in 1930 that ousted the Radical
president Yrigoyen.
Electoral Fraud and the Rise of Perón: 1930–1946
The Great Depression shocked the economic system. The Conservatives, particularly those
aligned with agriculture, felt that the government must “do something.” Precisely what action to
take was not clear. Being a major exporter of wheat and beef, Argentina was hit hard by the
plunge in commodity prices; from December 1929 to December 1930, wheat prices (in
Liverpool) fell from $1.41/bushel to $0.74, and Argentine beef fell from $5.92/100 lb. to
$3.67/100 lb. (US Department of Agriculture 1936: 21; 216). Both parties believed that the crisis
warranted action. Legislative bills languished at the executive level, where neglect was the norm.
The aging President Yrigoyen either was incapable of sensing the depth of the recession or
simply did not know what to do. Either way, the Great Depression coupled with the passive
Yrigoyen prompted the military to oust Yrigoyen at the behest of the Conservatives and with the
countenance of the Radical Party. The Radical Party did not mount a protest because many in
their party were also frustrated with Yrigoyen in not grasping the seriousness of the downturn.
Though the coup was an affront to the electoral process and the constitution (as well as the first
in Argentine history), most parties anticipated a quick transition back to legitimate elections.
This was not to be.
The military installed the Conservatives in power (de facto) and looked for legitimacy.
During this early period, the military and the Conservatives were closely aligned. The Supreme
Court labeled the coup a “triumphant revolution” (Alston and Gallo 2010: 182). Only one
Supreme Court justice resigned in protest. The military planned to transition back to elections
and the path to solidifying the critical transition. The Conservatives thought that citizens would
recognize that the Conservative elite should run the government during an international
economic crisis. The military and Conservatives misread the public. The first free election was in
the province of Buenos Aires in April 1931. To the surprise of the Conservatives, the Radicals
won the election, and the military annulled the results. The military called for a national election

30

in 1932 but did not allow any candidates from the Radical Party who had been in office during
Yrigoyen’s final term. The Radicals protested by refusing to recognize and participate in the
election. As a result, the Conservatives returned to power in 1932 with the military in the wings
if needed. The dominant network consisted of agricultural producers and others associated with
exports; the Conservative Party; and the military. The combined actions of annulling an election
and preventing the Radicals from having candidates marked the beginning of the departure away
from sustainable political and economic development.
The prevailing belief held by the Conservatives and their military allies—the de facto
dominant network—was that the emergency of the Great Depression necessitated rule by the
Conservatives. Ironically, the Conservatives received high marks for their macroeconomic policy
during the 1930s (Della Paolera and Taylor 1998, 1999, 2001). But, to stay in power, the
Conservatives resorted to electoral fraud (known by its advocates as “Patriotic Fraud”)
throughout the 1930s. 61 The economic outcomes desired by the dominant network met their
expectations, but they trampled on the political rights of the Radicals and their allies. The
Radicals protested but to no avail. The Supreme Court stood on the sidelines on the grounds that
the fraud was a political, not a constitutional, issue. The persistent fraud throughout the 1930s led
to an erosion among the electorate in the belief that a system of checks and balances could ever
be legitimately implemented in Argentina:
The Conservative regimes of the 1930s, in spite of their flirtations with fascist reformism,
brought to a halt the modest momentum for political and social reform started by the
Radical governments. Their failure to buttress the relative healthy economic structure
with social and political arrangements allowing for growing security and political
participation for rural and urban masses contributed to the creation of revolutionary
possibilities. In short, the Conservatives appeared to have won the battle by fraud but lost
the war by abandoning the rule of law. (Díaz Alejandro 1970: 107–8)
In 1940, President Ortiz promised to return to nonfraudulent elections in 1942. Ortiz signaled an
intention to return to the path that had been interrupted by the Great Depression and the
nonlegitimate rule of the Conservatives. This marked a potential window of opportunity created
by the leadership of Ortiz. Whether transparent elections were possible under the rule of

61

For an in-depth account of fraud in the 1930s, see Alston and Gallo (2010) and sources cited therein. A
slight majority of the total reports of fraud come from three provinces in the Pampas: Buenos Aires, Entre
Rios, and Santa Fe. The Province of Cordoba (in the Pampas) never engaged in fraud and consistently
elected Radicals to the House of Deputies.

31

Conservatives is a counterfactual that we will never know because Ortiz fell ill early in his term
and died on June 27, 1942, several months before the general elections. His successor, President
Castillo, resorted to fraud to sustain the Conservatives in power in the elections of 1942.
Castillo’s reign was short-lived. A faction of the military defected from the former
dominant network of Conservatives and ousted Castillo in June 1943. Many thought (or hoped)
that the new military government would return quickly to democracy. This might have happened,
but a nationalistic faction within the military relatively quickly took control. Juan Perón was an
important player within the nationalistic faction and held several powerful posts. He quickly
demonstrated his support for labor and opposition to the Conservatives.
To the surprise of many, the military government called for free elections in 1946 with
Perón as their candidate. Perón campaigned through skillful oratory as well as on his record for
supporting labor. He openly showed his populist streak and contempt for the conservative court,
which had countenanced the electoral fraud in the 1930s. The election was clean. Perón won the
election with a majority of 52 percent (Ciria and Astiz 1978). In the absence of fraud in the
1930s, Perón may well have not won the election in 1946 (Alston and Gallo 2010). 62 Perón’s
support was strongest in the provinces where fraud had been the greatest. Additional support for
the view that electoral fraud in the 1930s drove the support for Perón comes from the electoral
results in Cordoba. Cordoba did not engage in fraud in the 1930s, and Perón did not receive a
majority of votes in Cordoba in 1946.
We view the election of Perón a “shock” to the system, and a new window of opportunity
under the leadership of Perón that set Argentina on a new trajectory with a different set of beliefs
from those held by the dominant network of Conservatives in the 1930s. A majority of citizens
had lost faith in the system of checks and balances because of the electoral fraud. Perón played to
the choir by expressing his support for the “will of the people.” The new dominant network
under the leadership of Perón consisted of factions of the military, labor, and most of the rural
provinces. In addition to being able to count on the working classes because of his policy
positions, Perón exhibited leadership by coordinating the dominant network through the use of
subsidies to rural provinces outside of the Pampas. The transfers to rural provinces made
62

Alston and Gallo (2010) report regression results that show that if there had been no fraud in the 1930s,
then Perón would not have won the election. Of course, without fraud, there may never have been a
military coup, but the purpose of the exercise is to show the rise in the belief of populism promoted by
Juan Perón.

32

governors more powerful, and in return they supported Perón. Perón took advantage of the
window of opportunity and, with the support of the new dominant network, initiated institutional
changes consistent with a belief in populism. Perón saw the Supreme Court as an obstacle to his
agenda, and impeaching most of the court was his first order of business. This would turn out to
have long-run consequences.

Instability Is the Rule: 1946–2016
We treat this nearly seventy-year period as one episode, not because it remained constant but
rather because the entire period has been marked by incredible policy instability that until the
mid-1980s led to oscillations between populist governments siding with labor, and
conservative/military governments siding with the conservative agricultural sector in the
Pampas. 63 Oscillations between the military and Perónists became a de facto autopilot until
President Alfonsin slashed the budgets of the military in 1984. Menem recognized a window of
opportunity in the mid-1990s to change the trajectory of Argentina, but he failed to exercise
sufficient leadership to accomplish his goal of fiscal and monetary orthodoxy.
After being elected president, Perón acted quickly to solidify his populist agenda. 64 He
displayed the leadership characteristics of cognition of the issues that he wished to address, an
extraordinary ability to coordinate interests in his dominant network, and some moral authority
based on his time in prison as well as his great oratory skills. Many of his actions most likely
would have been considered unconstitutional by the conservative Supreme Court that Perón
inherited. Perón set his sights early on impeaching all but one of the Supreme Court justices.
Perón clearly expressed his contempt of the court:
In my opinion, I put the spirit of justice above the Judicial Power, as this is the principal
requirement for the future of the Nation. But I understand that justice, besides from being
independent has to be effective, and it cannot be effective if its ideas and concepts are not
with the public sentiment. Many praise the conservative sentiment of the Justices,
believing that they defend traditional beliefs. I consider that a dangerous mistake, because
it can put justice in opposition with the popular feeling, and because in the long run it
produces a rusted organism. Justice, in its doctrines, has to be dynamic instead of static.
63

For a more detailed discussion of the subperiods, especially related to policy instability, see Spiller and
Tommasi (2009). Gallo and Alston (2008) show the instability in banking, fiscal policy, foreign trade, and
constitutional politics.
64
By populism, Perón (and we) meant ruling by the will of the people with little respect for the minority
rights of the agricultural elite in the Pampas. Perón saw as his primary constituencies the urban and rural
working classes. To bring the outlying provinces into his network, he relied on transfers.

33

Otherwise respectable popular yearnings are frustrated and the social development is
delayed, producing severe damage to the working classes when these classes, which are
naturally the less conservative, in the usual sense of the word, see the justice procedures
closed they have no other choice than to put their faith in violence. (Diario de Sesiones
del Honorable Senado de la Nacion Constitutido en tribunal, T. VI, December 5, 1946:
89; quoted in Alston and Gallo 2010: 192)
With this statement, Perón clearly aligned himself with working classes and felt the executive
power should reign supreme. The Perónists in the House of Deputies went to great lengths to tie
the impeachment of the court not just to their obstruction to the new Perón policies but also to
their countenance of the electoral fraud of the 1930s. Perón and his allies won, and all the
accused justices were impeached. With new appointments to the court by Perón, there was no
opposition to the new Perónist agenda. A new belief system was in place with a new dominant
network consisting of the working class (urban and rural), nationalists, and allies from the
outlying provinces that Perón brought into the network through the strategic use of directed
transfers. The Perónist agenda consisted of, to a large extent, taxing landowners in the
agricultural Pampas and redistributing it to members of the dominant coalition. He did this by
establishing a national price for cattle and wheat that the government paid and then exported at a
higher price. He used the surplus to subsidize outlying provinces. To promote his agenda, he
nationalized several public utilities (e.g., railroads, telephone, and water). As populist measures
appeasing his major constituencies, rent controls and the thirteenth-month wage payment stand
out.
Perón increased expenditures faster than revenues increased. His sources of revenues
included export taxes (particularly beef and cattle), revenue from state enterprises (many
nationalized utilities), and seigniorage from increasing the monetary base and monetizing debts
of provincial banks. To rely on seigniorage required taking away the independence of the Central
Bank. At first, outcomes matched expectations, but over time, deficits mounted to an
unsustainable level such that toward the end of Perón’s reign, Argentina could no longer borrow
on the international market (Díaz Alejandro 1970). The taxing of the Pampas also led to less
domestic and, most notably, foreign investment in the Pampas. Inflation during Perón’s time in
office was nearly 20 percent but increased even more rapidly in the years following Perón’s first
two terms. Most notable was the decline in foreign investment.

34

The steadily eroding fiscal situation in Argentina slowly but surely opened a window of
opportunity for Conservatives to retake control of the dominant network. A military coup in
1955, with a faction opposed to Perónists, set in motion the oscillations in policy that dominated
Argentina’s slide from one of the wealthiest countries in the world. The new military-led
dominant network in 1955 consisted of Catholic nationalists and a liberal/conservative coalition.
The new regime tried to undo some of the confiscatory and redistributive policies of Perón,
especially the control of beef and cattle prices and the elimination of price controls. But, given
the extant power of unions and the large number employed in the public sector, the military
regime ultimately resorted to inflation to stay afloat. Of course, this was not sustainable. Policy
oscillated because the military favored the Pampas. Like Perón, the military regime wrote a new
constitution and forced the resignation of all five members of the Supreme Court. The military
regime allowed limited elections in 1958 (the Perónist Party was formally banned).
We view the oscillations of policies and regimes as an ex post form of autopilot. We see
the populists and the Conservatives as competing for control of the dominant network, but
neither side having sufficient power once Perón was initially ousted from power in 1955. With a
return to limited democracy (1958–1962), policies again oscillated, continuing to hurt foreign
and direct investments. The administration reinstated price controls and nationalized the oil
industry. The court also increased to seven justices. The democracy proved short-lived and was
followed by another coup in 1962, which too was short-lived. Argentina continued to oscillate
back and forth from military to democratic regimes from Perón’s first two terms up until Perón’s
return to Argentina and reelection in 1973. Each government up to de la Rúa in 1999 forced
resignations, impeached justices, or added justices. As a result, the judiciary was never a
constraint on the executive, and the legislature was either pliable because of its reliance on
transfers from the national government or nonexistent during the military periods. Argentina
eventually tied the hands of the military during the term of Alfonsín (1983–1989) and has
remained populist since 1983, except for an attempt during Menem’s ten-year term (1989–1999)
to stabilize the economy.
Like in Brazil, the hyperinflation in Argentina in 1989 (1,200 percent/year) gave Menem
a window of opportunity to fundamentally change Argentina. He tried with the convertibility
plan in 1991, pegging the peso to the dollar with open convertibility. It was a bold move
signaling to the world that the provincial overspending in Argentina must be reined in.
35

Regrettably, Menem lacked the leadership skills to change the fiscal game in Argentina, and the
convertibility plan began to unravel in 2000. The Convertibility Law was officially repealed in
January 2002, and Argentina went back to its populist ways with the election of Néstor Kirchner
in 2003, followed by Christina Fernandez (the wife of the deceased Kirchner). Except for a brief
period in the late 1990s, foreign direct investment has remained low, frequent bouts with
hyperinflation (triple-digit inflation from 1976 to 1990), and federal deficits swinging wildly.
Since 2001, Argentina and its creditors have been waging legal battles over whether Argentina
reneged on its contractual obligations. In 2012, a New York District Court ruled that Argentina
was in default of its obligations, and in 2014 the same court ruled them in contempt of court for
not meeting its judicial decision. In 2015, Argentina’s credit rating was one of the worst in the
world. The economic malaise besetting Argentina brought particular attention to the election for
president in the fall of 2015. Christina Fernandez could not run because of term-limit restrictions.
Fernandez backed an heir apparent, the governor of Buenos Aires, but he faced stiff competition
from Mauricio Macri, the mayor of Buenos Aires who ran on a platform of liberalizing the
economy and stamping out the corruption. Macri won the election, receiving 51.5 percent of the
vote.
After assuming the presidency on December 10, 2015, Mauricio Macri moved swiftly to
seize the window of opportunity left by ten years of populist overspending under Kirchner and
Fernandez. He has acted on the beliefs that brought him the presidency. He passed legislation
allowing the peso to float, and successfully negotiated Argentina’s foreign debt. Argentina can
once again issue debt based on the rising reputation of Marci’s stated friendly market policies.
Whether his outcomes will match his expectations and initiate a virtuous cycle toward economic
and political openness only time will tell.

Concluding Remarks
We reiterate: economic and political development is contextual. But, there are lessons for
development from understanding the process, which has some general features. In Alston et al.
(forthcoming 2016), we developed a framework for understanding development in Brazil over
the past fifty years, and the framework presented here is inductive from the Brazilian experience.
To illustrate its wider applicability, we applied the framework very generally to understand the
critical transitions in Argentina from the early twentieth century to 2016. The key elements in
36

our framework are beliefs and leadership, which interact synergistically and vary across
countries. Because beliefs and leadership cannot be measured rigorously and classified, the use
of the framework necessarily involves subjectivity and interpretation. With more case studies
applying our framework, we can construct more general lessons on the dynamics among beliefs,
power, leadership, institutions, policies, and outcomes that form stasis or development.

37

References
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson. 2005. “Institutions as the
Fundamental Cause of Economic Growth.” In Handbook of Economic Growth, ed.
Philippe Aghion and Steve Durlauf, 385–472. New York: North Holland.
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, James A. Robinson, and Pierre Yared. 2008. “Income and
Democracy.” American Economic Review 98(3): 808–42.
Acemoglu, Daron, and James A. Robinson. 2000. “Why Did the West Extend the Franchise?
Democracy, Inequality, and Growth in Historical Perspective.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 115(4): 1167–99.
———. 2006. Economic Origins of Dictatorship and Democracy. New York: Cambridge
University Press.
———. 2012. Why Nations Fail: The Origins of Power, Prosperity, and Poverty. New York:
Random House.
———. 2013. “Economics versus Politics: Pitfalls of Policy Advice.” Journal of Economic
Perspectives 27(2): 173–92.
Ahlquist, John, and Margaret Levi. 2011. “Leadership: What It Means, What It Does, and What
We Want to Know about It.” Annual Review of Political Science 14: 1–24.
Aliber, Robert Z., and Charles P. Kindleberger. 2015. Manias, Panics, and Crashes: A History of
Financial Crises. 7th ed. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Alston, Lee J., and Andrés A. Gallo. 2010. “Electoral Fraud, the Rise of Peron and Demise of
Checks and Balances in Argentina.” Explorations in Economic History 47(2): 179–97.
Alston, Lee J., Marcus André Melo, Bernardo Mueller, and Carlos Pereira. Forthcoming 2016.
Brazil in Transition: Beliefs, Leadership, and Institutional Change. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.
Alston, Lee J., and Bernardo Mueller. 2006. “Pork for Policy: Executive and Legislative
Exchange in Brazil.” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization 22(1): 87–114.
Alston, Lee J., Bernardo Mueller, and Tomas Nonnenmacher. Forthcoming. Institutional and
Organizational Analysis: Concepts and Applications. New York: Cambridge University
Press.
Bates, Robert H., Rui J. P de Figueiredo Jr., and Barry R. Weingast. 1998. “The Politics of
Interpretation: Rationality, Culture, and Transition.” Politics and Society 26: 603–42.
Bidner, Chris, and Patrick François. 2013. “The Emergence of Political Accountability.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 128(3): 1397–448.
Ciria, Albert O., and Carlos Alberto Astiz. 1978. Parties and Power in Modern Argentina, 1930–
1946. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Collier, David. 2011. “Understanding Process Tracing.” PS: Political Science and Politics 44(4):
823–30.
Della Paolera, Gerardo, and Alan M. Taylor. 1998. “Finance and Development in an Emerging
Market: Argentina in the Interwar Period.” In Latin America and the World Economy
since 1800, ed. John H. Coatsworth and Alan M. Taylor, 139–70. Series on Latin
American Studies. Cambridge: David Rockefeller Center for Latin American Studies;
distributed by Harvard University Press.
———. 1999. “Economic Recovery from the Argentine Great Depression: Institutions,
Expectations, and the Change of Macroeconomic Regime.” Journal of Economic History
59(3): 567–99.
38

———. 2001. “Bailing Out: Internal versus External Convertibility.” In Straining at the Anchor:
The Argentine Currency Board and the Search for Macro-economic Stability, 1880–
1935, ed. Gerardo della Paolera and Alan M. Taylor, 165–87. National Bureau of
Economic Research Series on Long-Term Factors in Economic Development. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Díaz Alejandro, C. F. 1970. Essays on the Economic History of the Argentine Republic. New
Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Eggertsson, Thráinn. 2005. Imperfect Institutions: Possibilities and Limits of Reform. Ann
Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Ellis, Joseph J. 2015. The Quartet: Orchestrating the Second American Revolution, 1783–1789.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
Fiorina, Morris, and Kenneth Shepsle. 1989. “Formal Theories of Leadership: Agents, AgendaSetters, and Entrepreneurs.” In Leadership and Politics, ed. Bryan D. Jones, 17–40.
Lawrence: University Press of Kansas.
Fogel, Robert W. 1982. “Circumstantial Evidence in ‘Scientific’ and Traditional History.” In
Philosophy of History and Contemporary Historiography, ed. D. Carr, W. Dray, and T.
Geraets, 61–112. Ottawa, Canada: University of Ottawa Press.
Frohlich, N., J. Oppenheimer, and O. C. Young. 1971. Political Leadership and Collective
Goods. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Gallo, Andrés A., and Lee J. Alston. 2008. “Argentina’s Abandonment of the Rule of Law and
Its Aftermath.” Journal of Law and Policy 26: 153–82.
Greif, Avner. 2006. Institutions and the Path to the Modern Economy: Lessons from Medieval
Trade. New York: Cambridge University Press.
———. 2008. “The Normative Foundations of Institutions and Institutional Change.”
Unpublished manuscript.
———. 2012. “Institutions and Leadership.” Book manuscript in progress.
Greif, Avner, and Jared Ruben. 2014. “The Institutional Basis of Political Legitimacy: The
Reformation and the Origin of the Modern Economy in England.” Working Paper,
Chapman University.
Hall, Peter. 1989. The Political Power of Economic Ideas: Keynesianism across Nations.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Harberger, Arnold C. 1998. “A Vision of the Growth Process.” American Economic Review
88(1): 1–32.
Higgs, Robert. 1987. Crisis and Leviathan: Critical Episodes in the Growth of American
Government. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Jones, Benjamin F., and Benjamin A. Olken. 2005. “Do Leaders Matter? National Leadership
and Growth since World War II.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 120(3): 835–64.
Knight, Frank H. 1921. Risk, Uncertainty, and Profit. Boston: Hart, Schaffner, and Marx;
Houghton Mifflin.
Kuran, Timur. 1995. Private Truths, Public Lies: The Social Consequences of Preference
Falsification. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
McCloskey, Deirdre. 2006. The Bourgeois Virtues: Ethics for an Age of Commerce. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
———. 2010. Bourgeois Dignity: Why Economics Can’t Explain the Modern World. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.

39

Mokyr, Joel. 2009. The Enlightened Economy: An Economic History of Britain, 1700–1850.
New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Neal, Larry. 1993. The Rise of Financial Capitalism: International Capital Markets in the Age of
Reason. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Neustadt, R. 1990. Presidential Power and the Modern Presidents: The Politics of Leadership
from Roosevelt to Reagan. New York: Free Press.
North, Douglass C. 1981. Structure and Change in Economic History. New York: Norton.
———. 1990. Institutions, Institutional Change and Economic Performance. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
———. 2005. Understanding the Process of Economic Change. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
North, Douglass C., John Joseph Wallis, Steven B. Webb, and Barry R. Weingast. 2012. In the
Shadow of Violence: Politics, Economics and the Problems of Development. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
North, Douglass C., John Joseph Wallis, and Barry R. Weingast. 2009. Violence and Social
Orders: A Conceptual Framework for Interpreting Recorded Human History. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Peele, Gillian. 2005. “Leadership and Politics: A Case for a Closer Relationship?” Leadership
1(2): 187–204.
Pereira, Carlos, and Andrés Mejía Acosta. 2010. “Policymaking in Multiparty Presidential
Regimes: A Comparison between Brazil and Ecuador.” Governance 23(4): 641–66.
Rakove, Jack, Andrew R. Rutten, and Barry R. Weingast. 2004. “Ideas, Interests, and Credible
Commitments in the American Revolution.” Working Paper, Hoover Institution, Stanford
University, August.
Riker, William H. 1983. “Political Theory and the Art of Heresthetics.” In Political Science: The
State of the Discipline, ed. Ada W. Finifter. Washington, DC: American Political Science
Association.
———. 1984. “The Heresthetics of Constitution-Making: The Presidency in 1787, with
Comments on Determinism and Rational Choice.” American Political Science Review
78(1): 1–16.
———. 1996. The Strategy of Rhetoric: Campaigning for the American Constitution. New
Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Schofield, Norman. 2006. Architects of Political Change: Constitutional Quandaries and Social
Choice Theory. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Shepsle, Kenneth A. 2016. “Rule Breaking and Political Imagination.” Book manuscript in
progress.
Spiller, Pablo T., and Mariano Tommasi. 2009. The Institutional Foundations of Public Policy in
Argentina: A Transaction Cost Approach. New York: Cambridge University Press.
US Department of Agriculture. 1936. Agricultural Statistics 1936. Washington, DC: US
Department of Agriculture.
Wagner, R. 1966. “Pressure Groups and Political Entrepreneurs.” Public Choice 1(1): 161–70.
Wallis, John Joseph. 2011. “Institutions, Organizations, Impersonality, and Interests: The
Dynamics of Institutions.” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 79(1–2): 48–
64.
———. 2016. “Leviathan Denied: Rules, Governments, and Social Dynamics.” Book
manuscript in progress.
40

Figure 1. Dominant network.

41

Figure 2. Expected outcomes given a set of formal institutions.

42

Figure 3. Expected outcomes from all possible formal institutions.

43

Figure 4. Choice of formal institutions given beliefs.

44

Figure 5. Autopilot and critical transitions.

45

