NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FACULTY PREFERENCES OVER UNIONIZATION:
EVIDENCE FROM OPEN LETTERS AT TWO RESEARCH UNIVERSITIES
Joel Waldfogel
Working Paper 22149
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22149

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2016

I am grateful to John Budd, David Green, and Tom Holmes for helpful comments on an earlier
draft and to Avner Ben-Ner for useful hallway conversations on the topic. Errors and
interpretations are my own. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Joel Waldfogel. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Faculty Preferences over Unionization: Evidence from Open Letters at Two Research Universities
Joel Waldfogel
NBER Working Paper No. 22149
April 2016
JEL No. J51,K31
ABSTRACT
What determines employee preferences for unionizing their workplaces? A substantial literature
addresses this question with surveys on worker attitudes and pay. Unionization drives at the
Universities of Minnesota and Washington have given rise to open letters of support or opposition
from over 1,000 faculty at Washington and support from over 200 at Minnesota. Combining these
expressions with publicly available data on salary, job titles, department affiliation, research
productivity, teaching success, and political contributions from over 5,000 faculty, we provide
new estimates of the determinants of faculty preferences for unionization at research universities.
We find that faculty with higher pay and greater research productivity are less supportive of
unionization, even after controlling for job title and department. Attitudes matter as well: after
accounting for pay and productivity, faculty in fields documented elsewhere to have more
politically liberal participants are more likely to support unionization.

Joel Waldfogel
Frederick R. Kappel Chair in Applied Economics
3-177 Carlson School of Management
University of Minnesota
321 19th Avenue South
Minneapolis, MN 55455
and NBER
jwaldfog@umn.edu

Substantial bodies of social science research seek to empirically explain why workers
join unions or the related question of why workers would seek union representation at their
firms. Economic studies tend to focus on factors such as pay and the workers’ beliefs about how
unionization would affect pay.1 Psychological studies tend to emphasize general attitudinal
factors, such as political beliefs, attitudes toward unionization, or dissatisfaction with one’s job
as possible determinants.2
While data on aggregate outcomes of union certification elections are widely available
(see Farber, 2014), secret ballots make information on individuals’ expressed preferences for
unionization unobservable. As a result, studies of the determinants of individuals’ preference for
either joining unions, or unionizing their workplaces, rely on surveys asking about individuals’
pay, their job satisfaction, and their attitudes toward unionization, among other possible factors.
Because of the difficulties administering surveys, the literature tends to rely on relatively small
samples, in addition to whatever measurement problems arise from relying on self-reports of
objective information such as pay or subjective information such as general attitudes toward
unionization. Even when researchers have access to survey-based measures of individuals’ union
sympathies, some of the other important data (such as salary, political preferences, or
productivity) are typically lacking.
A confluence of circumstances has created a promising opportunity to document how
preferences for unionization relate to directly observable individual characteristics such as pay as
well as productivity, gender, and political attitudes. First, current faculty unionization drives
have given rise to public expressions of support for unionization at the University of Minnesota,

1
2

See, for example, Farber and Saks (1980), Demsetz (1993), and other studies described below.
See, for example, Premack and Hunter (1988) and other studies discussed below.

1

and to public expressions of both opposition and support at the University of Washington. At
Minnesota, 234 faculty members have signed an open letter in support of unionization. At
Washington 837 of the faculty have signed their names to an open letter of opposition to
unionization, and 327 have signed an open letter of support.3 Hence, one can observe a strong
measure of union preference – and willingness to state this preference publicly – for the faculties
at the Universities of Washington and Minnesota. Second, because both universities are public,
their faculty salary data are publicly available, as are job titles and department affiliations as
well. Third, and related, because of improving data infrastructure as well as transparency, it is
possible to get systematic access to both the individual-level salary data as well as detailed
public data potentially relevant to unionization preferences, research and teaching performance,
and political preferences.
That is, we can obtain two measures of research productivity (the number of publications
per faculty member from ISI and Google Scholar citations), a measure of teaching success (the
ratemyprofessor.com rating), and a measure of political preferences – political contributions by
party of candidate or PAC from the Federal Elections Commission. We are also able to classify
faculty by gender using first-name frequencies from the Census, by title using the state salary
data, and by academic department using the respective university directories. Given existing
findings on the relationship between academic field and political leanings (Zipp and Fenwick,
2006), the department affiliations have promise as indirect measures of attitudes toward
unionization. Putting these data together, we have a direct measure of unionization preference
for large samples of faculty at Washington (over 3,000) and Minnesota (roughly 2,000), along
with direct measures of pay, productivity, political preferences, and other factors. The data set is

3

See http://mnacademics.org/dearcolleagues and http://www.uwexcellence.org/statement-of-opposition.html

2

both large in comparison with the individual-level datasets used in existing studies of
unionization preferences. It is also detailed and fairly objective compared with self-reports of
attitudes. Using these data we can revisit the question of who supports unionization or, more
specifically, which of the various potential determinants – direct factors such as pay or general
attitudinal factors arising from individuals’ or fields’ political predilections – generates observed
preferences for and against unionization.
While our data are of interest because they provide an unusually detailed glimpse into
individual-level measures that are not usually observable, they are separately of interest because
of the public-sector university context. First, while unionism is generally in decline in the US,
public sector unions are growing in importance (Freeman, 1988). Second, unionization of
professionals is a topic of interest in itself (Park, McHugh and Bodah, 2006). Finally, the
unionization of university faculty and instructors is a topic of growing interest as universities rely
more heavily on non-tenure-track instructional faculty and adjunct faculty, whose pay tends to be
far lower than pay for tenure-track faculty (Dworkin and Lee, 1985; Holsinger, 2008; Goeddeke
and Kammeyer-Mueller, 2009).
This paper proceeds in four sections after the introduction. Section 1 reviews the relevant
existing literatures and describes the contexts of the unionization contests at the Universities of
Minnesota and Washington. Section 2 discusses rationales for employee support for, and
opposition to, unionization at a research university, linking these ostensible rationales specific
questions that we can explore empirically (e.g. are higher-paid faculty, or more research-active
faculty, more or less likely to support unionization?) Section 3 discusses the data, assembled
from ten disparate sources, used in this study. Section 4 turns to empirical results. We first
document bivariate relationships between openly expressed attitudes toward unionization and
3

salary, research productivity, teaching success, gender, and scholarly field. We then turn to
regressions to find the distinct relationships between these determinants and union support. We
also explore robustness to both missing values for explanatory variables as well as the possibility
that those signing an open letter are not merely those who feel more strongly about unionization.
We find that salary, research productivity, and scholarly field affect unionization
preference. Higher-paid faculty are less likely to support unionization. After accounting for
salary, faculty who are more productive at research are less likely to support unionization. After
accounting for both salary and research productivity, scholarly field matters for unionization
preference. Faculty in fields documented elsewhere (Zipp and Fenwick, 2006) to be more
politically liberal are substantially more supportive of unionization. After accounting for salary,
research productivity and scholarly field, other factors – teaching ratings, gender, and political
contributions – bear no significant relationship to union support.
.
I.

Existing Literature and Current Context

1. Existing Literature
This study is relevant to two related but separate literatures on unionization. One large
literature examines the impact of unionization on pay as well as other outcomes. Unions are well
understood to reduce the variance of pay along with, perhaps, increasing its mean.
Blanchflower and Bryson (2004) summarize evidence to this effect, showing both that unions
raise pay by about ten percent and that “unions raise wages most for the least educated, with the

4

most highly educated having the lowest premium.”4 If employees are seeking unionization in
order to redistribute pay from higher to lower-paid workers, we would expect higher support for
unionization among low-paid workers and greater opposition among those with higher pay.
A specific strand of the literature examines the impact of unions on pay at universities
(see Hedrick et al, 2011, for a recent contribution). Other papers examine impacts of
unionization on research productivity (Hosios and Siow, 2004) or faculty input into decision
making (Porter, 2013). The findings of this literature include that unions have small positive
impacts on average pay at universities (Hedrick et al, 2011), although unions may redistribute
pay among employees (Hedrick et al, 2011; Hosios and Siow, 2004). In addition, unions
promote faculty input into decision making but may reduce research productivity (Hosios and
Siow, 2004; Porter, 2013).
A second substantial literature explores the determinants of worker support for the
unionization of their workplaces. This second literature is of course related to the first in that
employee support for unionization might depend, at least in part, on the anticipated effects of
unionization. The work tends to link workers’ self-reported tendencies to support unionization to
five kinds of factors: one’s current pay, or pay relative to other workers at the firm;
dissatisfaction with current working conditions; attitudes toward unionization; belief that a union
can materially improve working conditions; and political attitudes.5

They conclude that “the wage benefits of [public sector] union membership are greatest for manual workers, the
young and the least educated.” Card, Lemieux, and Riddell (2004) similarly confirm Freeman’s (1980) finding that
unions reduce wage inequality.
5
Contributions in the economic, industrial relations, and psychology literatures, respectively, include Farber and
Saks (1980), Kochan (1979), and Premack and Hunter’s (1988) meta-analysis. Wheeler and McClendon (1991)
provides a useful summary of the early literature.
4

5

Many of the existing studies of employees’ preferences for unionization include a
measure of pay, such as the worker’s wage relative to other workers are the firm. Numerous
studies – such as Farber and Saks (1980), Demsetz (1993), Premack and Hunter (1988), Dworkin
and Lee (1985), and Goeddeke and Kammeyer-Mueller (2010) – find that lower-paid workers
are more likely to support unionization. Other studies - such as Wheeler, McLendon, and
Weikle (1998), Holsinger (2008), and Charwood (2002) – find no relationship between pay and
preference for unionization.
Much of the literature emphasizes the role of attitudes toward unions as well as political
attitudes more generally. For example, Park, McHugh, and Bodah (2006) find that general
beliefs (e.g. attitudes toward unionization) play a large role in preferences for unionization
among a sample of pharmacists. Eaton et al (2014), in a study documenting the role of emotion
in a union election at Delta Airlines, also find a strong impact of workers’ general attitudes
toward unions.
Because individual voting choices are secret, the literature on preferences for unionizing
of one’s workplace relies on surveys.6 Surveys have the advantage of being able to elicit
measures of attitudes and beliefs, which are the focus of much of the psychological and industrial
relations literatures, along with self-reports of objective factors such as pay. Surveys also have
the disadvantage of being costly to undertake. As a result, most studies rely on fairly small
samples of employees at each workplace. For example, Farber and Saks (1980) employ a

6

A related literature uses individual-level data such as the CPS containing demographic information as well as
whether one is a union member, exploring the determinants of union membership. See Hundley (1988), Haberfeld
(1995), and Charwood (2002), for example.

6

sample of 829 workers at 29 different workplaces. Wheeler, McLendon, and Weikle (1998)
have a relatively large sample of 1,196 at six different workplaces.
Our sample is based on a combination of administrative data on pay, job titles, and
academic department, quasi-administrative data on political contributions, scholarly productivity,
and teaching success, and open expressions of support or opposition to unionization. Our
samples are large, over 3,000 at one university and nearly 2,000 at the other. We have direct
measures of pay and productivity, so we can explore the relationship of these factors to
unionization preferences.
Our data contain no direct measures of worker dissatisfaction of the sort emphasized
since Kochan (1979). Along with pay, we do have three measures of on-the-job performance –
number of publications, citations to one’s work, and teaching ratings. To the extent that poor
performance leads to dissatisfaction, one might view these as measures of job satisfaction. More
generally, we can view these as measures of whether employees are successful at their jobs. It is
of interest to know whether those who are proficient at their jobs are more or less supportive of
unionization.
While we lack direct measures of employee attitudes, we do have three pieces of
information that are indirectly related to attitudes toward unionization. First, we have the
employees’ political contributions, by party. Given that Democrats have traditionally been more
sympathetic than Republicans to unions, employees’ contributions may serve as a proxy for
attitudes toward unionization (see Charwood, 2002). Second, we have information on gender,
which some existing studies have identified as a source of different views of unionization.

7

Finally, and perhaps most important, we have the employees’ scholarly fields. Previous
research documents relationships between fields and political attitudes, so we can employ the
academic department variable as a measure of general attitude toward unionization. Zipp and
Fenwick (2006) document the shares of faculty by broad field identifying themselves on a five
point scale between very liberal and very conservative. Surveying faculty in both 1989 and
1997, they find that humanities faculty are the most likely to report being politically liberal,
while engineering and business faculty are least likely. To the extent that openly expressed
attitudes toward unionization relate to scholarly discipline – and moreover, to the extent that
those in more liberal fields are more likely to support unionization – we would take this as
evidence of an effect of general political attitudes on unionization.
Thus we use this new and rich dataset to revisit the following questions identified in the
existing literature. First, among those at the university, how does one’s pay affect one’s
preference for unionization? Second, how does one’s proficiency at work affect one’s preference
for unionization? Third, how do preferences for unionization vary according to one’s field-based
political leanings? Finally, what is the relative importance of these various factors in
determining preferences for unionization?

2. Context at Washington and Minnesota
a. Minnesota
The University of Minnesota system operates five campuses, two of which (Duluth and
Crookston) are unionized. 7 The Twin Cities campus is the University of Minnesota flagship

7

http://www.mprnews.org/story/2016/01/20/uofm-faculty-union-petition

8

campus and the only major research university in the state. In 2014, the Center for Measuring
University Performance ranked the University of Minnesota 16th among US research universities
and 6th among US public universities. 8 The 2015 unionization drive is not the first at the
University. Union supporters attempted unsuccessfully to organize the Twin Cities campus in
the late 1990s, when the University’s regents entertained eliminating tenure.9
The Service Employees International Union (SEIU) began organizing at the University of
Minnesota in 2014.10 Minnesota law requires that the bargaining cannot include just the adjunct
faculty but rather must include the tenured and tenure track faculty as well. The latter faculty “already
receive the kind of pay and benefits that adjuncts are demanding,” making it potentially more difficult
for the union to prevail in an election.11
Union organizers argue that “a union would give them more input on the direction of the
university” and would “give raises to contingent faculty.” One lecturer who “teaches three
classes a semester” argued that she does “pretty much everything that a tenure line faculty does”
but is “paid less and there's not the ability for recognition and pay increases.”12 University
representatives have stated a preference to “work directly with our faculty, rather than through a
third-party union.”13
Not all departments at Minnesota are included in the bargaining unit. In particular, the
faculties of the Law School and the Academic Health Center (including the schools of medicine,

8

http://mup.asu.edu/MUP-TARU-Natl-1-25.html
http://www.tcdailyplanet.net/seius-faculty-union-effort-may-face-hurdles-university-minnesota/
10
http://www.startribune.com/union-tries-to-woo-faculty-at-university-of-minnesota/279220392/
11
http://www.startribune.com/union-tries-to-woo-faculty-at-university-of-minnesota/279220392/
12
http://www.mprnews.org/story/2016/01/20/uofm-faculty-union-petition
13
Email from Patti Dion, Senior Director, Employee Relations at the University of Minnesota, to U of M faculty,.
February 12, 2016.
9

9

dentistry, nursing, pharmacy, public health, and veterinary medicine) are not currently eligible to vote
on unionization.
On January 20, 2016 SEIU “filed cards” with the Minnesota Bureau of Mediation
Services (BMS) “to seek an election for the Twin Cities faculty to decide if SEIU will be their
exclusive bargaining representative.”14 That is, the SEIU submitted signed cards from a group of
faculty whom SEIU hopes will constitute 30 percent of the voters that the BMS deems eligible.
At this writing, the union and the university await BMS decisions on which job titles are eligible
to vote as well as whether the union has submitted enough signed cards.
The union and the University disagree on whether non-tenure track faculty are allowed to
vote. Minnesota law indicates that the “bargaining unit definition includes the rank of professor,
associate professor, assistant professor, research associate or instructor, and research fellow.”
Although the union uses the language ‘contingent faculty,’ according to the University, this “is
not an employee group or job classification at the University, and it is not a term used in state
statute.” After a February 16, 2016 BMS hearing, the University reported that the union “does
not agree with the voter eligibility list” provided by the University. Instead, the “union contends
that in addition to the positions stated in the statute, this election should also include a number of
additional positions, including primarily teaching specialists, senior teaching specialists, lecturer,
and senior lecturer.”15
Pro-union employees have prepared a website making their case for a union. As of
February 13, 2016, 234 faculty had signed their names to an open letter supporting for the

14

Email from Patti Dion, Senior Director, Employee Relations at the University of Minnesota, to U of M faculty,
January 25, 2016.
15
Email from Patti Dion, Senior Director, Employee Relations at the University of Minnesota, to U of M faculty,
February 18, 2016.

10

unionization effort.16 Of the 234, 172 held titles containing the word “professor.” The others
were instructors, lecturers, and teaching specialists who are seemingly outside the group that the
University claims is eligible to vote.
b. Washington
The University of Washington at Seattle is a major research university, ranked 11th in the
US among research universities. The University of Washington operates three campuses, at
Bothell and Tacoma, in addition to the flagship Seattle campus.
The SEIU began organizing the UW faculty in 2015.17 Like Minnesota, Washington
requires a single union for all faculty at the UW system. “State law requires that all faculty be
represented by a single union. If the effort is successful, about 5,500 to 6,000 faculty members
— from part-time lecturers to tenured professors — at all three campuses (Seattle, Bothell,
Tacoma) would belong to one union.”18
At Washington, groups of faculty favoring, and others opposing, unionization have
established respective websites outlining their positions. As of February 13, 2016, the pro-union
faculty open letter included 327 signatures.19 Of these, 191 held titles containing the word
“professor.” The faculty opposing unionization have a website, and their open letter includes
837 signatures at this writing.20 Hence, we have public statements of support for unionization
for roughly five percent of UW faculty as well as public pronouncements of opposition from

16

See http://mnacademics.org/dearcolleagues.
http://www.seattletimes.com/seattle-news/education/debate-over-unionizing-uw-faculty-hot-and-heavy/
18
http://www.seattletimes.com/seattle-news/education/debate-over-unionizing-uw-faculty-hot-and-heavy/
19
See http://www.uwfacultyforward.org/sign_public_letter_from_uw_faculty.
20
See http://www.uwexcellence.org/statement-of-opposition.html .
17

11

over ten percent. At Minnesota we have public statements of support from more than five
percent of eligible faculty.

II.

Data

We have datasets covering the faculties of the Universities of Minnesota and Washington
as of January 2016. Subject to caveats described below, for each faculty member we observe
salary, whether the faculty is openly opposed to unionization at Washington21, whether the
faculty member is openly supportive of unionization22, job title (professor, associate professor,
lecturer, etc), department (English, economics, etc.). For subsets of faculty we observe a
teaching rating (from ratemyprofessor.com), Google Scholar citations, and the faculty member’s
number of publications at ISI, and political contributions from the Federal Elections Commission
website. That we observe some variables only for subsets creates an issue of missing values.
The University of Minnesota dataset is very similar, except that we only observe a list of faculty
openly supporting unionization. This section discusses details of dataset construction.
1. Minnesota
Assembling a master list of faculty eligible to vote, along with their titles and academic
department affiliations, is a non-trivial task. According to summary data provided by the
administration’s website, the University of Minnesota had 3,804 Twin Cities faculty in 2015,
including Medical School, Duluth Medical School, and Duluth Pharmacy.23 Moreover, the

21

Name listed at http://www.uwexcellence.org/statement-of-opposition.html .
Name listed at http://www.uwfacultyforward.org/sign_public_letter_from_uw_faculty .
23
See
http://www.oir.umn.edu/hr/employee_count/report?filter%5B%5D=1&filtered_values%5B1%5D=2015&pivot%5B
%5D=2&rows%5B%5D=16&rows%5B%5D=3&show_dimensions=0
22

12

University of Minnesota follows the IPEDS definition of faculty, including persons who “hold
academic rank titles of professor, associate professor, assistant professor, instructor, lecturer or
the equivalent of any of those academic ranks.” 24
To create an individual-level dataset, we begin with the salary data, which contain pay
and job titles but not academic departments. These data are drawn from a public disclosure of
salary data posted at a local newspaper site (the Pioneer Press).25 We obtain all 2014 salaries (the
most recent year for which data are available) for the University of Minnesota Twin Cities
campus. Of these, we retain a superset of employees whose titles contain the words, “professor,”
“lecturer,” instructor,” “research,” or “teaching.” This includes 5,055 individuals with positive
salaries. I aggregate the titles into six categories: professor, associate professor, assistant
professor, lecturer, instructor, and other.
To get department affiliations we do two things. First, we obtain data on department
affiliation from the University of Minnesota online department directory. 26 The department
directories listings as of February 2016 include 4,491 distinct names under the headings of
“faculty/staff.” While this number of individuals exceeds the number of faculty, two comments
are in order. First, some of the listed faculty/staff are not actually current faculty. For example,
the directories include emeritus faculty. Second, some of the faculty in the salary data are
missing from the departmental directories. Accordingly, we searched the individual online
directory for these faculty by first and last name to obtain department affiliations. In the end, we

24

https://nces.ed.gov/ipeds/glossary/index.asp?searchtype=term&keyword=faculty&Search=Search
See http://extra.twincities.com/car/salaries/ .
26
http://www1.umn.edu/systemwide/directories/
25

13

obtain department affiliations for 3,664 faculty appearing in the salary data, of whom 3,348 have
non-zero salaries.
Because the unionization drive at Minnesota excludes the Academic Health Center and
the Law School, we exclude individuals in those units. This brings the relevant number of
directory listings down to 1,835 in the sample with positive salaries and department affiliations.
Of these 1,835, we match open union support data for 155 openly pro-union faculty using a
matching key consisting of the last name and the first three letters of the first. We obtain
Google citation data for 431, ISI publication data for 1,08527, ratemyprofessor data for 856, and
FEC election contribution data for 150.
A query to the ISI dataset for the publications of faculty of a particular university returns
a publications from the faculty only while they are employed at that university. Hence, the
number of publications is incomplete for faculty members who move mid-career. To deal with
this, I separately obtain the annual number of publications, 2006-2015, I then calculate the
average number of annual publications, beginning with the first year since 2006 in which the
faculty member has publications. This annual average is my measure of ISI publications.
Table 1a shows sample statistics for the University of Minnesota faculty in the sample,
both overall and broken down by those expressing pro-union sentiments and those who do not
sign an open letter. Supporters have lower salaries, are less productive at research, and are more
likely to be female. Their average teaching ratings are about the same as those not expressing
support for the union.

27

Note that ISI provides only a first initial, so the matching key for ISI data is the last name plus the first letter of
the first name.

14

2. Washington
The master list of University of Washington employees is from the Washington state
salary database.28 We obtain all of the 91,105 employees of the University of Washington
system. Most of these are not faculty. Prior to matching we retain 7,439 employees whose job
titles include the words “professor,” “instructor,” or “lecturer.” This overstates the number of
instructional faculty reported by the university as 4,351, which appears to be the faculty of only
UW-Seattle, whereas the University of Washington salary data cover Tacoma and Bothell
campuses as well.29 While this database includes job title, it does not indicate academic
department.
Because of the possible attitudinal link between academic field and union support, it is
important to determine each faculty member’s department. For this, we used the UW online
directory, making one query for each department. These queries return both faculty and staff, a
superset including 15,934 entries. Of these, 5,618 have titles containing the words “professor,”
“lecturer,” “head,” “chair,” “dean,” or “instructor” and therefore are faculty. We also eliminate
those whose titles include the words “emeritus,” “retired,” or “visiting.” This leaves us with a
master sample of faculty members with positive salaries for 2014, as well as departmental
affiliations, consisting of 3,525 observations. I classify the individuals in the sample into nine
job titles: professor, associate professor, assistant professor, clinical professor, affiliate professor,
professor without tenure, associate professor without tenure, acting professor, and lecturer.
The list of faculty publicly opposing unionization includes 837 names. Of these, 483
match with the data including both salary and departments using a matching key made of the

28
29

See http://fiscal.wa.gov/salaries.aspx.
See https://admit.washington.edu/QuickFacts#faculty .

15

upper case last name and the first three letters of the first name. Some of the non-matching
faculty are emeritus faculty who no longer appear in the salary database. The list of UW union
supporters includes 327 names. Of these, 196 match with data including both salary and
department designations.
The FEC data include 4,733 campaign contributions made by University of Washington
employees over the period 1997-2015. The FEC classifies contributions as partisan (and if
partisan, which party) as well as non-partisan (as with contributions to PACs supporting nonpartisan causes). We aggregate giving for each of 1,317 University of Washington employees up
to total contributions to Democratic, Republican, and non-partisan recipients. We have 309
aggregated contributions in the matched data.
The teaching rating data include all faculty at ratemyprofessor.com associated with the
University of Washington. This list includes 3,174 names, of which 2,847 have at least one
rating. Many of these are graduate student instructors, rather than faculty. Of the listed
instructors, 849 match with the UW employee data including departmental designations using a
matching key consisting of the last name and the first three letters of the first. Google Scholar
has 1,531 scholars who registered with Google indicating that they are associated with the
University of Washington. Of these, 496 match with the UW employee/department data using
the same matching key described above. Many of the remainder are graduate students and others
who should not match with the employee data. I am able to match 2,028 faculty with the ISI
annual publication data.

16

Using first names of employees, we can impute gender using data on the distributions of
first name frequencies by gender.30 We deem a name female if the name is more common
among females than males.
Table 1b presents average values of the variables in the UW data. The first column
describes the entire UW dataset, and the remaining columns divide the data into those who
oppose the unionization effort, those expressing no preference, and those supporting
unionization. The vast majority of the individuals in the sample are at the Seattle campus.
Average salaries are higher among opposers. Opposers are, on average, more research
productive and less likely to be female. Teaching ratings are, on average, higher among union
supporters. Partisan political contributions are overwhelmingly made to Democrats regardless of
union attitudes. Contributions are larger among the higher-salaried opposers than among the
others. Table 2 presents correlations among variables.

III.

Results

Our goal below is to document how attitudes toward current unionization efforts – as
implied by open expressions of support or opposition – are related to both individual
characteristics such as pay and research and teaching productivity, as well as factors potentially
related to more general attitudes: political contributions, scholarly field, and gender. It is worth
reflecting on the goal of the exercise. One sort of question is whether, say, higher salary causes
more or less support for unionization. To get credibly at that sort of causal inference, we would
require a source of exogenous variation in pay. A second sort of question, more descriptive than
30

See http://deron.meranda.us/data/census-dist-female-first.txt and http://deron.meranda.us/data/census-dist-malefirst.txt .

17

causal, is the question, how do preferences for unionization vary among faculty with different
characteristics? Are higher or lower-paid faculty more likely to oppose the union? And, related,
conditional on other characteristics, are higher- or lower-paid faculty more likely to support? Or
conditional on salary, department, and job title, are more research-productive scholars (or more
popular teachers) more or less likely to support unionization? The second sort of question is
what we address here. We begin with bivariate descriptive approaches and then turn to
multivariate analyses.

1. Simple Descriptive Analyses
Before turning to multivariate analyses of union opposition, it is useful to present
bivariate analyses. We begin with the relationship between salary and union opposition. Figure
1 shows the distribution of salary for each school, along with measures of union preference,
using locally weighted regression, with higher weights for nearer observations (the “lowess”
command using the mean option in Stata). At each school, open support for the union initially
rises in salary, reaching a peak around 10 percent at a salary of about $70,000, then declines.
Open opposition to the union rises steadily in salary at Washington, reaching over 25 percent at
salaries above $200,000.
Figure 2 examines the relationship between Google Scholar citations and union support
for the faculty with linked Google Scholar data. For the University of Washington, opposition
rises in citations, and support falls. At Minnesota, the relationship is less clear: the support rate
is around 5 percent up to 8 log citations, then it declines. It’s worth noting, however, that there

18

are only 24 union supporters among the 431 University of Minnesota sample members with
Google Scholar data.
Figure 3 examines the relationship between a different measure of scholarly productivity,
the annual number of ISI publications, and union support. Among University of Washington
faculty, opposition rises fairly steadily in publications, and support falls. The pattern at
Minnesota is very similar. Union support is around 10 percent for faculty with 1 publication (e0)
and falls toward zero as the publication rate rises.
Figure 4 examines the relationship between teaching ratings and union support for the
matched set. At Minnesota, union support rises with teaching ratings up to 4, when union
support tops 12 percent. Union support falls to 8 percent for ratings between 4 and 5. The
support pattern is very similar at Washington. Opposition to the union among Washington
faculty falls monotonically in teaching ratings. Over a fifth of teachers rated below 2.5 oppose
unionization, while under 15 percent of teachers rated over 4 oppose unionization.
Figure 5 shows attitudes toward unionization by gender at the two schools. At both
schools, female faculty are more likely to support unionization. At Washington, male faculty
are more likely to oppose unionization.
Table 3 provides some evidence on how openly voiced views about unionization vary by
academic department. The ten departments at Minnesota with the highest shares of faculty
openly supporting unionization are primarily in the humanities and social sciences. They are
Cultural Studies and Comparative Literature, History, Asian Languages and Literature, Spanish
and Portuguese, Theater Arts and Dance, Anthropology, Field Wildlife and Conservation
Biology, Social Work, Art, and Music whose support rates range from 44 to 19 percent.

19

As at Minnesota, the Washington departments with highest support for unionization are
predominantly in the humanities and social sciences. The top ten are History, English,
Communications, Social Work, Sociology, Political Science, Asian Languages and Literature,
Mathematics, Mechanical Engineering, and Urban Design and Planning. Support drops quickly
across these departments, from 36 and 21 percent, respectively, in History and English, to under
10 percent at Mathematics, Mechanical Engineering, and Urban Design and Planning. The
Washington departments with highest shares of faculty openly opposing unionization are
Obstetrics and Gynecology, Bioengineering, Computer Science and Engineering, Chemistry,
Accounting, Electrical Engineering, Physics, Mechanical Engineering, Economics, and Genome
Sciences.
While the bivariate relationships are intriguing, they are also potentially misleading
because of correlations among variables. Table 2 reports correlations among variables in the two
samples, and many variables – such as publications and citations - are highly correlated. Beyond
that, attitudes toward unionization vary by salary and by department. Salary also varies by
department, and bivariate analyses cannot by themselves indicate whether the departmental
variation in union support simply reflects salary differences. To address this we turn now to
multivariate analyses that simultaneously control for different variables.

2. Regression models of open support and opposition
a. Washington
For Washington faculty we observe open expressions of union opposition and support
from about a quarter of the faculty, which we can use in the following way. Suppose each
faculty member has some underlying level of support intensity y*. If y* >0, the employee
20

supports the union, while if y*≤0, the employee opposes unionization. Not all employees
express their preferences, because doing so is costly. Expressing open opposition has some
unobservable cost cs, while expression open opposition has an unobservable cost co.
With this setup we observe an expression of support if (and only if) y* > cs, and we
observe an expression of opposition if (and only if) y*< co. If the employee’s intensity of
support lies in [co, cs], then we observe no openly expressed preference. Even though we do not
observe y*, we can estimate a model of its determinants based on the three observable outcomes:
open support, open opposition, and no expression. In particular, we can estimate this using an
ordered model such as ordered probit.
That is, we posit the model yi*=Xiβ + εi, where yi* is individual i’s unobserved level of
support for unionization, Xi is individual i’s characteristics (salary, etc), and εi is a normal error.
The likelihood function has three branches:
Pr(i expresses support)=Pr(yi* > cs) = Pr(Xiβ + εi> cs)=Pr(εi> cs – Xiβ)=1-Φ(cs – Xiβ)
Pr(i expresses opposition)=Pr(yi* < co) = Pr(Xiβ + εi < co)=Pr(εi < co – Xiβ)= Φ(co – Xiβ)
Pr(i remains silent)=Pr(cs ≥ yi* ≥ co) = Pr(cs ≥ Xiβ + εi ≥ co)=Pr(cs – Xiβ ≥ εi ≥ co – Xiβ)=
Φ(cs – Xiβ) – Φ(co – Xiβ), where Φ is the standard normal cdf.
The variables included in X merit some discussion. We have salary, job titles, and
department affiliations for all observations. We have political contributions, publications,
citations, and teaching ratings only for a subset. With political contributions, the absence of a
match means in principle means that the individual has made no political contributions that
require FEC reporting.

21

The absence of a match with the Google citation, ISI publication, and teaching ratings
data has a different meaning. Scholars must register with Google Scholar in order to appear in a
particular university’s list. Scholars not listed under “University of Washington” have citations
on Google Scholar, but their totals are not calculated. Similarly, not all University of
Washington teaching faculty have entries at ratemyprofessor.com. Matches with ISI are
imperfect because ISI includes only first initials and not entire first names.
The number of observations with no missing values on any variables is small, and
including all variables in the models directly is not feasible, so we proceed using three different
approaches. First, after including the always-available salary and gender variables, we include
the others one at a time. Second, we use indicator variables for the missing observations, along
with the underlying variables where the missing values are replaced with zeroes. Third, we
employ multiple imputation approaches for the missing values (White, Royston, and Wood,
2011).
Table 4 reports ordered probit models on open union support at the University of
Washington using one of the often-missing variables at a time. Each of the models also includes
department and title fixed effects, and salary and gender are included in all specifications. The
various columns include log Google Scholar citations, the log ISI publication rate, the
ratemyprofessor rating, and log political contributions, respectively. Included individually along
with salary and gender, the log ISI publication variable and the Google Scholar citation variables
are each significant, while the others are not. After accounting for department, title, and gender,
faculty with higher salaries – and faculty with greater research productivity – are less supportive
of unionization.

22

Table 5 reports specifications with dummies for the missing values. For each of the four
often-missing variables xk, Google Scholar citations, ISI publications, ratemyprofessor rating,
and campaign contributions, we include two variables in the models. First, we create dummy
that takes the value of 1 if the variable is missing (δk). Second, we create a variable which takes
the value of 0 when it is missing and the value of the continuous variable xk when it is not
missing. Thus, for example, we include a dummy variable for whether an individual lacks ISI
publications along with another variable that is the log of ISI publications for observations where
they are available and zero for the other observations. Using this approach, again including
department and title fixed effects, we see negative and significant relationships between both
research productivity measures (Google citations and ISI publications) and union support. The
other variables – gender, teaching rating, and contributions – are statistically insignificant.
To measure the role of political attitudes, we replace the department dummies with the
percent of faculty in that field who designate themselves as liberal or somewhat liberal, derived
from Zipp and Fenwick (2006). The political attitude variable, included in the second column of
Table 4, is highly significant: support for unionization is more likely from faculty in departments
whose members are in fields whose participants are on average more politically liberal. For
column (2) standard errors are clustered on the Zipp and Fenwick (2006) department groupings.
Before turning to other methods for dealing with missing values, we can entertain a
different model. Thus far we have assumed that the willingness to express a view and the
attitude toward unionization are governed by the same index. It is possible that willingness to
openly express a view has different determinants. One approach would be to have a two part
model of, first, open expression, and second, attitudes toward unionization conditional on open
expression. I lack a credible source of identification for the open expression model. Still, the
23

concern that open expression and attitudes toward unionization are different dimensions bears
exploration. In the model above I assume that those who are silent have cs ≥ yi* ≥ co. An
alternative interpretation of silence is that I have no information about preferences. So a simple
robustness check discards the silent individual and simply estimates a probit on union support
among only open supporters and open opposers. The last two columns of Table 5 reproduces the
exercise of the first two columns including only those expressing an open preference. The
pattern of results is similar. Salary and publications are significant (as is log citations in column
4); and the departmental political attitude matters. I conclude that the results are not sensitive to
the modelling assumption implicit in the ordered approach.
Table 6 turns to a more sophisticated method for dealing with missing values. We have
determined thus far that after accounting for the always-available department and title fixed
effects, gender, and salary, only productivity measures matter. Hence, our goal is to impute the
missing values of these measures, log Google citations and log ISI publications. The first
column reports an ordered probit modelling support for unionization as a function of gender,
salary, and department and title fixed effects, as well the log ISI publication measure. Recall that
we observe the ISI measure for 2,028 observations among the full sample of 3,526. We impute
using predicted mean matching, using the ten nearest neighbors. In addition we perform ten
imputations. Column (1) of Table 6 is the imputed value analog of column (2) of Table 4, which
reports the same model using only observations where log ISI publications are non-missing. As
before, union support declines in salary and research productivity. The coefficients are -0.09 for
log salary and -0.07 for log ISI publications, respectively, in the imputed specification, compared
with -0.12 and -0.13 using only the observations with non-missing data.

24

Column (2) of Table 6 imputes Google Scholar citations on the entire sample, a rather
aggressive approach given that the variable is missing for over 3,000 of the 3,526 observations.
The third column imputes Google Scholar citations just for the subset of observations for which
we have ISI publications. Columns (4)-(6) repeat the exercise of columns (1)-(3), removing the
department fixed effects and adding the department-level political attitude variable. In each
case, as above, faculty with higher salaries and greater research productivity are less supportive
of unionization. Faculty from departments with higher levels of political liberalism are more
supportive of unionization.
Table 7 turns to effect magnitudes. We first report probability derivatives from a
parsimonious ordered probit model (including salary, gender, the ISI publication rate,
departmental political attitudes, and title fixed effects) for two of the three outcomes: support for
unionization and opposition.31 We then report the 90th and 10th percentiles of the distributions
of the explanatory variables. Finally, we report the product of the probability derivative and the
90-to-10th percentile difference in the explanatory variable. This is our estimate of the change in
predicted probability of support (or opposition) with a movement from the 10th to the 90th
percentile of the explanatory variable.
An increase in salary from the 10th to the 90th percentile would decrease support by 3
percentage points and increase opposition by 8 percentage points. A movement from the 10th to
the 90th percentile of the ISI annual publication distribution would decrease support by 4
percentage points and increase opposition by 10. A movement from the 10th to the 90th
percentile of the political attitude distribution in the direction of greater liberalism would raise

31

Note that the probability derivatives for all three outcomes must sum to one, so the probability derivative not
shown, for the quiet outcome, is unity less the sum of the reported derivatives.

25

support by 9 percentage points and decrease opposition by 23 percentage points. Thus, interdepartmental differences in attitude - after accounting for salary and research success - have a
bigger impact than either scholarly impact or salary.

b. Minnesota
The Minnesota data contain only open expressions of support for unionization. Hence,
we have two groups, those who are silent and those who support. If we view individuals as
having an unobserved preference for or against unionization y* along with some cost of
expressing support cs, we can view those expressing support as revealing an intensity of support
in excess of cs. We can model the determinants of the underlying preference via probits or linear
probability models. Table 8 reports these models. Column 1 reports a probit that includes both
title and department fixed effects. Column (2) replaces the department fixed effects with the
departmental political attitude measure. Probability derivatives are reported in columns (1) and
(2). Column (3) and (4) repeat the exercises the first two columns using linear probability
models rather than probits.32
We see two broad results here. First, salary matters. The probability of expressing open
support rises in salary, then falls, reaching a peak probability around $50,000 in salary. Second,
department has a large effect; and this effect is correlated with departments’ fields political
attitudes. Moving salary from the 10th to the 90th percentile of the earnings distribution reduces
the probability of support by 8 percentage points. Moving the department-based political attitude
measure from the 10th to the 90th percentile (toward liberal) raises the probability of open support
32

The probit model in column (1) includes fewer observations because the observations in which the department
fixed effects perfectly predicts union support are dropped.

26

by 14 percentage points. Hence, at Minnesota as at Washington, the size of the effect associated
with the department’s average political attitude is large in relation to the other effects.
Because opposition tends to occur for employees with research output – and we do not
observe opposition among MN faculty – we don’t see evidence of the relationship between
research and union preference at MN.

Conclusion
Using a relatively large new dataset comprised of both open expressions of support and
opposition to unionization, along with administrative and quasi-administrative data on pay,
productivity, and indirect measures of political attitudes, we provide new evidence on the
determinants of preferences for unionization among university faculty. We find a clear negative
relationship between salary and support for unionization. We also find that faculty who produce
more – and more highly cited – research are less likely to support unionization. After accounting
for salary, department, and title, gender and contributions do not matter. Finally, we see large
impacts of academic department on union support; and these differences are correlated with field
political attitudes. After accounting for their pay and research productivity, faculty in fields
whose members tend to be more politically liberal are far more likely to support unionization.
Our findings have relevance to the literature as well as some practical contemporary
issues. First, while the literature finds mixed effects of salary we find clear negative effects of
salary on preference to unionization, both directly and after accounting for a host of other
factors. Second, while individual factors related to pay and research are important, we also find
a large role for attitudinal factors, as reflected in the role of the scholarly field. Third, our results
27

have clear implications for the relationship between the composition of the electorate and its
tendency to support unionization. At a research university, including non-tenure track faculty,
who have lower salaries and less research output than tenure track faculty, will deliver an
electorate more favorably disposed toward unionization.
Finally, our results have implications for possible impacts of unionization on universities’
pursuit of their research mission. More productive researchers are less supportive of unionizing
their universities. To put this another way, the workplace attribute of having a union is one that
our results indicate is less appealing to more research-productive scholars. This raises the
possibility that universities that unionize will face difficulty attracting and retaining the most
productive scholars.

28

References
Blanchflower, David and Alex Bryson. What Effect Do Unions Have on Wages Now and Would
‘What Do Unions Do?’ Be Surprised? NBER Working paper 9973, September 2003
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9973.pdf
Card, David, Thomas Lemieux and W. Craig Riddell. “Unions and Wage Inequality.” Journal of
Labor Research 25 (Fall 2004).
Charlwood, Andy. Why do Non–union Employees Want to Unionize? Evidence from Britain.
British Journal of Industrial Relations 40 (3), 463-491. 2002.
Demsetz, Rebecca S. “Voting Behavior in Union Representation Elections: The Influence of
Skill Homogeneity and Skill Group Size Author(s): Source: Industrial and Labor Relations
Review, Vol. 47, No. 1 (Oct., 1993), pp. 99-113.
Farber, Henry S. “Union Organization Decisions in a Deteriorating Environment: The
Composition of Representation Elections and the Decline in Turnout.” NBER Working Paper
19908, Feb. 2014. http://www.nber.org/papers/w19908
Farber Henry S. and Saks Daniel H. . 1980. “Why Workers Want Unions: The Role of Relative
Wages and Job Characteristics.” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 88, No. 2
Richard B. Freeman. Contraction and Expansion: The Divergence of Private Sector and Public
Sector Unionism in the United States. The Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 2, No. 2
(Spring, 1988), pp. 63-88
Goeddeke, Francis Xavier and John D. Kammeyer-Mueller. “Perceived support in a dual
organizational environment: Union participation in a university setting.” Journal of
Organizational Behavior. 31 (1): 65-83. 2010.
Hedrick, David W., Steven E. Henson, John M. Krieg, and Charles S. Wassell, Jr., “Is there
really a faculty union salary premium?” Industrial & Labor Relations Review; Apr2011, Vol. 64
Issue 3, p558.
Hosios, Arthur J., and Aloysius Siow. 2004. "Unions Without Rents: The Curious Economics of
Faculty Unions." Canadian Journal of Economics, Vol. 37, No. 1, pp. 28-52.
Kochan, Thomas A. "How American workers view labor unions." Monthly Lab. Rev. 102 (1979):
23.
McClendon, John A., Hoyt N. Wheeler, and Roger D. Weikle. “The Individual Decision to
Unionize.” Labor Studies Journal September 1998. vol. 23 no. 3 34-54
doi: 10.1177/0160449X9802300302
Park, Heejoon, Patrick McHugh, and Matthew M. Bodah. “Revisiting General and Specific
Union Beliefs: The Union-Voting Intentions of Professionals.” Industrial Relations: A Journal of
Economy and Society, 45 (2): 270-289, 2006. doi: 10.1111/j.1468-232X.2006.00426.x
29

Pencavel, John. (1971). ‘The demand for union services: an exercise’. Industrial and Labor
Relations Review, 24: 180–90.
Porter, Stephen R. “The Causal Effect of Faculty Unions on Institutional Decision-Making.”
Industrial & Labor Relations Review October 2013 66: 1192-1211,
doi:10.1177/001979391306600508
Premack, Steven L.; Hunter, John E. Individual unionization decisions. Psychological Bulletin,
Vol 103(2), Mar 1988, 223-234.http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0033-2909.103.2.223
Wheeler Hoyt N. and John A. McClendon. 1991. “The Individual Decision to Unionize.”
In Strauss George, Gallagher Daniel G., and Fiorito Jack , eds., The State of the Unions.
Madison, Wis.: Industrial Relations Research Association, pp. 47–83.
White, Ian R., Patrick Royston, and Angela M. Wood. "Multiple imputation using chained
equations: issues and guidance for practice." Statistics in medicine 30.4 (2011): 377-399.
Zipp, John F. and Rudy Fenwick. “Is the Academy a Liberal Hegemony? The Political
Orientations and Educational Values of Professors. Public Opinion Quarterly (2006) 70 (3): 304326. doi: 10.1093/poq/nfj009

30

Table 1: Summary Statistics
a. University of Minnesota
all
Salary
female
Google citations
ratemyprofessor rating
ISI publications
contributions to Dems
contributions to Reps
non-partisan contribs

N
1,835
1,835
431
856
1,085
119
6
25

silent

mean
102,909
0.32
4809.84
3.55
3.96
2,202
1,433
631

N
1,680
1,680
407
767
1,007
106
6
20

supportive
N
mean
155
90,535
155
0.39
24
2545.58
89
3.58
78
2.26
13
2,654
0
5
520

mean
104,051
0.32
4943.36
3.55
4.09
2,146
1,433
659

b. University of Washington
all

opposed

silent

supportive

N

mean

N

mean

N

mean

N

mean

salary

3,526

101,261

483

143,522

2,847

95,467

196

81,266

female

3,526

0.33

483

0.27

2,847

0.33

196

0.43

496

5,267

160

7,328

312

4,518

24

1330

Google Scholar Citations
Ratemyprofessor rating

850

3.71

163

3.67

604

3.70

83

3.88

ISI publications
contributions to Dems
contributions to Reps
non-partisan contributions
Bothell

2,028
212
10
87

3.79
3,116
1,885
2,122

364
45
4
20

4.59
4,627
1,238
3,630

1,575
157
6
64

3.72
2,765
2,317
1,687

89
10
0
3

1.79
1825

3,526

0.08

Seattle

3,526

0.86

Tacoma

3,526

0.07

c. University of Washington Union Support by Campus
campus
Bothell
Seattle
Tacoma

Oppose
union
2.59%
15.55%
2.94%

Support
union
12.22%
3.81%
20.17%

31

1333

Table 2: Correlations among Variables
Washington
oppose

support

female

log
salary

log
Google

support

-0.0967*

female

-0.0507*

0.0527*

log salary

0.2115*

0.0127

-0.0441*

log Google

0.2252*

-0.2754*

-0.1161*

0.3533*

0.097

-0.0242

-0.0416

0.0283

contributions

contributions

teaching
rating

-0.1244

teaching rating

-0.0246

0.0595

-0.0237

-0.0294

-0.0151

-0.1183

log ISI pubs

0.1468*

-0.1088*

-0.1155*

0.2675*

0.3835*

0.0057

-0.0843

Minnesota
support

female

log
salary

log
Google

contributions

female

0.0412

log salary

-0.0405

-0.1530*

log Google

-0.0295

-0.1208*

0.5158*

contributions

0.0133

-0.0119

0.0766*

0.0668

teaching rating

0.0108

-0.0249

-0.1460*

-0.1443*

0.0061

-0.1275*

-0.1192*

0.1931*

0.3274*

-0.0007

log ISI pubs

Note: * indicates significance at the 5% level in a two-sided test.

32

teaching
rating

-0.0107

Table 3: Unionization Views by Department

A. Minnesota
Minnesota departments most supportive
CULTURAL STDY AND COMP LIT
HISTORY
ASIAN LANGUAGES AND LIT
SPANISH AND PORTUGUESE
THEATRE ARTS AND DANCE
ANTHROPOLOGY
FISH WILDLIFE AND CONS BIO
SOCIAL WORK, SCHOOL OF
ART
MUSIC

support
44.44%
35.00%
27.78%
26.09%
24.00%
23.53%
23.53%
23.08%
19.05%
18.60%

B. Washington
Departments with highest pro-union
share
HISTORY

support

Departments with highest anti-union share

opposed

35.71%

OBSTETRICS AND GYNECOLOGY

67.50%

ENGLISH

21.43%

BIOENGINEERING

62.50%

COMMUNICATIONS

17.24%

58.97%

SOCIAL WORK

16.92%

COMPUTER SCIENCE AND
ENGINEERING
CHEMISTRY

SOCIOLOGY

14.29%

ACCOUNTING

40.00%

POLITICAL SCIENCE

14.29%

ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING

39.53%

ASIAN LANGUAGES AND
LITERATURE
MATHEMATICS

11.11%

PHYSICS

29.82%

9.84%

MECHANICAL ENGINEERING

28.13%

MECHANICAL ENGINEERING

6.25%

ECONOMICS

28.00%

URBAN DESIGN AND PLANNING

5.00%

GENOME SCIENCES

26.67%

33

50.00%

Table 4: Ordered Probit on Union Support at /UW:
Salary, Gender, and Each other Variable
citations
log salary
female
log Google Scholar
Citations

publications

teaching rating

contributions

-0.5147

-0.1265

-0.1922

-0.1276

(0.1603)**

(0.0430)**

(0.0880)*

(0.2153)

0.1969

-0.0565

0.1631

-0.0672

(0.1656)

(0.0746)

(0.1060)

(0.2937)

-0.2349
(0.0713)**

log ISI publications

-0.1200
(0.0347)**

RYP rating

0.0061
(0.0542)

log contributions

-0.0461
(0.1042)

N

496

2,028

850

248

* p<0.05; ** p<0.01

Note: Dependent variable is ordered with support the highest value, followed by silence, then
opposition. All models includes department and title dummies.

34

Table 5: UW Union Support and Political Attitudes
Dummies for Missing Values
log salary
Google cites
missing
Log G cites
ISI pubs missing
log ISI pubs
female
RYP missing
RYP rating
Contribs 0 or
missing
Log contributions

all

all

-0.0763

-0.0635

-0.8261

-0.3905

(0.0282)**

(0.0205)**

(0.3351)*

(0.1736)*

-1.2847

-1.1904

-3.0311

-2.3594

(0.3417)**

(0.6429)

(1.5002)*

(1.2336)

-0.2210

-0.2216

-0.4609

-0.3861

(0.0439)**

(0.0817)**

(0.2035)*

(0.1827)*

-0.0086

0.0080

0.2995

-0.0231

(0.0612)

(0.0438)

(0.2906)

(0.1370)

-0.0909

-0.1278

-0.1815

-0.3320

(0.0336)**

(0.0295)**

(0.1556)

(0.1044)**

exclude silent

0.0578

0.0474

0.3632

0.2904

(0.0564)

(0.1132)

(0.2656)

(0.1928)

0.1362

0.3792

-0.5940

0.8587

(0.2143)

(0.1747)*

(0.6724)

(0.7286)

0.0080

0.0396

-0.1563

0.1217

(0.0543)

(0.0467)

(0.1737)

(0.1569)

0.0920

0.0885

0.9820

-0.0184

(0.0995)

(0.1252)

(0.6181)

(0.3829)

-0.0374

-0.1397

-0.5363

-0.3943

(0.0699)

(0.0770)

(0.4269)

(0.2860)

political attitude
N

exclude silent

3,527

0.0330

0.0685

(0.0049)**

(0.0080)**

3,060

679

589

* p<0.05; ** p<0.01

Note: Dependent variable is ordered with support the highest value, followed by silence, then
opposition. Columns (1) and (3) includes department dummies. Column (2) replaces
department with the Zipp and Fenwick (2006) share of faculty in the field identifying as “liberal”
or “somewhat liberal.” Columns (3) and (4) exclude silent. All columns include title dummies.
Standard errors clustered on the Zipp and Fenwick department classifications in columns (2) and
(4)

35

Table 6: Ordered Probit on Union Support UW Union Support
Missing Values Imputed via PMM
impute ISI var
on whole
sample
log salary
log ISI pubs
female

impute Google
cites on whole
sample

impute Google
cites on ISI
subsample

impute Google
cites on whole
sample

impute Google
cites on ISI
subsample

-0.0876

-0.0880

-0.1212

-0.0808

-0.0880

-0.1087

(0.0278)**

(0.0283)**

(0.0446)**

(0.0270)**

(0.0273)**

(0.0401)**

-0.0771

-0.0928

(0.0338)*

(0.0276)**

0.0759

0.0823

-0.0257

0.0801

0.0911

0.0111

(0.0558)

(0.0560)

(0.0739)

(0.0536)

(0.0548)

(0.0678)

-0.0453

-0.1210

-0.0916

-0.1261

(0.0295)

(0.0417)**

log Google
citations
political
attitude
N

impute ISI var
on whole
sample

3,526

3,526

2,123

(0.0282)**

(0.0341)**

0.0321

0.0303

0.0300

(0.0025)**

(0.0027)**

(0.0035)**

3,059

3,059

1,872

* p<0.05; ** p<0.01

Note: Dependent variable is ordered with support the highest value, followed by silence, then opposition. All specifications include
department and title FE. Imputation done via predictive mean matching using the 10 nearest neighbors, with 10 imputations. The first
and fourth columns impute the log ISI publication variable for the entire sample. The second and fifth columns impute the Google
citation variable for the whole sample. The third and sixth columns use the ISI publication variable to help impute the Google citation
variable for the ISI subsample.

36

Table 7: UW Effect Magnitudes (Parsimonious Model)
support
dProb/dx
log salary
-0.009
female
-0.001
log ISI pubs
-0.012
political attitudes
0.003

se
0.004
0.006
0.003
0.000

oppose
dProb/dx
0.026
0.004
0.034
-0.007

se
0.010
0.017
0.008
0.001

10%

Δ prob: 90-10 pctile
90% support
oppose

9
0
1.1
8.7

12.2
1
4.1
40.9

-0.03
0.00
-0.04
0.09

0.08
0.00
0.10
-0.23

Note: the first four columns show the probability derivatives and their standard errors for the
probabilities of support and opposition (based on an ordered probit linking union support to log
salary, gender, political attitudes, and log ISI publications). Columns 5 and 6 show the 90th and
10th percentiles of the variable distributions. The last two columns show the change in the
probabilities of support and opposition with a movement from the 10th to the 90th percentile in
the row variable.

37

Table 8: U of M Individual Characteristics and Open Union Support
(probit; probability derivatives reported)

probit
log salary
(log salary)^2
female
missing ISI pubs
log ISI publications
not in Google Scholar
log citations
Contribution=0
log contributions
missing rating
RMP rating

probit

LPM

1.0975

1.1992

0.6016

0.5828

(1.4603)

(0.3053)**

(0.2775)*

(0.1883)**

-0.0506

-0.0552

-0.0290

-0.0274

(0.0662)

(0.0130)**

(0.0128)*

(0.0092)*

0.0013

0.0043

0.0019

0.0041

(0.0128)

(0.0220)

(0.0153)

(0.0301)

-0.0024

0.0009

-0.0024

0.0041

(0.0139)

(0.0060)

(0.0165)

(0.0080)

-0.0090

-0.0112

-0.0084

-0.0140

(0.0116)

(0.0063)

(0.0089)

(0.0066)

0.0371

0.0362

0.0522

0.0393

(0.0623)

(0.0262)

(0.0643)

(0.0434)

0.0045

0.0045

0.0056

0.0040

(0.0102)

(0.0040)

(0.0085)

(0.0049)

0.0646

0.0594

0.1462

0.1440

(0.0726)

(0.0236)*

(0.1427)

(0.0999)

0.0221

0.0193

0.0272

0.0263

(0.0259)

(0.0094)*

(0.0209)

(0.0152)

-0.0141

0.0031

-0.0127

-0.0061

(0.0377)

(0.0435)

(0.0408)

(0.0512)

-0.0007

0.0009

0.0004

0.0008

(0.0095)

(0.0091)

(0.0107)

(0.0107)

political attitude
N
R2

LPM

1,441

0.0044

0.0052

(0.0004)**

(0.0007)**

1,709

1,709
0.07

1,709
0.07

* p<0.05; ** p<0.01

Note: The dependent variable is 1 for open support for unionization while 0 reflects no expressed
opinion. Columns (1) and (2) present probability derivatives from probit models. Columns (3)
and (4) present linear probability models. Standard errors in columns (2) and (4) are clustered on
Zipp and Fenwick department groups. All models include both title and department fixed
effects.

38

U of M Salary Distribution

1.0e-05

0

0

5.0e-06

Density

1.5e-05

UW Salary Distribution

2.0e-06 4.0e-06 6.0e-06 8.0e-06 1.0e-05

0

100000

200000

300000

0

100000

200000

300000

totalpay

Salary 2014

U of M Salary and Open Support

.08
.06

.1

.2

lowess prounion totalpay

.1

.3

UW Salary and Voiced Opinion

.04

0

Density

Figure 1: Salary and Views on Unionization

0

100000

200000

300000

Salary 2014
oppose

0

support

100000

200000
totalpay

39

300000

Figure 2: Google Scholar Citations and Views on Unionization
U of M Log Google Citation Distribution

.15

0

0

.05

.1

.1

Density

Density

.2

.2

.3

.25

UW Log Google Citation Distribution

2

4
6
log Google Scholar citations

8

10

12

2
4
log Google Scholar citations

6

8

10

12

U of M Log Citations and Open Support

.05
.04
.03

0

.1

.2

.3

lowess prounion lcitations

.4

.06

.5

UW Log Citations and Voiced Opinion

4

6
8
log Google Scholar citations
oppose

10

12

.02

2

2

support

40

4

6
8
log Google Scholar citations

10

12

Figure 3: ISI Publications and Views on Unionization
U of M Faculty Log ISI Publications

.4

Density

0

0

.2

.2

.4

Density

.6

.6

.8

.8

1

UW Faculty ISI Publications

0

1

2
3
log ISI publications

4

0

2
log ISI publications

3

4

U of M Log ISI Pubs and Open Opposition

0

1

2
3
log ISI publications
oppose

4

.06
.04
.02

0

.1

.2

lowess prounion lpubs

.08

.3

UW Log ISI Pubs and Voiced Opinion

1

5

0

support

41

1

2
log ISI publications

3

4

Figure 4: Teaching Ratings and Views of Unionization
U of M Teaching Rating

instructors with 5+ ratings

instructors with 5+ ratings

Density

0

0

.2

.2

.4

Density

.4

.6

.6

.8

UW Teaching Rating

1

2

3
prof rating

4

5

1

2

3
Ratemyprofessor rating

4

U of M Teaching Rating and Open Support

instructors with 5+ ratings

instructors with 5+ ratings

1

2

3
Ratemyprofessor rating
oppose

4

.11
.1
.09
.08

.05

.1

.15

lowess prounion rating

.12

.2

.13

UW Teaching Rating and Open Opposition

5

5

1

support

Note: teaching ratings from ratemyprofessor.com.

42

2

3
Ratemyprofessor rating

4

5

Figure 5: Union Support by Gender
U of M Open Support by Gender

UW Voiced Support by Gender

female

male

.06
.04

0

.02

.05

.1

mean of prounion

.08

.15

.1

female

support

0

oppose

Graphs by gender

Graphs by gender

43

male

