                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          THE GLOBAL SPATIAL DISTRIBUTION OF ECONOMIC ACTIVITY:
                 NATURE, HISTORY, AND THE ROLE OF TRADE

                                    J. Vernon Henderson
                                       Tim L. Squires
                                      Adam Storeygard
                                        David N. Weil

                                     Working Paper 22145
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w22145


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    April 2016




We thank Alex Drechsler, Joshua Herman, Young Min Kim, Kevin Proulx, Sameer Sarkar, Yang
Shen, and Sanjay Singh for excellent research assistance, and seminar participants at Berkeley,
George Mason, LSE, Williams, the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia/NBER Conference on
Macroeconomics Across Time and Space and the Brown University conference on Deep Rooted
Factors in Comparative Economic Development for helpful comments and suggestions.
Storeygard thanks Deborah Balk, Marc Levy, Glenn Deane and colleagues at CIESIN for
conversations on related work in 20042006, and LSE and UCBerkeley for hospitality while this
research was conducted. The authors acknowledge the support of the World Bank’s Knowledge
for Change Program and a Global Research Program on Spatial Development of Cities funded by
the Multi Donor Trust Fund on Sustainable Urbanization of the World Bank and supported by the
UK Department for International Development. The views in this paper are solely the
responsibility of the author(s) and should not be interpreted as reflecting the views of
Amazon.com, any other person associated with Amazon.com, or the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by J. Vernon Henderson, Tim L. Squires, Adam Storeygard, and David N. Weil. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Global Spatial Distribution of Economic Activity: Nature, History, and the Role of Trade
J. Vernon Henderson, Tim L. Squires, Adam Storeygard, and David N. Weil
NBER Working Paper No. 22145
April 2016
JEL No. O13,O18,R12

                                           ABSTRACT

We study the distribution of economic activity, as proxied by lights at night, across 250,000 grid
cells of average area 560 square kilometers. We first document that nearly half of the variation
can be explained by a parsimonious set of physical geography attributes. A full set of country
indicators only explains a further 10%. When we divide geographic characteristics into two
groups, those primarily important for agriculture and those primarily important for trade, we find
that the agriculture variables have relatively more explanatory power in countries that developed
early and the trade variables have relatively more in countries that developed late, despite the fact
that the latter group of countries are far more dependent on agriculture today. We explain this
apparent puzzle in a model in which two technological shocks occur, one increasing agricultural
productivity and the other decreasing transportation costs, and in which agglomeration economies
lead to persistence in urban locations. In countries that developed early, structural transformation
due to rising agricultural productivity began at a time when transport costs were still relatively
high, so urban agglomerations were localized in agricultural regions. When transport costs fell,
these local agglomerations persisted. In late developing countries, transport costs fell well before
structural transformation. To exploit urban scale economies, manufacturing agglomerated in
relatively few, often coastal, locations. With structural transformation, these initial coastal
locations grew, without formation of more cities in the agricultural interior.

J. Vernon Henderson                               Adam Storeygard
Department of Geography                           Department of Economics
London School of Economics                        Tufts University
Houghton Street                                   Braker Hall
London UK WC2A2AE                                 8 Upper Campus Road
J.V.Henderson@lse.ac.uk                           Medford, MA 02155
                                                  adam.storeygard@tufts.edu
Tim L. Squires
Amazon.com                                        David N. Weil
2100 Western Ave,                                 Department of Economics
APT 57                                            Box B
Seattle WA 98121                                  Brown University
tsquires@amazon.com                               Providence, RI 02912
                                                  and NBER
                                                  david_weil@brown.edu
    1. Introduction


The population of the world is distributed very unevenly. In some places, one can go for miles
without seeing another living soul. In others, it is hard take a couple of steps without running
into someone. The most obvious determinant of the spatial distribution of population is the
                                                          2
physical setting, sometimes called “first nature.” Some places are simply more amenable to
human habitation and output production than others. A substantial literature describes how first
nature characteristics affect location of economic activity.3


Natural characteristics are for the most part fixed over time.4 The effect that these characteristics
have on the concentration of population may change, however. Our first interest is precisely in
studying such changes. In some cases, the source of the change is obvious: Irrigation, air
conditioning, and the discovery of new uses for subsoil minerals have all altered the values
attached to particular aspects of first nature. In this paper, we take a systematic approach to
analyzing changes in the effects of specific natural characteristics, focusing on what we believe
to be the two areas in which the importance of first-nature characteristics has changed the most.
These are, first, the suitability of a region for growing food, and, second, the suitability of a
region for engaging in national and international trade. We show evidence that the weight
attached to the first of these characteristics has declined over time, while the weight associated
with the second has risen.


Over the past several centuries (the period of time in which most of the agglomeration in the

2
  As far as we are aware, this terminology was introduced to the economics literature by Krugman (1991), based on
Cronon (1991).
3
  Examples of this approach include Nordhaus (2006) and Nordhaus and Chen (2009), who look at the effect of a
whole suite of geographic factors using coarse subnational data; Mellinger, Gallup, and Sachs (2000) and Rappaport
and Sachs (2003), who investigate the role of coasts, for both productive and amenity reasons; and Nunn and Puga
(2012), who look at the effect of terrain ruggedness. See also Gennaioli et al. (2013, 2014), who regress subnational
income and growth on geographic factors along with institutions, population and human capital measures, for a
sample that covers much of the world but largely excludes Africa. Related work in the trade literature (e.g. Allen and
Arkolakis 2014) have used a more structural approach and focused on the United States, where data on subnational
trade flows are available.
4
  Exceptions include the drying of the Fertile Crescent, Iceland’s loss of its topsoil, and of course current global
climate change.
                                                                                                                    2
world has taken place), the link from ease of food production to concentration of population has
attenuated both because an increase in agricultural productivity has ensured that food represents
a much smaller fraction of the consumption basket today than in the past, and because costs of
transporting food have fallen dramatically. Thus on both the production and consumption sides,
there is less need for most of the population to live near where food is produced. In a similar
vein, access to international trade, via location on coasts, navigable rivers, or near natural
harbors, has become more valuable as opportunities to reap gains from trade increased over the
last several centuries.5


To assess a claim that a determinant of population concentration has become more or less
important over time, it would at first appear that one would need to have data on measures of
population concentration itself over time. The rich data on the spatial distribution of lights that
we harness in this paper has the downside of not being available over long periods. We show that
using contemporary data we can nonetheless investigate how weights of different geographic
characteristics have changed by taking advantage of a commonly observed phenomenon in the
study of spatial economics: persistence. Agglomeration, balanced by congestion, the other great
force determining population distribution beyond first nature, begets persistence. Large
population agglomerations, once established, tend to stay put. This persistence, and our
understanding of when agglomeration took place (specifically the fact that we can sort countries
by how urbanized they were at a particular point in time) enables us to understand how the
weights associated with natural characteristics have changed. Several economic studies have
examined such persistence in more localized settings (i.e. specific regions, or in response to
particular shocks).6 Our paper is the first to examine (and take advantage of) such persistence at




5
  The historical changes in agricultural productivity and transport costs on which we focus are hardly the only ways
in which technological change and economic development have impacted the spatial pattern of population. To
mention two others: first, income growth has shifted the relative importance of natural characteristics associated
with productivity and those associated with amenity. Second, the costs and benefits of agglomeration have also
changed over time, for example due to improved medical and public-health technologies (which lowered the costs)
and the use of more complex production processes (which raised the benefits).
6
  Examples include Davis and Weinstein (2002), Bleakley and Lin (2012), and Michaels and Rauch (2013).
                                                                                                                   3
a global scale.7


Persistence leads to outcomes which might seem puzzling. Today, in developed countries that
experienced the start of structural transformation releasing labor from agriculture two centuries
ago, the location of economic activity is driven much more by factors determining agricultural
productivity than in developing countries, where structural transformation is a post-1950’s
phenomenon and in much of Asia and Africa is still on-going. A primary goal of the paper is to
explain this puzzle.


Although our primary interest is in examining the interaction of nature with history, we begin by
examining the overall predictive power of first-nature characteristics for the distribution of
economic activity in modern cross-sectional data. Our primary dependent variable is light at
night, as observed from from satellites, aggregated to roughly 250,000 quarter degree
(longitude/latitude) grid squares, because unlike all global population datasets, it is sampled
uniformly (Henderson, Storeygard and Weil 2012). Our measures of first nature include
characteristics of the climate, land surface, natural water bodies, and plant life (temperature,
precipitation, elevation and ruggedness, coasts, navigable rivers, natural ports, and biomes). We
are particularly interested in the relative importance of characteristics related to the possibility of
trade (such as being located near a natural harbor) versus those associated with agricultural
productivity.


A significant advance we make over much of the current literature is that we focus on the
distribution of activity within countries, in addition to between them. The most important reason
for doing this is that our measure of density, lights observed from outer space, is a function of
both population density and income per capita. Looking within countries, the variance of income

7
  Mesbah et al. (2014) estimate the year in which a given half-degree grid cell passed various urbanization rate
thresholds. Their urban and rural population data are gridded estimates for the past 2,000 years from Klein
Goldenwijk et al. (2011). Mesbah et al. regress the date of urbanization on a cultivation suitability index, distance to
coast, a river navigability proxy, frost, and elevation, finding significant predictive power for all of these variables
except elevation. We view their work as complementary to ours, in that they examine the determinants of early
urbanization and we examine the effect of early urbanization, along with other factors, on outcomes today.
                                                                                                                       4
per capita is greatly reduced. Additionally, institutions (for which countries are a convenient
proxy) clearly matter for population density. While geographic factors may well play a
significant role in shaping institutions, sorting out the effect of institutions versus geography in
cross-country data is extremely difficult, if not impossible. Our approach of including country
fixed effects throws away some geographic variation, but we show that there is a still a very
large amount of usable variation left.


Following this preliminary analysis, we present a simple theoretical model to capture the
intuition of how, in the presence of geographical persistence, historical changes in the economic
value of natural characteristics can be inferred from the modern mapping from characteristics to
density. The model incorporates the key changes mentioned above: rising agricultural
productivity lowers the fraction of the population who work producing food and so raises
urbanization, while falling trade costs weaken the link between city locations and regions of high
agricultural productivity. A key result is that the time pattern in which these changes arrive
affects how first-nature characteristics are mapped into the eventual distribution of economic
activity, which will explain the puzzle noted earlier.


Looking at historical data on urbanization and education (to proxy for agricultural productivity)
and transport costs, we show that there is an important difference between today’s developed
countries where the process of agglomeration and structural transformation began early and those
developing countries where it is more recent. In the former group, urbanization started at a time
when transport costs were still relatively high, so urban agglomerations were more localized in
different agricultural regions, due to high costs of trade and local home markets being able to
support local manufacturing. In the latter, transport costs fell before structural transformation
occurred. To exploit urban scale economies before structural transformation with a limited
national urban labor force, manufacturing tended to agglomerate in relatively few, often coastal
locations. With structural transformation, these initial coastal locations then grew, without
formation of more cities in the agricultural interior. Thus the model predicts that agglomeration
will be more tied to locations where food can easily be produced in the former than in the latter.

                                                                                                       5
To test the model, we consider different ways of splitting the countries in the world in samples of
“early agglomerators” and “late agglomerators.” Specifically, we let the data choose the cutoff
values of two variables (urbanization and education in 1950) so that countries are sorted into one
bin or the other. We show that in countries that agglomerated early, first-nature characteristics
related to food production are more important in determining current settlement than are those
associated with trade, relative to the case of countries that agglomerated later. From a static
perspective this result is counterintuitive as noted above: highly urban Britain is far less
dependent on agriculture and more dependent on trade than Mozambique. Yet early settlement
patterns in present day rich countries have strongly persistent impacts.


The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the data on lights and
geographic characteristics that we use. In Section 3 we first discuss the interpretation of the
lights data, and then turn to an examination of the ability of geographic factors in general to
predict variation in observable lights, focusing on the fit as measured by R2 or the increment to
R2 after country fixed effects are included. Section 4 presents the model of regional
development, emphasizing the roles of rising agricultural productivity, falling transport costs,
and the timing with which these two changes occur. In Section 5 we develop an empirical
specification to assess the main implications of the model and discuss the division of countries
into early and late agglomerators. Section 6 presents the main empirical results, while Section 7
discusses the effect of adjusting for spatial spillovers. Section 8 concludes.


   2. Data


In order to carry out this exercise, we need measures of economic activity and several
components of physical geography, all available on a global scale.


Our proxy for economic activity is night lights (Figure 1). Unlike Henderson, Storeygard and
Weil (2012) and most quantitative work on lights, we use the radiance-calibrated version of the

                                                                                                    6
data (Elvidge et al. 1999; Ziskin et al. 2010). In normal operations, the light detection sensor is
very good at detecting low levels of light in small cities. However, the strong amplification that
enables this detection also saturates the sensor in the most brightly lit places, including the
centers of most of the largest 100 cities in the United States, so that their values are top coded.
The 2010 Global Radiance Calibrated Nighttime Lights dataset we use combines the high
magnification regime for low light places with a lower magnification regime for more brightly lit
places. Thus nearly all topcoding is removed, with minimal loss of information about low light
places. The lights data are distributed as a grid of pixels of dimension 0.5 arc-minute resolution
                                                                                                  8
(1/120 of a degree of longitude/latitude, or approximately 1 square kilometer at the equator).


We use lights as the measure of economic activity because it is measured consistently worldwide
at the same spatial scale. Alternatively, we could have considered population. There are three
main sources of global population data. Landscan9 and Worldpop (Stevens et al. 2015) use other
geographic data to interpolate population within census geographic units, which has the potential
to bias our estimates. The Gridded Population of the World (GPW; CIESIN and CIAT 2005) uses
population data exclusively, assuming uniform population density within enumeration units
larger than its native (2.5 arc-minute) grid resolution. On average, this means that population
estimates are more heavily smoothed in poorer countries with lower statistical capacity, as well
as in more sparsely populated regions. This could also bias our results.


Apart from measurement issues, the lights data are conceptually different from population,
because they reflect intensity of economic activity, which is a combination of population and
income per capita. Assuming a reasonable degree of population mobility within countries in the
long run, lights variation within countries will mostly reflect variation in the spatial distribution
of population.




8
    Available at http://ngdc.noaa.gov/eog/dmsp.html.
9
    http://web.ornl.gov/sci/landscan/
                                                                                                        7
Our other variables of interest are all reported at several different geographic scales, ranging
from 1/120 of a degree to 1/2 degree. For analysis, we convert them all to a grid of 1/4-degree
squares, with each square covering approximately 770 square kilometers at the equator,
decreasing with the cosine of latitude. This scale is a compromise between the fine detail
observed at the native resolution of several datasets and the computational practicality of coarser
cells. It also allows us to be less concerned about spatial autocorrelation than we would be at
finer scales, and to reduce true spillovers as well. At this resolution our sample is over 200,000
grid squares.


Variables originally reported at scales smaller than 1/4 degree are aggregated with an appropriate
function. In the case of variables with continuous values, measures for our grid squares represent
the mean or sum of all input cells falling within them, as appropriate. So for example, the night
lights measure for each quarter-degree grid square is the sum of the 900 component raw lights
pixels. In the case of categorical variables, we assign the modal value. For variables originally
reported in 1/2 degree cells, each 1/4-degree grid square receives the value of the larger input cell
into which it falls.


To analyze the determinants of variation in economic activity across locations, we define three
sets of explanatory variables, which we refer to as agricultural, trade, and base covariates. The
base covariates are two variables that arguably affect both trade and agriculture. These are
malaria and ruggedness. Malaria affects human ability to live in an area regardless of the
economic activities they perform, and ruggedness increases the cost of both trade and
agriculture. The index of the stability of malaria transmission, based on species-specific
measures of human biting rates and climate predictors of mosquito survival, is from Kiszewski et
                                                                        10
al. (2004). Ruggedness is based on Nunn and Puga (2012).


10
  We correct the Nunn and Puga measure to account for the fact that two east-west neighboring cells at high
latitudes are closer than two east-west neighboring cells at low latitudes, biasing their measure downward at high
latitudes. Applying this corrected measure to the main regression in Nunn and Puga (2012) leads to virtually no
change in the point estimate of the variable of interest and an approximately 15% increase in its standard error. We
also area-weight the average to follow Nunn and Puga. In practice, area weighting has minimal impact within our
small units.
                                                                                                                       8
Our agricultural covariates comprise six continuous variables (temperature, precipitation, length
of growing period, land suitability for agriculture, elevation, and latitude) as well as a set of 14
biome indicators. The temperature variable is a long run (1960-1990) average of UEA CRU et al.
(2013) based on Mitchell and Jones (2005) and precipitation is the Wilmott and Matsuura (2012)
measure averaged over the same period. Length of growing period, in days, is from FAO/IIASA
(2011). Land suitability is the predicted value of the propensity of a given parcel of land to be
                                                                                                                 11
under cultivation based on four measures of climate and soil, from Ramankutty et al. (2002).


Elevation, in meters, is from Isciences (2008). While high elevation locations often have poor
transport, we believe that once distance to various types of water transport (see below) and
ruggedness are controlled for, it is best interpreted as an agricultural variable. Furthermore, while
ruggedness and malaria have similar effects on economic activity across different sample splits
discussed below, elevation, like many trade and agricultural variables, does not. In practice, the
choice of whether to place elevation in the agriculture category or the “both” category is
inconsequential to the main results. Finally, we control for the absolute value of latitude which
could affect agriculture even net of our climate controls.


Biomes are mutually exclusive regions encoding the dominant natural vegetation expected in an
area, based on research by biologists. The distribution of 14 biomes is from Olson et al (2001).
We combine “tropical and subtropical dry broadleaf forests” with “tropical and subtropical
coniferous forests”, and also combine “tropical and subtropical grasslands and savannas and
shrublands” with “flooded grasslands and savannas” because each pair is broadly similar, and



11
  Because several variables are only defined or reported for grid squares containing land, and different datasets have
different effective definitions of the land surface, as noted below, values for some variables are imputed (or
“grown”) as the mean (continuous) or mode (categorical) of their eight 1/4-degree grid square neighbors. This
process is repeated up to two times until nearly all cells containing land based on our coastline dataset have values
for all variables. Between the two iterations, interpolated values assigned to cells containing no land are dropped, so
that imputation cannot occur across large water bodies. The only land cells without data following this spatial
interpolation process are small islands. Land suitability, biomes, temperature and precipitation are grown twice, and
length of growing season is grown once.
                                                                                                                      9
because the second member of each pair contains less than 1% of cells globally. We exclude
areas covered by permanent ice.


Our five trade variables focus on access to water transport. We calculate Euclidean distances in
kilometers from cell centroids to the nearest coast, navigable river, and major lake using the
                                                                                                            12
Fuller icosahedral map projection, and great circle distances to the nearest natural harbor. Our
specifications include indicators for the presence of each of these four features within 25 km of a
cell centroid, as well as a continuous measure of distance to the coast. In each case, we take a
more systematic approach to characterizing the universe of waterbodies than previous work.
Vector coastline data are from NOAA (2011; “low” resolution), based on Wessell and Smith
(1996). The same data are also gridded at 0.5 arc minutes in order to determine the fraction of
these 0.5 minute cells in a quarter-degree grid square that fall on land. Our universe of rivers is
those in size categories 1-5 (on a scale of 1-7) of the river and lake centerline dataset from
Natural Earth (2012). We restrict to river segments that are navigable, having determined the
navigability of each river using a variety of text sources.13 Lakes data are from the Global Lakes
and Wetlands Database produced by the World Wildlife Fund and the Center for Environmental
                                                                              14
Systems Research, University of Kassel (Lehner and Döll 2004). We restrict consideration to
the 29 lakes with a surface area greater than 5000 square kilometers, having excluded four that
were wholly created by dams. Port locations are digitized from US Navy (1953). We restrict to
ports defined there as natural harbors.


Columns 1 and 2 of Table 1 report summary statistics for all of these variables.




12
   All available GIS software of which we are aware performs this calculation in the plane, and thus requires
choosing a projection (see Tobler (2002) for a critique). No projection preserves distance in general, and many,
including the Plate Carrée implicitly used in most economics research, can induce substantial error. Spherical
point-to-point distances, in contrast, can be calculated easily in many software packages. We use Fuller’s icosahedral
projection, which we believe is relatively well-suited for the task, and has not previously been used for such
quantitative purposes in any literature of which we are aware.
13
   Full list available upon request
14
   http://www.worldwildlife.org/publications/global-lakes-and-wetlands-database-large-lake-polygons-level-1,
accessed 2014/8/14
                                                                                                                  10
     3. The measure of economic activity and initial results


3.1 The measure of economic activity and specification


As seen in Figure 1, the lights data convey a great deal of information about the location of
economic activity. At the country level, the cross-sectional correlation between emitted light and
GDP in our data is 0.90. More importantly for our purposes, the lights map out the location of
economic activity within countries. Note that lights represent total economic activity, which is a
combination of the number of people and the activity level per person. Lights are comparably
bright in northern India and the eastern United States, because while economic activity per
person is lower in India, population density is higher in many places.


The land area falling within each grid square varies, both because some are partially covered by
water or permanent ice, and because the surface distance between lines of longitude varies with
the cosine of latitude. To deal with the first problem, we divide our lights measure by land area.
Specifically, we sum the lights in each grid square and inflate by the inverse of the fraction of the
900 pixels in the grid square falling on land. This is equivalent to averaging over land pixels
only. On the second problem, while cell area varies with latitude, the light readings are densities.


One notable limitation of the lights data is that 59% of our grid squares emit too little light for
the satellite to detect. Since nearly all grid squares contain population and thus presumably emit
some level of light, we consider this a censoring problem. The lowest non-zero values are
generally interpreted as noise and recoded to zero at the pixel level in initial processing by
NOAA. The lowest non-zero value of the sum of lights adjusted by fraction of pixels over land is
3.05. We assign this value to all measured zeroes to avoid artificially inducing variation between
them and the smallest non-zero values.15


15
  Alternatively, we could estimate a Tobit model, which is the traditional way to capture censoring. OLS avoids the
Tobit error structure and provides a more intuitive measure of goodness of fit, which is our focus. Estimated
coefficients from the analogous tobit models (with and without country fixed effects) on variables with significant
coefficients are exclusively of the same sign and are mostly larger in magnitude.
                                                                                                                 11
The base formulation for grid square i in country c is thus


ln(lightic ) = X ic β+ εic
                                                                                                   (1)

                      900 ∑ lightjc
                            ∈
                            j i
where lightic     =                   if lightic ≥ 3.05
                       ∑ 1(landjc )
                       ∈
                      j i


                   = ln(3.05)           otherwise


and j indexes pixels. We also consider the intensive and extensive margins separately. Figure 2
plots the distribution of the dependent variable excluding the bottom code.


We emphasize two further points about equation (1). First, it is a very simple functional form.
With such a large number of covariates, a 2nd order Taylor series has hundreds of terms, which
improves the fit but limits interpretation. Second, we consider multiple error structures. We
show all results with and without country fixed effects. This distinction is critical: the fixed
effects regressions rely on within-country variation and account for the allocation of activity
within a country, in a context where we expect a higher variance across countries than across grid
cells within a country. Errors are clustered by 3-by-3 squares of cells to account for spatial
autocorrelation. Conley standard errors, used in alternative specifications below, are similar.


3.2 Basic results


Columns 3 and 4 of Table 1 report the results of a regression of our lights variable on the full
suite of physical geography characteristics without and with country fixed effects. The
coefficients with and without fixed effects are generally of similar magnitudes and are of the
same sign for all covariates except the mangroves indicator, which applies to 0.4% of the sample.
Because of the high potential for collinearity among the right hand side variables, it may be that

                                                                                                   12
looking at the change in a particular coefficient in comparing the specification with country fixed
effects to the specification without them is not very informative. As an alternative, we created
fitted values from the specifications in columns 3 and 4, in the latter case suppressing the country
fixed effects (i.e. setting all the country dummies to zero when forming fitted values). The
correlation of the fitted values is 0.860, suggesting that the two specifications provide very
similar predictions of which regions have high light density. In other words, the geographic
forces that drive the allocation of economic activity within and across countries are similar. In
Figures 3a and 3b we plot the fitted values of lights under the two specifications. The absolute
scales differ because when we omit the fixed effects themselves, the fixed effect predictions are
all relative to the base country. Nonetheless, the relative variation in lights within continents and
countries is similar in the two figures.


In columns 3 and 4, coefficients on covariates are largely in the expected direction. Most biomes
have significantly more lights than deserts (the reference biome); only boreal forests, tundra, and
perhaps surprisingly, tropical grasslands, have significantly less. Being near the coast, lakes,
navigable rivers and natural harbors is associated with more lights, as is a longer growing season
and higher agricultural suitability. Net of growing season, land suitability and biomes, higher
temperatures and lower precipitation are associated with more lights, perhaps because of their
residential consumer amenity value. In an alternative specification excluding growing season,
land suitability, and the biomes (not shown), precipitation has a positive effect overall as might
be expected based on agricultural productivity. When entered in quadratic form (not shown),
both temperature and precipitation increase lights at a decreasing rate. In the base formulation,
net of ruggedness and coastal distance, higher elevation is associated with more lights.


As reported in Table A1, using column 3 as an example, Conley (2008) standard errors using a
kernel of radius 40 km (similar to clustering for immediate queen neighbors) are larger than the
ones in column 3 by 5-20%. We think our cluster design, which is substantially easier to compute
for our many variants, yields reasonable estimates of standard errors, in a context where we are
not particularly interested in the specific degree of significance of individual coefficients.

                                                                                                    13
The most important numbers in Table 1, columns 3 and 4, for our exposition are the R2 values.
These 23 variables account for 46 percent of the variation in lights globally in column 3. We
consider it remarkable that such a parsimonious specification can account for so much of the
variation in global economic activity, without explicit regard to agglomeration or history. Of
course to the extent that grid cells with better characteristics have neighbors with better
characteristics (which we will see later is highly likely) and there are agglomeration forces, some
of the light intensity associated with more lights in better places represents agglomeration. And
of course there are within-grid square agglomeration forces. In short, these coefficients are
reduced form estimates, which in part capture forces of agglomeration (see Section 7). In column
4 we add country fixed effects. While on their own these account for 34 percent of light
variation, they only increase the column 4 R2 by 11 percentage points relative to column 3.
Country-level variation adds relatively little once physical geography factors are accounted for.
Conversely, the geographic factors add 23 percentage points in explaining variation, on top of the
fixed effects.


Table A2 reports OLS estimates of the effects of the same variables on the extensive and
intensive margin of lights. Sign patterns for covariates with and without fixed effects are mostly
the same across margins but there are some differences, especially for the 3 tropical biomes
measures and elevation. Higher elevation increases the probability of being lit but is associated
with lower light intensity, conditional on being lit.


Table 2 reports R2 for a variety of specifications, exploring the role of different variable sets in
explaining variation in lights in more detail. Column 1 excludes country fixed effects and column
2 includes them. The first row repeats the R2s from Table 1. Rows 2 and 3 report the extensive
and intensive margin R2s, respectively. Although the R2 values are not strictly comparable across
margins, it is nonetheless striking that the extensive margin, a linear probability model, has a
relatively large R2 value of 0.39 without fixed effects and 0.48 with them. As shown in rows 4-6,
country fixed effects alone capture differing levels of economic development (and underlying

                                                                                                       14
cultural and institutional differences), explaining more than 20 percent of both extensive and
intensive margin variation.


In rows 7-9, we start to explore the relative role of trade and agricultural variables. Row 7 shows
that the two base controls on their own explain little and that fixed effects explain a lot. In row
8, agricultural variables on their own have much explanatory power, an R2 of 0.44 without fixed
effects, and 0.56 with them. Row 9 suggests that the short list of trade variables on their own
explain much less of lights variation and add little to the explanatory power of country fixed
effects. However, as we will show, these relative contributions vary importantly between early-
and late-developing countries.


   4. Model


As suggested in the introduction, the effect of physical geography is modulated by history.
Changes in productive technologies have altered the importance of different first nature factors.
We focus on two critical changes. First, over the last two centuries, the cost of transporting goods
has fallen dramatically, both between and within countries. Among developing countries with
low productivity agriculture, by 1950 and in many cases much earlier, transport costs had fallen
with the building of colonial rails and roads as well as the use of trucks (Donaldson forthcoming;
Jedwab and Moradi forthcoming; Jedwab, Kerby and Moradi forthcoming). Second, there has
been an enormous increase in agricultural productivity, releasing labor to agglomerate in cities.
In today’s developed countries, this structural transformation began well before the major
declines in transport costs (Desmet and Henderson, 2015). Structural transformation has been
slower in today’s developing countries, occurring in Latin America mostly after 1950 and still
ongoing in most of Asia and Sub-Saharan Africa today.


We develop a model in which the order in which these two changes occurred may influence the
spatial distribution of economic activity. As we will argue below, those countries that
experienced the agricultural revolution before much of the dramatic drop in transport costs saw

                                                                                                  15
local agglomerations develop early in several regions. Higher agricultural productivity released
farmers into the manufacturing cities, but since transport costs were high, cities developed in
several agricultural regions at once. We will argue that these agglomerations in agricultural
regions regions then persisted after the period of the most dramatic drop in transport costs. In
contrast, today’s developing countries experienced substantial drops in transport costs before
they underwent structural transformation. Thus, their urban systems are more likely to be
concentrated in one or a few places such as the coast, taking greater advantage of urban scale
economies in the face of initial limited urban labor. Lowered transport costs allow trade of
manufactures across the regions (as opposed to just local production). Once structural
transformation starts, these initial agglomerations persist and grow, with little city development
in the agricultural hinterland.


4.1 Setup


We consider a country consisting of two regions, which we call coast ( c ) and interior ( i ) for
exposition. Workers in each region potentially produce food ( f ) with decreasing returns and a
manufactured good ( m ) with external economies of scale subject to congestion. In both sectors,
workers are paid their average product. We assume that (in the “long run”) workers are free to
move between regions and among sectors such that utility is equalized. The economy is closed
to the outside world.


For either region r   ∈ {c, i} , in the food sector average product is A L−β
                                                                        f fr   and total production is

Af L1f r−β , where Af > 0 reflects productivity and Lf r is the amount of labor in the food sector in

the region. Food sector productivity is the same across regions. Decreasing marginal
productivity of labor in agriculture, due to a fixed supply of land, is reflected in the parameter
1 > β > 0 . The urban sector produces the manufactured good. Average product per unit of labor
                                 ϵ
in the urban sector is Amr (v + Lmr ) , where the v allows nonzero output by the marginal worker
as Lmr → 0 , and ϵ > 0 represents agglomeration economies increasing productivity in the


                                                                                                     16
presence of more workers. Each worker is endowed with one unit of time, to be used for labor
and commuting in the city as in standard urban models (see Duranton and Puga, 2004, for a
review), so labor supplied per worker is 1 − tLmr , where 0 < t << 1 represents unit-distance
commuting costs in the city.16 Average product per worker in the city is thus
          ϵ
Amr (v + Lmr )(1 − tLmr ) . The size of the manufacturing labor force that maximizes this is a
solution to εLεmr−1   −
                                   ε
                          (1 + ε)tLmr   −   v t = 0 . As long as ϵ < 1 , any Lmr fulfilling this expression
will be a unique maximum, but further restrictions on the parameter space are required to
guarantee the existence of an interior maximum.


Food, which is traded costlessly between regions as in standard new economic geography
models, is the numeraire good. Preferences are such that each worker consumes a fixed amount
of food γ , and spends the remainder of her value of net average product on the manufactured
good. Welfare for any person in region r is then equivalent to consumption of the manufactured
good, (W r − γ )/pmr , where W r is net wage income and pmr is the price of the manufactured
good in region r .


A fixed national population of workers L is free to move between sectors and regions, so that


                                     Lr = Lf r + Lmr ,     r = c, i                                           (2a)
                                     L = Lc + Li .                                                            (2b)


Real income equalization across sectors within each region (assuming both sectors exist in the
region) implies:

16
  Following Duranton and Puga (2004), each worker is endowed with 1 unit of time, and lives on a lot of fixed size
1, with zero opportunity cost, in a two sided linear city. Working time is 1-4tu where u is distance from the city
center and 4t unit commuting costs. Given a wage rate w, income after commuting is w(1-4tu). Residents pay rents
that differ by distance from the city center, and rental income is redistributed as an (equal) dividend to all city
residents. Since the lots have zero opportunity costs, rent at the city edge (umax=L/2) is zero. Net income of the
person at the city edge before rent income transfers is w(1-4tumax) = w(1-2tL) and that equals net income of any other
person w(1-4tu)-R(u), where R(u) is rent at location u. Thus R(u) = 4tw(L/2-u), so integrating across the whole city,
total rents are twL2, and rents remitted per worker are twL. Thus, total (labor plus rental dividend) income per person
in the city net of rent and commuting time is W=w(1-tL) and total income is w(1-tL)L. This corresponds to effective
labor supply in the city being L(1-tL).
                                                                                                                     17
                               Af L−f rβ = pmr Amr (v + Lmr
                                                         ϵ
                                                            )(1 − tLmr ) , r = c, i .                                     (3)

Free migration equalizes per person welfare (i.e. manufacturing consumption), across regions
so that:
                                                      −β
                               Af Lf−cβ −γ       Af Lf i   −γ

                                  pmc
                                             =       pmi
                                                                .                                                         (4)


The model is closed by imposing equilibrium in goods markets. How that is done depends on
whether there is inter-regional trade or not and whether regions absolutely specialize or not.
There are three different types of closure relating to three types of equilibria.


4.2 Autarkic equilibrium


If there is no trade between regions, clearing of the manufacturing good market in each region
requires total regional demand equals regional supply, or:


                               Lr (Af L−f rβ     −
                                                                         ϵ
                                                     γ ) = pmr Amr (v + Lmr )(1 − tLmr ) Lmr ,                           (5a)



or alternatively, using the agricultural market


                               γ Lr = Af L1f r−β .                                                                       (5b)


Given L, Af , Ami , Amc , β , ϵ, γ , t, v , the eight equations implied in (2)-(4) and (5b) specify
equilibrium in the distribution of labor and the price of the manufactured good wherever it is
produced ( Lmc , Lmi , Lf c , Lf i , Lc , Li , pmc , pmi ).17


4.3 Trade equilibrium with both regions producing manufactures


If transport costs are sufficiently low, both regions can trade and produce manufactures if they

17
     To see that these represent eight equations, note that (2a), (3) and (5b) each must be fulfilled for each region.
                                                                                                                          18
have differential comparative advantage. If they are identical and have sufficient manufacturing
scale beyond the point where average product is maximized, then there will be no trade. We
generally designate one region to be slightly better at manufacturing, in order to allow trade
equilibria when trade costs are sufficiently low. We maintain the assumption that food can move
costlessly between regions, and further assume that there is an iceberg cost τ that applies to
movement of the manufactured good between regions. Trade will occur when the autarky price
                                                                 1
ratio of manufactured goods is outside the range (1 − τ ,       1−τ
                                                                    ).   When there is trade, and no
absolute specialization in either region, the within-region goods market clearing conditions (5a)
and (5b) are replaced by an inter-regional goods market clearing condition and an arbitrage
condition. We specify food market equilibrium and leave the manufactured good as a residual:


                          γ L = Af Lf1c−β + Af Lf1i−β .                                                    (6)


Assigning manufacturing comparative advantage to the coastal region, in practice it will always
be the manufacturing exporter in this class of equilibria, although we check for equilibria where
the interior is exporting manufactures as well. The prices of the manufactured good in the two
regions are related by an arbitrage condition:


                          pmi = pmc (1 − τ )−1 ,                                                           (7)


for τ the trade cost. Given L, Af , Ami , Amc , β , ϵ, γ , t, τ , v , the eight equations embedded in (2)-(4),
(6) and (7) specify an equilibrium in the distribution of labor and the price of the manufactured
good in the two regions.


4.4 Specialization equilibrium


Finally, there are equilibria where all manufactured goods are produced in one region, Since that
one region can be either the coast or the interior, we consider the two corresponding types of
specialized equilibria in the solution mechanism below. It can be defined by slightly adjusting

                                                                                                           19
the trade equilibria without specialization above, setting manufacturing employment in one
region to zero and removing equation (3) for that region.


4.5 Solving the model


For any given set of parameters, we solve the model as follows. We have 3 types of possible
equilibria: autarkic, trade without absolute specialization, and trade with absolute specialization,
with each of the last two available in two variants, one for each region exporting manufactures.
We pick an allocation of population to the interior region (with the coastal population being the
remainder of national population) and suspend equation (4) (equalizing welfare across regions).
We then use the remaining equations in each type of equilibria to solve for all remaining
variables. From these we calculate the consumption per worker in each region (the LHS and
RHS to (4)). Then, for each equilibrium type, we plot these two regional consumptions as a
function of (say) interior population. Their intersections are equilibria.


We limit attention to stable equilibria, subject to two stability conditions. Type 1 stability is with
respect to small changes in the population allocation across regions, assuming within-region
labor markets and all goods markets always clear (“instantly”). Equilibria are stable as long as
per-person manufacturing consumption in the interior (coast) is a declining (increasing) function
of Li (i.e., there are overall diseconomies to regional size). Type 2 stability is with respect to
perturbations within regions, focused in particular on adding a small number of workers to a
non-existent or small manufacturing sector within a region. For example, we perturb a small
number of workers out of food production in, say, the interior region and move them into
manufacturing in the interior. We keep regional populations fixed, but allow intra- and
inter-regional goods markets and coastal labor markets to clear (“instantly”). Equilibria are
unstable if interior manufacturing workers then have higher consumption than interior food
workers. They are stable if the reverse is the case. This condition implicitly assumes slower than
instant adjustment in inter-regional labor markets. We note however that in practice in all
examples we solved, in this type of experiment, under stability, interior food workers have the

                                                                                                     20
highest welfare (manufacturing consumption) of workers anywhere and interior manufacturing
workers the lowest; and vice versa under instability.


Details of the solution method as applied to the examples below are given in the Appendix. In
general, for any τ there will either be an autarky or non-specialization equilibrium but not both,
with higher τ having autarky. There may or may not be specialization equilibrium in one or both
regions, with the likelihood of stable specialization equilibria enhanced as τ falls.


4.6 Analysis of possible equilibria


As with many similar models, there is no closed form solution. We illustrate the relevant
properties with several examples. Our baseline parameter set is
{L = 10, 000, 000; v = 0.5; ϵ = 0.08; t = 7×10−8 ; β = 0.25; γ = 0.018; Af = 1; Ami = 1; Amc = 1.01}.
With these parameters, average manufacturing product peaks at a city population of about
969,100. Note the regions are not precisely symmetrical, so that if trade is feasible, it will occur
because the coast has a slight comparative advantage in manufacturing production (with a higher
Am ). We consider all the specialization and non-specialization equilibria that exist and are stable
for values of transport costs, τ , from 0.99 to 0.01. There are two types of specialization
equilibria: the coast producing only food and the interior producing only food.
Non-specialization implies autarky at high τ ; while at lower τ , when stable non-specialized
equilibria exist, they are trade equilibria.


Our focus is on how these patterns change in the transition from low ( Af = 1 ) to high (Af = 1.5)
agricultural productivity. When Af is low, at least with non-specialized manufacturing, there is

insufficient manufacturing employment to support a city populous enough to exploit scale
economies in any one region. When Af is high, much less labor is needed to produce the required
food, so there is a lot more manufacturing employment to allocate between the two regions.




                                                                                                   21
Figure 4 shows the stable specialization and non-specialization equilibria when Af = 1 for
different costs of trade, τ , as graphed against the population of the interior region. The two outer
prongs correspond to the two sets of specialization equilibria: one where the interior produces
only food and one where the coast does that. When do these specialization equilibria exist and
when are they stable? They are (type 2) unstable when trade costs are high ( τ > 0.4 ). In that
case, workers who begin manufacturing in the region with no existing manufacturing will be
better off, because high trade costs make them profitable in their home market despite the limited
scale. When τ is lower, the scale effect advantage of the existing manufacturing sector in the
foreign region dominates any trade cost advantage in starting manufacturing in the home region
to sell in the home market. Starting a small scale manufacturing operation is not profitable for
those workers. In our example with Af = 1 , the allocation of workers to manufacturing in the
specialized region is less than the city size that maximizes average product. Thus stable
specialization equilibria persist as τ falls to 0.


The middle prong represents non-specialized equilibria. At high τ , they are autarkic and stable.
While manufacturing scale is low in both regions, trade is too costly for workers to profitably
move to take advantage of scale economies in one region. As trade costs fall, it becomes
potentially profitable to trade. However, once it is profitable to trade it is also profitable to
enhance manufacturing scale in one region relative to the other. Thus at these parameter values,
the only stable equilibria when τ is low have manufacturing located in a single region, with the
other region producing only food.


In Figure 5 we turn to our second case, where agricultural productivity Af has risen to 1.5,
allowing more workers to enter manufacturing. As in the low agricultural productivity case,
specialization equilibria are not stable at the highest τ . As in the previous case, when trade costs
are high, the only non-specialized equilibrium is autarky. However, what is new in this case is
that, as trade costs fall and autarky becomes unstable, a trade equilibrium without specialization
now becomes stable. In this equilibrium, both regions have enough manufacturing scale that


                                                                                                    22
shifting a small number of manufacturing workers one way or another is not profitable for
workers. Given our assumption of a slight coastal comparative advantage in manufacturing, the
coast exports manufactured goods in this equilibrium, but such goods are produced in both
regions.


Figure 6 shows the existence of the different classes of equilibria in ( Af , τ ) parameter space for
values of Af from 1 to 2.3 and τ from 0.01 to 0.6. In the upper left of the figure, where
agricultural productivity is high and trade costs are low, the only equilibrium is one in which
manufacturing takes place in both regions (area G). At this equilibrium, the coast has a
comparative advantage in manufacturing, so it exports this good. Maintaining low trade costs but
lowering agricultural productivity, there are a series of different equilibrium configurations: in
area B, there are two equilibria: one with trade and manufacturing taking place in both regions,
and one with trade and manufactures produced only on the coast. In area C, there are three
equilibria: the two just listed as well as one in which manufactures are produced only in the
interior. For even lower agricultural productivity, maintaining low trade costs, are only two
equilibria, those where manufactures are produced in a single region (area D).      Raising trade
costs (i.e. moving from left to right in the figure), autarky appears as a possible equilibrium,
although there are also possible equilibria where manufactures are produced in one or both
regions (areas E and F). Finally, with high enough trade costs, the only possible equilibrium is
autarky (area A).


Figure 6 demonstrates the path dependence we explore empirically in the next section. Circa
1800, all of the world was in the high trade cost and low agricultural productivity autarkic
equilibrium at the lower right in area A. In the countries that developed early, the historical
paths of rising agricultural productivity and transport costs that did not fall too quickly
maintained the economy in areas A, E, or F, in all of which there was a stable autarkic
equilibrium. Although we do not model persistence explicitly, our assumption is that in such
areas, an economy that was formerly at the autarkic equilibrium will remain there. Finally, with


                                                                                                    23
further declines in transport costs, these early developing economies moved into areas B, C, or
G, all of which lack an autarky equilibrium, but do feature an equilibrium with non-specialized
trade. Again, in the absence of an explicit model of persistence, we assume that when the
autarkic equilibrium disappeared, these economies naturally moved to the non-specialized trade
equilibrium, which featured very similar distributions of population and economic activity
between regions.


Today’s developing world followed a different path, with the fall in transport costs relative to the
rise in agricultural productivity occurring earlier. In this case, countries entered area D in the
figure, where neither autarky nor non-specialized trade is a stable equilibrium. Manufactures
will be produced in only one region, and it is natural to expect that this would be the coast, where
productivity is higher. Once this specialization equilibrium has been entered, persistence would
mean that further increases in agricultural productivity (moving into areas C and B) would not
move the economy away from the equilibrium in which manufactures are produced in only one
region. Thus, by the time of the mid- to late-20th century agricultural revolution in the
developing world, urbanization (and manufacturing activity) is more concentrated in a smaller
set of regions with better access to world markets.




   5. Empirical specification


Operationalizing our model requires defining factors that affect trade and those that affect
agriculture, as well as defining the set of early-agglomerating countries and the set of
late-agglomerating countries. Above in the data section we discussed the variables that relate
primarily to trade and to agriculture.


To categorize countries that agglomerated late and those that agglomerated early, we rely
primarily on human capital, which allowed farmers to take advantage of higher-yield
technologies. Figure 7 plots adult literacy rates over time for the UK (an early adopter of

                                                                                                     24
advanced technology) and India. The UK had over 50% literacy by the 17th century, and
following a rapid rise after 1820, over 75% by 1870. Thus the UK achieved a massive increase in
human capital before the precipitous decline in the global freight cost index of the late 19th and
early 20th century. In 1951 India’s literacy rate was still under 20% and only then started to rise
quickly, achieving 50% in the 1990s. More broadly, we argue that a set of “early agglomeration"
countries, largely today’s developed world, harnessed new agricultural technologies and
urbanized before the radical decline in freight costs, while “late agglomeration” countries,
today’s developing world, only saw these new technologies and substantial urbanization much
later, after the largest declines in transport costs.


We operationalize our human capital measure using national average years of schooling in the
adult population in 1950, the earliest year with comprehensive data, from Barro and Lee (2010).
Alternatively, we use an agglomeration outcome, the level of urbanization in 1950, again the
earliest year with comprehensive data, from United Nations (2014). Figure 8 shows the
cumulative distribution of these two measures in 1950 weighted by national populations. They
closely track each other and indeed the partitions we make and the regression results are similar
across the two measures.


Our theory provides no guidance on the precise distinction between early and late spatially
transforming countries. We thus follow Durlauf and Johnson (1995), letting the data tell us the
cutoff at which the overall unexplained variance, summed across the “early and “late” samples,
is minimized. In general, we estimate the following equation, as well as use it to determine
where to split the sample between early and late transformers:


ln(lightic ) = X ic β + D_splitc + D_splitc X ic β d + εic                                        (8)


where D_splitc is a dummy variable indicating, for example, whether a country is in the high
education category. From Table 2, the overall R2s without splits are 0.459 and 0.569 without and
with fixed effects, respectively. We carry out the sample split exercise out for four separate

                                                                                                  25
situations, one with and one without country fixed effects for each of our two proxies, education
and urbanization.


Figure 9a provides an illustration of the approach for the education proxy without fixed effects.
The vertical axis represents the sum of squared residuals (SSR), summed across two regressions
carried out with the same specification on two separate samples. The horizontal axis specifies the
cutoff level of education defining the early and late samples. SSR is minimized (and therefore
explained variance is maximized) at a cutoff level of 3.6 years of education in 1950. In the fixed
effects regressions in Figure 9b, explained variance is maximized at 3.0 years of education.
Figures 9c and 9d show the analogous information for the urbanization proxy. A 1950
urbanization level of 44 percent is our cutoff without fixed effects; adding fixed effects reduces it
slightly to 38 percent.


Regardless of the proxy we use, we end up with a similar split of the sample. Table 3
cross-tabulates the full sample and the lit sample using the two types of cutoffs, separately with
and without country fixed effects. The off-diagonal cells, those that are characterized as being in
early agglomeration countries using the urbanization criterion and late agglomeration countries
using the education criterion, or vice versa, represent less than 5% of the full sample and less
than 10% of the lit sample. It is also the case that the chosen cutoffs split the samples quite
evenly. The countries and their categorization in each of the four variants are listed in Table A3.18


     6. Differential results


6.1 Explanatory power


Table 4 reports our main results, the contribution of different blocks of variables in explaining
lights variation within the early and late agglomeration samples, with and without country fixed

18
  Because some countries lack a measure of urbanization in 1950, and several more lack an education measure, the
sample sizes in these two differential exercises are smaller by 0.13% and 6.27%, respectively, than those in Tables 1
and 2. However, the overall R2 changes by less than 1% with fixed effects, and 0.1% without fixed effects.
                                                                                                                  26
effects, following equation (8). We discuss results for the education split shown in the left half of
the table. Results for the urbanization split, in the right half, are very similar. Panel A shows each
variable set’s contribution to R2 for low and high education countries. To highlight the
comparison of interest, we can net out the contribution of the base variables. In the high
education countries, the additional explanatory power of the agricultural variables is more than
that of the trade variables. In the low education countries, it is the trade variables that offer
relatively more explanatory power. So, for example, using the education split without fixed
effects, agriculture adds 0.54 to explanatory power relative to the base for high education
countries but only 0.27 for low education countries. In contrast, trade relative to the base adds
0.062 to explanatory power for high education countries but a higher 0.17 for low education
countries. This pattern, consistent with our model, holds for all such pairwise comparisons in
Panel A: for the education split with fixed effects and for the urbanization split with and without
fixed effects.


The last row of panel A summarizes this relationship, the relative advantage of agriculture over
trade variables in explaining lights variation for high versus low education countries, in a double
difference. The patterns are clear across both education and urbanization splits. Agriculture is
relatively more important for early developing countries. Without fixed effects for both
education and urbanization the double differential is over 0.31 and with fixed effects for both it is
over 0.17.


Panels B and C are the analogs of Panel A splitting overall effects into the intensive and
extensive margins, respectively. The distribution of effects between country sets and variable sets
are similar across the two margins.


Finally in Panels D and E we address an issue so far put aside. This paper makes a split between
developed and developing countries. A number of other splits have been suggested to us, one of
which is New World versus Old World. Splitting the data (allowing differential slope coefficients
of all covariates) in any way will improve the explanatory power of equation (8) over equation

                                                                                                    27
(1). A New-Old World split yields similar explanatory power as a high-low education or
urbanization split.19 What is critical to us is that the pattern we have shown in Panel A is not
simply a proxy for the New World-Old World split. Panels D and E show that this is the case.
The relative advantage of agriculture over trade variables in explaining lights variation for high
versus low education countries (or high versus low urbanization) is present in both New and Old
World countries. In other words, results are consistent with our model within the New World and
within the Old World.


6.2 Marginal effects


Table 4 emphasized the overall explanatory power of groups of trade and agricultural variables in
the two samples. We now consider the differential in their relative marginal effects. If marginal
effects of trade variables, relative to marginal effects of agricultural variables, are stronger in late
agglomerator countries than in early agglomerator countries, this is consistent with the
explanatory power results. We first estimate equation (8) in general form with a full set of
interactions. Results, shown in Tables A4 and A5 for education and urbanization, respectively,
generally show a pattern analogous to the explanatory power results. The (uninteracted) marginal
effects of the agriculture variables are usually of the same sign as their interactions with the early
agglomerator indicator, implying that they have a stronger effect in the early agglomerator
countries. Conversely, the (uninteracted) marginal effects of the trade variables are usually of the
opposite sign as their interactions with the early agglomerator indicator, implying that they have
a weaker effect in the early agglomerator countries.


To test this idea more formally, we consider the following equation:


ln(lightic ) = X Bic β B + X icA β A + X icT β T + D_splitc (αX icA β A + γ X icT β T ) + εic                  (9)



19
  For example, low-high education, low-high urbanization, and new-old world splits yield R2s of respectively 0.492,
0.483, and 0.488 with no country fixed effects.
                                                                                                               28
where “B” refers to the 2 base covariates, “A” to agriculture, and “T” to trade. The common
(constrained) deviation of effects for early agglomerators (where D_splitc = 1 ) are α and γ for
the sets of agricultural and trade variables, respectively. Table 5 reports non-linear least squares
estimates of equation (9), with our focus on the α and γ estimates at the end. Across the board
(split according to either education or urbanization, with or without fixed effects) patterns are
similar. The coefficient α is positive and significant, meaning that marginal effects of
agricultural variables are larger in absolute value for early agglomerating countries than for late
agglomerating countries. For trade the opposite is the case. The coefficient γ is negative and
significant, meaning that marginal effects of trade variables are smaller in absolute value for the
former group than for the latter. Thus not only is agriculture relatively more important than trade
in explaining lights variation for high compared to low education or urbanization countries, but
marginal effects of agriculture compared to trade variables are relatively stronger for high versus
low education or urbanization countries.


As a means of visualizing how the determinants of the location of agglomeration have changed
over time, we examine the difference between fitted values generated using the estimates for
early developing countries and those generated using estimates for late developers. We can
generate both sets of these fitted values for every country, regardless of whether it developed
early or late. The higher is this difference, the more that grid square is favored by the coefficients
that governed early developers relative to those that govern late developers. In practice, this is
                                                  ︿
equivalent to looking at the values of X ic β d in equation (8). This can be done either with or
without country fixed effects.20 Figure 10 shows this difference in fitted values for Europe,
Africa, and parts of west Asia, using the education split.


In Africa, for example, interior areas such as the Congo basin and the Ethiopian highlands would
have had higher light density under the early development regime than under the late

20
   The actual estimates for equation (8) are reported in Table A4. For these figures we use education as the splitting
variable between early and late developers. In the case of estimates using country fixed effects, these fixed effects
are left out in forming fitted values. After forming the difference in fitted values, we normalize by subtracting the
mean difference.
                                                                                                                   29
development regime (which is in fact what applied to them). And similarly, in Africa, the areas
around navigable rivers, particularly the Nile and Niger, have higher densities than if the region
had developed early. Within Europe, coastal areas, which of course already have particularly
high density, would have had even higher density if Europe had developed late instead of early. It
is also interesting to note that Europe has a predominantly negative values for the difference
between predicted lights using early developer coefficients and predicted lights using late
developer coefficients. This means that Europe is particularly rich in characteristics that favor
population density in late developers, despite the fact that it developed early.




   7. Spatial spillovers


Both the lights and the physical geography characteristics predicting them are highly spatially
correlated. To the extent that this is manifested in spatially correlated errors, we have accounted
for this by clustering errors and, alternatively, calculating Conley standard errors. However,
direct agglomeration of lights and spillover effects of the X’s, such as a natural harbor’s impact
on its hinterland, are also possible. We have tried to minimize the extent to which these affect our
results by aggregating individual light pixels to much larger grid squares. While minimizing
spillovers across cells, this essentially internalizes the agglomeration externalities. The estimated
coefficients are thus reduced form, reflecting not just raw agricultural and trade effects but also
endogenous agglomeration. For example, a natural harbor may represent a natural trade
advantage, which induces clustering around it, but because of scale economies, the intensity of
lights in a cell containing a harbor reflects both the basic harbor advantage and the induced
agglomeration from scale economies focused on a harbor.


Separating these three phenomena (correlated errors, spillovers, and agglomeration) is
notoriously difficult (e.g. Gibbons, Overman, and Patacchini 2015). One solution is to focus on
the reduced form, adding as covariates the trade and agriculture determinants of neighbors’

                                                                                                    30
lights. Alternatively, one may to try to uncover spillover effects from lights themselves (pure
agglomeration), although it is hard to do counterfactuals with the results (by exogenously
varying an endogenous variable). One way to estimate these effects, common in the literature, is
to add neighbors’ lights as a covariate and instrument for it, using second order neighbors’ trade
and agriculture determinants. This method relies on spillovers attenuating fully beyond
immediate neighbors.


However, the physical geography characteristics we use are highly spatially correlated. The
simple correlation coefficient between cells and their neighbors for each variable are given in
Table 6, with neighbors defined on a rook basis (the N, S, E and W neighbors of a grid square
sharing a finite border) and on a queen basis, which adds the NE, NW, SE and SW neighbors
sharing a corner. In either case, fifteen of these have a correlation coefficient in excess of 0.958
and several are over 0.99. Given these correlations, we cannot credibly separate own and
neighbor effects let alone instrument for them.


As an alternative, we experimented with imposing the structure of the spatial autoregressive
model


ln Li = ρ W i ln Li + X i β + εi                                                                  (10)


where the weights matrix W i is 1 for queen neighbors and 0 for all other squares. Note in this
we assume neighbors’ X and ε have no effect on outcomes. We then estimate this model in the
traditional fashion where


ln Li = (I − ρ W i )−1 X i β + εi                                                                 (11)


Results are in Appendix Table A6. The coefficient of interest is ρ , the effect of neighbor’s lights
on own lights. The estimates for the full sample in columns 1 and 2 of Table A6 are 0.99 with


                                                                                                   31
rook contiguity and 1.001 with queen contiguity, implying extreme spillovers. This is in part a
symptom of the huge patches of contiguous unlit areas. When we run the same specification on
lit areas, the coefficient is still above 0.6, whereas the agglomeration literature suggests a value
of 0.10 at most. Our attempts at instrumenting yielded similarly implausible results. We did not
further pursue this line of investigation.


   8. Conclusion


In this paper we have explored the role of natural characteristics in determining the locations of
population agglomerations, with a focus on the within-country distribution of population.
Natural characteristics have a surprisingly high degree of overall explanatory power, but when
we divide these natural characteristics into those associated with agricultural productivity and
those associated with ease of trade, a puzzle emerges: agricultural characteristics have relatively
more explanatory power in countries that developed early, despite the fact that these countries,
which tend to be wealthy, have much smaller agricultural sectors than countries which developed
later. We see the resolution of this puzzle in the intersection of three forces. The first is
persistence, the strong tendency for spatial patterns of agglomeration, once established, to remain
in place. The second is the changing weights on different characteristics natural as economies
develop. The two most important changes, in our view, are a reduction in the weight of
characteristics associated with agricultural productivity and an increase in the weight of
characteristics associated with trade. Finally, the third force is that early- and late-developing
countries experienced changes in the weights associated with sets of natural characteristics in a
different order. In today’s developed countries the process of agglomeration and structural
transformation began early, when transport costs were still relatively high, so urban
agglomerations were more localized in different agricultural regions. High costs of trade
protected local markets. In later developing countries, transport costs fell well before structural
transformation started. To exploit urban scale economies before structural transformation with a
limited national urban labor force, manufacturing tended to agglomerate in relatively few, often
coastal, locations. With structural transformation these initial coastal locations grew, without

                                                                                                     32
formation of more cities in the agricultural interior. Thus agricultural fundamentals drove the
location of economic activity in developed countries, while cost of trade fundamentals played a
much bigger role in developing countries.




                                                                                                  33
References
Allen, Treb and Costas Arkolakis. 2014. “Trade and the Topography of the Spatial Economy.”
   Quarterly Journal of Economics 129(3): 1085-1140.
Barro, Robert and Jong-Wha Lee. 2010. “A New Data Set of Educational Attainment in the
   World, 1950-2010.” Journal of Development Economics, 104: 184-198, April.
Bleakley, Hoyt and Jeffrey Lin. 2012. “Portage and Path Dependence.” Quarterly Journal of
   Economics 127: 587-644.
Broadberry, Stephen and O’Rourke, Kevin H. (2010) The Cambridge Economic History of
   Modern Europe: Volume 1, 1700-1870. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Buringh, Eltjo and Jan Luiten Van Zanden (2009). Charting the “Rise of the West”: Manuscripts
   and Printed Books in Europe, A Long-Term Perspective from the Sixth through Eighteenth
   Centuries. The Journal of Economic History, 69, pp 409-445.
Central Intelligence Agency. 2013. The World Factbook 14. Washington: Central Intelligence
   Agency. https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/ Accessed 9 August
   2015
Chen, Xi and William Nordhaus. 2011. “Using luminosity data as a proxy for economic
   statistics.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 108(21): 8589-8594.
Center for International Earth Science Information Network - CIESIN - Columbia University,
   and Centro Internacional de Agricultura Tropical - CIAT. 2005. Gridded Population of the
   World, Version 3 (GPWv3): Population Density Grid. Palisades, NY: NASA Socioeconomic
   Data and Applications Center (SEDAC). http://dx.doi.org/10.7927/H4XK8CG2.
Conley, Timothy G. 2008. Spatial Econometrics. The New Palgrave Dictionary of
   Economics, Second Edition, Eds .Steven N. Durlauf and Lawrence E. Blume.
Costinot, Arnaud, Dave Donaldson and Cory Smith. 2016. “Evolving Comparative Advantage
   and the Impact of Climate Change on Agricultural Markets: Evidence from 1.7 Million
   Fields Around the World.” Journal of Political Economy 124(1): 205-248, February.
Cronon W. 1991. Nature’s Metropolis: Chicago and the Great West. New York: W.W. Norton.




                                                                                              34
Davis, Donald R. and David E. Weinstein. 2002. “Bones, Bombs, and Break Points: The
   Geography of Economic Activity.” American Economic Review 92(5): 1269-1289,
   December.
Desmet Klaus and J.V. Henderson 2015. The geography of development within countries. In G.
   Duranton, J. V. Henderson and W. Strange (eds.), Handbook of Regional and Urban
   Economics, 5.
Donaldson, Dave (forthcoming) “Railroads of the Raj: Estimating the Impact of Transportation
   Infrastructure,” American Economic Review.
Durlauf, Steven N & Johnson, Paul A, 1995. "Multiple Regimes and Cross-Country Growth
   Behaviour," Journal of Applied Econometrics, 10(4): 365-384, Oct.-Dec.
Elvidge, C.D., Baugh, K.E., Kihn, E.A., Kroehl, H.W, Davis, E.R. 1997. “Mapping of city lights
   using DMSP Operational Linescan System data.” Photogrammetric Engineering and Remote
   Sensing 63: 727-734.
Elvidge, C.D., Baugh, K.E., Dietz, J., Bland, T., Sutton, P.C., Kroehl, H.W. 1999. “Radiance
   Calibration of DMSP-OLS Low-Light Imaging Data of Human Settlements.” Remote
   Sensing of Environment 68(1): 77-88.
FAO/IIASA, 2011. Global Agro-ecological Zones (GAEZ v3.0). FAO Rome, Italy and IIASA,
   Laxenburg, Austria. http://gaez.fao.org
Gollin, Douglas, and Richard Rogerson. 2014. “Productivity, transport costs and subsistence
   agriculture.” Journal of Development Economics 107: 38-48, March.
Gennaioli, Nicola, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer. 2013.
   “Human Capital and Regional Development.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 128(1):
   105-164.
Gennaioli, Nicola, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez De Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer. 2014.
   “Growth in Regions.” Journal of Economic Growth 19: 259-309
Gibbons, S., H.G.Overman and E. Patacchini. 2015. Spatial methods. In G. Duranton, J. V.
   Henderson and W. Strange (eds.) Handbook of Urban and Regional Economics Volume 5.
Henderson, J. Vernon, Adam Storeygard, and David N. Weil. 2012. “Measuring Economic
   Growth from Outer Space.” American Economic Review 102(2): 994-1028.

                                                                                               35
ISciences LLC (2008) Elevation and Depth v2 2000 (dataset)
   http://geoserver.isciences.com:8080/geonetwork/srv/en/resources.get?id=208&fname=Elevat
   ionGridv2.zip&access=private
Jedwab, Remi and Alexander Moradi (forthcoming) “The Permanent Economic Effects of
   Transportation Revolutions in Poor Countries: Evidence from Africa,” Review of Economics
   and Statistics.
Jedwab, Remi, Edward Kerby and Alexander Moradi (forthcoming) History, Path Dependence
   and Development: Evidence from Colonial Railroads, Settlers and Cities in Kenya. The
   Economic Journal.
Klein Goldewijk, Kees, Arthur Beusen, Gerard Van Drecht, Martine De Vos. 2011. “The HYDE
   3.1 spatially explicit database of human-induced global land-use change over the past 12,000
   years” Global Ecology & Biogeography 20(1):73–86, January.
Krugman, Paul. 1991. “First Nature, Second Nature, and Metropolitan Location” NBER
   Working Paper 3740.
Lehner, B. and Döll, P. 2004. “Development and validation of a global database of lakes,
   reservoirs and wetlands.” Journal of Hydrology 296(1-4): 1-22.
Mellinger, Andrew, Jeffrey D. Sachs, and John Luke Gallup. 2000. “Climate, Coastal Proximity,
   and Development,” in Clark, Gordon L., Maryann P. Feldman, and Meric S. Gertler, eds.,
   The Oxford Handbook of Economic Geography, 169-194.
Mesbah J. Motamed, Raymond J.G.M. Florax and William A. Masters. 2014. “Agriculture,
   Transportation and the Timing of Urbanization: Global Analysis at the Grid Cell Level.”
   Journal of Economic Growth 19(3): 339-368, September.
Michaels, Guy and Ferdinand Rauch. 2013. “Resetting the Urban Network: 117-2012.” BREAD
   Working Paper 405, November.
Ministry of Human Resource Development. 1987. A Hand Book of Educational and Allied
   Statistics. New Delhi.
Mitchell, Timothy D. and Philip D. Jones. 2005. “An improved method of constructing a
   database of monthly climate observations and associated high-resolution grids.” International
   Journal of Climatology 25(6): 693–712.

                                                                                             36
Mohammed, S.I.S. and J.G. Williamson 2004. Freight rates and productivity gains in British
   tramp shipping 1869–1950. Explorations in Economic History 41: 172–203
Natural Earth. 2012. Natural Earth version 2.0.0. http://www.naturalearthdata.com/, Accessed
   2013.
NOAA National Geophysical Data Center (2011). Global Self-consistent, Hierarchical,
   High-resolution Geography Database (GSHHG) Version 2.2.0.
   http://www.ngdc.noaa.gov/mgg/shorelines/shorelines.html.
Nordhaus, William. 2006. “Geography and Macroeconomics: New Data and New Findings,”
   Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 103(10): 3510-3517, March.
Nordhaus, William and Xi Chen. 2009. “Geography: Graphics and Economics.” The B.E.
   Journal of Economic Analysis and Policy 9(2): 1-12.
Nunn, Nathan and Diego Puga. 2012. “Ruggedness: The Blessing of Bad Geography in Africa.”
   The Review of Economics and Statistics 94(1): 20-36.
Olson, D.M., E. Dinerstein, E.D. Wikramanayake, N.D. Burgess, G.V.N. Powell, E.C.
   Underwood, J.A. D'Amico, I. Itoua, H.E. Strand, J.C. Morrison, C.J. Loucks, T.F. Allnutt,
   T.H. Ricketts, Y. Kura, J.F. Lamoreux, W.W. Wettengel, P. Hedao, and K.R. Kassem. 2001.
   “Terrestrial ecoregions of the world: A new map of life on earth.” Bioscience 51(11):
   933-938.
Ramankutty, Navin, Jonathan A. Foley, John Norman and Kevin McSweeney. 2002. “The global
   distribution of cultivable lands: current patterns and sensitivity to possible climate change.”
   Global Ecology and Biogeography 11(5): 377-392.
Rappaport, Jordan and Jeffrey Sachs. 2003. “The United States as a Coastal Nation.” Journal of
   Economic Growth 8: 5-46.
Rauch J. 1993. “Does History Matter Only When it Matters Little?” Quarterly Journal of
   Economics 108(3): 843-67
Stevens, Forrest R., Andrea E. Gaughan, Catherine Linard, and Andrew J. Tatem. 2015
   “Disaggregating Census Data for Population Mapping Using Random Forests with
   Remotely-Sensed and Ancillary Data” PLoS One 10(2): e0107042.
UNESCO. 1957. World Illiteracy at Mid-Century: A Statistical Study. Paris, UNESCO

                                                                                                 37
United States Navy (1953) World Port Index 1953. Hydrographic Office, US Navy
University of East Anglia Climatic Research Unit; Jones, P.D.; Harris, I. (2013): CRU TS3.20:
   Climatic Research Unit (CRU) Time-Series (TS) Version 3.20 of High Resolution Gridded
   Data of Month-by-month Variation in Climate (Jan. 1901 - Dec. 2011). NCAS British
   Atmospheric Data Centre.
   http://catalogue.ceda.ac.uk/uuid/2949a8a25b375c9e323c53f6b6cb2a3a
United Nations. 2014. World Urbanization Prospects, the 2014 revision. New York: United
   Nations.
Wessel, P., and W. H. F. Smith. 1996. “A Global Self-consistent, Hierarchical, High-resolution
   Shoreline Database.” Journal of Geophysical Research 101(B4): 8741-8743.
Willmott, C. J. and K. Matsuura (2012) Terrestrial Precipitation: 1900-2010 Gridded Monthly
   Time Series (V 3.02),
   http://climate.geog.udel.edu/~climate/html_pages/Global2011/Precip_revised_3.02/READM
   E.GlobalTsP2011.html. Accessed 25 January 2013
World Bank. 2015. World Development Indicators,
   http://data.worldbank.org/data-catalog/world-development-indicators Accessed 9 August
   2015.
Ziskin, Daniel, Kimberly Baugh, Feng Chi Hsu, Tilottama Ghosh, Chris Elvidge. 2010.
   “Methods Used For the 2006 Radiance Lights.” Proceedings of the 30th Asia-Pacific
   Advanced Network Meeting 131-142.




                                                                                                 38
Appendix. Algorithm to solve the model
The algorithm begins by creating a vector of all possible interior populations and a
corresponding vector of all possible coastal populations based on L and Li such that:
         L c = L − Li
To find equilibria, we cycle through these vectors in a loop. As a result, the following steps are
carried out for a fixed population allocation between the interior and coast.
First, we create another vector of all possible Lf i values, ranging from 0 (no agriculture in the
interior) to the entire interior population (everyone is employed in agriculture in the interior).
Then, a corresponding vector is created of Lf c values. This vector is calculated based on food
needs of the entire population, solving the following equation based on the text:
                                                  1


                    (      Lγ − Af L1f i−β
                                             )
                                                 1−β
         Lf c =                 Af c


We subsequently cycle through these vectors in another loop, nested within the previous one.
Consequently, the following steps are carried out for fixed regional agricultural labor forces and
regional population allocations.
         Within these two loops, we begin to find equilibria. If Lf c < Lc and Lf i < Li (both
regions have some manufacturing labor force), then we calculate Lmc and Lmi using the
following equation:
         Lmr = Lr − Lf r
Now that we have Li , Lc , Lf i , Lf c , Lmi , and Lmc , we calculate prices in each region based on
the average product of agriculture and manufacturing in each region (so that wages are equalized
across sectors within each region):
               Af L−f rβ
pmr =   Amr Lεmr (1−tLmr )1+ε

Next, we determine which of the two regions is exporting manufactured goods. This can be
determined by checking which of the two regions produces less food than its population requires.
Then, we check if the inter-regional goods market clears by checking if prices in the exporting
region are equal to prices in the importing region, adjusted for the iceberg trade cost τ . For most


                                                                                                     39
allocations of Lf c and Lf i this condition is not met, and the algorithm simply ends at this point
and starts at the next allocation of Lf c and Lf i .
However, if this condition is met, manufacturing consumption per capita is calculated for each
region. In the exporting region, manufacturing consumption is calculated by subtracting the
quantity of manufactured goods that are exported from the total quantity of manufactured goods
produced in the region, divided by the region’s population. The quantity of exported
manufactured goods is determined utilizing the fact that the inter-regional goods market clears.
As a result, exported manufactured goods necessarily equals the quantity of imported food
divided by the price of manufactured goods in the region. The quantity of imported food is
determined by the gap in the region’s food needs and food production in the region.
In the importing region, manufacturing consumption per capita is equal to total manufactured
goods produced plus the quantity of imported manufactured good, divided by regional
population. Analogously to the previous case, the value of imported manufactured goods is
determined by the quantity of exported food divided by price of manufactured goods in that
region.
Manufacturing consumption in each region is not necessarily equal at this point. As such, this
data point is recorded as a “possible equilibrium,” where every equilibrium condition is met
except that manufacturing consumption is equal across regions. If manufacturing consumption is
also equal across regions, then this data point is recorded as an “equilibrium.”
          If Lf c = Lc or Lf i = Li , then we have a corner solution where one region has no
manufacturing labor force. In this case, Lmc and Lmi are calculated just like before. Prices in the
region that has a manufacturing labor force are calculated using the average products of
agriculture and manufacturing just like above. However, prices in the region that has no
manufacturing labor force are now determined solely by adjusting the other region’s prices by
the iceberg trade cost. Next, manufacturing consumption per capita is calculated for each region.
The region that has a manufacturing labor force obviously exports manufactured goods in this
case. Manufacturing consumption per capita in this region is equal to total manufactured goods
minus exported manufactured goods (determined just as before) divided by regional population.


                                                                                                  40
In the region with no manufacturing labor force, manufacturing consumption is just equal to
imported manufactured goods divided by regional population.
This data point is recorded as a possible equilibrium. If manufacturing consumption is also equal
across regions, then this data point is recorded as an equilibrium. This ends the loop through
possible values of Lf c and Lf i .
         Next we address the endogenous no-trade equilibria where, as the name might imply,
there is no trade between the two regions. First we check if the current (fixed) population
allocation is feasible in that each region can feed itself without any trade. Then, we calculate Lf c
and Lf i based on each region’s individual food needs, remembering that there is no trade between
regions. As a result:
                 1

Lf i =   ( )
         Li γ
         Af
                1−β




Lmc and Lmi are then calculated using regional population and agricultural labor force. Prices
for each region are also calculated based on the average product of agriculture and
manufacturing so that wages are equalized across sectors in a region. Next, we check if prices are
in the “no-trade band” where no amount of trade is profitable, or:
pmi                   pmc
1−τ
       ≥ pmc and      1−τ
                            ≥ pmi
If this condition is met, then there is no incentive for trade between regions. We then calculate
manufacturing consumption per capita in each region as total manufactured goods divided by
regional population. Since the regional populations are still fixed (i.e. no mobility between
regions), manufacturing consumption is not necessarily equal across regions. This data point is
recorded as a possible equilibrium; every equilibrium condition is met except that manufacturing
consumption is equal across regions. If manufacturing consumption is also equal across regions,
then this data point is recorded as an equilibrium. This ends the loop through possible values of
Li .
         This ends the procedure for calculating equilibria for a set of parameters. Next, we check
the stability of all “full equilibria,” where all markets clear and manufacturing consumption is
equal across regions. We define two types of stability. “Type 1 stability” occurs when there is no



                                                                                                    41
incentive to move between regions. “Type 2 stability” occurs when there is no incentive to move
industries within regions (i.e. move from agriculture to manufacturing).


To check type 1 stability, we take 100 people from the coast and move them to the interior. We
allow for all other markets to clear, but manufacturing consumption is not equal between regions
(i.e. calculate the resulting “partial equilibrium”). If the people who moved have lower
consumption than before, then the equilibrium passes the stability check.


To check type 2 stability, we take 100 people from agriculture and move them into
manufacturing in a single region, which puts the labor market in that particular region in
disequilibrium. We then calculate the agricultural labor force in the other region based on the
food needs of the entire population. We hold regional populations constant, so manufacturing
labor forces are determined by regional population minus agricultural labor force. Next, since we
still allow the labor market in the other region (where people did not initially change sectors) to
be in equilibrium, we calculate prices in that region using the average product of manufacturing
and agriculture like in earlier steps. Prices in the region where the labor market is in
disequilibrium are then determined by prices in the other region adjusted for the iceberg trade
cost. Wages in agriculture and manufacturing are finally calculated for that region. If the
manufacturing consumption of manufacturing workers rises above that of their neighbors in
agriculture within the region, then the equilibrium fails the stability check. The stability test is
passed if manufacturing consumption of manufacturing workers in, for example, the interior is
below food workers in the interior. We note that under stability in this experiment in all
examples, food workers in the interior have the highest consumption nationally and
manufacturing interior workers the lowest, and vice versa for instability.




                                                                                                       42
                 Figure 1. Global nighttime lights in 2010




High : 15.7828




Low : 1.11514
Figure 2. Distribution of lights in lit areas
                Figure 3. Worldwide predicted lights

                    (a) Predicted lights (no country FEs)




High : 8.9046




Low : -5.4871
                 (b) Predicted lights (with country FEs)




High : 7.65271




Low : -7.29904
Figure 4. Equilibria with low agricultural productivity (Af = 1)
Figure 5. Equilibria with high agricultural productivity (Af = 1.5)
Figure 6. Equilibria in Agricultural productivity-transport costs (Af − τ ) phase space



                                                                         Trade costs (τ)
                                                  0.1   0.15       0.2    0.25       0.3   0.35   0.4   0.45   0.5   0.55   0.6

                                        2.3   G
                                       2.25
                                        2.2
                                       2.15
                                        2.1
                                       2.05
                                          2
                                       1.95   B
                                        1.9
      Agricultural productivity (Af)




                                       1.85
                                        1.8
                                       1.75
                                        1.7
                                       1.65   C                                  E                                   A
                                        1.6
                                       1.55
                                        1.5
                                       1.45
                                        1.4
                                       1.35
                                        1.3
                                       1.25   D
                                        1.2                    F
                                       1.15
                                        1.1
                                       1.05
                                          1

     Key (number of equilibria in bold)
     A     1: autarky
     B     2: trade with manufacturing in both regions or solely in coast
     C     3: trade with manufacturing in both regions, solely in coast, or solely in interior
     D     2: trade with manufacturing solely in coast or solely in interior
     E     2: autarky or manufacturing solely on coast
     F     3: autarky or trade with manufacturing solely in coast or solely in interior
     G     1: trade with manufacturing in both regions
      Figure 7. Timing of transport cost changes versus changes in eective technology




Note: Freight rates exclude periods including world war years. Sources: Freight rates: Mohammed and Williamson (2004)' UK

Literacy 1475-1750 (midpoints of reported periods 1451-1500, 1501-1600, 1601-1700, 1701-1800): Broadberry and O'Rourke

(2010), 1820-1870: Buringh and Van Zanden (2009), 2003: CIA (2015), India: 1901-1951: UNESCO (1957), 1971: Ministry

of Human Resource Development (1987), 1981-2001: World Bank (2015).
Figure 8. Cumulative distribution of education and urbanization in 1950
Figure 9. Cutos to minimize sum of squared residuals
           Figure 10. Changes from having or being given high education coecients
                                  (over low education ones)




Note: While 1950 education levels are unavailable for the following modern-day countries, for the purposes of this map we

assume that they are below 3.6 years: Angola, Burkina Faso, Chad, Comoros, Djibouti, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia,

Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Madagascar, Nigeria, São Tomé and Príncipe, and Somalia.
Note: While 1950 education levels are unavailable for the following modern-day countries, for the purposes of this map we

assume that they are below 3 years: Angola, Burkina Faso, Chad, Comoros, Djibouti, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia,

Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Madagascar, Nigeria, São Tomé and Príncipe, and Somalia.
                         Table 1: Summary Statistics and Baseline Regression Results
                                             Summary Statistics             Baseline Regression Results
                                        mean, (sd)        min, max    w/o country FEs    w/ country FEs
                                           (1)               (2)            (3)                (4)


Dependent variable

ln(light/area)                             3.501           1.115
                                          (3.176)          15.783
Base Covariates

 ruggedness                              2766.746             0         -8.70e-06***       -1.82e-05***
                                        (4838.898)        95814.383      (1.99e-06)         (1.68e-06)
 malaria index                             1.912              0          -0.0348***         -0.0486***
                                          (5.279)           38.081        (0.00260)          (0.00243)
Agricultural Covariates

 tropical moist forest                     0.116              0            -0.0406          -0.203***
                                          (0.321)             1           (0.0756)           (0.0661)
 tropical dry forest                       0.022              0           0.936***          0.228***
                                          (0.147)             1           (0.0943)           (0.0804)
 temperate broadleaf                       0.104              0           1.771***           1.294***
                                          (0.305)             1           (0.0707)           (0.0648)
 temperate conifer                         0.033              0           0.769***            0.159**
                                          (0.178)             1           (0.0822)           (0.0776)
 boreal forest                             0.167              0          -0.442***          -1.246***
                                          (0.373)             1           (0.0769)           (0.0812)
 tropical grassland                        0.12               0          -0.862***            -0.0548
                                          (0.325)             1           (0.0561)           (0.0487)
 temperate grassland                       0.077              0           0.710***           0.922***
                                          (0.267)             1           (0.0648)           (0.0568)
 montane grassland                         0.033              0          0.631***           0.762***
                                          (0.179)             1           (0.0806)           (0.0721)
 tundra                                    0.124              0          -0.874***          -1.438***
                                          (0.329)             1           (0.0863)           (0.0895)
 Mediterranean forest                      0.024              0           0.837***           1.373***
                                          (0.153)             1           (0.0926)           (0.0877)
 mangroves                                 0.004               0           0.418**            -0.0312
                                          (0.064)              1           (0.180)            (0.154)
 desert                                    0.176              0
                                                                        (reference)         (reference)
                                          (0.381)              1
 temperature (◦ C)                         9.970           -22.286        0.174***           0.124***
                                         (13.788)           30.366        (0.00337)          (0.00387)
 precipitation (mm/month)                 60.678            0.387       -0.00896***         -0.0112***
                                          (59.29)          921.909       (0.000446)         (0.000468)
 growing days                            139.306              0          0.00985***         0.00856***
                                         (99.067)            366         (0.000284)         (0.000283)

                                                                                       Continued on next page
                                     Table 1  Continued from previous   page

                                             Summary Statistics                     Baseline Regression Results
                                        mean, (sd)         min, max        w/o country FEs       w/ country FEs
                                           (1)                (2)                (3)                   (4)

 land suitability                           0.273               0                 2.690***           2.184***
                                           (0.319)             1                  (0.0552)           (0.0528)
 abs(latitude)                              38.34              0                  0.114***          0.0371***
                                          (20.923)             75                (0.00251)          (0.00336)
 elevation (m)                            601.505           -187.341            0.000501***        8.02e-05***
                                         (788.097)          6169.01              (2.41e-05)         (2.58e-05)
Trade Covariates

 1 (coast)                                 0.098               0                   0.421***          0.414***
                                          (0.297)              1                   (0.0396)          (0.0323)
 distance to coast (km)                   485.226              0                -0.000665***      -0.000677***
                                         (480.554)          2273.801              (2.81e-05)        (3.24e-05)
 1 (harbor<25km)                           0.027               0                   1.625***          1.414***
                                          (0.163)              1                   (0.0677)          (0.0575)
 1 (river<25km)                            0.027               0                   0.764***          0.690***
                                          (0.163)              1                   (0.0662)          (0.0601)
 1 (big lake<25km)                         0.127               0                   0.317***          0.179***
                                          (0.333)              1                   (0.0272)          (0.0244)

Observations                              243,985           243,985            243,985             243,985
Non-zero observations                      98,941            98,941             98,941              98,941
R-squared                                                                        0.459               0.568
Notes: Standard errors in parentheses in columns (3) and (4) are clustered by square blocks of 9 cells. *** p<0.01,

** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
                   Table 2: R2 for selected regressions predicting ln(light/area)

                                                                  (1)                      (2)
                                                            No country FEs          With country FEs
(1) All variables, both margins (N = 243,985)                    0.459                   0.568
(2) All variables, extensive margin (LPM)                        0.385                   0.475
(3) All variables, intensive margin (OLS)                        0.262                   0.359
(5) Country xed eects, both margins                                                    0.338
(5) Country xed eects, extensive margin                                                0.269
(6) Country xed eects, intensive margin                                                0.219
(7) Base variables (malaria, ruggedness)                         0.020                   0.350
(8) Agriculture variables, both margins (plus base)              0.437                   0.554
(9) Trade variables, both margins (plus base)                    0.072                   0.367
             Table 3: Cell counts in 4 way splits: Education vs. Urbanization

           No country FEs                                 With country FEs
 (ed cuto = 3.6; urban cuto = 0.44)             (ed cuto = 3; urban cuto = 0.38)


Whole Sample                                    Whole Sample
               high urban low urban                            high urban low urban
high education   119,824    7,399               high education   123,908    3,879
low education     1,681     99,713              low education     6,214     94,616

Lit Sample                                      Lit Sample
               high urban low urban                            high urban low urban
high education   43,444      5,840              high education   46,614      3,196
low education      961      44,360              low education     3,790     41,005
  Table 4: R2 dierentials of trade and agriculture variables in regressions predicting ln(light/area)
                           for high/low education & urbanization countries

                                                 Education                                        Urbanization

                                      No FEs                 With FEs                   No FEs                   With FEs

                              High            Low       High           Low      High            Low       High            Low

Panel A: Both margins


 Base                         0.008           0.052    0.379           0.291    0.008           0.058     0.352           0.346

 Agriculture + base           0.546           0.326    0.638           0.445    0.529           0.356     0.611           0.489

 Trade + base                 0.070           0.218    0.418           0.399    0.073           0.212     0.389           0.438

 High - Low dierential               0.368                    0.174                    0.312                     0.171


Panel B: Extensive margin LPM


 Base                         0.006           0.046    0.281           0.248    0.006           0.047     0.264           0.285

 Agriculture + base           0.489           0.268    0.555           0.371    0.475           0.280     0.533           0.401

 Trade + base                 0.058           0.171    0.328           0.324    0.065           0.163     0.306           0.350

 High - Low dierential               0.334                    0.180                    0.293                     0.176


Panel C: Intensive margin OLS


 Base                         0.011           0.050    0.253           0.171    0.008           0.063     0.240           0.214

 Agriculture + base           0.251           0.184    0.366           0.255    0.239           0.213     0.344           0.298

 Trade + base                 0.082           0.163    0.281           0.262    0.078           0.166     0.271           0.297

 High - Low dierential               0.148                    0.092                    0.114                     0.072


Panel D: New world, both margins


 Base                         0.006           0.193    0.243           0.239    0.007           0.208     0.249           0.267

 Agriculture + base           0.485           0.302    0.601           0.346    0.488           0.300     0.578           0.398

 Trade + base                 0.139           0.284    0.302           0.326    0.132           0.286     0.295           0.352

 High - Low dierential               0.328                    0.279                    0.342                     0.237


Panel E: Old world, both margins


 Base                         0.016           0.049    0.473           0.342    0.052           0.056     0.442           0.388

 Agriculture + base           0.648           0.385    0.683           0.518    0.627           0.412     0.664           0.541

 Trade + base                 0.099           0.213    0.505           0.437    0.140           0.210     0.477           0.467

 High - Low dierential               0.377                    0.097                    0.285                     0.113

 Notes:   Education cutos are 3.6 (no FEs) and 3 (with FEs), and urbanization cutos are 0.44 (no FEs) and 0.38 (with FEs).
 High - Low dierential is high[(Agriculture + base)-(Trade + base)] - low[(Agriculture + base)-(Trade + base)]
                        Table 5: Dierential group marginal eects
                             Dependent variable: ln(lights/area)

                                       Education                               Urbanization

                           No FEs                  With FEs          No FEs               With FEs
                             (1)                      (2)              (3)                   (4)


ruggedness               -9.44e-06***          -1.46e-05***        -9.53e-06***         -1.70e-05***
                          (2.09e-06)               (1.78e-06)       (1.97e-06)            (1.69e-06)
malaria index             -0.0429***           -0.0443***          -0.0403***            -0.0436***
                          (0.00261)                (0.00262)        (0.00252)             (0.00235)
tropical moist forest     -0.406***                -0.440***        -0.346***             -0.326***
                           (0.0703)                (0.0660)          (0.0676)             (0.0629)
tropical dry forest        0.757***                 0.140*          0.717***               0.182**
                           (0.0890)                (0.0815)          (0.0882)             (0.0777)
temperate broadleaf        1.253***                1.044***         1.359***              1.184***
                           (0.0640)                (0.0633)          (0.0618)             (0.0633)
temperate conifer          0.610***                  0.118          0.719***               0.158**
                           (0.0703)                (0.0722)          (0.0697)             (0.0731)
boreal forest             -0.354***                -1.049***        -0.274***             -1.061***
                           (0.0684)                (0.0826)          (0.0664)             (0.0846)
tropical grassland        -0.760***                -0.103**         -0.727***                 -0.0583
                           (0.0500)                (0.0483)          (0.0479)             (0.0457)
temperate grassland        0.464***                0.671***         0.538***              0.776***
                           (0.0543)                (0.0558)          (0.0540)             (0.0562)
montane grassland          0.562***                0.737***         0.502***              0.714***
                           (0.0756)                (0.0757)          (0.0730)             (0.0721)
tundra                    -0.548***                -1.086***        -0.462***             -1.139***
                           (0.0745)                (0.0891)          (0.0723)             (0.0922)
Mediterranean forest       0.548***                1.086***         0.655***              1.195***
                           (0.0746)                (0.0807)          (0.0758)             (0.0823)
mangroves                 -0.930***                -1.042***        -0.327**              -0.532***
                           (0.180)                  (0.154)          (0.166)                  (0.149)
temperature                0.139***                0.113***         0.135***              0.117***
                          (0.00338)                (0.00411)        (0.00306)             (0.00411)
precipitation            -0.00709***           -0.00996***         -0.00704***           -0.0101***
                          (0.000370)           (0.000437)          (0.000356)            (0.000436)
                                                                                 Continued on next page
                                      Table 5  Continued from previous page
                                                  Education                                    Urbanization

                                      No FEs                  With FEs              No FEs                With FEs
                                         (1)                     (2)                   (3)                   (4)


growing days                         0.00901***             0.00821***             0.00853***             0.00810***
                                     (0.000263)             (0.000289)             (0.000251)             (0.000284)
land suitability                      2.348***                1.955***              2.313***               1.971***
                                      (0.0501)                (0.0559)              (0.0485)               (0.0532)
abs(latitude)                         0.107***                0.0380***             0.101***              0.0382***
                                     (0.00265)                (0.00310)            (0.00235)              (0.00313)
elevation                           0.000429***               5.03e-05*           0.000380***            8.67e-05***
                                     (2.34e-05)               (2.57e-05)           (2.14e-05)             (2.53e-05)
1 (coast)                             1.127***                1.109***              0.861***               0.946***
                                      (0.0737)                (0.0667)              (0.0670)               (0.0604)
distance to coast                   -0.00149***            -0.00126***            -0.00133***            -0.00119***
                                     (3.65e-05)               (4.72e-05)           (3.37e-05)             (4.49e-05)
1 (harbor<25km)                       2.379***                2.292***              2.160***               2.088***
                                       (0.115)                 (0.102)               (0.104)               (0.0901)
1 (river<25km)                        1.244***                1.172***              1.218***               1.051***
                                       (0.109)                 (0.101)               (0.103)               (0.0968)
1 (big lake<25km)                     0.454***                0.377***              0.501***               0.314***
                                      (0.0495)                (0.0441)              (0.0459)               (0.0405)
above cut                            -3.954***                -74.26***            -3.780***               24.30***
                                       (0.142)                 (0.158)               (0.134)                  (2.468)
α (agriculture deviation)             0.368***                0.167***              0.375***               0.119***
                                      (0.0209)                (0.0258)              (0.0191)               (0.0237)
γ (trade deviation)                  -0.761***                -0.712***            -0.740***              -0.644***
                                      (0.0164)                (0.0177)              (0.0188)               (0.0201)


Observations                          228,690                  228,690              243,661                243,661
R-squared                               0.486                   0.574                 0.474                   0.571
Notes:  Above cut is an indicator, which equals 1 if average years of education is greater than or equal to 3.6 (column
1) or 3 (column 2), or the fraction of urban population is greater than or equal to 0.44 (column 3) or 0.38 (column 4).
Agriculture and trade deviation represent the constrined deviation of each variable set for early agglomerator countries
(α and γ , respectively, in equation (12)). Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by square blocks of 9 cells. ***
p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
            Table 6: Correlations with the average value of neighbors
                     as dened by rook or queen contiguity

                                            (1)                     (2)
Variable                                   Rook                    Queen
mangroves                                 0.6336                   0.6486
ruggedness                                0.7550                   0.7611
1 (harbor<25km)                           0.8222                   0.7843
1 (big lake<25km)                         0.8815                   0.8585
1 (river<25km)                            0.8914                   0.8735
1 (coast)                                 0.9050                   0.8772
tropical dry forest                       0.9057                   0.9001
temperate conifer                         0.9201                   0.9120
montane grassland                         0.9291                   0.9235
tropical moist forest                     0.9595                   0.9586
Mediterranean forest                      0.9674                   0.9639
temperate grassland                       0.9683                   0.9635
tropical grassland                        0.9721                   0.9699
temperate broadleaf                       0.9737                   0.9699
tundra                                    0.9753                   0.9701
boreal forest                             0.9761                   0.9709
malaria index                             0.9876                   0.9799
land suitability                          0.9892                   0.9818
elevation                                 0.9923                   0.9895
precipitation                             0.9943                   0.9903
growing days                              0.9989                   0.9985
temperature                               0.9994                   0.9988
abs(latitude)                                1                        1
distance to coast                            1                        1
Table A1: Conley Standard errors, kernel cuto = 40 km
             Dependent variable: lrad2010land_csd

                                              (1)


 ruggedness                              -8.70e-06***
                                          (2.19e-06)
 malaria index                           -.0348355***
                                          (.0027154)
 tropical moist forest                     -.040639
                                          (.0800286)
 tropical dry forest                     .9364165***
                                          (.0994472)
 temperate broadleaf                     1.771348***
                                          (.0759276)
 temperate conifer                       .7689181***
                                          (.0899183)
 boreal forest                            -.441965***
                                          (.0858767)
 tropical grassland                      -.8617399***
                                          (.0591735)
 temperate grassland                     .7103923***
                                          (.0703476)
 montane grassland                       .6306202***
                                          (.0867233)
 tundra                                  -.8745064***
                                          (.0970188)
 Mediterranean forest                    .8365996***
                                          (.0981427)
 mangroves                                .4176001**
                                          (.1943355)
 temperature                             .1737878***
                                           (.00393)
 precipitation                           -.0089633***
                                    Continued on next page
            Table A1  Continued from previous page
                                              (1)


                                           (.000473)
growing days                              .0098492***
                                           (.0003026)
land suitability                          2.689555***
                                           (.059731)
abs(latitude)                             .1135415***
                                           (.0028149)
elevation                                 .0005011***
                                           (.0000267)
1 (coast)                                 .4216031***
                                           (.0444975)
distance to coast                         -.0006645***
                                           (.0000306)
1 (harbor<25km)                           1.62537***
                                           (.0786706)
1 (river<25km)                            .7637808***
                                           (.0769342)
1 (big lake<25km)                         .316677***
                                           (.0324868)
Notes:   *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
                        Table A2: Intensive and extensive margins

                                 Intensive       Extensive      Intensive           Extensive
                                  No FEs         No FEs         With FEs            With FEs
                                    (1)             (2)               (3)               (4)


ruggedness                      -2.53e-05***    9.58e-07***    -3.31e-05***         -6.31e-07**
                                 (2.14e-06)     (3.05e-07)      (1.94e-06)          (2.70e-07)
malaria index                    -0.0377***     -0.00499***     -0.0509***         -0.00640***
                                 (0.00320)      (0.000451)      (0.00446)           (0.000440)
tropical moist forest            -0.430***      0.0363***       -0.196***            -0.00467
                                  (0.0571)       (0.0109)           (0.0551)         (0.00988)
tropical dry forest               -0.117*        0.172***           -0.124**        0.0581***
                                  (0.0613)       (0.0126)           (0.0625)         (0.0112)
temperate broadleaf              0.735***        0.174***           0.561***         0.154***
                                  (0.0546)       (0.00987)          (0.0519)         (0.00921)
temperate conifer                0.384***       0.0985***            0.110*         0.0457***
                                  (0.0631)       (0.0120)           (0.0610)         (0.0117)
boreal forest                    -0.242***      -0.0777***      -0.370***            -0.176***
                                  (0.0681)       (0.0118)           (0.0689)         (0.0121)
tropical grassland               -0.917***      -0.0948***      -0.273***            0.0149**
                                  (0.0580)       (0.00878)          (0.0586)         (0.00757)
temperate grassland               -0.0446        0.148***            0.0762          0.183***
                                  (0.0524)       (0.00984)          (0.0506)         (0.00883)
montane grassland                 0.0293        0.0776***           0.396***        0.0835***
                                  (0.0683)       (0.0133)           (0.0669)         (0.0122)
tundra                           -0.261***       -0.177***      -0.532***            -0.230***
                                  (0.0972)       (0.0131)           (0.106)          (0.0134)
Mediterranean forest             0.247***       0.0725***           0.385***         0.214***
                                  (0.0634)       (0.0123)           (0.0685)         (0.0129)
mangroves                          -0.144       0.0676***           -0.0447           -0.0162
                                  (0.122)        (0.0230)           (0.113)          (0.0200)
temperature                      0.0828***      0.0262***       0.0160***           0.0236***
                                 (0.00346)      (0.000508)      (0.00452)           (0.000601)
                                                                            Continued on next page
                                     Table A2  Continued from previous page
                                              Intensive         Extensive           Intensive         Extensive
                                               No FEs            No FEs            With FEs           With FEs
                                                 (1)                (2)                (3)                (4)


precipitation                               -0.00327***        -0.00116***        -0.00519***        -0.00157***
                                             (0.000369)         (6.50e-05)         (0.000419)         (7.20e-05)
growing days                                 0.00418***         0.00132***         0.00500***        0.00110***
                                             (0.000217)         (3.92e-05)         (0.000231)         (4.08e-05)
land suitability                              0.697***           0.417***           0.736***           0.348***
                                              (0.0402)           (0.00784)          (0.0414)          (0.00780)
abs(latitude)                                0.0479***          0.0175***           0.00240          0.00935***
                                              (0.00212)         (0.000373)         (0.00327)          (0.000502)
elevation                                     -1.36e-05        8.78e-05***        -0.000310***       4.67e-05***
                                             (2.54e-05)         (3.84e-06)         (2.75e-05)         (4.08e-06)
1 (coast)                                     0.916***            0.0102*           0.898***           0.0107**
                                              (0.0352)           (0.00528)          (0.0322)          (0.00452)
distance to coast                           -0.000389***       -9.85e-05***       -0.000309***       -9.88e-05***
                                             (2.92e-05)         (4.56e-06)         (3.31e-05)         (5.21e-06)
1 (harbor<25km)                               0.492***           0.152***           0.568***           0.138***
                                              (0.0449)           (0.00824)          (0.0403)          (0.00752)
1 (river<25km)                                0.320***           0.118***           0.306***           0.106***
                                              (0.0548)           (0.00895)          (0.0485)          (0.00843)
1 (big lake<25km)                             0.246***          0.0443***           0.182***          0.0259***
                                              (0.0273)           (0.00393)          (0.0257)          (0.00361)


Observations                                   98,941             243,985            98,940            243,974
R-squared                                       0.262              0.385              0.359              0.475
Notes:   Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by square blocks of 9 cells. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
          Table A3: Country education and urbanization levels (1950) and categorization
                                                                  Education category       Urban category
Country name               Education level   Urbanization level
                              (years)                             No FEs   With FEs     No FEs    With FEs


New Zealand                     9.19               0.725           high      high        high       high
Switzerland                     8.84               0.444           high      high        high       high
United States of America        8.40               0.642           high      high        high       high
Slovakia                        8.13               0.300           high      high        low        low
Czech Republic                  8.10               0.542           high      high        high       high
Australia                       8.04               0.770           high      high        high       high
Canada                          7.60               0.609           high      high        high       high
Norway                          7.40               0.505           high      high        high       high
Israel                          7.30               0.710           high      high        high       high
Belize                          7.23               0.553           high      high        high       high
Armenia                         7.22               0.403           high      high        low        high
Hungary                         7.13               0.530           high      high        high       high
Germany                         6.80               0.681           high      high        high       high
Belgium                         6.75               0.915           high      high        high       high
Sweden                          6.75               0.657           high      high        high       high
Japan                           6.73               0.534           high      high        high       high
United Kingdom                  6.39               0.790           high      high        high       high
Ireland                         6.23               0.401           high      high        low        high
Estonia                         6.13               0.497           high      high        high       high
Netherlands                     6.08               0.561           high      high        high       high
Austria                         5.97               0.636           high      high        high       high
Slovenia                        5.86               0.199           high      high        low        low
Iceland                         5.70               0.728           high      high        high       high
Croatia                         5.66               0.223           high      high        low        low
Denmark                         5.51               0.680           high      high        high       high
Poland                          5.40               0.383           high      high        low        high
Trinidad and Tobago             5.00               0.214           high      high        low        low
Argentina                       4.85               0.653           high      high        high       high
Chile                           4.81               0.584           high      high        high       high
Republic of Korea               4.50               0.214           high      high        low        low
Romania                         4.38               0.256           high      high        low        low
Ukraine                         4.37               0.355           high      high        low        low
China, Hong Kong SAR            4.36               0.852           high      high        high       high
Uruguay                         4.34               0.779           high      high        high       high
France                          4.33               0.552           high      high        high       high
Guyana                          4.24               0.280           high      high        low        low
Italy                           4.21               0.541           high      high        high       high
Greece                          4.14               0.522           high      high        high       high
Tajikistan                      4.13               0.294           high      high        low        low
Kyrgyzstan                      4.04               0.265           high      high        low        low
South Africa                    4.03               0.422           high      high        low        high
Finland                         3.86               0.430           high      high        low        high
                                                                                       Continued on next page
                                Table A3    Continued from previous page

                                                                   High/ low, educ        High/ low, urban
Country name             Education level     Urbanization level
                            (years)                               No FEs    With FEs    No FEs    With FEs


Latvia                        3.84                 0.464           high       high       high       high
Russian Federation            3.83                 0.441           high       high       high       high
Spain                         3.83                 0.519           high       high       high       high
Bulgaria                      3.82                 0.276           high       high       low        low
Panama                        3.76                 0.358           high       high       low        low
Lithuania                     3.71                 0.288           high       high       low        low
Fiji                          3.62                 0.244           high       high       low        low
Jamaica                       3.59                 0.241           low        high       low        low
Cyprus                        3.56                 0.284           low        high       low        low
Costa Rica                    3.55                 0.335           low        high       low        low
Cuba                          3.49                 0.565           low        high       high       high
Sri Lanka                     3.40                 0.153           low        high       low        low
Luxembourg                    3.39                 0.672           low        high       high       high
Republic of Moldova           3.28                 0.185           low        high       low        low
Taiwan                        3.03                   .             low        high       high       high
Réunion                       2.85                 0.235           low        low        low        low
Peru                          2.83                 0.410           low        low        low        high
Singapore                     2.71                 0.994           low        low        high       high
Paraguay                      2.69                 0.346           low        low        low        low
Albania                       2.60                 0.205           low        low        low        low
Kazakhstan                    2.59                 0.364           low        low        low        low
Ecuador                       2.55                 0.283           low        low        low        low
Dominican Republic            2.52                 0.237           low        low        low        low
Mauritius                     2.51                 0.293           low        low        low        low
Viet Nam                      2.47                 0.116           low        low        low        low
Lesotho                       2.47                 0.018           low        low        low        low
Namibia                       2.40                 0.134           low        low        low        low
Colombia                      2.33                 0.327           low        low        low        low
Bolivia (Plurinational
                              2.32                 0.338           low        low         low        low
State of)
Saudi Arabia                  2.31                 0.213           low        low         low       low
Philippines                   2.21                 0.271           low        low         low       low
Mexico                        2.19                 0.427           low        low         low       high
Malaysia                      2.08                 0.204           low        low         low       low
Brazil                        2.08                 0.362           low        low         low       low
Thailand                      2.04                 0.165           low        low         low       low
Brunei Darussalam             2.02                 0.268           low        low         low       low
Portugal                      1.90                 0.312           low        low         low       low
Zambia                        1.77                 0.115           low        low         low       low
Senegal                       1.76                 0.172           low        low         low       low
Honduras                      1.64                 0.176           low        low         low       low
Venezuela (Bolivarian
                              1.63                 0.473           low        low        high       high
Republic of)
                                                                                       Continued on next page
                                    Table A3    Continued from previous page

                                                                       High/ low, educ        High/ low, urban
Country name                 Education level     Urbanization level
                                (years)                               No FEs    With FEs    No FEs    With FEs


Qatar                             1.63                 0.805           low        low        high       high
Mongolia                          1.61                 0.200           low        low        low        low
Zimbabwe                          1.58                 0.106           low        low        low        low
China                             1.58                 0.118           low        low        low        low
Nicaragua                         1.55                 0.352           low        low        low        low
El Salvador                       1.53                 0.365           low        low        low        low
Kuwait                            1.48                 0.615           low        low        high       high
Botswana                          1.38                 0.027           low        low        low        low
Jordan                            1.33                 0.370           low        low        low        low
Guatemala                         1.31                 0.251           low        low        low        low
Mauritania                        1.27                 0.031           low        low        low        low
Lao People's Democratic
                                  1.25                 0.072           low        low         low        low
Republic
Swaziland                         1.23                 0.020           low        low         low        low
United Republic of
                                  1.21                 0.035           low        low         low        low
Tanzania
Kenya                             1.16                 0.056           low        low        low        low
Myanmar                           1.15                 0.162           low        low        low        low
Turkey                            1.11                 0.248           low        low        low        low
Indonesia                         1.09                 0.124           low        low        low        low
Bahrain                           1.00                 0.644           low        low        high       high
Pakistan                          0.99                 0.175           low        low        low        low
India                             0.99                 0.170           low        low        low        low
Malawi                            0.96                 0.035           low        low        low        low
Bangladesh                        0.93                 0.043           low        low        low        low
Uganda                            0.89                 0.028           low        low        low        low
Algeria                           0.85                 0.222           low        low        low        low
Syrian Arab Republic              0.85                 0.327           low        low        low        low
Côte d'Ivoire                     0.84                 0.100           low        low        low        low
United Arab Emirates              0.79                 0.545           low        low        high       high
Congo                             0.79                 0.249           low        low        low        low
Cameroon                          0.70                 0.093           low        low        low        low
Ghana                             0.68                 0.154           low        low        low        low
Tunisia                           0.65                 0.323           low        low        low        low
Haiti                             0.59                 0.122           low        low        low        low
Democratic Republic of
                                  0.58                 0.191           low        low         low        low
the Congo
Liberia                           0.57                 0.130           low        low         low        low
Iran (Islamic Republic of)        0.54                 0.275           low        low         low        low
Egypt                             0.52                 0.319           low        low         low        low
Papua New Guinea                  0.51                 0.017           low        low         low        low
Mozambique                        0.49                 0.035           low        low         low        low
Gabon                             0.47                 0.114           low        low         low        low
                                                                                           Continued on next page
                                  Table A3    Continued from previous page

                                                                     High/ low, educ        High/ low, urban
Country name               Education level     Urbanization level
                              (years)                               No FEs    With FEs    No FEs    With FEs


Libya                           0.44                 0.195           low        low        low        low
Benin                           0.44                 0.050           low        low        low        low
Cambodia                        0.42                 0.102           low        low        low        low
Burundi                         0.42                 0.017           low        low        low        low
Sierra Leone                    0.41                 0.126           low        low        low        low
Gambia                          0.40                 0.103           low        low        low        low
Central African Republic        0.39                 0.144           low        low        low        low
Togo                            0.34                 0.044           low        low        low        low
Rwanda                          0.32                 0.021           low        low        low        low
Sudan                           0.32                 0.068           low        low        low        low
Niger                           0.32                 0.049           low        low        low        low
Morocco                         0.28                 0.262           low        low        low        low
Afghanistan                     0.27                 0.058           low        low        low        low
Iraq                            0.24                 0.351           low        low        low        low
Mali                            0.15                 0.085           low        low        low        low
Nepal                           0.11                 0.027           low        low        low        low
Yemen                           0.02                 0.058           low        low        low        low
Gibraltar                         .                  1.000             .          .        high       high
Monaco                            .                  1.000             .          .        high       high
French Guiana                     .                  0.537             .          .        high       high
Isle of Man                       .                  0.529             .          .        high       high
Bahamas                           .                  0.521             .          .        high       high
Falkland Islands
                                  .                  0.510            .          .         high       high
(Malvinas)
Greenland                         .                  0.490            .          .         high       high
Suriname                          .                  0.469            .          .         high       high
Azerbaijan                        .                  0.457            .          .         high       high
Turkmenistan                      .                  0.450            .          .         high       high
Puerto Rico                       .                  0.406            .          .         low        high
Djibouti                          .                  0.398            .          .         low        high
Andorra                           .                  0.388            .          .         low        high
Georgia                           .                  0.369            .          .         low        low
Guadeloupe                        .                  0.358            .          .         low        low
Lebanon                           .                  0.320            .          .         low        low
Dem. People's Republic
                                  .                  0.310            .          .          low        low
of Korea
Uzbekistan                        .                  0.289            .          .          low        low
Belarus                           .                  0.262            .          .          low        low
New Caledonia                     .                  0.246            .          .          low        low
Montserrat                        .                  0.158            .          .          low        low
Equatorial Guinea                 .                  0.155            .          .          low        low
Cabo Verde                        .                  0.142            .          .          low        low
Bosnia and Herzegovina            .                  0.137            .          .          low        low
                                                                                         Continued on next page
                                   Table A3    Continued from previous page

                                                                      High/ low, educ       High/ low, urban
Country name               Education level      Urbanization level
                              (years)                                No FEs    With FEs   No FEs   With FEs


Sao Tome and Principe             .                   0.135            .          .        low        low
Samoa                             .                   0.129            .          .        low        low
Somalia                           .                   0.127            .          .        low        low
Guinea-Bissau                     .                   0.100            .          .        low        low
Timor-Leste                       .                   0.099            .          .        low        low
Vanuatu                           .                   0.088            .          .        low        low
Oman                              .                   0.086            .          .        low        low
Nigeria                           .                   0.078            .          .        low        low
Madagascar                        .                   0.078            .          .        low        low
Angola                            .                   0.076            .          .        low        low
Eritrea                           .                   0.071            .          .        low        low
Guinea                            .                   0.067            .          .        low        low
Comoros                           .                   0.066            .          .        low        low
Ethiopia                          .                   0.046            .          .        low        low
Chad                              .                   0.045            .          .        low        low
Burkina Faso                      .                   0.038            .          .        low        low
Solomon Islands                   .                   0.038            .          .        low        low
Bhutan                            .                   0.021            .          .        low        low
Notes: Education cutos are 3.6 (no FEs) and 3 (with FEs), and urbanization cutos are 0.44 (no FEs) and 0.38
(with FEs).
                        Table A4: High education dierentials
                           Dependent variable: ln(lights/area)

                                           No FEs                             With FEs

                                   (1)                 (2)           (3)                  (4)
                              Main eect        Interaction      Main eect        Interaction


constant                                            -2.790***
                                                     (0.330)
ruggedness                    -1.39e-05***          4.50e-06     -1.69e-05***        5.55e-06
                               (3.10e-06)        (4.20e-06)       (2.79e-06)        (3.62e-06)
malaria index                  -0.0419***           0.00893      -0.0274***         -0.0610***
                               (0.00282)            (0.0127)      (0.00280)         (0.00875)
tropical moist forest            -0.0213            -0.947***      -0.0737          0.870***
                                (0.0934)             (0.250)       (0.0812)          (0.246)
tropical dry forest             1.037***              0.758       0.350***               0.341
                                 (0.102)             (0.503)       (0.0922)          (0.345)
temperate broadleaf             1.595***             -0.0942      0.961***           0.301**
                                (0.0922)             (0.147)       (0.0913)          (0.136)
temperate conifer               0.610***             0.0487       0.316***            -0.131
                                 (0.119)             (0.171)       (0.118)           (0.161)
boreal forest                  -0.416***             -0.114        -0.0320          -0.964***
                                 (0.142)             (0.185)       (0.136)           (0.174)
tropical grassland             -0.481***            -0.797***      -0.0120          -0.356***
                                (0.0729)             (0.124)       (0.0669)          (0.107)
temperate grassland             0.267***              0.199       0.363***          0.471***
                                (0.0895)             (0.130)       (0.0878)          (0.125)
montane grassland               0.745***             -0.0139      0.297***          1.248***
                                 (0.110)             (0.183)       (0.101)           (0.169)
tundra                                              -0.509***                       -0.685***
                                                     (0.128)                         (0.115)
Mediterranean forest            0.886***             -0.232       1.915***          -1.034***
                                 (0.109)             (0.169)       (0.127)           (0.164)
mangroves                      -0.684***             1.261*       -0.733***              0.703
                                 (0.193)             (0.711)       (0.178)           (0.467)
                                                                           Continued on next page
                                     Table A4  Continued from previous page
                                                  (1)                   (2)             (3)                  (4)
                                             Main eect             Interaction    Main eect           Interaction


temperature                                   0.154***                0.0148*        0.123***              -0.0132
                                              (0.00631)              (0.00781)      (0.00794)             (0.00911)
precipitation                                -0.00823***             0.00185**     -0.00986***             0.00125
                                             (0.000563)             (0.000940)      (0.000651)          (0.000851)
growing days                                 0.00919***             0.00288***     0.00708***             0.00142**
                                             (0.000395)             (0.000591)      (0.000413)          (0.000563)
land suitability                              2.040***               1.383***        2.106***              -0.123
                                               (0.0735)               (0.111)        (0.0788)              (0.111)
abs(latitude)                                 0.121***                0.00698       0.0908***           -0.0887***
                                              (0.00410)              (0.00559)      (0.00573)             (0.00697)
elevation                                    0.000444***             6.30e-05      0.000233***       -0.000615***
                                              (3.92e-05)             (5.69e-05)     (4.11e-05)            (5.82e-05)
1 (coast)                                     1.237***               -1.041***       1.291***             -1.225***
                                               (0.0780)              (0.0897)        (0.0732)             (0.0809)
distance to coast                            -0.00156***            0.00182***     -0.00145***          0.00155***
                                              (3.96e-05)             (5.87e-05)     (4.83e-05)            (6.61e-05)
1 (harbor<25km)                               1.697***                0.0416         1.687***             -0.304**
                                               (0.116)                (0.145)        (0.108)               (0.128)
1 (river<25km)                                1.203***               -0.900***       1.094***             -0.639***
                                               (0.112)                (0.132)        (0.108)               (0.125)
1 (big lake<25km)                             0.375***                -0.0135        0.425***             -0.341***
                                               (0.0519)              (0.0603)        (0.0484)             (0.0557)


Country FEs                                                  No                                   Yes
Observations                                               228,690                               228,690
R-squared                                                   0.492                                 0.581
Notes:   Columns (1) and (3) report the coecient on the variables listed, and columns (2) and (4) report the coecient
on the variable's interaction with the high-education dummy. High education equals 1 if average years of education is
greater than or equal to 3.6 (no country FEs version) or 3 (with country FEs version). Standard errors in parentheses
are clustered by square blocks of 9 cells. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
                        Table A5: High urbanization dierentials
                            Dependent variable: ln(lights/area)

                                             No FEs                            With FEs

                                    (1)                  (2)          (3)                  (4)
                                Main eect        Interaction     Main eect         Interaction


constant                                              -1.206***
                                                       (0.307)
ruggedness                     -1.69e-05***       1.12e-05***     -1.87e-05***        9.10e-07
                                (2.82e-06)        (3.94e-06)       (2.53e-06)        (3.37e-06)
malaria index                   -0.0393***        -0.0262***      -0.0271***          -0.122***
                                 (0.00271)            (0.00982)    (0.00251)          (0.0100)
tropical moist forest            0.282***             -1.860***    0.272***           -2.090***
                                 (0.0882)              (0.193)      (0.0778)           (0.195)
tropical dry forest              1.181***             -0.865***    0.535***           -0.640***
                                  (0.103)              (0.259)      (0.0931)           (0.192)
temperate broadleaf              1.814***             -0.506***    1.178***               0.111
                                 (0.0848)              (0.144)      (0.0853)           (0.131)
temperate conifer                1.155***             -0.687***    0.671***           -0.587***
                                  (0.112)              (0.167)      (0.112)            (0.157)
boreal forest                    0.719***             -1.409***      0.121            -1.053***
                                  (0.192)              (0.226)      (0.135)            (0.173)
tropical grassland              -0.254***             -1.385***    0.163***           -0.547***
                                 (0.0679)              (0.121)      (0.0606)           (0.104)
temperate grassland              0.705***             -0.440***    0.623***               0.158
                                 (0.0863)              (0.129)      (0.0821)           (0.122)
montane grassland                0.885***             -0.505***    0.515***           0.877***
                                 (0.0940)              (0.195)      (0.0917)           (0.158)
tundra                          -2.955***             2.348***     -0.698***
                                  (0.519)              (0.534)      (0.115)
Mediterranean forest             1.234***             -0.801***    2.014***           -1.224***
                                  (0.105)              (0.170)      (0.124)            (0.162)
mangroves                         0.205               -1.241***     -0.0140           -1.302***
                                  (0.198)              (0.479)      (0.178)            (0.359)
                                                                             Continued on next page
                                     Table A5  Continued from previous page
                                                  (1)                   (2)             (3)                  (4)
                                             Main eect             Interaction    Main eect           Interaction


temperature                                   0.164***               -0.0163**       0.138***           -0.0328***
                                              (0.00583)              (0.00731)      (0.00761)             (0.00881)
precipitation                                -0.00753***              0.00109      -0.00925***            -1.17e-05
                                             (0.000539)             (0.000881)      (0.000625)          (0.000824)
growing days                                 0.00807***             0.00412***     0.00770***             0.000552
                                             (0.000371)             (0.000572)      (0.000384)          (0.000539)
land suitability                              1.952***               1.580***        1.853***             0.415***
                                               (0.0656)               (0.110)        (0.0720)              (0.106)
abs(latitude)                                 0.123***              -0.0139***       0.103***             -0.104***
                                              (0.00355)              (0.00517)      (0.00551)             (0.00675)
elevation                                    0.000454***             -4.84e-05     0.000220***       -0.000361***
                                              (3.55e-05)             (5.30e-05)     (3.93e-05)            (5.49e-05)
1 (coast)                                     0.974***               -0.765***       1.127***             -0.951***
                                               (0.0710)              (0.0832)        (0.0682)             (0.0760)
distance to coast                            -0.00138***            0.00165***     -0.00136***          0.00128***
                                              (3.61e-05)             (5.70e-05)     (4.65e-05)            (6.46e-05)
1 (harbor<25km)                               1.522***                0.226*         1.462***              -0.0359
                                               (0.106)                (0.136)        (0.0967)              (0.119)
1 (river<25km)                                1.173***               -0.787***       0.915***             -0.390***
                                               (0.106)                (0.127)        (0.107)               (0.125)
1 (big lake<25km)                             0.375***                -0.0479        0.359***             -0.238***
                                               (0.0469)              (0.0560)        (0.0458)             (0.0535)


Country FEs                                                  No                                   Yes
Observations                                               243,661                               243,661
R-squared                                                   0.483                                 0.579
Notes:   Columns (1) and (3) report the coecient on the variables listed, and columns (2) and (4) report the coecient
on the variable's interaction with the high-urbanization dummy. High urbanization equals 1 if the fraction of urban
population is greater than or equal to 0.44 (no country FEs version) or 0.38 (with country FEs version). Standard
errors in parentheses are clustered by square blocks of 9 cells. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
                                 Table A6: Spatial autoregressive model results

                                                     Full sample                              Lit sample

                                           Rook                     Queen          Rook                     Queen
                                            (1)                      (2)             (3)                      (4)


Neighbors' lights (rook), avg            0.990***                                 0.658***
                                         (0.00135)                                (0.00260)
Neighbors' lights (queen), avg                                     1.001***                                0.642***
                                                               (0.00151)                                   (0.00276)
ruggedness                              -8.21e-06***          -9.97e-06***    -1.92e-05***            -2.12e-05***
                                         (5.88e-07)            (6.78e-07)      (1.08e-06)              (1.16e-06)
malaria index                           -0.00144***            -0.00143**     -0.00612***              -0.00687***
                                         (0.000445)            (0.000563)         (0.00145)                (0.00153)
tropical moist forest                    -0.0478***            -0.0570***      -0.202***                   -0.215***
                                          (0.0137)                 (0.0166)       (0.0240)                 (0.0262)
tropical dry forest                       -0.00282                 -0.0157     -0.182***                   -0.193***
                                          (0.0173)                 (0.0211)       (0.0249)                 (0.0273)
temperate broadleaf                       -0.0226*             -0.0536***          0.0338                   0.0198
                                          (0.0125)                 (0.0155)       (0.0233)                 (0.0256)
temperate conifer                         -0.00362                 -0.0226        0.0534*                  0.0532*
                                          (0.0170)                 (0.0209)       (0.0284)                 (0.0313)
boreal forest                            -0.0414***            -0.0402**           0.0123                   0.0266
                                          (0.0142)                 (0.0178)       (0.0307)                 (0.0339)
tropical grassland                       -0.0394***            -0.0394***         -0.0463*                 -0.0560**
                                         (0.00927)                 (0.0115)       (0.0249)                 (0.0270)
temperate grassland                       -0.00187                 -0.00811    -0.184***                   -0.208***
                                          (0.0112)                 (0.0141)       (0.0226)                 (0.0249)
montane grassland                        0.0654***             0.0621***           -0.0228                  -0.0227
                                          (0.0189)                 (0.0230)       (0.0338)                 (0.0370)
tundra                                   -0.0339**                 -0.0250        0.270***                 0.338***
                                          (0.0158)                 (0.0197)       (0.0462)                 (0.0514)
Mediterranean forest                      0.00543              -0.000963          0.0434*                   0.0377
                                          (0.0156)                 (0.0193)       (0.0256)                 (0.0280)
                                                                                              Continued on next page
                                          Table A6  Continued from previous page
                                                           Full sample                                  Lit sample

                                                 Rook                     Queen               Rook                    Queen
                                                   (1)                     (2)                 (3)                      (4)


mangroves                                      -0.212***             -0.227***               -0.0793                  -0.0903
                                                (0.0653)                 (0.0729)           (0.0669)                 (0.0718)
temperature                                   -0.00406***           -0.00747***            -0.0160***               -0.0195***
                                               (0.000601)            (0.000751)             (0.00154)                (0.00170)
precipitation                                -0.000412***           -0.000469***          -0.000804***          -0.000933***
                                               (7.55e-05)            (9.31e-05)            (0.000154)               (0.000169)
growing days                                  0.000158***                6.45e-05         0.000264***               0.000188**
                                               (4.85e-05)            (5.99e-05)            (8.69e-05)               (9.51e-05)
land suitability                               0.0601***             0.0428***             -0.152***                 -0.177***
                                                (0.0103)                 (0.0128)           (0.0170)                 (0.0187)
abs(latitude)                                 -0.00292***           -0.00550***            -0.0114***               -0.0138***
                                               (0.000433)            (0.000539)            (0.000943)                (0.00104)
elevation                                     -3.83e-05***          -5.37e-05***          -0.000126***          -0.000146***
                                               (4.99e-06)            (6.14e-06)            (1.15e-05)               (1.26e-05)
1 (coast)                                      0.0745***                 0.106***           0.537***                 0.595***
                                               (0.00991)                 (0.0118)           (0.0171)                 (0.0186)
distance to coast                             1.90e-05***           3.50e-05***            3.21e-05**            4.89e-05***
                                               (4.67e-06)            (6.05e-06)            (1.27e-05)               (1.41e-05)
1 (harbor<25km)                                 0.361***                 0.491***           0.233***                 0.295***
                                                (0.0217)                 (0.0256)           (0.0223)                 (0.0245)
1 (river<25km)                                  0.155***                 0.222***           0.173***                 0.229***
                                                (0.0157)                 (0.0197)           (0.0228)                 (0.0251)
1 (big lake<25km)                              0.0261***             0.0376***             0.0871***                 0.0986***
                                               (0.00649)             (0.00794)              (0.0129)                 (0.0142)


Observations                                    243,970                  243,973             98,934                   98,935
R-squared                                        0.823                    0.803               0.631                    0.600
Notes:   Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by square blocks of 9 cells. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
