NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

UNINFORMATIVE FEEDBACK AND RISK TAKING:
EVIDENCE FROM RETAIL FOREX TRADING
Itzhak Ben-David
Justin Birru
Viktor Prokopenya
Working Paper 22146
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22146

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2016

We benefited from the comments of David Hirshleifer. We thank exp(capital) for providing the
data for the project. The authors appreciate comments received from participants in seminars at
Notre Dame University, The Ohio State University, and the University of Washington, as well as
participants at the Behavioral Finance Conference at Erasmus University (Rotterdam). Ben-David
and Birru’s research was supported by the Dice Center at the Fisher College of Business. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Itzhak Ben-David, Justin Birru, and Viktor Prokopenya. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Uninformative Feedback and Risk Taking: Evidence from Retail Forex Trading
Itzhak Ben-David, Justin Birru, and Viktor Prokopenya
NBER Working Paper No. 22146
April 2016
JEL No. G02,G11,G32
ABSTRACT
We document evidence consistent with retail day traders in the Forex market attributing random
success to their own skill and, as a consequence, increasing risk taking. Although past
performance does not predict future success for these traders, traders increase trade sizes, trade
size variability, and number of trades with gains, and less with losses. There is a large
discontinuity in all of these trading variables around zero past week returns: e.g., traders increase
their trade size dramatically following winning weeks, relative to losing weeks. The effects are
stronger for novice traders, consistent with more intense “learning” in early trading periods.

Itzhak Ben-David
Fisher College of Business
The Ohio State University
2100 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210
and NBER
bendavid@fisher.osu.edu
Justin Birru
Department of Finance
Fisher College of Business
The Ohio State University
2100 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210
birru.2@fisher.osu.edu

Viktor Prokopenya
SBS Swiss Business School and exp(Capital)
Internatsyyanal’naya Vulitsa 36
Minsk 220030
Belarus
v@expcapital.com

1

Introduction
Feedback is a key input in decision making. Information about outcomes from past actions

can help improve future decision making (e.g., Seidenfeld 1985). Also, feedback is considered one
of the main remedies for overconfidence: the more instances that one can observe and learn from,
the better future predictions become (e.g., Arkes, Christensen, Lai, and Blumer 1987, Thaler 2000).
In certain settings, however, feedback may be uninformative, yet individuals use it to
calibrate their future decisions. In particular, individuals tend to accredit observed successes to
their own ingenuity and blame failures on bad luck. Langer and Roth (1975), for example, show
that subjects attribute to themselves the skill of predicting the outcomes of coin tosses after a few
correct guesses. The information in the feedback, therefore, can be misinterpreted and mistakenly
enhance one’s perception of skill, even if the outcome is impossible or hard to predict. In such
cases, self-attribution of successes can lead individuals to take greater risks, based on the false
conclusion of having forecasting skill. The idea that feedback may distort decision making due to
self-attribution is a key component in several theoretical models. In Daniel, Hirshleifer, and
Subrahmanyam (1998) and Gervais and Odean (2001), traders attribute successful investment
outcomes to their skill and failures to bad luck. Over time, with some random successes, traders
overestimate their ability to trade. This effect is expected to be stronger early in a traders’ life. In
the words of Gervais and Odean (2001), traders learn to become overconfident. Despite the
compelling evidence from the lab and the theory suggesting that traders “learn” to be
overconfident, there is little empirical evidence documenting this process.
In this study, we test how past trading performance is interpreted and used by individuals.
The usefulness of feedback for learning and risk taking is ultimately an empirical issue that boils
down to the true ability of individuals to predict outcomes and the degree of self-attribution that

2

they exhibit. With this in mind, we focus on a population of day traders in the Forex (foreign
exchange) market: they trade intensively (median trade lasts 16 minutes) in an environment that is
very noisy and leaves very little room for skill. At the same time, traders receive immediate
feedback about outcomes following their actions. Our trading dataset allows us to measure risk
taking (measured as the average trade size) and perceived skill (measured as trade size variability
and the number of trades) as a function of traders’ past performance. If overconfidence arises
through the self-attribution mechanism, as proposed by Daniel, Hirshleifer, and Subrahmanyam
(1998) and Gervais and Odean (2001),1 we should be able to detect it. Our results show that past
performance plays an important role in the behavior of traders, supporting the “learning to be
overconfident” mechanism.
We use a dataset of individual retail accounts in the Forex futures market provided by a
large international broker based in Poland. The broker caters to retail traders and specializes in
foreign exchange futures. Traders use an electronic platform (dedicated software) to submit their
orders and monitor their accounts. The broker lets traders leverage their equity up to 500 times,
allowing ample room for risk taking. All of the traders in our dataset use a software package to
submit their orders, and most are day traders who hold their positions open for only a short time.
Retail trading in this market has seen large growth in recent years, perhaps because of its lotterylike nature (i.e., high leverage, short holding horizons, and quick feedback).
A key empirical challenge is to identify the effects of self-attribution (caused by
overconfidence), which is the mechanism that ties current trader behavior (e.g., risk taking) to past
performance. Our identification strategy is based on two non-linearities predicted by the theory

1

In the words of Gervais and Odean (2001), “A trader who receives frequent, immediate, and clear feedback will, on
average, peak in overconfidence early” (p. 13). Barber and Odean (2002) attribute the underperformance of online
traders (as opposed to phone traders) to overconfidence, self-attribution, and the illusion of control.

3

and distinguishes between irrational and rational learning. First, overconfident traders’ responses
to past gains and losses should be asymmetric. If traders exhibit self-attribution, then their behavior
should be more sensitive to the magnitude of past profits in the gain domain than in the loss
domain. These traders attribute past gains to their own abilities and thus strengthen their self-image
as successful traders following gains. However, losses are attributed to bad luck, meaning that
traders do not modify their prior beliefs about their own abilities by much. This is different from
a rational Bayesian trader who will enter into short-term trades only if she knows that she has
superior information. For her, the information in gains is as valuable as the information in losses;
hence, she is not expected to behave differently with respect to the sign of profits. Second, traders
may perceive gains, irrespective of their magnitude, as a sign of success. Thus, we should see a
discontinuity in trading behavior around the origin of past performance. In other words, traders
with self-attribution may respond differently to small past gains versus small past losses. In
contrast, a rational Bayesian trader should display no discontinuity around zero, given that a profit
that is epsilon above zero or below zero has the same informational content about the trader’s
skills.
In our main tests, we examine three measures of trader decision making. The first is the
change in average trade size (within a week). This variable reflects the change in risk taking, as an
increase in the average trade size suggests that the trader is increasing her bets. 2 Our second
measure of trader decision making is the change in the trader’s trade size variability. It is a measure
of the variability in trade sizes across the trader’s transactions, with high variability reflecting a
greater amount of active portfolio management. An increase in trade size variability is consistent

2

Because trading accounts are likely to be a relatively small fraction of traders’ wealth, the change in the average
trade size that we observe cannot be driven by rebalancing.

4

with the trader making more elaborated decisions about which positions to bet on, which should
ultimately be correlated with the trader’s perceived skill. The third measure is the growth in the
number of trades.
We find two novel results. First, we document that the change in the current week’s average
trade size, the change in trade size variability, and the growth in the number of trades respond to
past gains and losses in an asymmetric fashion. The past week’s gains are strongly associated with
higher risk taking and higher perceived skill, measured as increased average trade size and change
in trade size variability, respectively. Conversely, the past week’s losses have only a minimal effect
on these variables. For the growth in the number of trades, the relation with losses is even negative.
For all variables, we find a difference in the response slope to past performance between the
positive and negative domains that is statistically and economically significant.
Second, we document a discontinuity in the average trade size, trade size variability, and
the number of trades around zero past returns. When we compare small losses to small gains, we
find that traders substantially increase their average trade size following small gains, but not
following small losses. Similarly, trade size variability and the number of trades increase greatly
following weeks of small gains, relative to weeks of small losses. That is, we see a discontinuous
jump in risk taking and perceived skill exactly around zero past returns. This result is consistent
with self-attribution bias: traders behave as though they perceive any gain as a positive outcome,
indicating their skill. Conversely, they attribute small losses to bad luck.
The discontinuity in the changes in average trade size, trade size variability, and the number
of trades is both statistically and economically significant in all specifications. In particular, the
discontinuity around zero past performance accounts for about 12% to 17% of a standard deviation

5

of the weekly changes in average trade size and trade size variability. The jump for the growth in
the number of trades is more substantial, about 55%, on average.
One potential concern is that some of the behavior we document is due to margin calls. We
believe that the discontinuity tests preclude this possibility. The discontinuity in the average trade
size is around zero. Even when we collapse trades into bins of average trade size of 0.02%, we
observe a sharp discontinuity around zero. Although some traders in our dataset are very active,
one would need to make an unreasonably large number of trades per week in order for trades with
an average loss of 0.02% to trigger a margin call. For instance, a trader using ×50 leverage who is
allowed ×100 leverage would have to see a position decrease of slightly greater than 1% before
getting a margin call. A 1% decrease represents a loss that is 50 times the average loss of 0.02%.
The average number of trades per week in our sample is 23, and it is rare that more than a couple
of these positions are open simultaneously. Also, trades are held for a very short time, making it
less likely that the broker will close the position due to an adverse price movement. We conclude
that margin calls are not a likely explanation of the discontinuity around zero returns.
A necessary condition for our analysis to hold is to verify our identification assumption,
i.e., that current performance carries little information about future performance and is smooth
with respect to past performance. We test this assumption and, indeed, do not find a meaningful
differential relation between current performance and past gains versus losses that can explain the
observed relationship between trader behavior and past profits. Furthermore, there is no
discontinuity in future performance with respect to past gains and losses.
We conduct further analyses and isolate the first weeks of trading for each trader.
According to Gervais and Odean (2001), early trading experiences disproportionately shape

6

traders’ perceptions of their own skill. Consistent with this prediction, we find that the effects we
report are stronger in the first weeks (the first five or ten weeks) of trading.
Our study joins previous research showing that individuals often modify their behavior
based on feedback and signals that contain little information. Kaustia and Knupfer (2008) and
Chiang, Hirshleifer, Qian, and Sherman (2011) find supporting evidence from the IPO (initial
public offerings) market, documenting that investors increase their participation in IPOs following
positive returns on their previous IPO investments. Similar evidence of learning from one’s past
actions is documented by Malmendier and Nagel (2011), who find that investors who have
experienced low stock market returns throughout their lives are more risk averse. Choi, Laibson,
Madrian, and Metrick (2009) show that individuals experiencing high returns to 401(k) accounts
increase their savings rates. Campbell, Ramadorai, and Ranish (2014) find evidence that investors
fail to improve over time. Our paper offers novel insights into the mechanism through which
individuals interpret uninformative successes, and it provides new results regarding risk taking.
The evidence presented here complements the literature about rational learning in trading.
Seru, Shumway, and Stoffman (2010) find that retail traders with worse trading experiences are
more likely to exit the market. Linnainmaa (2011) presents a structural model in which traders
rationally learn about ability through trading, and using trading data, he shows that investors
increase trade size after successful trades and exit the market after unsuccessful trades. In a study
of retail traders, Nicolosi, Peng, and Zhu (2009) find that traders’ future trade intensity is correlated
with their past profits. Like them, we find a general correlation between trading behavior and past
performance. However, the interpretation is different. Nicolosi, Peng, and Zhu (2009) interpret
their results as suggesting trader rationality. In our work, we drill deeper and examine the
differential sensitivity to gains versus losses separately as well as exploring the discontinuity

7

around zero past performance. We show that acting in response to these dimensions is irrational
as they do not predict future outcomes. Mahani and Bernhardt (2007) present a model in which
rational traders learn about their skill as they trade and increase their intensity following good
performance; they support their argument with empirical evidence. In our study, we present a
stronger test and find that traders react to specific patterns in their past performance (gains versus
losses in general, and gains versus losses around zero) that do not predict their future performance.
Finally, our study relates to the literature linking the high volume in financial markets to
traders’ overconfidence. Oberlechner and Osler (2012) survey currency trades and find that traders
are on average overconfident (understate uncertainty) and believe that they have above-average
skill. Furthermore, they find that overconfidence does not vary with experience, and thus conclude
that overconfidence survives in markets. Statman, Thorley, and Vorkink (2006) find that trading
volume at the market level is positively related to lagged market returns in the United States and
argue that this pattern reflects investor overconfidence and biased self-attribution. Griffin, Nardari,
and Stulz (2006) study 46 markets and find that this relationship holds for many of them. Barber
and Odean (2000) document that retail traders trade too often: trader performance declines with
the frequency of trading. Similarly, Grinblatt and Keloharju (2009) show that traders who are more
overconfident trade more often. Ben-David and Hirshleifer (2012) present evidence that the
previously documented disposition effect for retail traders is a manifestation of overconfidence.
Moreover, the importance of the role of feedback extends far beyond the trading context to the
corporate world. Gervais, Heaton, and Odean (2011) describe how overconfidence built through
self-attribution makes executives less risk averse, and Gervais and Goldstein (2007) propose that
overconfidence of some team members leads to an overall increase in productivity.

8

2

Data

2.1

Sample
We utilize a dataset of individual retail accounts in the Forex futures market provided by a

large international broker based in Poland. The broker caters to retail traders and specializes in
foreign exchange (Forex) futures. The data contain 1,118,632 transactions between September
2010 and May 2012 made by 3,103 traders. Traders send their orders electronically through
dedicated software. We do not have information about the countries of residence of the traders;
however, we observe their home currency: 28% use the US Dollar, 25% use the Euro, and 28%
use the Polish Zloty. The remainder use other Eastern European currencies.
We observe the date, time, number of contracts, underlying currency, and executed price
for each buy and sell transaction. Traders in this market do not pay fixed commissions but rather
pay the bid-ask spread. The spread varies over time and across currencies; it is typically 1 basis
point (pips), e.g., the Euro-U.S. Dollar contract (EURUSD) can be traded at a 1.2701/1.2702
spread. We have little information about the characteristics of the traders beyond when they started
their trading activity. To provide greater comfort with the analysis, we include a specification with
trader fixed effects in all analyses.
The retail Forex traders in our analysis exhibit characteristics that are typical of traders in
other previously studied markets, suggesting that the conclusions drawn from our sample are
generalizable to other settings. For instance, the traders in our sample exhibit the disposition effect.
Specifically, consistent with the behavior of professional futures traders at the Chicago Mercantile
Exchange documented in Locke and Mann (2005), the traders in our sample hold losing trades for
significantly longer periods of time than winning trades; the majority of trades made in our sample
are profitable; and the magnitude of the average trade loss is substantially larger than the average
9

trade gain. Further consistent with previous studies of retail investors, the average trader in our
study does not exhibit skill. We discuss the sample of traders in more detail in Section 2.5.
Our analysis is performed at the trader-week level. We collapse our data at the weekly
frequency and measure trader performance as well as trading patterns at this frequency. The choice
of a week as a unit period is arbitrary. While it is possible that traders learn from their past
performance, there is no reason to believe that there is a look-back unit that is common to all
traders and that a week is that unit. In choosing the time unit, there is a trade-off. A short period
(e.g., one hour) might be too short for updating a trader’s beliefs about his or her own skill. In
contrast, a long period, say a year, might be too low a frequency, as traders might update their
beliefs about their own skill a few times over this period. To ensure that our results are not unique
to the weekly frequency, we report the main tests for the three-day (i.e., an approximation for half
a week) frequency (Internet Appendix Table A1) and two-week frequency (Internet Appendix
Table A2); the main results remain the same.

2.2

Measuring Performance
In determining how to measure performance, we seek to best capture the signal the investor

receives regarding her performance. Two possibilities emerge. First is to consider the weekly
change in the trader’s account balance (due to gains or losses) relative to the total amount invested
over the week, which seems the most robust measure. This is equivalent to the average return per
trade weighted by trade sizes (i.e., value-weighted average return per trade). The summary
statistics (Table 1) show that trader-week observations are concentrated around zero past returns,
with some bias toward very small negative average returns.

10

A second possibility is to examine the weekly change in the account balance relative to the
beginning-of-week account balance. By construction, this option incorporates the endogenous
trade size decision into the return variable, thereby failing to properly reflect the signal of
performance that the trader receives. To clarify this concept, imagine the case of two traders, each
with the same opening balance of, say, $100. Further assume that each trader makes a $100 profit
trading in week t. Trader A uses no leverage, resulting in trade sizes of $100, but Trader B uses
the maximum leverage of ×500, resulting in trade sizes of $50,000. That is, Trader A makes a
return that is equal to 100% of her trade size, while Trader B makes a return that is equal to 0.2%
of her trade size. Calculating returns as profit divided by balance leads us to conclude that both
traders have equivalent 100% returns for the week. However, it seems quite clear that Trader A,
who makes $100 profit on trades of $100, will interpret the profit as a more positive signal of skill
than will Trader B, who makes a $100 profit by undertaking trades of $50,000. For this reason, we
calculate returns relative to the size of the positions that the trader is taking rather than relative to
the trader’s balance.
Bearing these considerations in mind, we calculate returns as total profit in a week relative
to the aggregate value of all positions taken in the week. Total profit in a week also includes profit
from trades that have not been closed out by the end of the week. To calculate the profit of open
trades, we compare the price of the underlying currency pair as of the end of the week to the
purchase price. To eliminate erroneous observations, we remove observations in which the return
in the prior week is exactly zero (less than 1% of observations).

11

2.3

Measuring Risk Taking
We also face the question of how to best measure whether traders modified their risk taking.

Given that we do not observe account balances, one possibility is to measure the change in risk
taking by using the change in the average trade size.
One issue with this measure is that it may be affected by additions or withdrawals from the
account. We view this as a feature of our measure. The Forex accounts are likely to reflect a small
part of traders’ wealth. If they decide to add or withdraw funds from the trading account, it means
that they decide to increase the risk in their portfolio that is related to Forex trading. This is
consistent with adjusting risk taking.
A related issue is that changes in trade sizes can reflect the changes in the account balance
over time. For example, a trader may decide to invest a particular fraction of her account balance.
Again, this behavior indicates that the trader is willing to take a certain degree of risk related to
her trading activities.
The change in average trade size is therefore measured as

,

1.

Traders who exit the sample have a change in average trade size of -100% in the week following
the week of their last trade. (In Internet Appendix Table A3, we report results of regressions that
exclude these observations, and verify that this assumption does not have a material effect on the
main results.) After this, traders are removed from the sample.
A possible concern is that the measure of the change in the average trade size may be more
precisely estimated for traders with a greater number of trades relative to those who trade relatively

12

less frequently within the week. To alleviate this concern, we use two procedures. First, we form
another measure of the change in the average trade size based on the median trade size within a
trader-week. Instead of using the average trade size in each week, we use the median. Second, we
use a weighted least squares regression that gives greater weight to observations that are measured
more precisely. We discuss this procedure in detail in Section 4.

2.4

Measuring Perceived Skill
We measure the perceived skill of traders as the change in trade size variability. Trade size

variability may capture the extent to which a trader decides to increase or decrease trade size due
to her confidence in own ability to pick winners. If a trader believes that she has signals about the
profitability of trades, it is likely that these signals are of varying strength, and therefore also
command varying trade sizes: e.g., when a signal is perceived as strong, a trader would increase
the size of the bet. Trade size variability, therefore, reflects a combination of variability in trade
signals as well as reliance of the trader on these signals.3
A concern is that trade size variability captures traders’ rational reactions to true signals
and therefore may reflect true skill and not just perceived skill. What differentiates true skill and
perceived skill is the actual performance. Therefore, we test whether traders vary the size of their
trades when they have true signals (which translate to better performance). In Table 2, we regress

3

This variable could be viewed as related to the portfolio concentration discussed in the literature about mutual funds
and retail investors. In general, the literature is split about the relation between portfolio concentration and
performance. Some studies find that investors trade large amounts in securities in which they have superior
information (e.g., mutual fund managers: Kacperczyk, Sialm, and Zheng 2005, corporate insiders trading their own
industry: Ben-David, Birru, and Rossi 2015). In contrast, other studies find that high portfolio concentration is not
related to performance (mutual fund managers trading own-state stocks: Pool, Stoffman, and Yonker 2012) or
associated with lower performance (retail traders overweighting their own industry: Døskeland and Hvide 2011,
mutual fund managers: Choi and Lou 2010).

13

both trade size variability and the change in trade size variability on contemporaneous
performance. The results show that both dependent variables are negatively correlated with the
average weekly performance of traders. 4 These results indicate that the change in trade size
variability indeed does not reflect the true skill of traders but more likely their perceived skill.
In our data, we observe trades rather than portfolio holdings; hence, we define trade size
variability for trader at time is equal to

,

where

is the total number of trades in a given week for trader ;

trade for trader at week

is the relative weight of

(where weight is equal to the value of the trade divided by the

aggregate value of all trades taken in the week); and

is the average trade size for trader in

week (equal to 1/ ). We require at least two trades in a week to calculate trade size variability.
Change in trade size variability measures week-over-week changes in a trader’s perception
of his or her skill. As the trader becomes more confident in his/her abilities, we expect to see trade
size variability increasing as the trader makes more active decisions about dollar allocation across
trades. The change in trade size variability is calculated as

,

1,

where the change in trade size variability is measured as a fraction. Since the change in trade size
variability has a long right tail even after winsorizing at the 99% percentile, we winsorize it again
at 200%, which corresponds to the 83rd percentile. In Internet Appendix Table A4, we verify that

4

The univariate correlation of trade size variability and average returns is -0.06 (p < 0.001) and the univariate
correlation of the change in trade size variability and average returns is -0.03 (p < 0.001).

14

this choice does not drive the results: we repeat the main tests with winsorization at 5 (88th
percentile) and 10 (90th percentile).
Another measure of overconfidence that we use is the change in the number of trades from
week t – 1 to week t. Trading frequency has been used in the literature as an indicator of one’s
belief in his or her own skill (e.g., Barber and Odean 2000, Grinblatt and Keloharju 2009). We use
the following expression for the change in the number of trades:

,

2.5

1.

Summary Statistics
Table 1 presents summary statistics for the sample. Panel A displays statistics at the trader

level, Panel B at the trade level, and Panel C at the trader-week level. We exclude traders with
fewer than 20 trades in the sample. The 3,103 active traders in the sample make a total of 1,118,632
trades. All regression variables are winsorized at 1% and 99%. The average trader is in the dataset
for almost exactly six months (181 days). This is the amount of time between a trader’s first and
last trade. About 25% of traders leave the sample within the first 46 days, while 50% of traders
exit the sample within 155 days. Of the 181 days on average between open and close, traders are
actively trading on an average of 50 of those days. The average trader has an equal-weighted return
per trade of -0.035%, and very few traders quit while ahead. That traders have such small average
returns per trade is not surprising given that the median trade is open for only 16 minutes, as can
be seen from Panel B. Only 16.2% of traders are profitable upon exiting the sample.

15

In unreported results, we also document that traders appear substantially more likely to quit
immediately after experiencing poor returns. For instance, the average return of a quitting trader
in the week prior to quitting is -0.1024%. In contrast, the average return in week (t-1) for all nonquitting traders is -0.0184%. Additionally, 78% of the traders in the sample who quit experience
negative returns in the week prior to quitting. Not surprisingly, the effects are stronger for newer
traders. For traders that quit within the first five weeks of trading, 88% have experienced negative
returns in the week prior to quitting.
The traders in the sample are very active. Despite the relatively short trading lives of the
traders in the sample, the average trader engages in just over 341 trades. Panel B shows that traders,
on average, keep trades open for very short periods of time. The average trade is open for 292
minutes, but this is heavily skewed by the right tail of trades. About 25% of trades are open for
only four minutes or less, and the median trade is open for only 16 minutes. The average absolute
trade size is $14,230.
Panel C displays trader-week–level summary statistics. Again demonstrating the active
nature of the traders in the sample, the average trader makes 23 trades per week. Traders are on
average not profitable.5 Only 44% of weeks are profitable, and only 24% of weeks close with a
trader having an aggregate running profit. This stands in contrast to the fact that 62.8% of trades
are winning trades, as shown in Panel B. Traders exhibit the disposition effect, quickly realizing
winning trades while only slowly realizing losing trades. The result is that the magnitude of the
gain on winning trades is much smaller than the magnitude of the loss on losing trades. In
unreported statistics, we find that losing trades are on average open for more than twice as long as

5

Returns always use both realized and unrealized profits.

16

winning trades and that the average loss on a losing trade is more than twice the absolute magnitude
of the average gain on a winning trade.

3

Identification and Empirical Approach
The goal of the study is to test whether traders adjust their future risk taking and perceptions

about their own skill in response to past performance. The tested claim is causal in the sense that
there is an explicit proposed economic mechanism that generates the effect. Specifically, traders
adjust their behavior based on past performance in an asymmetric manner: they attribute successes
to their own skill but ascribe failures to bad luck. We expect this behavior to generate an
asymmetric pattern with respect to past performance.
We propose two testable predictions. First, the week-on-week changes in risk taking and
perceived skill may have greater sensitivity to past performance in the domain of past gains than
in the domain of past losses. In other words, higher returns in the domain of past gains should
encourage traders to increase their risk taking and enhance their perceptions of their own skill. In
contrast, an increase in losses is expected not to have a large effect on risk taking or perceived risk,
as losses are attributed to bad luck, and hence traders do not see a need to adjust their trading
parameters.
To test this hypothesis, we use a piece-wise linear specification (positive versus negative)
in which we measure the average slope (sensitivity) of trading behavior (risk taking or perceived
risk) as a function of past performance. If traders attribute losses to bad luck, then both small losses
and large losses will be attributed to bad luck and the slope in the negative domain will be relatively
flat. On the other hand, if investors attribute successes to skill, then large gains will be interpreted

17

as a signal of greater skill than small gains, resulting in a positive slope in the domain of gains.
We predict that the slope in the positive domain will be steeper than that in the negative domain.
Our second prediction is about the discontinuity in trading behavior around the origin of
past returns, as traders may simply use the binary categories of “gain” or “loss” to summarize their
performance. Because traders attribute gains to their own skill and losses to bad luck, even a very
small gain could trigger an increase in risk taking and enhanced perceptions of their skill. Thus,
we expect to see a discontinuity in behavior around the origin of past performance.
This prediction can be tested by examining the average response of the trading behavior
measures (risk taking and perceived skill) around zero for small gains and for small losses. We
predict that small gains will generate a statistically larger response than will small losses. Figure
1 presents an illustration of the patterns predicted by our two hypotheses.6
Another dimension in which we expect to observe differential effects is traders’ experience.
According to Gervais and Odean (2001), traders adjust their behavior more when they are novices.
Hence, the effects (differential slopes, discontinuity) should be stronger for early-life traders.
A necessary component in the identification proposal is that the relation between current
performance and past performance does not correspond with the patterns of trading behavior that
traders exhibit. While current performance can vary with past performance (e.g., if some skill
exists in trading), the identification exercise will not be valid if there is a slope differential in the
direction predicted (steeper slope for positive performance than for negative performance, or a

6
Note that while this chart looks visually similar to the charts in Ben-David and Hirshleifer (2012) (e.g., Figure 2a),
they convey different messages. The charts in Ben-David and Hirshleifer report the likelihood of selling an individual
position given an unrealized loss or gain in that position. In contrast, Figure 1 here shows risk taking as a function of
past realized profits from trading in the previous period. Also, the traders in Ben-David and Hirshleifer hold their
positions for days and months, while the traders in the current study typically hold their positions for a few minutes
or hours.

18

discontinuity around zero past returns). We can test the relation between current and past
performance using the same set of empirical specifications as in the predictions discussed above:
a test for slope differences and a test for discontinuity around zero past returns.

4

Risk Taking and Perceived Skill: Effect of Past Performance

4.1

Difference in Slopes between Positive and Negative Domains of Past Performance

In Table 3, we examine how past performance affects risk taking and perceived skill. Panel A tests
whether changes in risk taking and perceived skill exhibit differential responses in the positive and
negative domains of past returns. Self-attribution bias suggests that traders will display increased
risk taking and perceived skill in the domain of gains, while exhibiting far less sensitivity to past
returns in the domain of losses. We examine this hypothesis by testing for a difference in slope in
the positive and negative domain of past returns.
Panel A of Table 3 displays results from OLS regressions of the change in average trade
size, the change in trade size variability, and the change in the number of trades, on returns in week
t – 1, a binary variable capturing whether the return in week t – 1 was positive, and returns in week
t – 1 interacted with this binary variable. The interaction term coefficients in the second row
capture any differences in slope in the positive and negative domains of past week returns.7 In

7

Interestingly, the slope in the negative domain of past returns is negative but small, indicating that within the domain
of losses the average trade size is increasing in the size of the loss from the previous week. While we do not document
an overly strong effect, increased risk taking in response to larger losses is congruous with prospect theory preferences.
Specifically, it is consistent with the convexity of the value function in the domain of losses, as this suggests that
investors become increasingly risk seeking within the domain of losses. Coval and Shumway (2005) document
consistent evidence among professional traders on the Chicago Board of Trade (CBOT), finding that within the domain
of losses, the smaller the morning loss the smaller the afternoon increase in risk taking. That is, within the domain of
losses, CBOT traders become increasingly risk seeking as losses become larger. Other possible explanations for the
negative slope on the negative domain are mechanical stop loss orders or that traders get scared and start manually
winding down their positions.

19

addition to the main variables, we also control for week fixed effects (with respect to the trader’s
first week of trading) and for calendar week fixed effects and trader fixed effects. Standard errors
are clustered two-ways in all regressions, by week and trader.
Consistent with traders exhibiting self-attribution bias, the results indicate that the change
in average trade size, the change in trade size variability, and the change in the number of trades
exhibit a substantially higher sensitivity to returns in the positive domain of returns than in the
negative domain of gains.8 In the negative domain, the slope is -0.31 (i.e., average trade size
increases as losses increase). In the positive domain, the slope is 0.53 (0.84 – 0.31), reflecting a
difference of 0.84 between the positive and negative domains (Column (1)). The results remain
robust when we use the alternative measure for the change in the average trade size based on
medians (Column (2)). Similarly, the slope in the positive domain for the change in trade size
variability (0.72 – 0.17 = 0.55) is substantially greater than the slope in the negative domain (0.17), reflecting a difference in slopes of 0.72 (Column (3)).
The change in the number of trades exhibits a different pattern. Specifically, the slopes on
the positive domain (6.76 – 3.38 = 3.38) is virtually identical to the slope in the negative domain
(-3.38), although in a different direction. It appears that traders who experience large gains or
losses increase the number of trades substantially, relative to traders who experience more modest
gains or losses. We test the robustness of this result by eliminating trader-weeks that have small
numbers of trades (e.g., 5 to 10 trades per week): Both slopes become more moderate, but the
general pattern remains.

8

We find similar results when examining the growth in the total weekly volume by traders.

20

4.2

Discontinuity around Zero Past Returns
Next, we examine the discontinuity around zero. Panel B of Table 3 employs a regression

discontinuity design (RDD) to test for a jump in risk taking and perceived skill at zero. We fit
separate third-degree polynomials to the positive and negative domains of past returns and test for
a discontinuity at zero by including an indicator variable to capture positive past returns. The
regressions display the coefficient on the indicator variable that tests for the existence of a jump.9
We face a trade-off in choosing the appropriate degree of polynomial to use. A low-degree
polynomial may not be flexible enough to capture the functional form. In contrast, a high-degree
polynomial may be attenuated by extreme observations and therefore may not measure the
discontinuity around zero well. See Ben-David and Hirshleifer (2012) for a discussion of this
technique. In Internet Appendix Table A5, we provide additional analyses that measure the
discontinuity with fourth- and fifth-degree polynomials. The results from these tests are consistent
with those using the third-degree polynomial.
The coefficients imply that traders increase their average trade size by 0.12 (Column (1))
and their trade size variability by 0.17 (Column (3)) in weeks that follow very small positive
returns, relative to weeks with very small negative returns. The results for average trade size are
insensitive to whether we use the change in the average trade size or the change in the median
trade size (Column (1) versus Column (2)). These effects are very large, given that a one standard
deviation change in average trade size and trade size variability is 0.926 and 0.997, respectively.
Thus, the economic effect is 13% and 17% of a standard deviation of the weekly changes in
average trade size and trade size variability. The jump for the change in the number of trades is

9

Ben-David and Hirshleifer (2012) used a similar methodology to identify jumps around the origin of past returns.

21

substantial (Column (4)): around zero returns, traders ramp up the number of trades by 55%.10
These results again support the hypothesis that traders suffer from self-attribution bias: Small gains
lead to large increases in risk taking and perceived skill, but the same is not true for small losses.

4.3

Detecting the Discontinuity through Matching
Another empirical technique to identify the effect of the changes in the trading patterns

with respect to past performance is matching. To control for potential differences in types of
traders, each week we rank traders into deciles based on week (t – 1) trade size and number of
trades. We then match traders in week (t) based on week (t – 1) decile rankings of trade size and
number of traders. Traders are matched to groups based on their week of trading (i.e., how
experienced they are, measured as weeks since the first trade in our sample). Then we examine
how the behavior of these traders differs based on their realized returns in week (t – 1).
We then compare individuals who have just barely lost money to those who have just barely
made money. Their returns will place them just on either side of the 0 discontinuity regardless of
the denominator used in calculating returns. Our matching procedure matches traders with barely
positive profits (defined as 0 < ret (t – 1) < 0.02%) with those with barely negative profits (defined
as -0.02% < ret (t – 1) < 0). We match based on week of trading and require traders to be in the
same decile of the number of trades in week (t – 1) and in the same decile of average trade size in
week (t – 1).

10

We find similar results when examining the growth in the total weekly volume by traders.

22

Next, we examine how these traders behave in the following week. Specifically, we look
at the week (t) difference in growth in volume, change in trade size variability, and growth in
number of trades for traders just to the right relative to just to the left of zero.
The results are presented in Table 3, Panel C. The results show that the matching procedure
yields similar estimates for the size of the discontinuity for the change in the average trade size as
in the tests in Table 3, Panel B. The result for the change in trade size variability (Column (2)) has
similar magnitude (0.13 relative to 0.17 in Panel B); however, it is statistically insignificant,
potentially due to loss of power. The result for the change in the number of trades (Column (3)) is
statistically significant; however, its magnitude is lower than the one reported in Panel B (0.13
relative to 0.55).
Overall, the results from the matching exercise provide additional evidence that the trading
behaviors show a material jump around zero past returns.

4.4

Graphical Representation
We plot the relation between our variables of interest and past returns in Figure 2. To

produce each panel, we split the trader-week sample into bins of 0.02% by their value-weighted
average returns per trade in week t – 1 in the region around the origin. We limit the range of the
sample to +/– 0.15% (capturing about 86% of sample observations). For each group, we calculate
the change in average trade size and plot the error bounds for +/– two standard errors around the
mean. We overlay on the chart the third-degree polynomial that is produced in Panel B of Table 3
(estimated on the entire sample). Figure 2a demonstrates that the slopes of the change in the
average trade size in the positive and negative domains are different, and it also shows a clear

23

discontinuity around zero past returns. In Figure 2b, we use the same methodology to chart the
change in trade size variability with respect to previous week performance. The figure shows that
trade size variability is practically flat in the negative domain of past performance but is increasing
in the positive domain. Furthermore, we see a clear discontinuity around zero past returns. Figure
2c shows the relationship for the change in the number of trades. The figure shows that the change
in the number of trades has a V-shape, with a discontinuity at zero. Traders increase their trading
frequency as returns become more positive in the positive domain. In contrast, they increase their
trading activity as past returns are more negative in the negative domain. The strong slope on the
negative domain can be explained by traders increasing risk when faced with large losses (Coval
and Shumway 2005).

4.5

Robustness
In this section, we address several concerns regarding the empirical specifications. One

possible concern is that the dependent variables are statistics based on individual trades within the
week. When few trades are made in a week, then the calculated statistics are measured with noise.
The usual econometric treatment for this heteroskedasticity problem is to use weighted least
squares (WLS) regressions in which the weight of each observation is the square root of the inverse
of its precision. We implement this approach in Internet Appendix Table A6, where we replicate
the regressions from Table 3 using WLS. In the regressions for the change in average trade size
and change in trade size variability, the weight of each observation is the square root of the average
number of trades in weeks t and t – 1. For the return regressions, the weight of each observation is
the square root of the number of trades in week t. The results in Internet Appendix Table A6 are
almost identical to those in Table 3.

24

One concern is that the behavior that we observe is driven by margin calls. In particular,
the losses we consider in this study are relatively small on average. Figure 2a provides some
comfort regarding this concern. In this figure, we plot the average trade size as a function of
previous-week performance. The figure shows a large discontinuity around zero, where the bins
of average trade return that we consider are at the size of 0.02%. Of course, some traders have
many trades, but even with a hundred trades a week, the average loss that triggers a decline in the
average trade size is not likely to be due to a margin call. Furthermore, the negative slope in the
domain of losses suggests that traders with losses actually increase their average trade size in the
following week, which is inconsistent with a margin call explanation in which traders reduce their
positions.
Another concern is that our discontinuity test is misspecified by using zero returns as the
focal point. To mitigate this concern, we employ falsification tests to examine the robustness of
our results in Table 3, Panel B. The falsification test is presented in Internet Appendix Table A7.
We test whether the effects we have documented around zero past returns are present at other
random non-zero values. If traders do attribute successes to their own skill and failures to bad luck,
then we would not expect to see effects as large around other randomly chosen values.11
The falsification tests examine increments of +/– 0.5 standard deviations of the past week
return out to +/– 2 standard deviations from the origin. The results support the hypothesis that the
change in slope and discontinuity is specific to the origin. Panel A of Internet Appendix Table A7
tests for a change in slope for the change in average trade size, and finds that only three of the
eight falsification tests are significant at the 5% level. The same is true for four of the eight tests

11

Note that the predicted theoretical relationship documented in Figure 1 suggests that the slope should be higher to
the right of any randomly chosen point relative to the left of that point. However, the effect should be strongest at the
origin.

25

for the change in trade size variability, as displayed in Panel B. The slopes in the positive and
negative domains in the regressions of the change in the number of trades (Panel C) are so extreme
that all eight tests show a positive and significant difference between the positive and negative
domains. However, the difference in the slopes is the largest when the domains are split at the
origin.
The results in Panels D to F show that discontinuity is likely to occur only around the
origin. Only two of the eight falsification tests exhibit significance at the 5% level in the predicted
direction for the change in average trade size. For the change in trade size variability, none of the
eight tests is significant at the 5% level in the predicted direction. For the change in the number of
trades, none of the eight tests is significant at the 5% level in the predicted direction. Thus, the
falsification tests support the hypothesis that the change in slope and discontinuity is specific to
zero past week returns.
Finally, we address the critique by Gelman and Imbens (2014) on the RDD method, which
uses high-order polynomials for estimating discontinuities. They argue that this method is arbitrary
in the degree of polynomials used (i.e., different polynomial degrees can lead to different results)
and that the standard errors of the discontinuities estimated using this method may be understated.
Gelman and Imbens (2014) instead propose using a linear specification and limiting the sample to
the close neighborhood of the discontinuity. We use this approach in Internet Appendix Table A8.
We limit the sample to +/–0.5 standard deviations (+/–0.07%) around the origin and use a simple
piece-wise linear specification that estimates the discontinuity.
The regressions in Internet Appendix Table A8 confirm the prior results from Table 3,
Panels A and B. The point estimates in this table are generally within 20%–30% of the point
estimates in the tables in the main body of the study.

26

4.6

Risk Taking and Perceived Skill: Effects of Past Performance along Traders’ Lives
According to Gervais and Odean (2001), experiences early in a trader’s life have a

disproportionately large effect on trader overconfidence. Table 4 tests this hypothesis by
examining whether the effects that we document in Table 3 are strongest early in a trader’s life.
To do so, we restrict the sample to traders who survive at least 15 weeks in our sample. This
conditioning allows us to avoid a survival bias and ensures that the composition of the sample is
constant vis-à-vis weeks of traders’ experience. Then, we limit the sample to only trader-week
observations taking place in the first five weeks of the trader’s life. We repeat this procedure with
limitations of 10 weeks and 15 weeks. We repeat the analysis from Table 3 (slopes and
discontinuities) for these samples limited by traders’ trading experience.
Consistent with Gervais and Odean (2001), the results clearly suggest that the effect of past
returns on risk taking and perceived skill is strongest early in a trader’s life. Table 4, Panel A shows
that the growth in average trade size, the growth in trade size variability, and the growth in the
number of trades, exhibit the strongest response to past returns in the early weeks of trading. As
the trader becomes more experienced, the average response becomes smaller: the coefficient
decreases in size moving from Column (1) to (4), from Column (5) to (8), and from (9) to (12).
We find a similar pattern in Panel B. The magnitude of the discontinuity decreases as traders
become more experienced.

27

5

Current Performance and Past Performance
Lastly, we examine whether traders’ performance shares the same patterns exhibited by

growth in average trade size, change in trade size variability, and the change in the number of
trades, with respect to past returns. As noted before, this is a crucial test because it validates the
identification of the effect of overconfidence. If the relation between current and past returns is
similar to the relation between past returns and the change in average trade size, trade size
variability, or the number of trades, then traders could have potentially interpreted the signals from
past performance correctly, and we cannot conclude that they self-attribute positive signals and
discard negative ones.
In Tables 5 and 6, we follow an empirical specification similar to that of Tables 2 and 3.
The only difference is that the dependent variable is the trader’s performance in week t. The
explanatory variables are the same as before. Table 5 shows that in contrast to the change in trade
size, the change in trade size variability, and the growth in number of trades, trader returns show
no discontinuity at zero with respect to past returns. Furthermore, the relation between past and
future returns does not exhibit an increased slope in the domain of gains relative to the domain of
losses.
Table 5, Panel A, is also informative about the overall performance of traders. Specifically,
Column (1), which does not include trader fixed effects, shows that there is a positive correlation
between current returns and past returns. However, once trader fixed effects are included (Column
(2)), the correlation disappears. This suggests that that cross-sectionally there are traders who
perform consistently better than others; however, within trader, there is no correlation between
current and past returns.

28

In several settings, we perform robustness tests of our main results to ensure that the slope
of current performance on past performance does not match the pattern of trader behavior (Table
5, Panel A) and that there is no discontinuity around zero returns (Table 5, Panel B). In Internet
Appendix Table A5, we measure the discontinuity in current value-weighted average returns
around the origin using fourth- and fifth-degree polynomial specifications. The regressions report
a small discontinuity in the direction opposite of what we found in trader behavior (Table 3, Panel
B). In Internet Appendix Table A6, we repeat the main tests using WLS regressions and find that
after adjusting for heteroskedasticity, the results remain similar to the main results.
Table 6 repeats the same test but limits the sample to the first weeks in each trader’s life.
We see no discernable patterns in the relation between future and past performance as a function
of trader experience. The findings in Tables 5 and 6 confirm that the earlier results documenting
changes in risk taking and perceived skill are not driven by the relation between current
performance and past performance.
The relation between current returns and past returns is graphed in Figure 3. For all values
of past returns, traders—on average—lose money in their current trades. In addition, current
returns are lower for traders who experienced extreme returns—either very high or very low—in
the previous week, likely because these traders enter into volatile trades that result in extreme
returns but with very low expected returns. While there are differences in the average levels
between positive and negative past performance, there is no discontinuity around zero. Very small
losses and very small gains predict the same current performance. Nevertheless, traders attribute
much importance to whether they are in the domain of positive or negative performance, as Table
3, Panel B, shows: Average trade size, trade size variability, and number of trades all increase
following small gains, relative to small losses.

29

Figure 3 also shows that past returns have some predictability for current returns. In the
positive domain, the returns are, on average, somewhat higher than those in the negative domain.
However, the slopes are opposite of those we document in regard to traders’ behavior. In the
positive domain, higher past returns are associated with worse current returns. In contrast, the
results from the regressions of the change in average trade size, the change in trade size variability,
and the change in the number of trades show the opposite: Better past performance induces traders
to increase the average trade size, trade size variability, and number of trades. We observe similar
divergence in the negative domain: Worse past performance in the negative domain predicts worse
current performance. Conversely, within the negative domain, trading behavior appears to be more
aggressive (e.g., average trade size increases) following worse negative performance.
Overall, Figure 3 shows that the relation between current and past performance does not
explain the strong patterns we observe in trading behavior with respect to past performance. In
particular, we note in line with the results in the regressions in Table 5, Panel B, that there is no
discontinuity around the origin. In fact, the relation between current returns and past returns around
the origin is flat, meaning that small gains or losses have no predictive power over future returns
at all. We observe similar results in Internet Appendix Table A8, which offers a modified RDD
methodology following Gelman and Imbens (2014).

6

Conclusion
Feedback in the form of past performance is important in forming one’s beliefs about skill.

However, in certain situations, it may lead irrational individuals to develop overconfidence in their
own skill. Specifically, when individuals attribute successes to their own skill and failures to luck,
they become overconfident (Daniel, Hirshleifer, and Subrahmanyam 1998, and Gervais and Odean
30

2001). Ultimately, overconfidence leads to excess risk taking as the individual discounts the true
volatility of the outcome of the action taken.
Our study presents evidence for this mechanism using a sample of Forex day traders. We
present evidence that following successful trading periods traders increase risk taking (increase
traded amounts), and consistent with increased perceived skill (greater trade size variability and
higher frequency of trading). We find no material decline in these variables following periods of
losses. Our identification comes from contrasting the response of trader behavior in the positive
and negative domains of past performance, as well as identifying the presence of a discontinuity
around the origin of past performance. Furthermore, by focusing on a specific subset of investors—
extremely active Forex traders who arguably possess very little actual skill—we are able to
estimate an upper bound on the economic importance of the effect in real markets.
The findings in this paper expand the academic discussion about the quality of feedback.
In our study, there is ample feedback, but traders misinterpret it due to self-attribution. One
wonders whether the same applies to other professions or domains, e.g., corporate executives,
professional forecasters, weather forecasters, or medical doctors. If the usefulness of feedback
differs across domains, it remains an open question what the determinants of this distinction are.
Finally, one wonders to what extent our findings of retail trader overconfidence shed light on the
behavior of professional traders. Professional traders are certainly not immune to overconfidence,
and we therefore expect that our results also provide insight into the behavior of this important
group of market participants. We leave these important questions for future research.

31

References
Arkes, Hal R., Caryn Christensen, Cheryl Lai, and Catherine Blumer, 1987, Two Methods of
Reducing Overconfidence, Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 39(1),
133–144.
Barber, Brad M., and Terrance Odean, 2000, Trading Is Hazardous to Your Wealth: The Common
Stock Investment Performance of Individual Investors, Journal of Finance 55(2), 773–806.
Barber, Brad M., and Terrance Odean, 2002, Online Investors: Do the Slow Die First? Review of
Financial Studies 15(2), 455–488.
Ben-David, Itzhak, Justin Birru and Andrea Rossi, 2015, Trading Skill: Evidence from Trades of
Corporate Insiders in Their Personal Portfolios, The Ohio State University, Working Paper.
Ben-David, Itzhak, and David Hirshleifer, 2012, Are Investors Really Reluctant to Realize their
Losses? Trading Responses to Past Returns and the Disposition Effect, Review of Financial
Studies 25(8), 2485–2532.
Campbell, John Y., Tarun Ramadorai, and Benjamin Ranish, 2014, Getting Better or Feeling
Better? How Equity Investors Respond to Investment Experiences, Harvard University
Working Paper.
Chiang, Yao-Min, David Hirshleifer, Yiming Qian, and Ann E. Sherman, 2011, Do Investors
Learn from Experience? Evidence from Frequent IPO Investors, Review of Financial Studies
24(5), 1560–1589.
Choi, Darwin, and Dong Lou, 2010, A Test of the Self-Serving Attribution Bias: Evidence from
Mutual Funds, Working Paper.
Choi, James, David Laibson, Brigitte C. Madrian, and Andrew Metrick, 2009, Reinforcement
Learning and Savings Behavior, Journal of Finance 64(6), 2515–2534.
Coval, Joshua D., and Tyler Shumway, 2005, Do Behavioral Biases Affect Prices? Journal of
Finance 60(1), 1–34.
Daniel, Kent, David, Hirshleifer, Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, 1998, Investor Psychology and
Security Market Under and Overreactions, Journal of Finance 53(6), 1839–1885.
Døskeland, Trond M., and Hans K. Hvide, 2011, Do Individual Investors Have Asymmetric
Information Based on Work Experience? Journal of Finance 66(3), 1011–1041.
Gelman, Andrew, and Guido Imbens, 2014, Why High-Order Polynomials Should Not be Used in
Regression Discontinuity Designs Working paper, Columbia University.
Gervais, Simon, and Itay Goldstein, 2007, The Positive Effects of Biased Self-Perceptions in
Firms, Review of Finance 11, 453–496.
Gervais, Simon, J. B. Heaton, and Terrance Odean, 2011, Overconfidence, Compensation
Contracts, and Capital Budgeting, Journal of Finance 60(1), 1–34.
Gervais, Simon, and Terrance Odean, 2001, Learning to Be Overconfident, Review of Financial
Studies 14(1), 1–27.

32

Griffin John M., Federico Nardari, and René M. Stulz, 2006, Do Investors Trade More When
Stocks Have Performed Well? Evidence from 46 Countries, Review of Financial Studies 20(3),
905–951.
Grinblatt, Mark, and Matti Keloharju, 2009, Sensation Seeking, Overconfidence, and Trading
Activity, Journal of Finance 64(2), 549–578.
Kacperczyk, Marcin, Clemens Sialm, and Lu Zheng, 2005, On the Industry Concentration of
Actively Managed Equity Mutual Funds, Journal of Finance 60(4), 1983–2011.
Kaustia, Markuu, and Samuli Knupfer, 2008, Do Investors Overweight Personal Experience?
Evidence from IPO Subscriptions, Journal of Finance 63(6), 2679–2702.
Langer, Ellen J., and Jane Roth, 1975, Heads I Win, Tails It’s Chance: The Illusion of Control as
a Function of the Sequence of Outcomes in a Purely Chance Task, Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology 32(6), 951–955.
Linnainmaa, Juhani, 2011, Why Do (Some) Households Trade So Much? Review of Financial
Studies 24(5), 1630–1666.
Locke, Peter R., and Seven C. Mann, 2005, Professional Trader Discipline and Trade Disposition,
Journal of Financial Economics 76, 401–444.
Mahani, Reza, and Dan Bernhardt, 2007, Financial Speculators’ Underperformance: Learning,
Self-Selection, and Endogenous Liquidity, Journal of Finance 62(3), 1313–1340.
Malmendier, Ulrike, and Stephan Nagel, 2011, Depression Babies: Do Macroeconomic
Experiences Affect Risk Taking? Quarterly Journal of Economics 126 (1), 373–416.
Nicolosi, Gina, Liang Peng, Ning Zhu, 2009, Do Individual Investors Learn from Their Trading
Experience, Journal of Financial Markets, 317–336.
Oberlechner, Thomas, and Carol Osler, 2012, Survival of Overconfidence in Currency Markets,
Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 47(1), 91–113.
Pool, Veronika K., Noah Stoffman, and Scott E. Yonker, 2012, No Place Like Home: Familiarity
in Mutual Fund Manager Portfolio Choice, Review of Financial Studies 25(8), 2563–2599.
Seru Amit, Tyler Shumway, and Noah Stoffman, 2010, Learning by Trading, Review of Financial
Studies 23(2), 705–739.
Seidenfeld, Teddy, 1985, Calibration, Coherence, and Scoring Rules, Philosophy of Science 52(2),
274–294.
Statman, Meir, Steven Thorley, and Keith Vorkink, 2006, Investor Overconfidence and Trading
Volume, Review of Financial Studies 19(4), 1531–1565.
Thaler, Richard H., 2000, From Homo Economicus to Homo Sapiens, Journal of Economic
Perspectives 14(1), 133–141.

33

Table 1. Summary Statistics
Table 1 presents summary statistics for the sample. Panel A displays statistics at the trader level; Panel B
displays statistics at the trade level; and Panel C displays statistics at the trader-week level.

Panel A: Trader-Level Summary Statistics
# Days in Sample
# Days Active (Days with Trades)
% Profitable at End
Avg Trade Ret/Trade (%)
Avg Abs Trade Size/Trade ($)
# Trades

N
3,103
3,103
3,103
3,103
3,103
3,103

Mean
180.67
50.34
16.21
-0.035
21293.31
341.75

St Dev
149.38
53.22
36.86
0.089
40368.51
514.81

Min
1
1
0
-0.570
1224.71
2

P25
P50
P75
Max
46
155
279
563
11
32
70
254
0
0
0
100
-0.039 -0.016 -0.004
0.164
2224.19 5759.83 17578.94 235645.83
42
150
399
2975

Panel B: Trade-Level Summary Statistics
# Minutes Trade Open
Trades Long (%)
Average Trade Return (%)
Trades Profitable (%)
Trade Size ($)
Abs Trade Size ($)

N
Mean St Dev
Min
P25
P50
P75
Max
1,118,632 291.63 1065.64
0
4
16
83
7929
1,118,632 47.28
49.93
0
0
0
100
100
1,118,632 -0.009
0.204
-1.120
-0.038 0.015
0.056
0.578
1,118,632 62.76
48.34
0
0
100
100
100
1,118,632 -841.16 30383.46 -139805.00 -4026.59 -1300.26 2872.53 137286.00
1,118,632 14230.60 29162.89 1000.00 1414.55 3203.78 13500.77 173101.80

Panel C: Trader-Week–Level Summary Statistics
# Trades/Week
Weeks Profitable (%)
Weeks w Running Profit at Close (%)
Average Trade Return (t) (%)
Average Trade Return (t-1) (%)
Change in Avg Trade Size
Trade Size Variability (t)
Trade Size Variability (t-1)
Change in Trade Size Variability

N
41,480
41,480
41,480
41,480
42,880
42,880
34,785
34,785
34,785

Mean
23.10
44.07
24.07
-0.023
-0.021
0.124
0.249
0.257
0.241

St Dev
34.45
49.65
42.75
0.151
0.145
0.926
0.265
0.266
0.997

34

Min
1
0
0
-0.726
-0.726
-1.000
0.000
0.000
-0.999

P25
4
0
0
-0.051
-0.049
-0.190
0.006
0.007
-0.511

P50
10
0
0
-0.007
-0.007
-0.004
0.017
0.018
-0.020

P75
27
100
0
0.030
0.030
0.136
0.392
0.040
0.808

Max
214
100
100
0.488
0.488
6.130
1.096
1.090
2.000

Table 2. Is Trade Size Variability a Measure of True Skill?
This table reports results from regressions in which the dependent variable measures the trade size variability or the
change in trade size variability for trader i in week t relative to week t – 1. Avg Trade Ret(t) (%) is a continuous
variable equal to the return of trader i in week t, represented as percentage points. The trade size variability and the
change in trade size variability are represented as fractions. All regressions include week fixed effects. All regressions
are OLS regressions. Standard errors are clustered at the trader and week level. t-statistics are in parentheses. *, **,
*** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

Dependent variable:

Trade Size Variability (t)
(1)
Avg Trade Ret (t) (%)
-0.13***
(-11.04)
Calendar FE
Week FE
Trader FE
Obs
2

R

Change in Trade Size Variability (t)
(2)
-0.28***
(-6.03)

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

34,785

34,785

0.019

0.013

35

Table 3. Trading Behavior and Past Performance
This table reports results from regressions in which the dependent variable measures the change in average trade size,
the change in trade size variability, or the change in the number of trades for trader i in week t relative to week t – 1.
Avg Trade Ret(t - 1) (%) is a continuous variable equal to the return of trader i in week t – 1, represented as percentage
points. I(Avg Trade Ret(t - 1) > 0) is an indicator variable taking a value of 1 when returns in week t – 1 are positive.
The change in average trade size and the change in trade size variability are represented as fractions. The regressions
in Panel B include a third-degree polynomial of returns for the positive and for the negative domains, the coefficients
of which are not reported. All regressions include week fixed effects. Trader fixed effects are included where noted.
All regressions are OLS regressions. Standard errors are clustered at the trader and week level. t-statistics are in
parentheses. *, **, *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

Panel A: The Slopes of the Trading Behavior Variables with Respect to Past Returns,
around Zero Past Returns
Change in Avg
Trade Size (t)
(1)
Avg Trade Ret (t-1) (%)
-0.31***
(-5.18)
× I(Avg Trade Ret (t-1) > 0)
0.84***
(6.55)
Dependent variable:

I(Avg Trade Ret (t-1) > 0)

Change in Median
Trade Size (t)
(2)
-1.43***
(-3.76)
2.14***
(4.27)

Change in Trade Change in Number
Size Variability (t)
of Trades (t)
(3)
(4)
-0.17*
-3.38***
(-1.81)
(-14.04)
0.72***
6.76***
(4.29)
(14.51)

0.13***
(9.10)

0.08*
(1.89)

0.22***
(15.39)

0.52***
(16.81)
-0.02***
(-8.74)

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

42,880

42,880

34,785

42,880

0.014

0.004

0.025

0.056

# Trades (t-1)

Calendar FE
Week FE
Trader FE
Obs
R

2

36

Table 3. Trading Behavior and Past Performance (Cont.)
Panel B: The Discontinuity in the Trading Behavior Variables with Respect to Past
Returns, around Zero Past Returns
Dependent variable:
I(Avg Trade Ret (t-1) > 0)

Change in Avg
Trade Size (t)
(1)
0.12***
(6.48)

Change in Median
Trade Size (t)
(2)
0.16***
(2.36)

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

42,880

42,880

34,785

0.015

0.005

0.025

# Trades (t-1)

3rd degree polynomial
× I(Avg Trade Ret (t-1) > 0)
Calendar FE
Week FE
Trader FE
Obs
R

2

37

Change in Trade Change in Number
Size Variability (t)
of Trades (t)
(3)
(4)
0.17***
0.55***
(9.29)
(9.05)
-0.02***
(-8.61)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
42,880
0.056

Table 3. Trading Behavior and Past Performance (Cont.)
Panel C: A Matching Approach to the Discontinuity in the Trading Behavior Variables
with Respect to Past Returns, around Zero Past Returns
Change in Avg
Trade Size (t)
(1)
0.12***
(9.32)

Change in Trade
Size Variability (t)
(2)
0.13
(0.12)

Change in Number
of Trades (t)
(3)
0.13***
(4.35)

Matched cell FE
Calendar FE
Week FE

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Obs

6,696

5,727

6,696

0.011

0.004

0.023

Dependent variable:
I(Avg Trade Ret (t-1) > 0)

R

2

38

Table 4. Trading Behavior with Respect to Past Returns, by Trading Experience
This table reports results from regressions in which the dependent variable measures the change in average trade size,
the change in trade size variability, or the change in the number of trades for trader i in week t relative to week t – 1.
Avg Trade Ret(t - 1) (%) is a continuous variable equal to the return of trader i in week t – 1, represented as percentage
points. I(Avg Trade Ret(t - 1) > 0) is an indicator variable taking a value of 1 when returns in week t – 1 are positive.
The change in average trade size and the change in trade size variability are represented as fractions. The sample is
limited to the first five weeks of trading for each trader (Columns (1), (5), (9)), the first 10 weeks of trading for each
trader (Columns (2), (6), (10)), the first 15 weeks of trading for each trader (Columns (3), (7), (11)), or all traderweeks (Columns (4), (8), (12)). To enter the sample, a trader needs to survive at least 15 weeks. The regressions in
Panel B include a third-degree polynomial of returns for the positive and for the negative domains, the coefficients of
which are not reported. All regressions include week fixed effects. Trader fixed effects are included where noted. All
regressions are OLS regressions. Standard errors are clustered at the trader and week level. t-statistics are in
parentheses. *, **, *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

Panel A: The Slopes of the Trading Behavior Variables with Respect to Past Returns,
around Zero Past Returns, by Trading Experience
Change in Avg Trade Size (t)
≤5
≤ 10
≤ 15
All
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Avg Trade Ret (t-1) (%)
-0.92*** -0.83*** -0.71*** -0.42***
(-4.90)
(-9.43)
(-9.31)
(-6.03)
× I(Avg Trade Ret (t-1) > 0) 1.93*** 1.80*** 1.56*** 0.95***
(4.10)
(6.88)
(8.71)
(6.53)

Change in Trade Size Variability (t)
≤5
≤ 10
≤ 15
All
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
-0.34
-0.14
-0.125
-0.108
(-1.05)
(-0.81)
(-0.92)
(-1.10)
1.54*** 1.09*** 0.99*** 0.63***
(3.04)
(2.63)
(3.62)
(3.90)

I(Avg Trade Ret (t-1) > 0)

Dependent variable:
Weeks:

0.18***
(3.25)

0.15***
(8.43)

0.13***
(5.90)

0.12***
(8.97)

0.26***
(8.01)

0.22***
(9.20)

0.19***
(9.08)

0.21***
(12.45)

Calendar FE
Week FE
Trader FE

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Obs

4,833

10,859

16,888

33,188

4,247

9,378

14,396

27,361

0.038

0.026

0.020

0.014

0.050

0.035

0.028

0.025

2

R

Dependent variable:
Weeks:
Avg Trade Ret (t-1) (%)
× I(Avg Trade Ret (t-1) > x)
I(Avg Trade Ret (t-1) > x)
# Trades (t-1)

Calendar FE
Week FE
Trader FE
Obs
2

R

Change in Number of Trades (t)
≤5
≤ 10
≤ 15
All
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
-5.63*** -5.49*** -4.83*** -3.58***
(-5.40)
(-12.62)
(-10.33)
(-11.71)
11.36*** 10.01***
9.11***
6.96***
(7.32)
(11.91)
(12.38)
(13.28)
0.66***
0.57***
0.50***
0.49***
(6.99)
(11.48)
(10.58)
(15.82)
-0.02*** -0.02*** -0.02*** -0.02***
(-4.50)
(-6.62)
(-7.54)
(-10.97)
Yes
Yes
Yes
4,833
0.210

39

Yes
Yes
Yes
10,859
0.149

Yes
Yes
Yes
16,888
0.134

Yes
Yes
Yes
33,188
0.115

Table 4. Trading Behavior with Respect to Past Returns, by Trading Experience (Cont.)
Panel B: The Discontinuity in the Trading Behavior Variables with Respect to Past
Returns, around Zero Past Returns, by Trading Experience
Dependent variable:
Weeks:
I(Avg Trade Ret (t-1) > 0)

Change in Avg Trade Size (t)
≤5
≤ 10
≤ 15
All
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
0.27*** 0.19*** 0.14*** 0.12***
(4.41)
(4.94)
(4.36)
(6.78)

Change in Trade Size Variability (t)
≤5
≤ 10
≤ 15
All
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
0.19*** 0.19*** 0.17*** 0.16***
(3.74)
(3.91)
(4.91)
(7.41)

3rd degree polynomial
× I(Avg Trade Ret (t-1) > 0)
Calendar FE
Week FE
Trader FE

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Obs

4,833

10,859

16,888

33,188

4,247

9,378

14,396

27,631

0.041

0.028

0.021

0.015

0.051

0.036

0.0282

0.025

2

R

Dependent variable:
Weeks:
I(Avg Trade Ret (t-1) > x)
# Trades (t-1)

3rd degree polynomial
× I(Avg Trade Ret (t-1) > x)
Calendar FE
Week FE
Trader FE
Obs
R

2

Change in Number of Trades (t)
≤5
≤ 10
≤ 15
All
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
0.75***
0.55***
0.52***
0.51***
(3.78)
(3.87)
(4.90)
(8.11)
-0.02*** -0.02*** -0.02*** -0.02***
(-4.52)
(-6.66)
(-7.49)
(-10.84)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
4,833
0.212

40

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
10,859
0.150

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
16,888
0.135

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
33,188
0.116

Table 5. Current Performance and Past Performance
This table reports results from regressions of returns in week t as predicted by returns in week t – 1. The dependent
variable is the return of trader i in week t. Avg Trade Ret(t - 1) (%) is a continuous variable equal to the return of trader
i in week t – 1, represented as percentage points. I(Avg Trade Ret(t - 1) > 0) is an indicator variable taking a value of
1 when returns in week t – 1 are positive. The regressions in Panel B include a third-degree polynomial of returns for
the positive and for the negative domains, the coefficients of which are not reported. All regressions include week
fixed effects. Trader fixed effects are included where noted. All regressions are OLS regressions. Standard errors are
clustered at the trader and week level. t-statistics are in parentheses. *, **, *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%,
and 1% level, respectively.

Panel A: The Slopes of Current Performance with Respect to Past Performance
Dependent variable:

Average Trade Return (t) (%)
(1)
(2)
0.07***
-0.02
(6.00)
(-1.23)
-0.13***
-0.08***
(-4.94)
(-2.70)

Avg Trade Ret (t-1) (%)
× I(Avg Trade Ret (t-1) > 0)

I(Avg Trade Ret (t-1) > 0)

0.01***
(3.18)

0.00
(-1.05)

Calendar FE

Yes

Yes

Week FE
Trader FE

Yes
No

Yes
Yes

Obs

41,480

41,480

2

0.011

0.014

R

Panel B: Is There a Discontinuity around Zero for Current Performance with Respect to
Past Performance?
Dependent variable:

Average Trade Return (t) (%)
(1)
(2)
-0.0027
-0.0055*
(-0.91)
(-1.86)

I(Avg Trade Ret (t-1) > 0)

3rd degree polynomial
× I(Avg Trade Ret (t-1) > 0)
Calendar FE
Week FE
Trader FE

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Obs

41,480

41,480

2

0.012

0.015

R

41

Table 6. Current Performance and Past Performance, by Trading Period
This table reports results from regressions of the average trade return in week t as predicted by the return in week t –
1. The dependent variable is the return of trader i in week t. Avg Trade Ret(t - 1) (%) is a continuous variable equal to
the return of trader i in week t – 1, represented as percentage points. I(Avg Trade Ret(t - 1) > 0) is an indicator variable
taking a value of 1 when returns in week t – 1 are positive. The change in average trade size and the change in trade
size variability are represented as fractions. The regressions in Panel B include a third-degree polynomial of returns
for the positive and for the negative domains, the coefficients of which are not reported. All regressions include week
fixed effects. Trader fixed effects are included where noted. All regressions are OLS regressions. Standard errors are
clustered at the trader and week level. t-statistics are in parentheses. *, **, *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%,
and 1% level, respectively.

Panel A: The Slopes of Current Performance with Respect to Past Performance, by
Trading Period
Dependent variable:
Week:
Avg Trade Ret (t-1) (%)
× I(Avg Trade Ret (t-1) > 0)

I(Avg Trade Ret (t-1) > 0)

≤5
(1)
-0.24***
(-4.16)
-0.06
(-0.63)

Average Trade Return (t) (%)
≤ 10
≤ 15
All
(2)
(3)
(4)
-0.11***
-0.03
0.02
(-6.04)
(-1.52)
(1.11)
-0.08
-0.09**
-0.10***
(-1.45)
(-2.22)
(-3.03)

0.00
(0.03)

0.00
(1.15)

0.00
-0.95

0.00
-1.32

Calendar FE
Week FE
Trader FE

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Obs

4,833

10,859

16,888

32,831

2

0.084

0.034

0.02

0.0138

R

42

Table 6. Current Performance and Past Performance, by Trading Period (Cont.)
Panel B: Is There a Discontinuity around Zero for Current Performance with Respect to
Past Performance, by Trading Period?
Dependent variable:
Week:
I(Avg Trade Ret (t-1) > 0)

Average Trade Return (t) (%)
≤ 10
≤ 15
All
(2)
(3)
(4)
-0.0002
-0.0070
-0.0060*
(-0.03)
(-1.10)
(-1.86)

≤5
(1)
-0.0080
(-0.97)

3rd degree polynomial
× I(Avg Trade Ret (t-1) > 0)
Calendar FE
Week FE
Trader FE

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Obs

4,833

10,859

16,888

32,831

2

0.092

0.036

0.022

0.0147

R

43

Figure 1. Hypothesis: Risk Taking and Perceived Skill Have Differential Slopes and
Discontinuity around Zero Past Performance

Risk taking (t)
or
Perceived skill (t)

0 Performance (t-1)

The figure illustrates the hypotheses that individuals respond to past performance in an asymmetric
manner (different slope) with respect to gains and losses and that they may exhibit a discontinuity
around the origin of past performance.

44

Figure 2. Change in Trading Patterns and Past Performance
The figures show the change in trading patterns as a function of the lagged average trade return.
The change in average trade size is computed as the change in the average amount invested in each
trade as a fraction of the initial balance at week t – 1. Observations (trader-week) are sorted into
bins of 0.02%. In each bin, the diamond marker indicates the average, and the small x’s represent
two standard errors from the mean. The solid line represents a third-degree polynomial fit (separate
fit for positive and negative domains).

Figure 2b. Change in Trade Size Variability
and Past Performance

Figure 2a. Change in Average Trade Size
and Past Performance

Figure 2c. Change in the Number of Trades
and Past Performance

45

Figure 3. Current Performance and Past Performance

The figure shows the weekly average trade return of traders as a function of the lagged average
trade return. Observations (trader-week) are sorted into bins of 0.02%. In each bin, the diamond
marker indicates the average, and the small x’s represent two standard errors from the mean. The
solid line represents a third-degree polynomial fit (separate fit for positive and negative domains).

46

Uninformative Feedback and Risk Taking:
Evidence from Retail Forex Trading
Itzhak Ben-David
Fisher College of Business, The Ohio State University, and NBER
Justin Birru
Fisher College of Business, The Ohio State University
Viktor Prokopenya
exp(Capital)

March 2016

INTERNET APPENDIX

Internet Appendix Table A1. Main Tests with Three-Day Frequency
This table reports results from regressions in which the dependent variable measures the change in average trade size
or change in trade size variability for trader i in the two-week period t relative to the three-day period t – 1. Avg Trade
Ret(t - 1) (%) is a continuous variable equal to the return of trader i in the two-week period t – 1, represented as
percentage points. I(Avg Trade Ret(t - 1) > 0) is an indicator variable taking a value of 1 when past value-weighted
average returns are positive. The change in average trade size, the change in trade size variability, and the change in
the number of trades, are represented as fractions. The regressions in Panel B include a third-degree polynomial of
returns for the positive and for the negative domains, the coefficients of which are not reported. All regressions include
week fixed effects. Trader fixed effects are included where noted. All regressions are OLS regressions. Standard errors
are clustered at the trader and week level. t-statistics are in parentheses. *, **, *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%,
and 1% level, respectively.

Panel A: The Slopes of the Trading Patterns with Respect to Past Returns, around Zero
Past Returns (Three-Day Frequency)
Change in Avg
Change in Trade Change in Number
Trade Size (t)
Size Variability (t)
of Trades (t)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Avg Trade Ret (t-1) (%)
-0.22*** -0.32*** -0.10* -0.29*** -1.85*** -3.24***
(-5.06) (-6.78)
(-1.63) (-4.47) (-13.91) (-21.08)
× I(Avg Trade Ret (t-1) > 0) 0.51*** 0.70*** 0.35*** 0.71*** 3.64*** 6.47***
(7.98)
(9.64)
(3.28) (6.32)
(12.84) (19.69)
Dependent variable:

I(Avg Trade Ret (t-1) > 0)

Calendar FE
Week FE
Trader FE

0.07*** 0.09***
(6.65)
(7.80)

0.16*** 0.20***
(14.17) (16.17)

0.46*** 0.64***
(18.41) (23.50)

Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes

Obs

78,161

78,161

56,407

56,407

78,161

78,161

2

0.011

0.013

0.050

0.052

0.080

0.097

R

Panel B: The Discontinuity in the Trading Patterns with Respect to Past Returns, around
Zero Past Returns (Three-Day Frequency)
Dependent variable:
I(Avg Trade Ret (t-1) > 0)

3rd degree polynomial
× I(Avg Trade Ret (t-1) > 0)
Calendar FE
Week FE
Trader FE

Change in Avg
Trade Size (t)
(1)
(2)
0.09*** 0.10***
(5.71)
(6.94)

Change in Trade Change in Number
Size Variability (t)
of Trades (t)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
0.16*** 0.18*** 0.67*** 0.09***
(11.40) (12.35)
(20.25) (22.89)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Obs

78,161

78,161

56,407

56,407

78,161

78,161

2

0.011

0.013

0.050

0.052

0.083

0.103

R

1

Internet Appendix Table A2. Main Tests with Two-Week Frequency
This table reports results from regressions in which the dependent variable measures change in average trade size or
change in trade size variability for trader i in the two-week period t relative to the two-week period t – 1. Avg Trade
Ret(t - 1) (%) is a continuous variable equal to the return of trader i in the two-week period t – 1, represented as
percentage points. I(Avg Trade Ret(t - 1) > 0) is an indicator variable taking a value of 1 when past value-weighted
average returns are positive. The change in average trade size, the change in trade size variability, and the change in
the number of trades, are represented as fractions. The regressions in Panel B include a third-degree polynomial of
returns for the positive and for the negative domains, the coefficients of which are not reported. All regressions include
week fixed effects. Trader fixed effects are included where noted. All regressions are OLS regressions. Standard errors
are clustered at the trader and week level. t-statistics are in parentheses. *, **, *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%,
and 1% level, respectively.

Panel A: The Slopes of the Trading Patterns with Respect to Past Returns, around Zero
Past Returns (Two-Week Frequency)
Change in Avg
Change in Trade Change in Number
Trade Size (t)
Size Variability (t)
of Trades (t)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Avg Trade Ret (t-1) (%)
-0.27* -0.54***
-0.01
-0.16
-3.96*** -6.17***
(-1.95) (-5.06)
(-0.11) (-1.50) (-12.52) (-14.82)
× I(Avg Trade Ret (t-1) > 0) 0.77*** 1.29*** 0.54*** 0.87*** 7.46*** 12.37***
(2.74)
(5.08)
(3.52) (5.18)
(13.81) (15.43)
Dependent variable:

I(Avg Trade Ret (t-1) > 0)

Calendar FE
Week FE
Trader FE

0.14*** 0.19***
(6.29)
(9.11)

0.17*** 0.22***
(7.55) (8.37)

0.42*** 0.73***
(9.96) (13.45)

Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes

Obs

24,815

24,815

20,699

20,699

24,815

24,815

2

0.011

0.034

0.022

0.025

0.038

0.064

R

Panel B: The Discontinuity in the Trading Patterns with Respect to Past Returns, around
Zero Past Returns (Two-Week Frequency)
Dependent variable:
I(Avg Trade Ret (t-1) > 0)

3rd degree polynomial
× I(Avg Trade Ret (t-1) > 0)
Calendar FE
Week FE
Trader FE

Change in Avg
Trade Size (t)
(1)
(2)
0.10*** 0.15***
(3.59)
(5.84)

Change in Trade Change in Number
Size Variability (t)
of Trades (t)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
0.16*** 0.18*** 0.55*** 0.85***
(7.37) (6.98)
(9.33) (12.51)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Obs

24,815

24,815

20,699

20,699

24,815

24,815

2

0.013

0.036

0.023

0.025

0.043

0.076

R

2

Internet Appendix Table A3. Main Tests without Accounting for Trader Exit
This table reports results from regressions in which the dependent variable measures change in average trade size or
change in trade size variability for trader i from one week to another. In these tests, trader-weeks who exit the sample
are simply dropped. Avg Trade Ret(t - 1) (%) is a continuous variable equal to the return of trader i in the two-week
period t – 1, represented as percentage points. I(Avg Trade Ret(t - 1) > 0) is an indicator variable taking a value of 1
when past value-weighted average returns are positive. The change in average trade size, the change in trade size
variability, and the change in the number of trades, are represented as fractions. The regressions in Panel B include a
third-degree polynomial of returns for the positive and for the negative domains, the coefficients of which are not
reported. All regressions include week fixed effects. Trader fixed effects are included where noted. All regressions
are OLS regressions. Standard errors are clustered at the trader and week level. t-statistics are in parentheses. *, **,
*** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

Panel A: The Slopes of the Trading Patterns around Zero Past Returns (Exiting TraderWeeks Are Dropped)
Change in Avg
Trade Size (t)
(1)
(2)
Avg Trade Ret (t-1) (%)
-0.37** -0.55***
(-5.96) (-8.32)
× I(Avg Trade Ret (t-1) > 0) 0.86*** 1.26***
(7.09)
(9.30)
Dependent variable:

I(Avg Trade Ret (t-1) > 0)

Calendar FE
Week FE
Trader FE

0.09*** 0.12***
(4.74)
(8.10)

Change in Median
Trade Size (t)
(3)
(4)
-1.38*** -1.82***
(-3.78)
(-4.38)
1.74*** 2.75***
(3.78)
(5.04)

Change in Number
of Trades (t)
(5)
(6)
-3.33*** -4.98***
(-14.18) (-17.28)
6.02*** 9.63***
(13.73) (18.04)

0.00
(-0.01)

0.06*
(1.56)

0.36***
(14.44)

0.60***
(18.72)

Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes

Obs

41,480

41,480

41,480

41,480

41,480

41,480

2

0.011

0.013

0.005

0.005

0.039

0.063

R

Panel B: The Discontinuity in the Trading Patterns around Zero Past Returns (Exiting
Trader-Weeks Are Dropped)
Dependent variable:
I(Avg Trade Ret (t-1) > 0)

3rd degree polynomial
× I(Avg Trade Ret (t-1) > 0)
Calendar FE
Week FE
Trader FE

Change in Avg
Trade Size (t)
(1)
(2)
0.09*** 0.13***
(3.87)
(6.69)

Change in Median
Trade Size (t)
(3)
(4)
0.10*
0.17***
(2.06)
(2.47)

Change in Number
of Trades (t)
(5)
(6)
0.51*** 0.72***
(8.78)
(11.35)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Obs

41,480

41,480

41,480

41,480

41,480

41,480

2

0.011

0.015

0.005

0.005

0.041

0.070

R

3

Internet Appendix Table A4. Winsorizing the Change in Trade size variability
This table reports results from regressions in which the dependent variable measures change in trade size variability
for trader i in week t relative to week t – 1. Avg Trade Ret(t - 1) (%) is a continuous variable equal to the return of
trader i in week t – 1, represented as percentage points. I(Avg Trade Ret(t - 1) > 0) is an indicator variable taking a
value of 1 when returns in week t – 1 are positive. The change in trade size variability is represented as a fraction. The
dependent variable (change in trade size variability) is winsorized at 5 in Columns (1) to (4), and at 10 in Columns (5)
to (8). The regressions in Panel B include a third-degree polynomial of returns for the positive and for the negative
domains, the coefficients of which are not reported. All regressions include week fixed effects. Trader fixed effects
are included where noted. All regressions are OLS regressions. Standard errors are clustered at the trader and week
level. t-statistics are in parentheses. *, **, *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

Panel A: The Slopes of the Change in Average Trade Size and the Change in Trade size
variability with Respect to Past Returns, around Zero Past Returns
Change in Trade Size Variability (t)
Change in Trade Size Variability (t)
(winsorized at 5)
(winsorized at 10)
≤5
≤ 10
≤ 15
All
≤5
≤ 10
≤ 15
All
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
Avg Trade Ret (t-1) (%)
-1.23* -0.91*** -0.71*** -0.64*** -2.69** -2.26*** -1.71*** -1.53***
(-1.92)
(-2.72)
(-2.72)
(-3.45) (-2.37)
(-4.09)
(-3.67)
(-4.73)
× I(Avg Trade Ret (t-1) > 0) 4.29*** 3.44*** 2.88*** 2.19*** 8.99*** 7.15*** 5.81*** 4.68***
(4.41)
(4.65)
(5.43)
(7.20)
(5.24)
(5.95)
(6.04)
(8.42)
Dependent variable:
Weeks:

I(Avg Trade Ret (t-1) > 0)

0.42***
(7.83)

0.38***
(7.34)

0.33***
(9.20)

0.32***
(12.36)

0.64***
(5.68)

0.60***
(5.97)

0.51***
(8.28)

0.48***
(11.73)

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Obs

4,247

9,378

14,396

27,361

4,247

9,378

14,396

27,631

2

0.055

0.036

0.028

0.023

0.054

0.034

0.0263

0.0219

Calendar FE
Week FE
Trader FE

R

Panel B: The Discontinuity in the Change in Average Trade Size and the Change in Trade
size variability with Respect to Past Returns, around Zero Past Returns
Dependent variable:
Weeks:
I(Avg Trade Ret (t-1) > 0)

Change in Trade Size Variability (t)
(winsorized at 5)
≤5
≤ 10
≤ 15
All
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
0.39*** 0.38*** 0.31*** 0.27***
(3.83)
(3.92)
(4.98)
(6.86)

Change in Trade Size Variability (t)
(winsorized at 10)
≤5
≤ 10
≤ 15
All
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
0.65*** 0.63*** 0.50*** 0.42***
(3.42)
(3.50)
(4.35)
(5.99)

3rd degree polynomial
× I(Avg Trade Ret (t-1) > 0)
Calendar FE
Week FE
Trader FE

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Obs

4,247

9,378

14,396

27,631

4,247

9,378

14,396

27,631

2

0.056

0.037

0.028

0.024

0.055

0.035

0.0265

0.0222

R

4

Internet Appendix Table A5. Measuring the Discontinuity Using Higher Degree
Polynomials
This table reports results from regressions in which the dependent variable measures the change in average trade size
or the change in trade size variability for trader i in week t relative to week t – 1, or the average trade return in week
t. Avg Trade Ret(t - 1) (%) is a continuous variable equal to the return of trader i in week t – 1, represented as percentage
points. I(Avg Trade Ret(t - 1) > 0) is an indicator variable taking a value of 1 when returns in week t – 1 are greater
than 0. The change in average trade size, the change in trade size variability, and the change in the number of trades,
are represented as fractions. The regressions include a fourth- or fifth-degree polynomial of returns for the positive
and for the negative domains, the coefficients of which are not reported. All regressions include week fixed effects
and trader fixed effects. All regressions are OLS regressions. Standard errors are clustered at the trader and week level.
t-statistics are in parentheses. *, **, *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

Dependent variable:
Polynomial degree:
I(Avg Trade Ret (t-1) > 0)

Xth degree polynomial
× I(Avg Trade Ret (t-1) > 0)
Calendar FE
Week FE
Trader FE
Obs
2

R

Change in Avg
Trade Size (t)
4th
5th
(1)
(2)
0.14*** 0.15***
(6.47) (5.96)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Change in Trade
Size Variability (t)
4th
5th
(3)
(4)
0.15*** 0.13***
(7.16) (6.48)

Change in Number
of Trades (t)
4th
5th
(5)
(6)
0.70*** 0.68***
(-11.35) (-11.19)

Average Trade
Return (t) (%)
4th
5th
(7)
(8)
-0.01** -0.01**
(-2.05) (-2.27)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

42,880 42,880

34,785

34,785

42,880

42,880

41,480 41,480

0.015

0.026

0.026

0.063

0.064

0.015

0.016

5

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.015

Internet Appendix Table A6. Estimation Using WLS
This table reports results from regressions in which the dependent variable measures the change in average trade size,
the change in trade size variability for trader i in week t relative to week t – 1, or the average trade return in week t.
Avg Trade Ret(t - 1) (%) is a continuous variable equal to the return of trader i in week t – 1, represented as percentage
points. I(Avg Trade Ret(t - 1) > 0) is an indicator variable taking a value of 1 when returns in week t – 1 are greater
than 0. The change in average trade size, the change in trade size variability, and the change in the number of trades,
are represented as fractions. The regressions in Panel B include a third-degree polynomial of returns for the positive
and for the negative domains, the coefficients of which are not reported. All regressions include week fixed effects,
and trader fixed effects are included where noted. All regressions are weighted least squares (WLS) regressions.
Standard errors are clustered at the trader and week level. t-statistics are in parentheses. *, **, *** denote significance
at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

Panel A: The Slopes of the Trading Patterns with Respect to Past Returns, around Zero
Past Returns
Change in Avg
Trade Size (t)
(1)
(2)
Avg Trade Ret (t-1) (%)
-0.95*** -0.62***
(-5.07) (-4.03)
× I(Avg Trade Ret (t-1) > 0) 1.76*** 1.07***
(5.22)
(4.39)

Change in Trade
Size Variability (t)
(3)
(4)
-0.29*
-0.12
(-1.76) (-0.81)
0.99*** 0.46**
(3.28)
(2.02)

Change in Number
of Trades (t)
(5)
(6)
-6.43*** -9.32***
(-14.22) (18.48)
0.32*** 19.00***
(17.59) (21.87)

I(Avg Trade Ret (t-1) > 0)

0.23*** 0.19***
(11.19) (9.53)

0.32*** 0.58***
(7.12) (12.30)

Dependent variable:

Calendar FE
Week FE
Trader FE

0.19*** 0.15***
(10.66) (6.92)

Average Trade
Return (t) (%)
(7)
(8)
-0.09***
0.03**
(-4.66)
(2.29)
-0.03
-0.11***
(-0.66)
(-2.92)
0.00
(1.15)

0.00**
(2.27)

Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes

Obs

42,880

42,880

34,785

34,785

42,880

42,880

41,480

41,480

2

0.027

0.042

0.034

0.078

0.104

0.084

0.023

0.045

R

Panel B: The Discontinuity in the Trading Patterns with Respect to Past Returns, around
Zero Past Returns
Dependent variable:
I(Avg Trade Ret (t-1) > 0)

3rd degree polynomial
× I(Avg Trade Ret (t-1) > 0)
Calendar FE
Week FE
Trader FE

Change in Avg
Trade Size (t)
(1)
(2)
0.18*** 0.15***
(7.62)
(4.45)

Change in Trade
Size Variability (t)
(3)
(4)
0.17*** 0.16***
(5.87)
(5.57)

Change in Number
of Trades (t)
(5)
(6)
0.41*** 0.61***
(6.84)
(9.84)

Average Trade
Return (t) (%)
(7)
(8)
-0.0028*** -0.0040***
(-1.28)
(-1.81)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Obs

42,880

42,880

34,785

34,785

42,880

42,880

41,480

41,480

2

0.030

0.044

0.035

0.078

0.106

0.092

0.024

0.047

R

6

Internet Appendix Table A7. Falsification Tests: Testing Slope and Discontinuity at Other
Values
This table reports results from regressions in which the dependent variable measures the change in average trade size
or the change in trade size variability for trader i in the week t relative to week t – 1. Avg Trade Ret(t - 1) (%) is a
continuous variable equal to the return of trader i in week t – 1, represented as percentage points. I(Avg Trade Ret(t 1) > x) is an indicator variable taking a value of 1 when returns in week t – 1 are greater than 0 +/- the specified
number of standard deviations. The change in average trade size, the change in trade size variability, and the change
in the number of trades, are represented as fractions. The regressions in Panels D to F include a third-degree
polynomial of returns for the positive and for the negative domains, the coefficients of which are not reported. All
regressions include week fixed effects, and trader fixed effects are included where noted. All regressions are OLS
regressions. Standard errors are clustered at the trader and week level. t-statistics are in parentheses. *, **, *** denote
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

Panel A: Slopes of the Change in Average Trade Size around Non-Zero Returns
-2 std
(1)
0.08
(0.38)
0.39*
(1.86)

-1.5 std
(2)
0.06
(0.44)
0.51***
(3.73)

-1 std
(3)
-0.01
(-0.12)
0.71***
(6.55)

Change in Avg Trade Size (t)
-0.5 std
0 std
+0.5 std
(4)
(5)
(6)
-0.10* -0.31***
-0.01
(-1.63)
(-5.18)
(-0.18)
0.95*** 0.84***
0.26*
(8.22)
(6.55)
(1.86)

-0.04
(-0.40)

-0.05
(-0.77)

-0.03
(-0.75)

-0.01
(-0.30)

0.13***
(9.10)

Calendar FE
Week FE

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Trader FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

Obs

42,880

42,880

2

0.010

0.010

Dependent variable:

Avg Trade Ret (t-1) (%)
× I(Avg Trade Ret (t-1) > x)

I(Avg Trade Ret (t-1) > x)

R

+1 std
(7)
0.12***
(2.69)
0.20
(1.17)

+1.5 std
(8)
0.15***
(3.75)
0.39
(1.26)

+2 std
(9)
0.17***
(4.31)
0.53
(1.23)

0.13***
(4.88)

0.06
(1.13)

-0.03
(-0.27)

-0.11
(-0.61)

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

42,880

42,880

42,880

42,880

42,880

42,880

42,880

0.011

0.012

0.014

0.010

0.009

0.009

0.009

Panel B: Slopes of the Change in Trade size variability around Non-Zero Returns

7

Dependent variable:
-2 std
(1)
Avg Trade Ret (t-1) (%)
-0.01
(-0.04)
× I(Avg Trade Ret (t-1) > x) 1.05***
(3.11)
I(Avg Trade Ret (t-1) > x)

-1.5 std
(2)
-0.23
(-0.91)
1.36***
(4.99)

Change in Trade Size Variability (t)
-1 std
-0.5 std
0 std
+0.5 std
+1 std
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
-0.32* -0.32*** -0.17*
0.41*** 0.53***
(-1.82)
(-2.58)
(-1.81)
(5.13)
(6.85)
1.57*** 1.58*** 0.72***
-0.10
-0.25
(7.32)
(8.95)
(4.29)
(-0.49)
(-0.92)

+1.5 std
(8)
0.55***
(7.41)
-0.63
(-1.39)

+2 std
(9)
0.58***
(8.26)
-0.32
(-0.42)

0.01
(0.10)

0.12
(1.33)

0.16***
(3.04)

0.16***
(6.43)

0.22***
(15.39)

0.15***
(4.20)

0.13*
(1.90)

0.28
(1.61)

0.13
(0.43)

Calendar FE
Week FE

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Trader FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Obs

34,785

34,785

34,785

34,785

34,785

34,785

34,785

34,785

34,785

2

0.020

0.020

0.021

0.021

0.025

0.018

0.017

0.017

0.017

R

8

Internet Appendix Table A7. Falsification Tests: Testing Slope and Discontinuity at Other
Values (Cont.)
Panel C: Slopes of the Change in the Number of Trades around Non-Zero Returns
Change in Number of Trades (t)
-2 std
-1.5 std
-1 std
-0.5 std
0 std
+0.5 std
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Avg Trade Ret (t-1) (%)
-2.23*** -2.35*** -2.03*** -2.82*** -4.29*** -2.60***
(-3.62)
(-5.07)
(-6.09) (-11.51) (-16.41) (-12.19)
× I(Avg Trade Ret (t-1) > x) 4.09*** 4.88*** 5.85*** 8.11*** 8.50*** 5.61***
(6.41)
(9.92)
(14.73) (18.33) (16.85) (11.17)
Dependent variable:

I(Avg Trade Ret (t-1) > x)

+1 std +1.5 std +2 std
(7)
(8)
(9)
-1.82*** -1.41*** -1.13***
(-9.56)
(-7.57)
(-6.32)
4.66*** 4.07*** 5.01***
(7.23)
(4.88)
(2.75)

0.00
(0.01)

-0.01
(-0.03)

-0.31**
(-2.59)

-0.15**
(-2.50)

0.61***
(19.89)

0.47***
(7.49)

0.33**
(2.02)

0.29
(1.00)

-0.32
(-0.43)

Calendar FE
Week FE

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Trader FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Obs

42,880

42,880

42,880

42,880

42,880

42,880

42,880

0.027

0.031

0.042

0.050

42,880
0.056

42,880

2

0.039

0.030

0.026

0.022

R

Panel D: Discontinuity in the Change in Average Trade Size around Non-Zero Returns
Change in Avg Trade Size (t)
-0.5 std
0 std
+0.5 std
(4)
(5)
(6)
-0.01
0.12***
-0.06
(-0.19)
(6.48)
(-0.51)

Dependent variable:
-2 std
(1)
-9.41*
(-5.04)

-1.5 std
(2)
-1.71**
(-2.46)

-1 std
(3)
-0.24
(-0.97)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Obs

42,880

42,880

42,880

42,880

2

0.0126

0.0119

0.0117

0.013

I(Avg Trade Ret (t-1) > x)

3rd degree polynomial
× I(Avg Trade Ret (t-1) > x)
Calendar FE
Week FE
Trader FE

R

9

+1 std
(7)
1.02**
(2.13)

+1.5 std
(8)
-1.59
(-0.43)

+2 std
(9)
25.97*
(1.84)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

42,880

42,880

42,880

42,880

42,880

0.015

0.0126

0.0128

0.0116

0.0109

Internet Appendix Table A7. Falsification Tests: Testing Slope and Discontinuity at Other
Values (Cont.)
Panel E: Discontinuity in the Change in Trade size variability around Non-Zero Returns
Dependent variable:

Change in Trade Size Variability (t)
-0.5 std
0 std
+0.5 std
(4)
(5)
(6)
0.16*
0.17***
0.19
(1.91)
(9.29)
(0.99)

-2 std
(1)
3.40
(1.16)

-1.5 std
(2)
1.61*
(1.65)

-1 std
(3)
0.53
(1.51)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Obs

34,785

34,785

34,785

34,785

2

0.022

0.022

0.022

0.023

I(Avg Trade Ret (t-1) > x)

3rd degree polynomial
× I(Avg Trade Ret (t-1) > x)
Calendar FE
Week FE
Trader FE

R

+1 std
(7)
0.46
(0.45)

+1.5 std
(8)
3.39
(1.02)

+2 std
(9)
-8.93
(-0.36)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

34,785

34,785

34,785

34,785

34,785

0.025

0.023

0.022

0.021

0.020

Panel F: Discontinuity in the Change in the Number of Trades around Non-Zero Returns
Dependent variable:

I(Avg Trade Ret (t-1) > x)

3rd degree polynomial
× I(Avg Trade Ret (t-1) > x)
Calendar FE
Week FE
Trader FE

-2 std
-1.5 std
-1 std
(1)
(2)
(3)
-25.09*** -5.82*** -2.32***
(-5.60)
(-3.48)
(-2.83)

Change in Number of Trades (t)
-0.5 std
0 std
+0.5 std +1 std
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
0.20
0.69***
0.15
0.32
(1.06)
(10.91)
(0.39)
(0.18)

+1.5 std
(8)
13.46
(1.62)

+2 std
(9)
9.38
(0.16)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Obs

42,880

42,880

42,880

42,880

42,880

42,880

42,880

42,880

42,880

2

0.0469

0.0492

0.0493

0.053

0.062

0.0474

0.0471

0.0456

0.0431

R

10

Internet Appendix Table A8. Regression Discontinuity Design without High-Order
Polynomials
This table reports results from regressions in which the dependent variable measures the change in average trade size,
the change in trade size variability for trader i in week t relative to week t – 1, or the average trade return in week t.
Avg Trade Ret(t - 1) (%) is a continuous variable equal to the return of trader i in week t – 1, represented as percentage
points. I(Avg Trade Ret(t - 1) > 0) is an indicator variable taking a value of 1 when returns in week t – 1 are greater
than 0. The change in average trade size, the change in trade size variability, and the change in the number of trades,
are represented as fractions. The sample in this regression is limited to +/–0.5 standard deviations (+/–0.07%) around
the origin. All regressions include week fixed effects, and trader fixed effects are included where noted. All regressions
are OLS regressions. Standard errors are clustered at the trader and week level. t-statistics are in parentheses. *, **,
*** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

Change in Avg
Change in Trade Change in Number Average Trade
Trade Size (t)
Size Variability (t)
of Trades (t)
Return (t) (%)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
Avg Trade Ret (t-1) (%)
-0.92** -1.28**
0.99* 1.06** -4.69*** -8.76*** 0.17*** 0.04
(-1.99) (-2.34)
(1.91) (2.14)
(-4.39) (-7.25)
(3.35) (0.55)
× I(Avg Trade Ret (t-1) > 0) 1.93*** 2.41***
-0.95
-0.52
6.68*** 16.71*** -0.09 -0.07
(3.13) (3.35)
(-1.27) (-0.70)
(4.81)
(9.61)
(-0.95) (-0.70)
Dependent variable:

I(Avg Trade Ret (t-1) > 0)

Calendar FE
Week FE
Trader FE
Obs
2

R

0.11*** 0.14***
(4.56) (6.20)
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes

0.16*** 0.17***
(7.32) (8.84)

0.48*** 0.60***
(7.64)
(9.62)

-0.0016 -0.0031
(-0.63) (-1.25)

Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes

29,497 29,497

25,525

25,525

29,497

29,497

28,813 28,813

0.011

0.022

0.023

0.026

0.036

0.011

0.013

11

Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes

0.013

