                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




ARE ONLINE AND OFFLINE PRICES SIMILAR? EVIDENCE FROM LARGE MULTI-CHANNEL
                                 RETAILERS

                                          Alberto F. Cavallo

                                         Working Paper 22142
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w22142


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2016


  Financial support for this research was provided by the JFRAP at MIT Sloan and the NBER's
  Economics of Digitization and Copyright Initiative. I thank Maria Fazzolari for her outstanding
  work implementing and coordinating all the offline data collection. I also thank the MIT and
  Wellesley University students that collected some of the offline data: Vivian Xi, Maurizio Boano,
  Sibo Wang, Descartes Holland, Sabrina Lui, Suh Yoon, Holly Zhu, Sean Bingham, Elizabeth
  Krauthamer, Jeffrey Zhang, William Rodriguez, Wenxin Zhang, Jake Amereno, Ivy Jiang, Diya
  Mo, Qi Jin, Riley Quinn, Do Yeon Park, Jung Hyun Choi, Xiaoxi Wang, Aaroshi Sahgal, Isaiah
  Udotong, Giulio Capolino, Tanya Bakshi, Allison Davanzo, Karen Pulido, and Bailey Tregoning.
  I greatly benefited from the comments and suggestions by the Editor and anonymous referee, as
  well as seminar participants at the Ottawa Group, MIT Sloan, NBER/CIRW Summer Institute,
  and the UNECE/ILO Meeting of the Group of Experts on Consumer Price Indices. The Appendix
  that accompanies the paper can be found on the authors web page, together with the data and
  replication materials. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily
  reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

  The author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research. Further
  information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w22142.ack

  NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
  peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
  official NBER publications.

  © 2016 by Alberto F. Cavallo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
  paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
  notice, is given to the source.
Are Online and Offline Prices Similar? Evidence from Large Multi-Channel Retailers
Alberto F. Cavallo
NBER Working Paper No. 22142
March 2016, Revised August 2016
JEL No. E31,F4,L1

                                           ABSTRACT

Online prices are increasingly being used for a variety of inflation measurement and research
applications, yet little is know about their relation to prices collected offline, where most retail
transactions take place. This paper presents the results of the first large-scale comparison of
online and offline prices simultaneously collected from the websites and physical stores of 56
large multi-channel retailers in 10 countries. I find that price levels are identical about 72% of the
time for the products sold in both locations, with significant heterogeneity across countries,
sectors, and retailers. The similarity is highest in electronics and clothing and lowest in drugstores
and office-supply retailers. There is no evidence of online prices varying with the location of the
ip address or persistent browsing habits. Price changes are not synchronized but have similar
frequencies and average sizes. These results have implications for National Statistical Offices and
researchers using online data, as well as those interested in the effect of the Internet on retail
prices.


Alberto F. Cavallo
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-512
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
acavallo@mit.edu




A Data Appendix and Replication Materials is available at http://www.mit.edu/~afc/
1       Introduction

    Online prices are increasingly being used for measurement and research applications.
Since 2008, the Billion Prices Project at MIT (BPP) has been experimenting with daily
online price indexes in the US and other countries, as described in Cavallo and Rigobon
(2016). National Statistical Offices (NSOs) have recently started to consider the use of
online data in official Consumer Price Indices (CPIs), as discussed in Horrigan (2013),
Breton et al. (2015), Krsinich (2015), Nygaard (2015), Boettcher (2015), and Griffioen
et al. (2014). In the context of academic research, online prices are being used for a wide
range of topics, including the study of price competition, market segmentation, price
stickiness, international relative prices, and real exchange rate dynamics.1
    Despite their growing appeal, an open fundamental question about online prices is
whether they are similar to the prices that can be collected offline in physical stores. The
question is important because relatively few retail transactions take place online. In fact,
according to Euromonitor (2014), online purchases are currently less than 10% of all retail
transactions in the US, and even lower in other countries.
    This paper provides the first large-scale comparison of online and offline prices in
large multi-channel retailers designed to answer this question. Using a combination of
crowdsourcing platforms, a mobile phone app, and web scraping methods, I simultaneously
collected prices in both the online and offline stores of 56 of the largest retailers in 10
countries: Argentina, Australia, Brazil, Canada, China, Germany, Japan, South Africa,
UK, and the United States. These data are used to compare price levels, the behavior
of price changes, and the selection of products available for sale in the offline and online
stores. I document country, sector, and retailer heterogeneity, and test whether online
prices vary with ip-address locations or persistent browsing habits. The results have
implications for NSOs and researchers using online data, as well as those interested in the
effect of the Internet on retail prices.
    The data collection effort is unprecedented in scope and size, and was carried out

    1
    See Chevalier and Goolsbee (2003), Brynjolfsson et al. (2011), Simonovska (2015), Edelman (2012),
Cavallo et al. (2014), Gorodnichenko et al. (2014), Gorodnichenko and Talavera (2016), Cavallo (2016),
and Alvarez et al. (2016).

                                                  2
as part of the Billion Prices Project at MIT (BPP). I first selected the retailers to be
sampled by focusing on the top 20 companies by market shares in each country that sell
both online and offline (“multi-channel”), and have product barcodes that can be matched
across samples. Next, I used crowdsourcing platforms such as Amazon Mechanical Turk,
Elance, and UpWork to hire 323 workers to collect the offline data. Each worker was
assigned a simple task: to scan the barcodes and collect prices for a random set of 10-50
products in any physical store of a given retailer. In some cases they had to return to
the same store multiple times to scan the same set of products. Using a special app for
android phones developed to simplify and standardize the data collection process, these
workers scanned each product’s barcode, manually entered the price, took a photo of
the price tag, and sent all the information via email to the BPP servers, where it was
automatically processed and cleaned. A scraping software then used the barcode numbers
to look for the same product in the website of each retailer, and collected the online price
within a period of seven days. The matched online-offline dataset, available for download
at bpp.mit.edu, contains prices for more than 24 thousand products and 38 thousand
observations sampled between December 2014 and March 2016.
   The main finding is that online and offline price levels are identical about 72% of
the time, with significant heterogeneity at the country, sector, and retailer level. These
percentages range from 42% in Brazil to 91% in Canada and the UK. The US is close to
the average, with 69%. At the sector-level, drugstores and office-product retailers have
the lowest share of identical prices, with 38% and 25% respectively, while in electronics
and clothing these numbers rise to 83% and 92% respectively. When there is a price
difference, the online markup tends to be small, with a magnitude of -4% in the full
sample. If I include observations with identical prices, the online price difference is only
-1% on average.
   I also find that price changes have similar frequencies and sizes in the online and offline
data. However, only 19% of weekly price changes occur at the same time. While this is
higher than the unconditional probability of a simultaneous price change, the individual
price series are clearly not well synchronized.


                                              3
   The reasons for the existing online-offline price differences seem to vary across retailers
and countries. Sales tend to create some discrepancies, with only 36% of sale prices being
identical across samples, but they have a small impact in the aggregate results because the
number of sale observations is relatively small (11% of the total dataset). A similar thing
happens with offline price dispersion across physical stores, which tends to be low. Using
a small sample of offline prices collected for multiple zip codes on the same day, I find that
about 78% of goods have the a single price within stores of the same retailer. I also found
no evidence of “dynamic pricing” strategies that could potentially cause online-offline
differences. At least in the US, online prices do not change with the location of the ip-
address of the computer connecting to the website or when the scraping robot repeatedly
browses the same webpage of a particular good for a prolonged period of time. There
is also no evidence that online-offline price differences are being driven by attempts to
match the prices of Amazon.com, which are identical to the online prices in multi-channel
retailers about 38% of the time.
   In terms of product selection, 76% of the products sampled offline were also found
online by either using the automated scraping matching or by manually searching for the
product description on the website. The price comparison results for goods that can be
automatically matched are similar to those that had to be manually matched. There is
also no evidence that retailers try to obfuscate the online-offline price comparisons by
changing the products’ identification numbers.
   Despite the general similarity in online and offline prices, there is significant hetero-
geneity in pricing behaviors across retailers. Three main types of companies stand out:
those with nearly identical online and offline prices, those with stable online markups (ei-
ther positive or negative), and those with different prices that are not consistently higher
or lower online. Some of these patterns seem to be sector-level behaviors, while others
are common for most retailers within a country.
   For research economists using online data, these results provide evidence that most
large multi-channel retailers price similarly online and offline. There are both advantages
and disadvantages of using online data, as I discuss in Cavallo (2016), but the ability


                                              4
to collect a massive amount of prices so cheaply provides unprecedented opportunities
for economic research. My results suggest these prices are valid sources of information
for retail transactions, even those that take place offline. Retailer heterogeneity, how-
ever, implies that researchers using relatively few sources of data should be cautious to
understand particular pricing patterns and control for any sampling biases.
   For National Statistical Offices (NSOs), these results imply that the web can be effec-
tively used as an alternative data-collection technology to obtain the same prices found
offline. Prices collected through the web are very similar to those that can be obtained at
a much higher cost by physically walking into a store. While many challenges to the use
of online data in CPIs remain, such as the more limited sectoral coverage or the lack of
quantity data, my results should help alleviate concerns about the peculiarities of prices
collected online. The BPP app and methodology developed in this paper are also publicly
available at bpp.mit.edu to be used for more country and retailer-specific validation tests,
which are sensible given the high degree of heterogeneity in pricing behaviors.
   Lastly, my findings have implications for people interested in the effects of the Internet
on retail prices. The fact that online prices are the same for all locations and also similar
to offline prices collected from many different zip codes implies there is little within-retailer
price dispersion. I also show this explicitly with some offline data in multiple zip codes
in Section 5.2. In practice, most retailers seem to have a single price for the majority of
products, regardless of the location of the buyer and whether the product is sold online
or at a particular offline store. This suggests that while the web has not reduced price
dispersion across different retailers, as documented by a large literature surveyed by Baye
et al. (2006), it may have created incentives for firms to price identically in their own
stores. This type of within-retailer price dispersion has received little attention in the
literature, even though it could have large welfare implications within countries.
   This paper is related to a literature that studies the behavior of online prices. Some
papers written in the early 2000s compared manually-collected prices of online retailers
and traditional brick-and-mortar stores in a few narrow categories of goods. For example,
Brynjolfsson and Smith (2000) compared prices for CDs and books in both online-only and


                                               5
multi-channel retailers (“hybrids” in their notation). They report that online prices were
9-16% lower and had smaller price changes, but note that “findings would be strengthened
if we excluded hybrid retailers from our comparisons of price levels”, which implies that
online and offline prices for multi-channel retailers were closer together. Clay et al. (2002)
also found similar prices for 107 books in both the websites and some physical stores of
Barnes & Noble and Borders, which is consistent with my results.2 More recent com-
parisons of online and offline prices expanded on the categories covered but were limited
to small ad-hoc samples in a few stores. Examples include Cavallo (2016), Borraz et al.
(2015), Cavallo et al. (2014), and Cavallo et al. (2015). A separate branch of the liter-
ature uses online prices from “shopbots”, or price comparison websites, which are easier
to collect. Examples include Brynjolfsson and Smith (2001), Brynjolfsson et al. (2003),
Ellison and Ellison (2009a), Ellison and Ellison (2009b), Lunnemann and Wintr (2011),
Gorodnichenko et al. (2014), and Gorodnichenko and Talavera (2016). Although these
papers do not directly compare prices with offline data, their results suggest that online
prices change more frequently and with smaller sizes than comparable findings in papers
with offline CPI prices. The difference with my findings is likely caused by their focus on
retailers that participate in price-comparison websites. As Ellison and Ellison (2009a) dis-
cuss, such retailers face a uniquely competitive environment that can significantly affect
their pricing behaviors.



2       Simultaneous Online-Offline Data Collection

2.1     Multi-Channel Retailers

    There are many types of “online prices”, from those in marketplaces such as Ebay,
online-only retailers such as Amazon, and those sold by stores with both an online and
offline presence. In this paper, I focus on the prices of large “multi-channel” retailers
that sell both online and offline. When considering all retail sales, this type of retailers
still concentrate the vast majority of all retail transactions, making them the most im-
    2
    For other papers in this literature, see Bailey (1998), Tang and Xing (2001), Clay and Tay (2001),
Clemons et al. (2002), and Xing et al. (2006).

                                                  6
portant source of price data for applications that require the use of “representative” data
(such as inflation measurement). Despite its importance, this is also the type of “online
prices” that has received the least attention in the academic literature due to lack of data.
Furthermore, as pointed out by Brynjolfsson et al. (2013), technology is blurring the dis-
tinctions between physical and online retailing, making both traditional brick-and-mortar
and online-only companies behave increasingly like multi-channel (“omni-channel”) re-
tailers.


2.2        Retailer selection

    The names of the retailers included in the data collection are shown in Table 1. They
satisfy three conditions. First, they are in the list of top 20 retailers by market share in
their respective countries. The rank information was obtained from Euromonitor Inter-
national’s Passport Retailing Global Rankings. This helps ensure that I have a represen-
tative sample of the retail sector. Second, they sell both online through a country-specific
website and offline through physical stores. Most large retailers satisfy this condition.
Third, there must be a way to perfectly match products online and offline. In practice,
this means that the product id number collected offline can be used to find the product
on the website.


2.3        Collecting Offline Prices in Physical Stores

    Collecting prices offline is normally an expensive and complicated process. NSOs rely
on a large number of trained data collectors to do it correctly. Unfortunately, the micro
data collected by NSOs for CPI purposes cannot be used for my comparisons because
the retailer and product details are confidential information. Lacking the budget for a
traditional data collection effort, I looked for alternatives using new technologies. In
particular, I rely on popular crowd-sourcing platforms, such as Amazon Mechanical Turk,
Elance, and UpWork, to find people willing to do simple data collection tasks. To minimize
the chance of data-entry errors, I developed a custom mobile phone app that simplified
the data collection process.

                                             7
                                    Table 1: Retailers Included

 Country          Retailers Included

 Argentina        Carrefour, Coto, Easy, Sodimac, Walmart
 Australia        Coles, Masters, Target, WoolWorths
 Brazil           Droga Raia, Extra, Magazine Luiza, Pao de Azucar,
                  Renner
 Canada           Canadian Tire, Home Depot, The Source, Toys R Us,
                  Walmart
 China            Auchan Drive, Sams Club
 Germany          Galeria Kaufhof, Obi, Real, Rewe, Saturn
 Japan            Bic Camera, K’s Denki, Lawson, Yamada
 South Africa     Clicks, Dis-Chem Pharmacy, Mr Price, Pick n Pay,
                  Woolworths
 UK               Asda, Mark and Spencer, Sainsburys, Tesco
 USA              Walmart, Target, Safeway, Stop&Shop, Best Buy,
                  Home Depot, Lowe’s, CVS, Macys, Banana Republic,
                  Forever 21, GAP, Nike, Urban Outfitters, Old Navy,
                  Staples, Office Max/Depot.

 Notes: These retailers satisfy three conditions. First, they are in the list of top 20 retailers by mar-
 ket share in their respective countries according to Euromonitor International. Second, they sell both
 online through a country-specific website and offline through physical stores. Third, there is a way to
 perfectly match products online and offline for the price comparison. See the Appendix for more detailed
 characteristics and results.


    Crowd-sourcing platforms have many advantages. First, they allowed me to hire a
large number of workers and reach multiple locations and cities within each country.
Second, with many workers I could limit the number of individual prices that each one
of them had to collect. This reduced the burden on the worker and also minimized the
“show-rooming” concerns of the retailers. Showrooming is a term used to describe the
practice of visiting a physical store to examine a product but later purchasing it online
in another store. Some retailers worry about people who use mobile apps to scan the
product’s barcode and buy products online at other retailers, so if the data collectors
spent too much time at each store, they might be required to stop and asked to leave.3
    Two main versions of the task were posted on the crowd-sourcing websites. In the
simplest case, the worker had to use a mobile app provided by us to scan 10 to 50 random
   3
     I tried to conduct a similar large-scale offline data collection with MIT students in the Boston area
in 2011, but most of them were forced to stop and leave the stores after a some time. Collecting data
this way appears to be easier now that more people use smartphones inside stores. Indeed, FitzGerald
(2013) reports that fear of showrooming has faded for many US retailers. See Balakrishnan et al. (2013)
for an economic analysis of showrooming practices.

                                                    8
offline products in any physical store, with some basic instructions to spread out the data
collection across categories of goods. This provided the bulk of the data that I use to
compare price levels across samples. A more complex version of the task required the
worker to return to the same store every week for a full month and scan the same items.
This gave me the panel of prices that I use to study price changes in Section 4.




                 Figure 1: Screenshots from BPP App for Android Phones



   The mobile app was custom-built to simplify and standardize the data collection pro-
cess. It is an app for android phones called “BPP @ MIT”, available for download at
Google’s Play Store.4 Every time a worker visits a store, she clicks on a button to open a
new file. For the first product, she has to enter the store’s name, zip code, and country.
Then she scans the UPC barcode of the product (or the barcode on the price tag, de-
pending on the particular retailer instructions provided), manually enters the price shown
in the price tag next to the product (including all sales displayed), marks the price as
“regular” or “sale”, and takes a photograph of the price tag (which can be used to detect
errors and validate the data). All products are scanned in a loop which makes the process
quick and simple. When done, the worker presses another button to email the data to
the BPP servers. A member of the BPP team verifies the submitted data and pays the
worker.
   Every few hours, the BPP servers automatically processed the incoming offline files to
   4
     See https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.mit.bpp. The app can be downloaded for
free but a “project code” must be requested to the BPP team. This code is used to separate the data
from different projects. See http://bpp.mit.edu/offline-data-collection/ for more details.

                                                9
clean and consolidate the data for each retailer. The offline barcode information is then
used to collect the online price in the retailer’s website, as described below.


2.4    Collecting Online Prices on each Retailer’s Website

   To collect online prices, I built a custom scraping “robot” for each retailer. These
robots are specialized software that are programmed to use the product barcode to query
the retailer’s website and collect the online price and other product information. In most
cases, the robot was designed to use the website’s search box to enter the product id
obtained offline. For more general details on the BPP’s online scraping methods, see
Cavallo and Rigobon (2016).
   The price collected online is the posted price for the product on the retailer’s website,
including any sales or discounts that apply to all customers. Whether taxes are added or
not depends on the display conventions for prices in each country, but the same condition
applies both online and offline. For example, US prices include sales but are typically
shown without taxes, both on the website and the price tags found in physical stores.
In all other countries, sales or VAT tax rates are usually included in the price in both
locations. Shipping costs are never included in these online prices, so my comparisons
are for posted prices excluding shipping costs. Retailers have different ways to charge for
shipping. The most common is a set of shipping fees that varies with the total amount of
the sale or weight of the products. Some retailers offer free shipping, which could mean
that they adjust their online prices to compensate. The results at the retailer level provide
information that can be used to determine when this is happening.
   Nearly all of the online retailers in the sample have a single price online for each
product, independent of the location of the buyer. In other words, someone purchasing a
laptop from Bestbuy in San Francisco sees the same price as someone doing it from Boston.
The only exceptions are supermarkets, which sometimes require buyers to enter their zip
code or location before displaying prices. There are only five retailers that do this in my
sample. I always use the same zip code when collecting data online, independently of the
one where the offline price was obtained, so this can cause some price level differences


                                             10
between the online and offline data for those retailers. However, in the Appendix I use a
scraping experiment with one of the largest US supermarkets to show that even retailers
that ask for zip code information tend to price their goods identically in most location.
Furthermore, removing this type of retailers has little impact on my aggregate results.
   For all benchmark results, I allow online prices to be collected within 7 days of the
offline price and also exclude sale prices. Results are similar for prices collected on the
same day, or including sale prices, as shown in the Appendix.


2.5      The Online-Offline Matched Data

   Table 2 shows the main characteristics of the matched data. I collected prices in 56
retailers for more than a year, between December 2014 and March 2016. There are more
than 24 thousand products and 38 thousand observations in total. This dataset can be
downloaded from http://bpp.mit.edu, together with the replication scripts for the results
below.

                                  Table 2: Data by Country

                   (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)        (5)         (6)         (7)
 Country           Ret.       Start        End        Workers     Zip       Products      Obs.
                                                                 Codes

 Argentina           5        02/15       08/15          18        23         2324        3699
 Australia          4         03/15       08/15         13         22         3073       3797
 Brazil              5        05/15       03/16          18        26         1437        1915
 Canada             5         12/14       07/15         15         45         2658       4031
 China              2         07/15       03/16          5          6          410        513
 Germany            5         03/15       03/16          9         20         1215       1604
 Japan               4        04/15       03/16          7         23         1127       2186
 South Africa       5         03/15       03/16         21         31         2336       3212
 UK                  4        03/15       05/15          12        32         1661        2094
 USA                17        12/14       03/16         206        274        7898       15332
 ALL                56        12/14       03/16         323        499       24132       38383

 Notes: Column 1 has the number of retailers. Columns 2 and 3 have the start and end months of data
 collection. Columns 4 and 5 report the number of workers that collected the data and zip codes with
 offline prices. Columns 6 and 7 provide the number of products and price observations that could be
 matched with both online and offline information. Details by retailer are provided in the Appendix.



   The data coverage varies across countries. The effort was concentrated in the US, with


                                                 11
17 retailers and about forty percent of all observations. On the other extreme is China,
with only two retailers. I was unable to expand the offline data collection in China because
large retailers explicitly prohibit taking photographs and recording prices at physical
locations. Apparently, “showrooming” is more extended in China, and therefore retailers
try to prevent the use of mobile phones in their stores. A survey conducted by IBM in
2013 found that about 24% of people in China admitted to having visited a physical store
to buy online, compared with only 4% in the United States.5



3        Price Levels

    Table 3 compares the price levels across the online and offline samples. Column 3
shows the percentage of observations that have identical online and offline prices up to
the second decimal.

                                   Table 3: Country - Level Differences

                    (1)     (2)           (3)        (4)         (5)           (6)             (7)
 Country            Ret.    Obs        Identical   High On     Low On         Markup       Difference
                                         (%)         (%)         (%)           (%)            (%)

 Argentina            5    3699           60         27           13              3            1
 Australia            4    3797           74         20            5              5            1
 Brazil               5    1915           42         18           40             -7            -4
 Canada              5     4031           91         3             5             -5             0
 China                2     513           87         7             6              3            0
 Germany             5     1604           74         4            23             -8            -2
 Japan                4    2186           48         7            45            -13            -7
 South Africa         5    3212           85         6             9             -3            -1
 UK                   4     2094          91         2             7             -8            -1
 USA                 17    15332          69         8            22             -5            -1
 ALL                 56    38383          72         11           18             -4            -1

 Notes: Column 3 shows the percentage of observations that have identical online and offline prices.
 Column 4 has the percent of observation where prices are higher online and column 5 the percentage
 of price that are lower online. Column 6, is the online markup, defined as the average price difference
 excluding cases that are identical. Column 7 is the average price difference including identical prices.



    The percentage of identical prices is 72% for all pooled observations and also for the
average across countries. Some countries, such as Japan, have percentages close to 50%,
    5
        Klena and Puleri (2013).

                                                   12
while other such as Canada and the UK have over 90% of all prices being identical online
and offline. The US is close to the average, with 69% of identical prices.
   Columns 4 and 5 show the share of prices that are either higher or lower online.
Conditional on a price difference, most countries tend to have lower online prices, with the
exception of Argentina and Australia. The three countries with the lowest percentages of
identical prices, where differences matter the most, tend to have heterogeneous behaviors.
In Argentina, non-identical prices tend to be higher online, with an average markup of
3%. In Brazil, they are lower, with a markup of -7%. Japan is an outlier, with prices that
are lower online 45% of the time, with an average markup of -13%.
   The average size of the price differences is quite small. This can be seen in Columns
6 and 7, where a positive number means that prices are higher online. Column 6 shows
the online “Markup”, excluding cases where prices are identical, while column 7 shows
the online “Difference”, which includes cases with no price difference. The online markup
tends to be small, with a magnitude of -4% in the full sample. Adding prices that are
identical makes the online-offline price difference only -1% on average.
   Overall, these results show little difference between online prices collected from the
website of multi-channel retailers and the offline prices that can be obtained by visiting
one of their physical stores.
   The aggregate results, however, hide important heterogeneity at the sector level. Ta-
ble 4 shows similar results for retailers grouped by the type of good they sell.
   Drugstores and office-supply retailers have the lowest share of identical prices online
and offline. For office products, prices are sometimes higher and sometimes lower online,
without any clear patterns, as if the stores were managed independently. Drugstores, by
contrast, tend to have lower prices online, possibly because they are “convenience” stores
such as CVS and Walgreens in the US that can charge higher prices to offline customers.
   Electronics and clothing have the highest share of identical prices. For clothing, prices
are basically the same, with most of the observed differences possibly coming from offline
data collection errors. For electronics, prices are lower online 13% of the time, with an
average markup of -9% (the highest in this sample).


                                            13
                            Table 4: Sector - Price Level Differences

                  (1)      (2)         (3)          (4)           (5)           (6)             (7)
 Sector           Ret.     Obs      Identical     High On       Low On         Markup       Difference
                                      (%)           (%)           (%)           (%)            (%)

 Food              10      5953        52              32           15             3             1
 Clothing          7      2534         92              5            3              3             0
 Household          9     7875         79              5            16            -8            -2
 Drugstore          4     3053         38              11           52            -5            -3
 Electronics        5      3712        83              4            13            -9            -1
 Office            2      1089         25              37           38             1             1
 Multiple/Mix      18     14149        80              5            15            -9            -2

 Notes: Data classified into sectors at the retailer level. Column 3 shows the percentage of observations
 that have identical online and offline prices. Column 4 has the percent of observation where prices are
 higher online and column 5 the percentage of price that are lower online. Column 6, is the online markup,
 defined as the average price difference excluding cases that are identical. Column 7 is the average price
 difference including identical prices.


   Figure 2 shows the histograms for non-zero price differences in each country. The cases
of Argentina and Australia stand out because there are spikes around the 5% magnitude
of differences. This is caused by stable markups in online prices for some of the largest
retailers. In all other countries, the price differences are more dispersed in the range of
-50% to 50%.




                                                  14
                   Figure 2: Histograms of Non-Zero Price Level Differences




Notes: Price differences excluding identical prices. A positive number means that the online price is
higher than the offline price. Histogram scales are matched across countries. Bin width is 1%.




    As pointed out by Nakamura and Steinsson (2008), sale events are frequent in some
countries, and the magnitude of the price changes that they generate can be large. I do
find that sale prices create more differences between online and offline samples, the share
of identical online and offline prices for sale observations being only 36%. But this has
little impact on the full-sample results because the number of sales is small: only 11%
of all matched observations have either an online sale (4.12%), an offline sale (5.03%), or
both (1.92%).6
    Similarly, restricting the sample to include only prices collected on the same day
(instead of allowing for a 7-day window) has little impact on the main results. The reason
   6
      My ability to control for sales is somewhat limited because workers could not identify offline sales
with the app until October 2015, and some of the scrape jobs were not able to include online sale
indicators. It is therefore possible that the main results still contain a lot of sales that I cannot control
for, and the share of identical prices would rise significantly if these observations were removed.

                                                     15
is that prices do not typically change more than once a week. Details are provided in the
Appendix.
    Another potential reason for some of the price level differences is that goods have
prices with similar time series but are not synchronized. I look for direct evidence of this
in the next section, by comparing online and offline changes for a smaller sample of goods
for which I have multiple weekly observations.



4      Price Changes

    This section compares the behavior of price changes in the online and offline samples.
A price change is computed here as a non-zero log difference in the price between weeks
t and t+1. I study the frequency, size, and timing of price changes.

                    Table 5: Country - Price Change Frequency and Size


                   (1)         (2)       (3)        (4)         (5)        (6)        (7)        (8)
                   Obs.       Price     Mean       Mean       Equality    Mean       Mean      Equality
                             Changes    Freq.      Freq.       t-test      Abs        Abs       t-test
                                        Online     Offline     p-val       Size       Size      p-val
                                                                          Online     Offline

 Argentina         1392        245       0.137      0.146       0.56      13.61       12.46       .57
 Australia          759         72       0.056       0.09       0.07      45.76       42.62       .67
 Brazil             483         85       0.167      0.138       0.36      10.55        9.36       .53
 Canada            1427        120       0.077      0.068       0.48      31.11       21.71       .06
 Germany            419         16       0.035      0.041       0.74      27.08       15.86       .26
 Japan             1071         98       0.074      0.014         0       12.1         8.2        .34
 South Africa       882        109        0.1       0.077       0.17      23.33       16.99       .11
 UK                429         25        0.046       0.07       0.28      47.68       41.78       .67
 USA               7505        563       0.052      0.046       0.33      23.78       21.31        .2
 ALL              14367       1328        .076       .068        .07      22.02       19.94        .1

 Notes: China is excluded due to lack of price change data. The first two columns show the number of
 observations and price changes. The frequency statistics reported in columns 3 and 4 are computed for
 each individual good as the share of observations with a price change, and then averaged across countries.
 Column 5 shows the p-value of a two-sided t-test with a null hypothesis of equal average frequencies in
 the online and offline samples. Columns 6 and 7 report the mean absolute size of price changes. Column
 8 is the p-value of a two-sided t-test of equality in the online and offline means.



    Table 5 shows that the frequency of online and offline prices changes is quite similar.
The first two columns show the number of observations and price changes. There are

                                                   16
fewer observations than in previous sections because I have a short time series for a
limited subset of goods, and only about 10% of those observations have a price change.
The frequency statistics reported in columns 3 and 4 are computed for each individual
good first (as the share of observations with a price change), and then averaged across
countries. Column 5 shows the p-value of a two-sided t-test with a null hypothesis of
equal average frequencies in the online and offline samples. I can only reject the null
of equality with some confidence in the cases of Australia and Japan. Although the full
sample results appear to have slightly more frequent changes online, this is entirely driven
by the data from Japan.
   In addition to similar frequencies, online and offline price changes tend to have similar
sizes. This can be seen in columns 6 and 7, where I report the mean absolute size of price
changes. Column 8 is again the p-value of a two-sided t-test of equality in the online
and offline means. The null hypothesis can only be rejected in Canada, where online
price changes seem to be larger. In all other countries, the difference is not statistically
significant.

                              Table 6: Synchronized Price Changes


                       (1)                   (2)                  (3)                (4)
                       Obs.            Price Changes        Synchronized         Unconditional
                                                            Price Changes       Probability (%)
                                                                 (%)

 Argentina             1392                  245                   35                  2.0
 Australia              759                   72                   22                  0.5
 Brazil                 483                   85                   18                  2.3
 Canada                1427                  120                   32                  0.5
 Germany                419                   16                   31                  0.1
 Japan                 1071                   98                   1                   0.1
 South Africa           882                  109                   15                  0.8
 UK                     429                   25                   44                  0.3
 USA                   7505                  563                   11                  0.2
 ALL                   14367                1328                   19                  0.5

 Notes: China is excluded due to lack of price change data. Column 3 reports the percentage of price
 changes for a given product that occur both online and offline at the same time, which I refer to as
 “synchronized”. The unconditional probability of a synchronized price change in column 4 is obtained
 by multiplying the frequencies of price change in Table 5.




                                                17
    Similar frequencies and sizes do not imply that price changes are perfectly synchro-
nized. This can be seen in Table 6, which focuses on the timing of changes. Price changes
can occur online, offline, or in both locations. Column 3 reports the percentage of price
changes for a given product that occur both online and offline at the same time, which I
refer to as “synchronized”. Only 19% of the 1328 price changes were synchronized across
online and offline samples. While this is higher than the unconditional probability of a
simultaneous price change shown in column 4 (using the unconditional frequencies and
assuming independence), these price series are still far from being perfectly synchronized.7
    Overall, these results suggest that the online and offline price series behave similarly
but are not perfectly synchronized. In a related paper, Cavallo and Rigobon (2016), we
find evidence that online price inflation tends to anticipate offline CPI inflation. A faster
adjustment to shocks could be the reason why online price changes are not synchronized
with offline changes. Unfortunately, the limited panel data available so far does not allow
me to explicitly test this hypothesis in this paper.



5       Other Reasons for Online-Offline Differences

    In this section I consider three other potential reasons for the differences between
online and offline prices that required a special data-collection effort: different online
prices based on ip-address or persistent browsing habits, multiple offline prices in different
physical stores, and attempts to match prices at Amazon.com


5.1     IP-Address Location and Persistent Browsing

    There has been reports suggesting that some retailers change online prices based on
the browsing habits of the consumer or the location associated with the ip address of
the computer being used to purchase online. See, for example, Valentino-DeVries et al.
(2012), Mikians et al. (2012), and Mikians et al. (2013). If these pricing behaviors are
common for the multi-channel retailers in my sample, they could help explain some of the

    7
     As in all the benchmark results of the paper, I am excluding sales. Introducing them further reduces
the degree of synchronization, as I show in the Appendix.

                                                   18
price level differences in the data. To test whether prices vary with browsing habits or ip
address, I ran two experiments with special versions of the scrape robots for US retailers.
    The first experiment was designed to test whether prices change based on the zip
code associated with the ip address of the computer collecting the data. IP addresses
are unique numeric identifiers for computers that are connected to a network. They
are assigned by internet service providers and have an associated geographical location
that is public information. For example, MIT’s campus ip addresses range from 18.0.0.0
to 18.255.255.255 and are geographically linked to the 02139 zip code in Cambridge,
Massachusetts. In principle, retailers could detect the ip address of the consumer visiting
a site and automatically change the prices displayed based on its geo-location information.
To test if this is happening, I randomly selected 5 products in each of the 10 US retailers
and scraped their prices twelve times in a consecutive loop. In each loop, I changed the ip
address of the robots by using 12 different proxy servers in 9 US cities (Atlanta, Burbank,
Charlotte, Chicago, Cleveland, Miami, Nashville, New York, and two proxies in Phoenix)
and 2 international locations (Canada and UK).8 I did not find any evidence of this type
of price discrimination. In all cases, prices were the same for a given product, regardless
of what ip address was used to connect to the retailer websites.
    The second experiment was designed to test if frequent visits to the webpage of a
particular product could lead the retailer to change the price displayed. In this case, I
scraped a single product in each retailer every five minutes for a full day. Once again,
there was no evidence of price discrimination based on persistent-browsing habits: prices
were always the same.
    While these forms of online price discrimination may be important in other industries
(for example airlines and hotels), my results suggest that they are not commonly used in
large multi-channel retailers in the US. A likely reason is that retailers may fear antago-
nizing their customers if reports of these tactics were to become publicized in the press,



   8
     A proxy server is a computer that acts as an intermediary for the communications between two
other computers in a network –in this case between the machine where the scraping software runs and
the server hosting the website of the retailer–. From the retailer’s website perspective, the request was
coming from the ip address associated with the proxy server.

                                                   19
as it famously happened in 2000 with Amazon’s pricing tests.9


5.2     Offline Price Dispersion

    Most retailers have a single price online regardless of the location of the buyer, so a
second potential reason for online-offline differences may be that there are some prices
differences across physical stores.
    To test for the effects of offline price dispersion, I use a small subset of products for
which I have offline prices for multiple zip codes collected on the same day. These data
include 406 observations in 9 retailers and 46 zip codes in the US. Table 7 shows the
results for the online - offline comparison restricted to this multi-zipcode dataset.

           Table 7: Online - Offline Price Level Differences for Multiple Zipcodes


                     (1)     (2)        (3)          (4)           (5)          (6)             (7)
 Country             Ret.    Obs     Identical     High On       Low On        Markup       Difference
                                       (%)           (%)           (%)          (%)            (%)

 USA                   9     406        60              11          29             -4           -2
 Different Offline     7     85         35              16          48             -5           -3
 Identical Offline     8     316        67              9           24             -3           -1

 Column 3 shows the percentage of observations that have identical online and offline prices. Column 4
 has the percent of observation where prices are higher online and column 5 the percentage of price that
 are lower online. Column 6, is the online markup, defined as the average price difference excluding cases
 that are identical. Column 7 is the average price difference including identical prices.



    There are several things to note here. First, even though the sample is small, we get
roughly the same share of identical online-offline prices that in Table 3 of this paper, with
60% of the prices being identical online and offline. Second, as expected, goods that have
different offline prices across zip codes tend to have much lower probability of identical
online - offline prices, about 35% of the time. Third, if we focus exclusively on products
with the same offline price everywhere, labeled ”Identical Offline”, the percentage of
identical online - offline prices rises from 60% to 67%.
   9
     See CNN (2000) and Valentino-DeVries et al. (2012) for a more recent example. A pricing strategy
that appears to be more common than price discrimination is called “steering”, where the retailer changes
the order or ranking of goods shown to customers based on their location or browsing characteristics.
See, for example, Mattioli (2012).

                                                   20
   While offline price dispersion can create online-offline price differences, the impact is
limited because there is not much offline dispersion to begin with. Indeed, about 78% of
products sampled have the same price in different physical stores within the same retailer,
as seen in Column 2. Sector results range from 66% in drugstores to 96% in electronics,
consistent with the sectoral differences in the online-offline comparison in Section 3.10 In
the Appendix I further show that a large multi-channel supermarket that explicitly asks
online buyers to enter their zip codes also tends to limit the amount of price dispersion
across locations. Overall, these results reinforce the finding that price dispersion is low
for both online and offline prices within multi-channel retailers.
   To some readers, the lack of offline price dispersion may appear to be at odds with
a growing literature that uses scanner data and documents a significant price differences
across physical stores. For a recent example, see Kaplan and Menzio (2015). There are
many reasons that can explain the apparent differences with my results. First, many
papers in this literature compare data from different retailers, so that within retailer price
dispersion is mixed with between retailer price dispersion. My results focus exclusively
on price differences within retailers. Second, the price in scanner datasets is typically a
weekly average. As I discuss in Cavallo (2016), this can cause significant measurement
error for some applications. For example, consider a good with identical prices in two
stores, a price change on a Wednesday, and a single transaction in each store. If one store
sold the good on a Monday, and the other on Friday, the “weekly” price will appear to
be different when in fact prices were identical on a daily basis. Similarly, some scanner
datasets tend to have unit values instead of prices. These are calculated as the ratio of
sales to quantities sold, and can therefore be affected by the number of coupons used or
the share of transactions that take place at different prices. Of course, for some purposes it
makes sense to include coupons or transaction weights that affect the price actually payed
by the consumer, but the fact that there is price dispersion caused by coupons should not
lead us to believe that prices for the same goods are shown with different prices across
stores of the same retailer. Third, price dispersion is often measured within a month or a

  10
     See the Appendix for more details as well as results from a larger dataset that includes offline
observations for which no online price is available.

                                                 21
quarter, so much of difference in observed prices is caused by the same good being bought
at different times. Finally, most scanner datasets contain prices for groceries and related
goods. These are also the sectors for which I find more online-offline price dispersion, as
well as offline price differences across physical stores.


5.3       Amazon Pricing

   A third potential reason for differences in online and offline prices is that multi-channel
retailers may be matching their online prices to those in online-only retailers such as
Amazon.com, and by doing so, they create a wedge with the prices at their physical
stores.
   To test this possibility, I created a special dataset that contains three prices for each
product: the offline price at a multi-channel retailer, the online price in the same retailer,
and the price at Amazon.com. The matched data contain 1361 observations from 455
products and 8 multi-channel retailers: BestBuy, Walmart, Target, Lowes, Macys, Of-
ficeMax, and Staples. Amazon’s prices considered below correspond to those products
marked as ”Sold by Amazon.com”. To be consistent with the rest of the paper, I focus
on prices collected within up to seven days and excluding sales. More details on how this
data was collected, as well as results for products with sales or sold by third-party sellers
are provided in the Appendix.
   Figure 3 compares Amazon’s prices separately to both the offline and online prices
from multi-channel firms. A large share of prices are identical in both cases, which is
surprising given that this is comparing prices across different retailers. As expected,
Amazon’s prices are closer to the online prices. They are identical to the online prices ap-
proximately 38% of the time, and the average price difference is -5%. The same estimates
for the Amazon - offline comparison are 31% and -6% respectively.




                                              22
                 Figure 3: Price Differences with Amazon.com (US only)




         Notes: Price difference in Amazon.com prices relative to the offline and online prices
         from multi-channel retailers obtained from 1361 observations from 455 products and
         8 multi-channel retailers: BestBuy, Walmart, Target, Lowes, Macys, OfficeMax, and
         Staples. A negative number means Amazon is cheaper. Results for products marked
         as ”Sold by Amazon.com” are shown here, with prices collected within up to seven
         days and excluding sales. More details and results for products with sales or sold
         by third-party sellers at Amazon’s ”Marketplace” are provided in the Appendix.




   This does not mean that multi-channel retailers are making their online and offline
prices different in order to match the online price to Amazon’s one. In fact, as Table
8 shows, the conditional probability of having an identical online price with Amazon is
roughly the same for goods with identical online-offline prices than for those that have
some online-offline price difference. The same conclusion can be obtained by running a
simple probit regression of an identical online-offline price on an identical amazon-online
price. There is no statistically significant relation between these two variables. The only
indication that Amazon’s prices matter for the online-offline price differences is found in
columns 8 and 9, which show that the difference with Amazon’s prices is smaller for goods
that are not identical within the multi-channel retailers.




                                                  23
                       Table 8: Amazon - Online Price Level Differences


                              (1)     (2)      (3)        (4)     (5)      (6)   (7)      (8)    (9)
 Sector                       Ret.   Days     Prod.       Obs    Ident.   High   Low     Differ. On
                                                                  (%)     Am     Am      (%) Mark.
                                                                          (%)    (%)             (%)

 ALL                            8      87      342        1049    38       14     47       -5       -9
 Identical Online-Offline       8      65      231        801     38       11     51       -6      -10
 Different Online-Offline       8      54      113        248     38       25     37       -2       -3

 Notes: Column 3 shows the percentage of observations that have identical online and offline prices.
 Column 4 has the percent of observation where prices are higher online and column 5 the percentage
 of price that are lower online. Column 6, is the online markup, defined as the average price difference
 excluding cases that are identical. Column 7 is the average price difference including identical prices.




6        Product Selection

     The similarity between online and offline prices in previous sections would have dif-
ferent implications if most goods sold offline were not available online. I therefore now
estimate the “overlap” in product selection across samples, defined as the share of offline
goods that are also available online.11
     In principle, I could use the 63% of offline barcodes received through the app for which
the scraping software found data online. The problem with this number, however, is that
the automated matching procedure can fail for many reason: the worker may scan the
wrong barcode, the app can incorrectly read the barcode, or the scraping robot can fail
while checking the website. To get a better estimate of the overlap degree, we manually
checked how many of the offline products could also be found online for a sample of 100-
200 observations per retailer using all the information submitted by the workers, including
the product description readable in the photo of the price tag. The results, grouped by
country, are reported in Table 9.



    11
     Note that, given the data characteristics, I can only estimate how many offline products are also
sold online, but not the other way around. In some retailers, the online selection of goods can be larger
than in a single physical store because online sales can be shipped from large centralized warehouses. See
Quan and R. (2014) for a recent discussion of the welfare effect of online and offline product variety.

                                                     24
                         Table 9: Retailer - Product Selection Overlap


                              (1)                 (2)                   (3)                   (4)
 Country                    Sample               Found            Found Manually         Total Overlap
                                              Automatically                                   (%)

 ARGENTINA                     500                  294                    52                   73
 AUSTRALIA                    500                   435                    36                   95
 BRAZIL                        400                  331                    12                   86
 CANADA                       500                   279                   132                   85
 CHINA                        100                   50                      3                   53
 GERMANY                      400                   178                    23                   52
 JAPAN                        500                   329                    61                   74
 SOUTHAFRICA                   500                  332                    60                   76
 UK                            500                  373                    59                   86
 USA                          1600                 1003                   316                   81
 ALL (mean)                   5500                 3604                   754                   76

 Note: The share of offline products found online was checked for a random sample of 100-200 products
 per retailer. Column 2 shows the number of products that were found online by the automated process
 used to build the matched data used in the paper. Column 3 shows the number of products that were
 missed by the automated process but were found online by manually checking the website. Column 4
 shows the estimate for the total overlap in product selection. Only a subset of retailers in each country are
 included. These numbers are lower-bound estimates for the overlap because some of our manual checks
 took place several days after the original offline data was collected. Results by retailer are provided in
 the Appendix.



   As can expected given the large product variety in these websites, a large fraction of
goods found offline can also be found available online. On average, 76% of all products
randomly collected at the physical stores could also be found on the retailer’s website.
There are important differences among countries, although they seem to be unrelated
to the findings in previous sections. China and Germany have the lowest overlap, while
Australia, Brazil, and the UK the highest. In the US, 81% of offline products were also
found online.
   Furthermore, both the automatic and manually-matched goods produced similar re-
sults for online and offline price-level comparisons, as shown in the Appendix. This rules
out the possibility that goods that could not be automatically matched were precisely
those where the online and offline prices are different. This would happen, for example, if
retailers changed the online id number for those goods as a way to obfuscate their price
differences and prevent any comparisons. The evidence suggests that this is not generally

                                                    25
the case.



7     Retailer Heterogeneity

    The country-level results in the previous sections conceal a great deal of heterogeneity
across retailers in each country. Details for each retailer can be seen in Appendix Table A1,
were I show price level and changes results for all retailers with at least 100 observations.
    Three main types of retailers are typical. First, there are retailers where online and
offline prices are identical most of the time. These are cases where the retailer explicitly
chooses to have the same online and offline price. Second, there are also some retailers
with a low share of identical prices, but no clear online markups. Many retailers in Brazil,
for example, exhibit this pattern. These are likely cases where the online store is simply
treated as another outlet, sometimes cheaper, sometimes more expensive. Third, there
are retailers with a low share of identical prices and a significant online markup (either
positive or negative). There are some examples in Argentina, Brazil, Japan, and the US.
These patterns may reflect a desire to compensate for shipping costs or price-discriminate
online consumers.
    Whether each kind of retailer is useful as a source of data depends on the purpose of
the paper or application. For example, using online prices for the retailer in Argentina
where 79% of prices are higher online is not a problem for measuring inflation as long
as the online markup is relatively constant over time, but it would bias the results if we
were interested in comparing price level differences across countries. Unless a correction
is applied, the online data would make prices in Argentina appear higher than what they
really are. Identifying these special patterns and correcting for any biases is particularly
important in papers or applications that use online data from one (or a few) retailers.



8     Conclusions

    This paper shows that in large multi-channel retailers there is little difference between
the online price collected from a website and the offline price obtained by visiting the

                                             26
physical store. Prices are identical about 72% of the time, and while price changes are
not synchronized, they have similar frequencies and sizes. At the same time, there is
considerable heterogeneity across countries, sectors, and retailers.
   For research economists using online data for macro and international research ques-
tions, my results provide evidence that online prices are a representative source of retail
prices, even if most transactions still take place offline. At a more micro level, the dif-
ferences in behaviors can be used to better model the pricing dynamics and strategies of
different types of retailers in various sectors and countries. This high degree of hetero-
geneity also implies that papers that use relatively few sources of data should be cautious
to understand relevant pricing patterns and control for any potential sampling biases.
   For National Statistical Offices (NSOs) considering the use of online data for consumer
price indexes, my results show that the web can be effectively used as an alternative
data-collection technology for multi-channel retailers. Particularly for products such as
electronics or clothing, the price collected on the web will tend to be identical to the one
that can be obtained by walking into a physical store. Online prices are not only cheaper
to collect, but they also provide information for all goods sold by each retailer, with many
details per product, uncensored price spells, and can be collected on a high-frequency
basis without any delays. Of course, there are also many potential disadvantages of using
online data, including limited sector coverage and the lack of information on quantities,
as we discuss in Cavallo and Rigobon (2016). But from a data-collection perspective, my
results suggest that the online-offline price differences should not be a major source of
concern.
   For those interested in the effect of the Internet on retail prices, my findings imply little
within-retailer price dispersion, both online and offline. While the Internet may not have
reduced dispersion across retailers, it seems to have created the incentives for companies
to price identically across their own physical and online stores. More research is needed
to understand the mechanisms that drive this effect. One possibility is that retailers are
worried about antagonizing customers who can now easily compare prices online through
the web or their mobile phones. This might even be affecting cross-country pricing, as


                                              27
suggested by Cavallo et al. (2014), where we found evidence that global firms such as
Apple and Ikea tend to price identically in countries that use the same currency, where
it is trivial for consumers to compare prices across borders.
   Future work should also try to understand why there are still some observed price-
level differences. One explanation may be that online prices adjust faster to shocks. That
would be consistent with the un-synchronized price change results in this paper and the
anticipation in online price indices documented in Cavallo and Rigobon (2016). Another
potential reason is that location-specific sales or offline price dispersion may play a larger
role than I can detect in these data. In particular, the offline price comparisons for
multiple zip codes in Section 5.2 could be expanded to cover more sectors and countries.
In addition, good-level characteristics, such as the bargaining power of the manufacturer
or the nature of its production and distribution costs, may help explain why some goods
have identical prices while others do not.
   Another limitation of my analysis is the lack of quantity information at the product
and retailer levels. For some applications, such as the computations of price indices, we
can use category weights in official CPI data. But other pricing statistics may change
considerably when individual goods are weighted by sales, as shown with online book sales
by Chevalier and Goolsbee (2003). Future research should try to combine online prices
with other micro data, such as scanner datasets, that can provide more detailed quantity
information.
   Finally, with the exception of the Amazon results in Section 5.3, this paper does not
study the prices of online-only retailers or small companies that participate in online
“marketplaces”. If their share of retail transactions continues to grow, a large-scale com-
parison with traditional multi-channel retailers will be needed to better understand how
pricing strategies and dynamics are likely to evolve in the future.




                                             28
References
Alvarez, F., F. Lippi, and H. Le Bihan (2016). The real effects of monetary shocks in sticky
  price models: a sufficient statistic approach. American Economic Review Forthcoming.

Bailey, J. (1998, January). Electronic Commerce: Prices and Consumer Issues for Three
  Products: Books, Compact Discs and Software. OECD Digital Economy Paper 32,
  OECD Publishing.

Balakrishnan, A., S. Sundaresan, and B. Zhang (2013). Browse-and-Switch: Retail-Online
  Competition under Value Uncertainty. Production and Operations Management Soci-
  ety 23 (7), 1129–1145.

Baye, M. R., J. Morgan, P. Scholten, and others (2006). Information, search, and price
  dispersion. Handbook on economics and information systems 1, 323–375.

Boettcher, I. (2015). Automatic data collection on the Internet. Statistics Austria.

Borraz, F., A. Cavallo, R. Rigobon, and L. Zipitria (2015, April). Distance and Political
  Boundaries: Estimating Border Effects under Inequality Constraints. International
  Journal of Finance & Economics 21 (1), 3–35.

Breton, R., G. Clews, L. Metcalfe, N. Milliken, C. Payne, J. Winton, and A. Woods
  (2015). Research indices using web scraped data.

Brynjolfsson, E., A. A. Dick, and M. D. Smith (2003, February). Search and Product
  Differentiation at an Internet Shopbot. SSRN Electronic Journal .

Brynjolfsson, E., Y. Hu, and D. Simester (2011). Goodbye pareto principle, hello long
  tail: The effect of search costs on the concentration of product sales. Management
  Science 57 (8), 1373–1386.

Brynjolfsson, E., Y. J. Hu, M. S. Rahman, and B. E. Brynjolfsson (2013). Competing in
  the Age of Omnichannel Retailing. MIT Sloan Management Review 54 (4), 23–29.

Brynjolfsson, E. and M. D. Smith (2000, April). Frictionless Commerce? A Comparison
  of Internet and Conventional Retailers. Management Science 46 (4), 563–585.

Brynjolfsson, E. and M. D. Smith (2001, October). The Great Equalizer? Consumer
  Choice Behavior at Internet Shopbots. SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 290323, Social Science
  Research Network, Rochester, NY.

Cavallo, A. (2016). Scraped Data and Sticky Prices. Review of Economics and Statis-
  tics Forthcoming.

Cavallo, A., B. Neiman, and R. Rigobon (2014). Currency Unions, Product Introductions,
  and the Real Exchange Rate. Quarterly Journal of Economics 129 (2).

Cavallo, A., B. Neiman, and R. Rigobon (2015). The price impact of joining a currency
  union: evidence from Latvia. IMF Economic Review 63 (2), 281–297.

Cavallo, A. and R. Rigobon (2016). The Billion Prices Project: Using Online Data for
  Measurement and Research. Journal of Economic Perspectives 30 (2), 151–78.

                                            29
Chevalier, J. and A. Goolsbee (2003). Measuring prices and price competition online:
 Amazon. com and BarnesandNoble. com. Quantitative marketing and Economics 1 (2),
 203–222.

Clay, K., R. Krishnan, E. Wolff, and D. Fernandes (2002). Retail strategies on the web:
  Price and nonprice competition in the online book industry. The Journal of Industrial
  Economics 50 (3), 351–367.

Clay, K. and C. H. Tay (2001). Cross-country price differentials in the online textbook
  market. Unpublished Paper, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh.

Clemons, E. K., I.-H. Hann, and L. M. Hitt (2002). Price dispersion and differentiation
  in online travel: An empirical investigation. Management science 48 (4), 534–549.

CNN (2000, September). Amazon pricing flap - Sep. 28, 2000. CNN Money.

Edelman, B. (2012). Using Internet Data for Economic Research. The Journal of Eco-
  nomic Perspectives 26 (2), 189–206.

Ellison, G. and S. F. Ellison (2009a, March). Search, Obfuscation, and Price Elasticities
  on the Internet. Econometrica 77 (2), 427–452.

Ellison, G. and S. F. Ellison (2009b). Tax sensitivity and home state preferences in
  internet purchasing. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 53–71.

Euromonitor (2014). Internet vs Store-Based Shopping: The Global Move Towards Om-
  nichannel Retailing.

FitzGerald, D. (2013, November). Fear of ’Showrooming’ Fades — Best Buy, Other
  Retailers Optimistic That Price-Matching Can Stanch Trend. Wall Street Journal .

Gorodnichenko, Y., V. Sheremirov, and O. Talavera (2014). Price Setting in Online
 Markets: Does IT Click? NBER Working Paper Series (20819).

Gorodnichenko, Y. and O. Talavera (2016). Price Setting in Online Markets: Basic
 Facts, International Comparisons, and Cross-border Integration. American Economic
 Review (Forthcoming).

Griffioen, R., J. de Haan, and L. Willenborg (2014). Collecting clothing data from the
  Internet. In meeting of the group of experts on consumer price indices, pp. 26–28.

Horrigan, M. (2013). Big Data: A Perspective from the BLS | Amstat News.

Kaplan, G. and G. Menzio (2015). The morphology of price dispersion. International
 Economic Review 56 (4), 1165–1206.

Klena, K. and J. Puleri (2013). From transactions to relationships: Connecting with a
  transitioning shopper.

Krsinich, F. (2015). Price Indexes from online data using the fixed-effects window-splice
  (FEWS) index. Statistics New Zealand .




                                           30
Lunnemann, P. and L. Wintr (2011, October). Price Stickiness in the US and Europe
  Revisited: Evidence from Internet Prices*. Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statis-
  tics 73 (5), 593–621.

Mattioli, D. (2012, August). On Orbitz, Mac Users Steered to Pricier Hotels. Wall Street
 Journal .

Mikians, J., L. Gyarmati, V. Erramilli, and N. Laoutaris (2012). Detecting price and
 search discrimination on the internet. In Proceedings of the 11th ACM Workshop on
 Hot Topics in Networks, pp. 79–84. ACM. bibtex: mikians detecting 2012-1.

Mikians, J., L. Gyarmati, V. Erramilli, and N. Laoutaris (2013). Crowd-assisted search
 for price discrimination in e-commerce: First results. In Proceedings of the ninth ACM
 conference on Emerging networking experiments and technologies, pp. 1–6. ACM.

Nakamura, E. and J. Steinsson (2008). Five Facts About Prices: A Reevaluation of Menu
  Cost Models. Quarterly Journal of Economics 123(4), 1415–1464.

Nygaard, R. (2015). The use of online prices in the Norwegian Consumer Price Index.
 Statistics Norway.

Quan, T. W. and W. K. R. (2014). ”Product Variety, Across-Market Demand Hetero-
 geneity, and the Value of Online Retail.”.

Simonovska, I. (2015). Income differences and prices of tradables: Insights from an online
  retailer. The Review of Economic Studies 82 (4), 1612–1656.

Tang, F.-F. and X. Xing (2001). Will the growth of multi-channel retailing diminish the
  pricing efficiency of the web? Journal of Retailing 77 (3), 319–333.

Valentino-DeVries, J., J. Singer-Vine, and A. Soltani (2012, December). Websites Vary
  Prices, Deals Based on Users’ Information. Wall Street Journal .

Xing, X., Z. Yang, and F.-F. Tang (2006, March). A comparison of time-varying online
  price and price dispersion between multichannel and dotcom DVD retailers. Journal of
  Interactive Marketing 20 (2), 3–20.




                                           31
