                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             OPTIMAL CONTRACTING WITH SUBJECTIVE EVALUATION:
               THE EFFECTS OF TIMING, MALFEASANCE AND GUILE

                                     W. Bentley MacLeod
                                       Teck Yong Tan

                                     Working Paper 22156
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w22156


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    April 2016




We would like to thank Bob Gibbons, Bengt Holmström, Stephen Morris and seminar
participants at MIT and the Econometric Society meetings, San Francisco, 2016 for helpful
comments. We also thank Elliot Ash for research assistance. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by W. Bentley MacLeod and Teck Yong Tan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Optimal Contracting with Subjective Evaluation: The Effects of Timing, Malfeasance and
Guile
W. Bentley MacLeod and Teck Yong Tan
NBER Working Paper No. 22156
April 2016
JEL No. D86,J33,J41

                                         ABSTRACT

We introduce a general Principal-Agent model with subjective evaluation and malfeasance
characterized by two-sided asymmetric information on performance that allows for an arbitrary
information structure. Two generic contract forms are studied. An authority contract has the
Principal reveal his information before the Agent responds with her information. Under such a
contract, the Agent's compensation varies only with the Principal's information, while her
information is used to punish untruthful behavior by the Principal. Conversely, a sales contract
has the Agent reveal her information first. In this case, the Agent's performance incentives are
affected by the information revealed by both parties. Because the Agent's information affects her
compensation, the information revelation constraints are more complex under a sales contract,
and provide a way to integrate Williamson's (1975) notion of guile into agency theory. We find
that designing sales contracts for expert agents, such as physicians and financial advisors, are
significantly more complex than designing optimal authority contracts.


W. Bentley MacLeod
Department of Economics
Columbia University
420 West 118th Street, MC 3308
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
bentley.macleod@columbia.edu

Teck Yong Tan
Department of Economics
420 West 118th Street
New York, NY 10027
teckie83@gmail.com
                                                  1. Introduction

    An open challenge for the contract theory literature is to understand the wide variety of observed con-
tracting relationships. In a seminal paper, Kerr (1975) provides a number of examples in which organizations
introduced dysfunctional performance pay systems to illustrate that even successful firms are often challenged
by the problem of incentive pay design. Milkovich and Wigdor (1991) advised the US federal government
against the introduction of a performance pay system because the implementation costs would outweigh any
performance gain. There is also a great deal of evidence that, despite an enormous amount of research and
experimentation, reward systems in health care have not met expectations (McGuire (2000) and Frank and
McGuire (2000)). Similarly, attempts to introduce better reward systems in education have not proven to
be uniformly successful (Goodman and Turner (2010)). The purpose of this paper is to introduce a model
that can help to explain why contracting in these environments is so difficult, and provide some tools for the
analysis of optimal contracting with two-sided asymmetric information on performance.
    Beginning with seminal work by Ross (1973), Harris and Raviv (1979) and Holmström (1979), the early
work on the Principal-Agent problem characterizes the optimal contract with risk-averse parties and im-
perfect measures of the Agent’s performance. When clear and unambiguous performance measures exist,
optimal risk-sharing contracts should incorporate this information.1 An important caveat occurs when the
Agent must allocate her time over several tasks. Holmström and Milgrom (1991) show that under such
situations, the optimal contract may have to reduce rewards on one informative performance measure in
order to limit its negative externality upon other aspects of performance.
    A paradigmatic example of this is the speed/quality trade-off. The time of completion of a project is
easy to measure, but the quality is often hard to assess, particularly for complex goods such as software,
professional services, food, wine and music. To mitigate such multi-tasking problems, parties can rely,
in part, upon subjective evaluations of the difficult-to-measure elements of performance to provide rewards.
Prendergast (1999) observes that the use of subjective performance evaluation on top of objective assessments
is a common incentive system in organizations. When this happens, optimal contracts are required to be “self-
enforcing” - the Principal (he) can provide incentives via rewards that vary with his subjective evaluations
on the performance only if the Agent (she) in turn can provide incentives for the Principal to be truthful in
his evaluations.2
    Such incentives can be provided using a “relational contract” that views trade as a repeated game in which
current performance is enforced by the threat of future punishments (Telser (1980) and Bull (1987)). Building
upon the work of Abreu (1988), MacLeod and Malcomson (1989) provide a complete characterization of the
set of self-enforcing relational contracts when performance is commonly observed by the Principal and the
Agent, but not by outside parties. Levin (2003) relaxes this assumption to allow for asymmetric information
in the Agent’s cost and in the performance level (subjective evaluation). The key result is that the necessary
and sufficient conditions for efficient production rely upon the existence of sufficient rents from continuing
the relationship. The relational contracting literature has relied upon this result to focus on how these
rents are generated, and how they constrain the set of feasible contracts. For example, Baker et al. (1994)
show that rewards based upon objective measures can enhance the value of a relationship, thus creating
a complementarity between subjective and objective performance measures. Kandori (1992) and Kranton
1
 For example, MacLeod and Parent (1999) find that performance pay in the United States is most prevalent in jobs with high
quality performance measures such as sales and workers producing product to order.
2
 Prendergast (1993) and Prendergast and Topel (1996) show that the use of subjective performance evaluations to provide
effort incentives is an important factor in explaining some ubiquitous features in organizations.
                                                            2
(1996) emphasize the role of social networks, while Klein and Leffler (1981), Kornhauser (1983), Greif (1989)
and Banerjee and Duflo (2000) view reputation as a relational rent that can induce performance. Baker et al.
(2002) consider the effect of vertical integration on the quality of the relational contract. Brown et al. (2004)
show that a preference for reciprocity can provide a substitute for reputational concerns to enhance contract
performance. Finally, Sobel (2006) has a model of opportunistic behavior in which informal contracts can
support efficient trade within periods but lead to relationships that are inefficiently long lasting.
   This literature illustrates that a large number of economic institutions are explicitly designed to create
social norms and rents that can be harnessed for informal contract enforcement. However, it does not
address the classic Principal-Agent issue: how does variation in information about the performance level
shape the optimal contract? One reason for this gap is that the introduction of asymmetric information to a
repeated game dramatically increases the complexity of the problem (Kandori and Matsushima (1998) and
Kandori (2002)).3 Levin (2003) makes significant progress by focusing upon “full-review” contracts where
the Principal truthfully reports his private evaluation of performance every period in equilibrium. He shows
that when both players are risk-neutral, the optimal contract takes a simple one-step compensation structure
- the Agent is rewarded and retained if and only if the performance exceeds a threshold. Fuchs (2007), using
the idea of “re-usability of punishments” of Abreu et al. (1991), relaxes the “full-review” assumption and
shows that, when only the Principal has information about the performance level, efficiency is enhanced by
delaying payments to the Agent. Chan and Zheng (2011) and Maestri (2012) make further progress on the
understanding of dynamic contracting under subjective evaluation by considering the case where the Agent
also has information on the performance level.
   MacLeod (2003), using ideas from Abreu et al. (1990) and Kandori and Matsushima (1998), introduces
a reduced-form model of relational contracts which allows one to study the effects of risk aversion and
correlation in information. He observes that a key ingredient in a relational contract is that in every period,
parties can coordinate their rewards and punishments conditional upon past events. For example, if the
Principal is perceived to have deviated from an agreement, the parties can coordinate upon an equilibrium
punishment for the Principal.4 MacLeod (2003) introduces two ideas. First, subjective evaluation can be
modeled explicitly as a problem of asymmetric information - the same performance level by the Agent
can generate different information to the Principal and the Agent, which in turn represents differences in
perception of the Agent’s performance. The extent to which the evaluations are objective then depends
upon the degree of correlation in information. Second, when information is asymmetric, then as Myerson
and Satterthwaite (1983) show, the optimal exchange mechanism necessarily entails a social loss. This is
modeled by allowing the Agent to impose a deadweight loss upon the Principal if she believes that she has
been treated unfairly.
   In this paper, we build upon these observations to extend this model in a number of directions. First,
MacLeod (2003) assumes that only the Principal has a noisy measure of performance while the Agent
observes a noisy signal of the Principal’s information. We call this the “informed-Principal” case.5 We relax
this assumption to allow for an arbitrary information structure that also includes, among others, the “expert-
Agent” case. By this, we are referring to a situation where the Agent’s information about the performance

3
 This class of games is termed “repeated games with private monitoring” in the literature.
4
 Abreu et al. (1990) and Kandori and Matsushima (1998) show that in order to work out the possible equilibrium actions in
each period, the only information that is needed is the set of possible equilibrium payoffs for future periods.
5
 The information environment studied in Chan and Zheng (2011) and Maestri (2012) also correspond to the informed-Principal
case here. Most of the other work in subjective evaluation, including Levin (2003) and Fuchs (2007), consider the case where
the Agent has no information about the performance at all.
                                                             3
level is superior to that of the Principal, a case that corresponds to the problem of contracting for a “credence
good” (Darby and Karni (1973) and Emons (1997)). This is an important class of contracting problems,
that includes contracting for expert advice from physicians, lawyers, consultants and financial advisers.
   Second, we consider two generic contract forms that are distinguished by the timing of information rev-
elation. The first is an “authority contract” under which the Principal has to reveal his information of the
performance level before the Agent responds with her information. This contract form has a sharp predic-
tion: only the Principal’s information is used to provide incentives for effort, while the Agent’s information is
used to provide incentives for the Principal to reveal his information truthfully. The literature on relational
contracts tends to focus upon ensuring that the Agent can punish the Principal for deviation. In contrast,
this model also provides predictions regarding the pattern of organizational conflict as a function of the
observed signals. In particular, an efficient relational contract should modulate socially inefficient conflicts
by restricting their occurrence to states in which the Agent has high quality information regarding possible
mis-reporting by the Principal.6
   Next we consider a “sales contract” under which the Agent reveals her information before the Principal
responds with his. In practice, this can be implemented with a contract under which the Agent sets the
price, hence the term “sales contract”. The Principal then responds by imposing a deadweight loss upon the
Agent when he believes that the price is inconsistent with his private information. This contract can be seen
as a general version of contracts that have been used to study credence goods where the terms of trade are
often determined by the good or service provider.
   Models of credence goods typically use binary signals to model the potential for the under-provision of
quality or over-charging of the customers.7 In our model, effort is a continuous variable and we allow for
an arbitrary number of signals. The timing of information revelation in the sales contract implies that
the Agent’s rewards are determined by her report, while the Principal’s information ensures that the Agent
reveals his information truthfully. As Myerson (1986) first showed for multistage games, the simple revelation
principle may no longer apply. In the case of a sales contract, the Agent can manipulate the Principal’s
information via her effort choice. A consequence of this is that in some cases, even if a contract is incentive
compatible conditional upon the contractual effort obligation, the Agent may still have incentives to alter her
effort and then mis-report her information accordingly. In other words, under the sales contract, there is the
combined risk of moral hazard and deceitful reporting behavior that can restrict the set of feasible contracts.
This corresponds exactly to the type of behavior that Williamson (1975) calls opportunistic because it entails
the use of “guile”: the use of self-disbelieved promises.8
   Guile arises in our model when the Agent changes her effort and then, before information is revealed to
each party, plans to mislead the Principal accordingly. Thus, a feasible contract needs to jointly satisfy
the Agent’s incentive constraint for all ex-ante reporting strategies and effort choices.9 This then implies
an incentive constraint that is an order of magnitude more complex than checking the Agent’s truthful-
reporting constraints on the equilibrium path after the Agent has supplied the contractual effort terms. This
has a number of consequences. First, the standard Principal-Agent model suggests that the most informed
6
 Li and Matouschek (2013) also study the management of conflicts in relational contract. The difference there is that conflict
arises as a result of an exogenous random shock to the Principal’s cost of adhering to the contractual terms, and this shock is
independent of the Agent’s effort. Here, the amount of conflicts and the states at which they should occur are highly dependent
on the effort that the Principal wants to induce from the Agent.
7
 See the review by Dulleck and Kerschbamer (2006).
8
 See Williamson (1975) Section 2.2.
9
 The Agent’s joint-strategy for information revelation and effort choice here is an example of the “manipulative strategy”
considered in Myerson (1986).
                                                              4
individual should be setting the contractual terms. Such intuition might not hold here because even if the
Agent is better informed than the Principal, contracting via sales contract might be more inefficient because
of its more stringent set of constraints due to guile.
   Second, the fact that the constraint space is more stringent for the sales contract may help to explain
the many failures of performance pay systems. This intuition spills over to the consumer product market.
A nice example of this is the recent Volkswagen scandal where the car manufacturer implanted a software
to “cheat” government environmental testing systems (altering the effort obligation), and then lied to the
public by advertising their diesel automobiles as “green” (mis-reporting information). More generally, our
model provides a precise way to think about the observation of Williamson (1975) that:

        “Opportunism extends the conventional assumption of self-interest seeking with guile and
        has profound implications for choosing between alternative contractual relationships.” 10

Within the paradigm of the standard Principal-Agent model, Williamson’s comment is puzzling because the
model always assumes that contracts are designed while taking into account how individuals behave. Hence
it has not been obvious what these profound implications are.
   Our model also features malfeasance. By malfeasance, we refer to actions that the Agent can take to obtain
a reward that do not have any benefit to the Principal (Becker and Stigler (1974)). We add this feature to
highlight that guile is not a pure artifact of multi-tasking. A classic example of malfeasance is the mis-guided
compensation scheme of Lincoln Electric company which linked its typists’ pay to a measurement system
on the typewriter that records the number of keys hit by the typist (Fast and Berg (1975)). The company
was surprised to discover a typist hitting the same key repeatedly during her lunch break to generate a
“high performance signal” for herself. In this example the typist is just rationally responding to the rewards
provided by the firm. She would be engaging in guile if this behavior is also combined with being untruthful
regarding how she spends her time.
   The agenda of the paper is as follows. The next section introduces the model and notation. Section 2.5
works out the optimal contract in the presence of malfeasance alone, and provides necessary and sufficient
conditions for the existence of a malfeasance-free contract. This distinguishes the effect of malfeasance from
guile. Next, section 3 introduces subjective evaluation and the rest of the paper focuses on characterizing the
optimal authority and sales contracts. We follow Grossman and Hart (1983) and consider implementing an
agreed upon effort level via a contract with the lowest cost. Since the parties are assumed to be risk-neutral
with unlimited liability, the optimal contract is one that minimizes the deadweight loss due to conflicts
necessary to obtain truthful information revelation. We show that the problem of guile distinguishes the two
contracting problems.
   Section 4 studies the guile constraint in detail and provides some illustrative examples that link guile
to constraints on performance pay. In particular, any sales contract under which the Agent can, through
her reports on her performance, alter her effort-dependent part of the reward while leaving her expected
compensation unchanged, is susceptible to guile. This implies that guile is a potential problem when the
Agent’s truthful-reporting constraint binds on the equilibrium path. Finally, section 5 concludes with a
discussion of the results and potential avenues for future research. All omitted proofs are in Appendix A.




10
 Ibid, Page 26.
                                                       5
                                                      2. The Model

   This section outlines the Principal-Agent model. We assume that both parties are risk-neutral so that we
can focus upon the single margin of incentives versus information revelation. Sections 2.1 and 2.2 introduce
the environment and the information structure that allows for arbitrary correlation between the information
of the Agent and the Principal. Section 2.3 introduces contracts, and section 2.4 discusses the two contract
forms that are the focus of the analysis - authority and sales contracts. Section 2.5 provides existence results
for the symmetric information benchmark, followed by the analysis of subjective evaluation in the next
section.

2.1. The Environment. Consider a Principal-Agent model with risk-neutral parties.11 The Agent privately
allocates effort to a number of tasks from the set {H, 1, 2, 3, ..., m̄} = {H} ∪ M. The effort vector is given
by ~λ = [λH , λ1 , ..., λm̄ ] ∈ [0, 1]m̄+1 where λτ is the effort exerted on task τ ∈ {H} ∪ M. Each task τ can
generate either a “successful” outcome o = τ or a low outcome o = L, and λτ is the probability of getting
the “successful” outcome τ . Each “successful” outcome τ is associated with a value of Bτ to the Principal
while the value of outcome L is normalized to 0. Only task τ = H is a productive task (BH > 0); all other
tasks m ∈ M (the malfeasance set) are non-productive tasks (Bm = 0) corresponding to malfeasance - costly
actions that have no productive benefit, but might be rewarded via the performance contract.
   Outcomes are not directly observable,12 but they generate separate signals for the Principal and the Agent.
When a non-productive task in the malfeasance set M generates its “successful” outcome which is of no value
to the Principal, the Principal might still perceive it as valuable via the signal he receives. For example,
a car that is sent in for routine maintenance may have no problem, but the mechanic may nevertheless
perform unnecessary “repairs.” Upon observing the amount of work done on his car, the car-owner might
mistakenly believe that the mechanic has helped him avert certain disaster!13 Such a scenario is an example
of malfeasance. The difference between malfeasance and shirking is that malfeasance still incurs costly effort
by the Agent but it is intended only to affect the signals that the Principal receives, and thereby potentially
enhances her income under the compensation contract. In contrast, shirking is a reduction in effort, rather
than a reallocation of effort to another task.         P               
   Let the Agent’s cost of exerting effort ~λ be V         τ ∈{H}∪M  λτ   which satisfies:

Assumption 1. V : [0, 1) → <+ is any twice differentiable and strictly convex function such that V (0) = 0,
V 0 (0) ≥ 0 and limλ→1 V (λ) = ∞.
                                               P               
    To simplify notation, we also let V ~λ = V        τ ∈{H}∪M λτ  .14 The Agent has an outside option of U 0
and we do not impose any limited liability on her. The outside option for the Principal is normalized to
zero and he derives a fixed gain from trade U P 0 , even when the Agent’s effort is zero on all tasks. To make
the analysis non-vacuous, we also assume the efficiency of trade condition (ETC); trade is efficient in the
absence of costs of contract formation:
11
 We use the male pronoun for the Principal and the female pronoun for the Agent.
12For concreteness, one can think of B as some future payoff where the value is not immediately realized. Alternatively, it is
                                      τ
plausible that the values of the outcomes are never observed even after it is derived (see next footnote).
13In this example, it is plausible to view the values of the outcomes as never observable. If the car was indeed faulty and the
mechanic carries out the necessary repair, the car-owner derives some positive value from averting the potential accident. If
the car was in perfect condition but the mechanic carries out unnecessary repairs which has no value to the car-owner, the
outcome is still “no accident”. Since both outcomes are identical, the car-owner cannot differentiate between the two. See Ely
and Välimäki (2003) for a discussion of this problem for firm reputations.
14While this is a little unorthodox in mathematics, it is quite standard in object-oriented computer programming where the
type of argument (~λ ∈ [0, 1)m̄+1 or λ ∈ [0, 1)) determines the method to be applied.
                                                              6
Assumption 2. (ETC.) It is assumed that U P 0 − U 0 ≥ 0.

   Let λF B be the efficient effort level which is uniquely defined by V 0 λF B = BH . In that case, the first
                                                                               

best surplus net of outside options is:

                            SurplusF B = U P 0 + λF B BH − V λF B − U 0 ≥ 0.
                                                                        
(2.1)

   Assumptions 1 and 2 are maintained throughout the paper. The parties’ ability to achieve the first-best
surplus SurplusF B is constrained by the availability of information regarding effort. We assume that the
Principal and the Agent each receives a private signal of performance,15 denoted respectively by t, s ∈ S =
{0, 1, ..., n − 1}, where S, the set of possible signals, is a finite set with n ≥ 2 elements. These signals have
the same “meaning” to the two parties. For example, if s = 10 means that the food is excellent according to
the Agent, the Principal will have the same interpretation for t = 10. However, he may perceive the quality
differently when he receives a signal of, say, t = 8 which means that the food is good but not excellent.
The two parties can then reasonably disagree regarding the quality of performance. This provides a precise
notion of subjective evaluation where the extent to which parties’ signals are correlated provides a measure
of the subjectivity level (or the lack of it); when signals are perfectly correlated, the judgments are objective,
and we are back in the standard Principal-Agent framework.


2.2. Signal-generating Process. The signal-generating process begins with a set of states given by ts ∈ S 2 .
We refer to t observed by the Principal or s observed by the Agent as a signal, and the joint-realization ts
as a state. The set S 2 denotes the set of all possible states. To exploit the linear structure of the problem,
we index each state ts by an index function I : S 2 → {0, 1, . . . , n2 − 1} where I (ts) = (n × t) + s.16 Thus
                                     2
for a state-contingent vector ~x ∈ <n , xts refers to the I(ts)-th entry of vector ~x.
   Let the probability of state ts under outcome o ∈ O ≡ {L} ∪ {H} ∪ M be given by:

(2.2)                                                P rob [ts|o]     =   Γots .
                                                      h                    i
Let ~Γo be the corresponding 1 × n2 probability vector ΓoI(ts)                        . As a convention, we let all probability
                                                                             ts∈S 2
vectors be row vectors and all state-contingent variable vectors be column vectors. Thus the expected value
                                      2
of a state-contingent variable ~x ∈ <n is E [~x|o] = ~Γo ~x, where all multiplications of vectors in this paper refer
to the inner-product. If the Principal correctly anticipates the effort ~λ exerted by the Agent, both parties
will have the same ex-ante unconditional probability of state ts:
                                                                                          
                                   h    i            X                         X
                    Γts ~λ ≡ P rob ts|~λ =                    λτ Γτts + 1 −           λ τ  ΓL
                                                                                              ts
                                                          τ ∈{H}∪M                        τ ∈{H}∪M
                                                                      X
                                                     =    ΓL
                                                           ts +              λτ Γ̂τts ,
                                                                  τ ∈{H}∪M

where the marginal effect of effort λτ on the probability of state ts is defined by:

                                         Γ̂τts   =    Γτts − ΓL
                                                              ts ,    ∀τ ∈ {H} ∪ M.


15This asymmetry in information on the performance prohibits the Principal from efficiently “selling the firm” to the Agent.
16As a convention, all indexes of vectors and matrices will begin from 0 instead of 1 throughout the paper. The convention is
the same as is used in C and python programming languages, as is our convention on indexing which proceeds row wise. In
contrast, FORTRAN indexes begin with 1, and uses column wise indexing.
                                                                  7
In vector form, we have:
                                                                               ~
                                                                    X                2
                                            ~Γ ~λ     = ~ΓL +               λτ Γ̂τ ∈ <n .
                                                                 τ ∈{H}∪M

Notice that under Assumption 1, the Agent always chooses ~λ such that τ ∈{H}∪M λτ < 1, which ensures
                                                                     P
        
that ~Γ ~λ is a valid probability vector.
  We follow Grossman and Hart (1983) and frame the problem in terms of finding a contract that implements
an agreed-upon effort obligation, ~λ, at the lowest cost. We ensure the existence of a non-degenerate optimal
contract by requiring the full-support assumption:
                                                                                               
Definition 1. The effort obligation ~λ satisfies the Full Support Condition (FSC) at ~λ if Γts ~λ > 0, ∀ts ∈
S2.

   The FSC assumes that all states occur with strictly positive probability under ~λ.17 Its satisfaction ensures
that optimal payments can be bounded; if some states were instead perfectly informative of malfeasance,
then the moral hazard problem could be solved at zero cost by imposing large penalties when these states
occur, as in Becker and Stigler (1974).
   It would be convenient to define the probabilities that each signal is observed by the respective party. For
o ∈ {L} ∪ {H} ∪ M, let:
                                                    X
(2.3)                                     γto ≡         Γots ∀t ∈ S,
                                                               s∈S
                                                               X
(2.4)                                                βso   ≡         Γots ∀s ∈ S,
                                                               t∈S

where   γto    is the probability of the Principal observing signal t under outcome o, while βso is the probability
                                                                                                              ~o =
                                                                                                      
of the Agent observing signal s under outcome o. Analogously, we let ~γ o = γ0o , . . . , γn−1     o
                                                                                                         and β
 o            o
                   
 β0 , . . . , βn−1   be the respective 1 × n probability vectors for the Principal’s and the Agent’s signals.
   The probability that the Principal observes signal t ∈ S under effort ~λ is thus:
                                                                                        
                                        h i           X                       X
                           γt ~λ ≡ P rob t ~λ =                λτ γtτ + 1 −          λτ  γtL
                                                           τ ∈{H}∪M                      τ ∈{H}∪M
                                                                      X
                                                       = γtL +               λτ γ̂tτ ,
                                                                  τ ∈{H}∪M
                                                                                                       
with γ̂tτ = γtτ − γtL , the marginal effect of effort λτ on signal t for the Principal. The vectors ~γ ~λ and ~γ̂ τ
                                                 
are then the respective 1 × n vectors for γt ~λ and γ̂tτ .
   Similarly, the probability that the Agent observes signal s ∈ S under effort ~λ is:
                                                                                       
                                      h i            X                       X
                         βs ~λ ≡ P rob s ~λ =                 λτ βsτ + 1 −          λτ  βsL
                                                            τ ∈{H}∪M                     τ ∈{H}∪M
                                                                      X
                                                       = βsL +               λτ β̂sτ ,
                                                                  τ ∈{H}∪M




17Since P                λτ < 1, having ΓL             2
              τ ∈{H}∪M                   ts > 0 ∀ts ∈ S would suffice for FSC, but is not necessary.
                                                                  8
                                                                                                      ~
                                                                                               
with β̂sτ = β τ − β L , the marginal effect of effort λτ on signal s for the Agent. Vectors β~ ~λ and β̂ τ are then
                              
defined analogously to ~γ ~λ and ~γ̂ τ .
   Given that the correlation between the players’ signals plays an important role in the form of the optimal
contract, we define:
                                                                           
                                                        h      i Γts ~λ
(2.5)                                   qts ~λ     = P r s t, ~λ =         .
                                                                       γt ~λ
    
qts ~λ is the conditional probability of the Agent observing signal s when the Principal observes signal t
under effort ~λ. Similarly, we let:
                                                                           
                                                        h      i Γts ~λ
(2.6)                                   rts ~λ     = P r t s, ~λ =         ,
                                                                       βs ~λ

be the conditional probability of the Principal observing signal t when the Agent observes signal s under
effort ~λ.

2.3. Contracts. A contract in this model specifies the state-contingent costs for the Principal and state-
contingent wages for the Agent. In addition, we allow both the Principal and the Agent to impose conflict
costs upon the other. This captures the notion of conflict in a relationship. The extent to which such
conflicts are possible and required in equilibrium depends upon the context. For example, if the Agent
receives a payment that is less than what she perceives to be deserving, she might retaliate with lower-
quality services in the future or try to harm the reputation of the Principal. In this sense, such conflicts can
be viewed as “behavioral” responses that are implemented when the parties disagree on their evaluations of
the performance level.
    We adopt a reduced-form approach to these conflicts to focus upon the interplay between conflict and
contract form. The equilibria described here can be mapped to a corresponding equilibrium for a repeated
game. However, this is the class of repeated game with private monitoring, and since the contract and effort
choices are both taken from a continuum, the set of possible histories is very large, which in turn dramatically
increases the complexity of the analysis (Kandori and Matsushima (1998) and Kandori (2002)).
    Our concern here is to understand the contract form with subjective evaluation that minimizes the social
cost of conflict required to implement a given effort level by the Agent. The only significant ingredient that is
missing in our treatment is a constraint upon the size of the conflict. The literature on relational contracts,
beginning with MacLeod and Malcomson (1989), Baker et al. (2002) and Levin (2003), has tended to focus
upon the role of this constraint upon the existence of a contract. By putting aside this issue, we are able to
illustrate a complex relationship between information revelation and contract form.
    Following Myerson and Satterthwaite (1983), we invoke the revelation principle and add incentive con-
straints for both parties to truthfully reveal their information as part of the contract design. The interpreta-
tion of a contract depends upon the context. In general, this means that after the parties have agreed upon
the contract terms, neither party can benefit by deviating from these terms. This notion of a self-enforcing
contract is consistent with the way that it is used in the relational contracting literature, to indicate that
the actions taken by individuals are carried out in their best interest.
    It is shown later that the problem is convex and hence there is no gain from randomization. Accordingly,
let cts be the Principal’s cost and wts be the Agent’s wage in state ts under the contract. These costs
                                                         9
and wages are net of the conflict imposed by the other party and must satisfy the relaxed budget constraint
(RBC):

(2.7)                                               cts ≥ wts , ∀ts ∈ S 2 .

The social deadweight loss due to the conflict at state ts is:

(2.8)                                             δts    = cts − wts ≥ 0.

   This social loss is the sum of conflicts imposed by the Principal upon the Agent, and by the Agent upon
the Principal.18 What is crucial is that these conflicts are pure losses; they are not transfers.19 In effect,
we are relaxing
         h      ithe budget-balancing
                              h      i constraint thath is well-known
                                                            i          to reduce the set of feasible contracts.
                         ~ = wI(ts) ts∈S 2 and ~δ = δI(ts) ts∈S 2 be the cost, wage and social loss vectors
Let ~c = cI(ts) ts∈S 2 , w
respectively.
   A contract is formally defined as a triplet:
                                      n        o                     2      2
                                 ψ = ~λ, ~c, w
                                             ~ ∈ Ψ ≡ [0, 1)m̄+1 × <n × <n ,

which specifies the Agent’s effort obligation, and the Principal’s cost and the Agent’s wage at each state.
When the parties abide by the conditions of the contract, the expected payoffs (net of outside options) of
the Principal and the Agent are respectively:
                                                                    
(2.9)                              U P (ψ) = U P 0 + λH BH − ~Γ ~λ ~c,
                                                            
                                   U A (ψ) = ~Γ ~λ w   ~ − V ~λ − U 0 .

Since parties are risk-neutral, we can add up these two expressions to obtain a measure of the total surplus
from the relationship under contract ψ:
                                                                            
(2.10)                    Surplus (ψ) = λH BH − V ~λ + U P 0 − U 0 − ~Γ ~λ ~δ.

From this expression, it is immediate that the first-best entails λH = λF B (as defined in (2.1)), λm = 0 ∀m ∈
M and ~δ = ~0. We will address the issue of when the first-best surplus can be achieved and when it cannot
be.
   For the Agent to accept a contract ψ, his Participation Constraint (PC) must be satisfied:
                                                            
(2.11)                               U A (ψ) = ~Γ ~λ w~ − V ~λ − U 0 ≥ 0.
                                                                                            
   Next, notice that the payoffs to the Agent are linear in the probability distribution ~Γ ~λ . This, combined
with the fact that V is strictly convex, implies that the Agent’s optimal choice of ~λ is determined by the
first-order conditions that for all τ ∈ {H} ∪ M:
                                              ~
                                                            
(2.12)                                           ~ − V 0 (~λ)
                                          λτ Γ̂τ w                      =     0,
                                                        ~τ
(2.13)                                                     ~ − V 0 (~λ) ≤ 0.
                                                        Γ̂ w



18One could also view δ as the level of aggrievement in the sense of Hart and Moore (2007).
                       ts
19
  In some cases, employment can be organized so that these losses are implemented as a transfer to other workers (see Malcomson
(1984) and Carmichael (1983)). In this case, these losses are then no longer social losses. However, doing so introduces the
problem of collusion among agents and contracts will then have to be designed to be collusion-proof, which adds further
complexity to the contract design.
                                                              10
All the probabilities must satisfy λτ ≥ 0 and hence, the complementary slackness condition (2.12) is the
requirement that either λτ = 0 or the returns from effort on τ is equal to the marginal cost of effort.
                                      ~                                                              ~
    Let M B (w) ~ = maxτ ∈{H}∪M Γ̂τ w.    ~ It follows that a necessary condition for λτ > 0 is that Γ̂τ w
                                                                                                         ~ = M B (w)
                                                                                                                  ~ .
                                            ~H
This has two implications. First, if Γ̂ w       ~ < M B (w)~ , then λH = 0. Second, if it is optimal for the Agent
to choose λH > 0, then it is (weakly) optimal to set λm = 0 for all m ∈ M. Since Bm = 0, ∀m ∈ M,
malfeasance is never part of an optimal contract. Hence we only consider contracts with λH > 0 and λm = 0
∀m ∈ M. More generally, if it is optimal to set λH = 0, then there is no need for performance pay and thus,
no malfeasance.
    Given these observations, and for notational conciseness, when we write effort “λ”, we are referring to
an effort choice ~λ = [λ, 0, . . . , 0]; that is, λH = λ and λm = 0 ∀m ∈ M. In addition, we let Γts (λ) denote
ΓL         H                                                                                               ~
  ts + λΓ̂ts , the probability of state ts under effort λ on only the productive task H, and let Γ (λ) be the
corresponding probability row vector. The same applies to γt (λ), βs (λ), qts (λ) and rts (λ). Analogously, when
we say the FSC (definition 1) is satisfied at λ, we mean that the FSC is satisfied at effort vector [λ, 0, ..., 0]
(i.e. Γts (λ) > 0 ∀ts ∈ S 2 ). Lastly, since all relevant contracts should be malfeasance-free, we denote a
contract by ψ = {λ, ~c, w} ~ with the understanding that the effort vector obligation involved is [λ, 0, ..., 0].
The contract ψ will then have to be designed to make these choices incentive-compatible for the Agent.
                                                                      2
    In particular, from (2.12) and (2.13), a wage vector w     ~ ∈ <n will induce effort obligation λ from the Agent
if it satisfies the incentive constraint for effort (ICE):
                                                          ~H
(2.14)                                                       ~ ≥ V 0 (λ) ,
                                                          Γ̂ w

and the incentive constraint for no-malfeasance (ICM) :
                                                ~m
(2.15)                                             ~ ≤ V 0 (λ) ,
                                                Γ̂ w                  ∀m ∈ M.

Condition (2.14) requires the Agent to have the incentive to select λH ≥ λ while (2.15) ensures that she has
no incentive to carry out malfeasance. The reason for using a weak inequality in (2.14) is that it allows us to
sign the Lagrangian multiplier associated with this constraint (as shown below). From the Principal’s point
of view, having higher effort is desirable, and thus he would be willing to select the least expensive contract
that ensures the Agent chooses an effort λH that is at least as high as λ. In the Principal’s cost-minimizing
contract design problem, this constraint will bind.
   It is immediate that the set of wage vectors w~ that satisfy PC (2.11), ICE (2.14) and ICM (2.15) is convex.
The contract-design problem is finding a feasible contract ψ ∈ Ψ that minimizes the principal’s expected
cost:

(2.16)                        C (λ, ψ)     = ~Γ (λ) ~c = U A (ψ) + V (λ) + U o + ~Γ (λ) ~δ.

As will be shown, the unlimited liability assumption on the Agent allows us to always set U A (ψ) = 0 at the
optimal contract, even when there are truthful-reporting constraints to satisfy. Hence, the cost-minimizing
solution to implement λ entails finding a contract ψ that minimizes the expected social loss ~Γ (λ) ~δ.

2.4. Information Revelation and Authority. The timing of how information is revealed in our model
is an important determinant of how authority is allocated. Our notion of authority is different from Aghion
and Tirole (1997)20 and forms the basis for our model of “guile” in the Williamsonian sense. We consider

20In Aghion and Tirole (1997), formal authority is the right to veto decisions while real authority belongs to the party who has
the superior information. See also Baker et al. (1999).
                                                                 11
two natural information revelation arrangements. The first case is an authority relationship in which the
Principal reports his private signal t first and then the Agent responds with her report on s. We show that
this timing implies that all optimal allocations can be implemented with an authority contract in which the
Principal decides whether to pay bonuses or not, and then the Agent responds by imposing a conflict cost
upon the Principal.
   The second case we consider is a sales relationship, where the Agent reports her private signal s first and
then the Principal responds with his report on t. All optimal allocations in this case can be implemented
with a sales contract that has the Agent setting a price conditional upon only her information, followed by
the Principal responding with a conflict cost on the Agent when he feels that he has been overcharged.
   The sequence of moves for the contracting game is as follows:
    (1) The Principal offers a contract ψ ∈ Ψ to the Agent.
    (2) The Agent accepts, or selects her outside option value of U 0 .
    (3) If the contract is accepted, the Agent privately selects effort ~λ.
    (4) The outcomes o ∈ {L} ∪ {H} ∪ M are realized, which in turn generate private signals t and s for the
        Principal and the Agent respectively.
    (5) The timing of signal revelations are as follows:
         (a) Authority relationship: Principal reveals t first. Upon observing the Principal’s report, the
             Agent reveals s.
         (b) Sales relationship: Agent reveals s first. Upon observing the Agent’s report, the Principal
             reveals t.
    (6) The Principal pays out cts and the Agent receives wts according to the report ts ∈ S 2 .
At each stage parties are assumed to choose optimal strategies conditional upon having correct equilibrium
beliefs regarding how the other player will play. We follow the norms of contract theory, and assume that
the Principal can select his preferred sequential equilibrium. This means that we suppose he chooses his
preferred contract subject to the constraints characterizing optimal choices at each stage.

2.5. Benchmark Optimal Contract with Symmetric Information. Before we characterize the opti-
mal contracts with subjective evaluation, we first consider the case in which information is symmetric but
imperfect - that is, the parties’ information is verifiable by a third party. Here, in principle, the parties can
use the courts or an arbitrator to implement the contract. A goal here is to understand how the possibility
of malfeasance restricts contract formation in the absence of subjective evaluations, and how parties design
a contract to implement an effort λ. We emphasize that information is symmetric by terming contracts
here as enforceable contracts, as opposed to self-enforcing contracts in the next section where the parties’
information is private and contracts then have to provide incentives for parties to truthfully reveal their
information.
   Because there is no need to provide incentives for parties to reveal their information in this case, conflict
is unnecessary in an enforceable contract (~δ = ~0).21 This implies that cts = wts ∀ts ∈ S 2 , and we can thus
                                                                               2
let an enforceable contract be denoted by ψ E = {λ, w}   ~ ∈ ΨE ≡ [0, 1) × <n . An enforceable contract, ψ E ,
implements effort λ if it satisfies constraints PC (2.11), ICE (2.14) and ICM (2.15). The following proposition
provides the condition for the implementation of an effort λ under the full support condition (FSC):


21Through the paper, ~
                     0 and ~1 respectively denote a vector of all 0 and a vector of all 1.
                                                               12
Proposition 1. Suppose that the full support condition FSC holds at effort level λ. There exists an en-
forceable contract, ψ E ∈ ΨE , that implements λ if and only if the malfeasance-free condition (MFC) is
satisfied:
                                         ~
                                         n                       o
(2.17)                      M F =H++ Γ̂H ∩ ∩m∈M H+ ~ΓH − ~Γm           6= ∅.

Any wage vector w
                ~ that implements λ satisfies:

(2.18)                                        ~Γ (λ) w
                                                     ~   = U 0 + V (λ) ,
                                                 ~H
(2.19)                                           Γ̂ w~   = V 0 (λ),
                                                 ~m
(2.20)                                           Γ̂ w~   ≤ V 0 (λ), ∀m ∈ M.

   The Malfeasance-Free
                    n Condition  (MFC)
                                   o    in (2.17) is defined using the set of hyperplanes supporting
      n2   +            n2 T
~x ∈ < : H (~x) = ~y ∈ < |~x ~y ≥ 0 , where the superscript T denotes the transpose throughout this
paper. H++ is defined by replacing the weak inequality with a strict inequality.22
   Notice that the malfeasance-free condition (2.17) is independent of the effort choice. If malfeasance is
not possible (M = ∅), then a sufficient condition for the  existence  of a compensation scheme that induces
                                                         ++ ~ H
                                                                 
                                             23   H
effort is that the half-space (or blunt cone ) P = H          Γ̂   is non-empty. This in turn is equivalent to
                ~
requiring that Γ̂H 6= ~0. Hence, in the absence of malfeasance, an enforceable contract can be written as long
as there is even the slightest bit of information about the Agent’s performance.
   When malfeasance is possible (M 6= ∅), one then needs to ensure that the compensation scheme does not
encourage n malfeasance.
                      This requires
                                 o     that the wage vector w
                                                             ~ be in the following no-malfeasance pointed cone
  MF               + ~H      ~ m
P      = ∩m∈M H Γ − Γ               as well. Any wage vector in P M F sets the marginal reward to malfeasance
lower than that for the productive effort. This has some intuitive implications. Suppose that for each
malfeasance task m ∈ M, there is a state that is generated only by a “successful” outcome m but never
by H.24 If there is also some state other than these that provides information on outcome H, we can set
punishments in these states to make the marginal reward to malfeasance sufficiently low and hence deter
malfeasance. This implies:

Corollary 1. Suppose malfeasance is detectable; namely, for every m ∈ M, there exists a state tsm ∈ S 2
such that ΓH                m                                                            H
             tsm = 0 and Γtsm > 0. If there is also a state ts 6= tsm ∀m ∈ M such that Γ̂ts 6= 0, then for any
λ ∈ [0, 1), there exists an enforceable contract ψ E = {λ, w}
                                                           ~ ∈ ΨE that implements λ.

   With regard to the first-best effort level, from Proposition 1, it is immediate that the MFC condition
(2.17) provides conditions under which it can be implemented:

Corollary 2. Suppose that the FSC holds at the efficient effort level λF B . There exists an enforceable
contract ψ E ∈ ΨE that implements λF B if and only if the malfeasance-free condition (2.17) holds.

  Henceforth, we shall assume that condition MFC (2.17) is always satisfied so that any impossibility of
contract formation or any inefficiency that arises is not (solely) due to the presence of malfeasance.
22The set H+ is called a half-space when ~                                              2
                                         x 6= ~0. This is because H+ (~
                                                                      x) ∪ H++ (−~
                                                                                 x) = <n and H+ (~
                                                                                                 x) ∩ H++ (−~
                                                                                                            x) = ∅. More
generally, the intersection of a number of hyperplanes forms a convex polytope and represents the set of vectors that satisfies a
set of inequalities.
23A cone P ⊂ <n2 is any set with the feature that for all ~
                                                          x ∈ P , and any α > 0, α~x ∈ P . A cone is blunt if ~0 ∈
                                                                                                                 / P and pointed
if ~0 ∈ P .
24FSC can still be satisfied by allowing outcome L to generate all possible states with strictly positive probability.

                                                               13
                                              3. Subjective Evaluation

    In this section, we consider a Principal and an Agent who privately observe their signals, and derive the
necessary and sufficient conditions for the existence of an optimal contract under the authority and sale
relationships. As before, it is without loss of generality to consider only contracts that induce the Agent to
choose λH = λ > 0 with no malfeasance (λm = 0 ∀m ∈ M).
    Like the enforceable contracts considered in the previous section, a contract implementing λ must satisfy
constraints PC (2.11), ICE (2.14) and ICM (2.15). Moreover, because states ts are no longer verifiable by a
third-party, implementable contracts have to be self-enforcing in the sense that the Principal and the Agent
have an incentive to truthfully reveal their private information. We model this as in the relational contract
theory, and suppose that parties can impose punishments upon each other via a reduced-form relaxed budget
constraint (2.7). The cost and wage vectors of the contract completely determine the social conflict costs
due to these punishments at each state via (2.8).
    The non-triviality of the truthful-reporting constraints implies that conflict is necessary in general - there
are no contracts that implement positive effort with no conflict. To see why, consider an authority contract
in which the Agent gives her report on s only after observing the Principal’s report on t. Since t is known,
she will always report the signal that maximizes her wages. Hence, her truthful-reporting constraint can
only be satisfied if her wages are independent of her reports (see Lemma 2 below). But if her wages are
dependent on only the Principal’s reports and cts = wts ∀ts ∈ S 2 , then the Principal will always report the
signal that minimizes his cost. Hence, the truthful-reporting constraints are satisfied simultaneously only
when wages are independent of the information revealed, which in turn implies that it is optimal for the
Agent to supply no effort.25
    The theory of relational contracts was developed to model one way that parties implement efficient trade
with incomplete contracts. The idea is the following. In a repeated game there are many possible equilibria,
and parties can exploit this multiplicity by agreeing to play inefficient equilibria when one party is believed
to have breached an agreement. From a technical perspective, the only ingredients that the repeated game
structure adds are the ability of one party to impose conflict costs upon the other, and provide limits to the
magnitude of these costs.
    Within an organization, it is natural to have misunderstandings between individuals that may lead to
costly conflicts (Pondy (1967)). There is also some direct evidence on these conflict costs arising due to
contract disputes. Krueger and Mas (2004) and Mas (2008) provide evidence of disgruntled union workers
providing low quality effort that resulted in defective products. Similarly, Mas (2006) documents how an
unfavorable arbitration decision for a police union during wage bargaining in New Jersey is followed by an
increase in the local crime rate. These results provide concrete evidence that employees can and do respond to
perceived unfair treatment with actions that impose socially wasteful conflict costs upon the firm/Principal.
    In the context of optimal contracting with asymmetric information, these conflict costs are part of the
efficient contract design, an observation that goes back to Myerson and Satterthwaite (1983) and the repeated
game analysis of Green and Porter (1984). The fact that parties would like to avoid conflict allows us to
ignore the limits on the size of the conflict cost that is a central feature of the early literature on relational


25See MacLeod (2003) for a general proof for this point. The point that one cannot provide explicit incentives with two parties
under subjective evaluation has been observed by Carmichael (1983) and Malcomson (1984). The same idea explains why it is
not possible to have efficient and budget-balancing contracts in teams as pointed out by Holmström (1982) and Eswaran and
Kotwal (1984).
                                                              14
contracts. In this model we allow for conflict via the relaxed budget constraint (2.7) and derive the contract
that implements the agreed-upon effort λ with the least amount of expected conflict.
   The conflict in state ts is given by δts = cts − wts . Given that parties care only about their wage (wts ) or
cost (cts ), it follows that who imposes the conflict is indeterminate and thus we can choose who to impose
the cost in a way that is more convenient for the analysis. This is implied by the following result:

Lemma 1. In the absence of constraints on the size of the conflict ~δ, it is without loss of generality to
consider contracts where only one party (the Principal or the Agent) is inflicting the conflict.

   Lemma 1 is an extension of the result in MacLeod and Malcomson (1989), who show that under sufficient
gains from trade, there will be a continuum of possible contracts, from pure bonus-pay to an efficiency-wage,
that implement the optimal allocation.

3.1. The Authority Relationship. An authority relationship is one in which the Principal first reports
his subjective evaluation of the performance t. Upon observing the Principal’s report, the Agent responds
with her own report of s. Since effort is sunk and the performance has been realized, the Agent cares only
about her net compensation. Thus the Agent’s truthful-reporting constraint (ATR) is:

(3.1)                                     wts   ≥ wts0 , ∀t, s, s0 ∈ S.

This immediately implies:

Lemma 2. In an authority relationship, the Agent’s truthful-reporting constraint ATR (3.1) requires that
wts = wts0 ∀t, s, s0 ∈ S.

   In this case the Agent’s wages are independent of her report, which is a direct implication of having the
Principal report his information first. In order to provide incentives for the Principal to report truthfully, the
Agent must be able to inflict punishment on the Principal when the Agent feels that she is treated unfairly.
In this case, conflict is the “natural” consequence of differences in opinion. Given Lemma 1, it is without
loss of generality to let the Agent be the party who is inflicting all the conflict in an authority contract and
                               A
denote the conflict cost by δts  (A for authority).
   Under this behavior, wts varies only with t and not s. Thus, the authority contract can be defined by a
                                                                                 T
wage-price that varies only with the Principal’s report t, p~A = pA           A
                                                                    0 , ..., pn−1     ∈ <n , and wts ≡ pA
                                                                                                        t ∀t, s ∈ S.
The Agent then chooses to impose a conflict cost δts ≥ 0 on the Principal after she has received wage pA
                                                      A
                                                                                                              t and
                                                                 A
observes s. The net cost to the Principal in state ts is cts = δts  + pA t  ≥  pA
                                                                                t  . By assumption,  imposing  these
conflicts are at no cost to the Agent, and hence they do not affect the Agent’s truthful-reporting constraint
(3.1). We can integrate the Agent’s truthful-reporting constraint directly into the definition of an authority
contract by replacing the 1 × n2 wage vector w      ~ with the 1 × n wage-price vector p~A , and let the set of
authority contracts be given by:
                                        n           o                             2
                                  ψ A = λ, p~A , ~δA ∈ ΨA ≡ [0, 1) × <n × <n+ .

   The Principal’s truthful-reporting constraint (PTR) requires that conditional upon the Agent exerting the
effort obligation λ and upon observing a signal t ∈ S, he cannot reduce his costs by reporting a signal t0 6= t:
                                             !                          !
                               X                       X
(3.2)                     A
                         pt +              A       A
                                  qts (λ) δts − pt0 +      qts (λ) δt0 s ≤ 0, ∀t, t0 ∈ S,
                                                                    A

                               s∈S                        s∈S

where qts (λ) is the probability of state s given t, as defined in (2.5).
                                                         15
                                                                                                      2
Definition 2. The set of authority contracts that implements λ is defined by ΨA (λ) ⊂ <n × <n+ , where
                                                                                         ~
RBCn(2.7), PCo (2.11), ICE (2.14), ICM (2.15), ATR (3.1) and PTR (3.2) are satisfied for λ = [λ, 0, ..., 0] for
any p~A , ~δA ∈ ΨA (λ).



   Given that ΨA (λ) is defined by a set of linear inequalities, then if it is not empty, it must be a closed
and convex set. We can now state the program for finding the optimal authority contract with subjective
evaluation:


        Program-AC:

                                   
                                   min A A C λ, ψ A              , if ΨA (λ) 6= ∅
                            A∗         ψ ∈Ψ (λ)
(3.3)                      C (λ) =
                                    ∞                             , if ΨA (λ) = ∅.

   Notice that adding a constant, k, to each pA   t ∀t will not affect any of the incentive constraints. This
implies that under the unlimited liability assumption on the Agent, her participation constraint (PC) will
always bind at the optimum. Moreover, the Agent’s truthful-reporting constraint ATR (3.1) implies that
the Agent’s information cannot be used to provide effort incentives for the Agent, and hence the appropriate
malfeasance-free condition (2.17) for this case is:



Definition 3. The signal generating process satisfies the Strong Malfeasance-Free Condition (SMFC) if:
                                          
                           SM F = H++ ~γ̂ H ∩ ∩m∈M H+ ~γ H − ~γ m 6= ∅.
                                                                       
(3.4)



Proposition 2. Suppose that the full support condition FSC holds at λ. Then an optimal authority contract
implementing λ exists if and only if the Strong Malfeasance-Free Condition SMFC (3.4) holds.



  Since program-AC (3.3)nis a linear
                                   o program, the solution can be fully characterized by the Kuhn-Tucker
conditions. If a contract p~A , ~δA ∈ ΨA (λ) is a solution associated with an Agent’s outside option U 0
                                                                                 n            o
and Principal’s fixed gain from trade U P 0 , then for any k ∈ <, the contract p~A + k~1, ~δA will be a
solution associated with an Agent’s outside option U 0 + k and a Principal’s fixed gain from trade U P 0 + k.
Hence, without loss of generality, we can assume that U 0 and U P 0 are sufficiently high so that we may
restrict attention to only p~A ∈ <n+ ; p~A can be rescaled down later if necessary. The following proposition
characterizes the solution to program-AC (3.3) under this assumption:


                                                                                                n        o
Proposition 3. Suppose that the full support condition FSC holds at λ. A contract ψ A∗ = λ, p~A , ~δA is
an optimal authority contract implementing λ if and only if there exist non-negative Lagrangian multipliers
                      A(ICM )                                                 0         0
µA
 1 (for ICE (2.14)), µm        for m ∈ M (for ICM (2.15)), and µA tt0 for t, t ∈ S and t 6= t (for PTR (3.2))
such that:
                                                      16
                                                            A(ICM ) m
                               −µA   H
                                                                            + vtA = 0
                                             P
(3.5)                            1 γ̂t +         m∈M    µm         γ̂t                          , ∀t
                                                    A
(3.6)                                    Γts (λ) + vts  ≥0                                      , ∀t, s
                                       A
                                                      A
                                                         
(3.7)                                 δts  Γts (λ) + vts   =0                                   , ∀t, s
                                                                                                , ∀t, t0 6= t
                                                                         
                         pt + s∈S qts (λ) δts − pt0 + s∈S qts (λ) δtA0 s ≤ 0
                          A                 A      A
                              P                          P
(3.8)
                                                                                                , ∀t, t0 6= t
                          A P                                               
                    µA                        A
                                                  − pA                   A
                                                           P
(3.9)                tt0   pt + s∈S qts (λ) δts      t0 +   s∈S qts (λ) δt0 s    =0
(3.10)                                    ~γ̂ m p~A − V 0 (λ) ≤ 0                               , ∀m ∈ M
                                                 h                i
                                      A(ICM ) ~ m A
(3.11)                               µm            γ̂ p~ − V 0 (λ) = 0                          , ∀m ∈ M
(3.12)                                 V (λ) + U 0 − ~γ (λ)~
                                                           pA = 0
(3.13)                                    V 0 (λ) − ~γ̂ H p~A ≤ 0
                                           h                   i
                                        µA     0        ~ H ~A = 0
(3.14)                                   1 V (λ) − γ̂ p

where
                                                  X
                                      A
                                                            µA              A
                                                                                          
                                     vts     =               tt0 qts (λ) − µt0 t qt0 s (λ) ,
                                                  t0 6=t
                                                  X                X
                                     vtA                    A
                                                                     µA      A
                                                                                 
                                             =             vts =      tt0 − µt0 t .
                                                  s∈S              t0 6=t

Moreover, the expected social loss of implementation using the authority contract is:

(3.15)                                     LossA (λ) = ~Γ(λ)~δA = µA  0
                                                                   1 V (λ) ,

with LossA (λ) > 0 whenever λ > 0.

    (3.5) is the first-order condition for pA                                       A
                                            t ; it holds with equality because pt ≥ 0 ∀t. (3.6) and (3.7) are the
                                                              A
first-order and complementary slackness conditions for δts      . (3.8) and (3.9) are respectively constraint PTR
(3.2) and its complementary slackness condition. (3.10) and (3.11) are respectively constraint ICM (2.15)
and its complementary slackness condition. (3.12) is PC (2.11), and (3.13) and (3.14) are respectively the
ICE (2.14) and its complementary slackness condition.
                                                                                  A
    These conditions have some natural interpretations. Let µ         ~A
                                                                       PTR =       µtt0 t∈S,t0 ∈S/{t} be the vector of
Lagrange multipliers for PTR (3.2). Define the value of the Principal’s truthful-reporting constraint under
an optimal authority contract ψ A as:
                                      X X              h      X                          X                   i
               T C ψA , µ~A                        µA     A                A
                                                                              ) − (pA        qts (λ) δtA0 s ) .
                              
(3.16)                    PTR    =                  tt0 (pt +     qts (λ) δts       t0 +
                                     t∈S t0 ∈S/{t}                      s∈S                    s∈S

The marginal effect of conflict in state ts upon the constraints is given by:
                                                                    
                                           A       ∂T C ψ A , µ
                                                              ~A
                                                               PTR
(3.17)                                    vts =             A
                                                                      .
                                                         ∂δts
         A                    A
When vts   < 0, increasing δts  relaxes the truthful-reporting constraint. On the other hand, the direct marginal
                      A                                                                  A
cost of increasing δts is Γts (λ), the probability of state ts occurring. When Γts (λ)+vts > 0, the marginal cost
                 A                                                A                                       A
of increasing δts outweighs it marginal benefit and hence, δts should be made as small as possible (δts     = 0);
this is reflected in conditions (3.6) and (3.7). Conflict thus occurs only when the marginal benefit from
             A
conflict, −vts , is equal to the marginal cost, Γts (λ).
                                                                   17
  We can get a bit more insight into the optimal contract when the optimal contract is differentiable in an
open ball around some effort level λ.26 Let us also suppose that the no-malfeasance constraints ICM (2.15)
                                              A(ICM )
do not bind at the optimal contract so that µm        = 0 ∀m ∈ M. By the envelope theorem, we have:
                              d A∗             ∂ A A A
                                C (λ)       =     L ψ ,µ     ~
                             dλ               ∂λ
(3.18)                                      = V 0 (λ) + µA     00
                                                          1 V (λ)
                                                  X
(3.19)                                        +       Γ̂H   A
                                                        ts δts
                                                     t,s∈S
                                                     X       X              X ∂qts (λ)
                                                                     µA                   A
                                                                                             − δtA0 s .
                                                                                                     
(3.20)                                           +                    tt0                δts
                                                                                  ∂λ
                                                     t∈S t0 ∈S/{t}          s∈S

    Expression (3.18) is the effect upon C A∗ (λ) due to both the rising absolute (for PC (2.11)) and marginal
cost of effort (for ICE (2.14)). The next two lines concern how C A∗ (λ) changes with effort due to its effect
upon the probability of conflict at different states. In particular, expression (3.20) depends on the effect of
effort on the correlation between the parties’ signals.27
    Proposition 3 characterizes the optimal authority contract under the full support condition FSC at λ. In
the absence of the full support condition, it is possible that conflict never occurs in equilibrium, although
it must remain as part of the contract terms. For example, suppose that Γts (λ) = 0 whenever t 6= s. By
          A                                A
setting δts = 0 for all t = s and setting δts sufficiently large whenever t 6= s, the players’ truthful-reporting
constraints are satisfied immediately. Since t 6= s occurs with zero probability, the expected conflict is
zero and we get implementation without conflict on the equilibrium path, with µA        1 = 0. The full support
condition FSC implies that there is always some residual uncertainty and conflict in equilibrium then becomes
unavoidable. From (2.16), the inefficiency in any contract is due entirely to these conflicts.
    Next, since V (λ) is unbounded as λ → 1, there is a λmax satisfying λmax BH − V (λmax ) + U P 0 < U 0 and
V 0 (λmax ) > BH , such that the Principal will never choose to implement any λ > λmax . Thus, without loss
of generality, we can restrict the choice set for optimal effort to the closed set [0, λmax ]. In that case, if the
cost function is continuous in λ, then the optimal λ choice always exists.

Proposition 4. Suppose that the full support condition FSC holds for all λ ∈ [0, λmax ] and the Strong
Malfeasance-Free Condition SMFC (3.4) is satisfied. The solution to program-AC (3.3), C A∗ (λ), is contin-
uous in λ ∈ [0, λmax ].

    Given that the cost function is continuous, there exists a solution to the optimal effort choice: λA∗ ∈
                                                                                                         
arg maxλ∈[0,λmax ] U P 0 +λBH −C A∗ (λ) . The parties will then enter into an agreement ψ A λA∗ ∈ ΨA∗ λA∗
                                          
if and only if U P 0 + λA∗ BH − C A∗ λA∗ ≥ 0.


3.2. The Sales Relationship and Guile. Next, we consider contracting under a sales relationship. Here,
the Agent reports her performance evaluation s first, and then the Principal reports his evaluation t upon
observing the Agent’s report. This type of contract is natural in situations where the Agent is an expert


26In general, the solution to a linear program is not unique, which complicates sensitivity analysis. The contract can be unique
and continuous in parameters when the solution is at a regular extreme point of the constraint space. See Luenberger and Ye
(2008).
27In Supplementary Appendix B, we explore the case where the correlation between the signals is independent of effort. This
allows a clearer illustration on the effect of the correlation on the conflicts.
                                                               18
selling services to the Principal, such as expert advice. Analogous to ATR (3.1), the Principal’s truthful-
reporting constraint (PTR) in the sales relationship is:

(3.21)                                          cts   ≤ ct0 s ,        ∀t, t0 , s ∈ S.

This immediately implies:

Lemma 3. In a sales relationship, the Principal’s truthful-reporting constraint PTR (3.21) implies that
ct0 s = cts ∀t, t0 , s ∈ S.

   This corresponds to a sales contract whereby the Agent supplies a good or service to the Principal and
informs him about the expected quality s. The Principal then has to pay according to the Agent’s evaluation,
but if he feels that he is short-changed, he can respond by inflicting a punishment on the Agent to discipline
her. Hence, without loss of generality (Lemma 1), we let the Principal be the party imposing all the conflict
costs under a sales contract.
                                                                                              T
   Since cts varies only with s and not t, we define a cost-price vector p~S = pS0 , ..., pSn−1 ∈ <n (S for sales
contract) where cts ≡ pSs ∀t, s ∈ S.28 Given the conflict δts
                                                            S
                                                               imposed by the Principal on the Agent in state
ts, the wage of the Agent under a sales contract is then wts = pSs − δtsS
                                                                           ≤ pSs ∀t, s ∈ S. Thus, the set of sales
contracts that incorporate the Principal’s truthful-reporting constraint takes the form:
                                        n            o                        2
                                   ψ S = λ, p~S , ~δS ∈ ΨS ≡ [0, 1) × <n × <n+ .

Next, the Agent’s truthful-reporting constraint requires that after exerting effort λ and observing a signal
s ∈ S, she cannot increase her expected wages by reporting a signal s0 6= s. The Agent’s truthful-reporting
constraint (ATR) conditional upon λ are:
                                           !                          !
                             X                        X
(3.22)                  S
                       ps −              S       S
                                rts (λ) δts − ps0 −       rts (λ) δts0 ≥ 0, ∀s, s0 ∈ S,
                                                                   S

                                   t∈S                             t∈S
                           
where rts (λ) = P r t s, λ , as defined in (2.6).
   Unlike the authority contract, the Agent’s payoffs can depend on her report under the sales contract. This
introduces an additional form of opportunism because the Agent also has some control over the distribution
of both parties’ signals through her choice of effort ~λ. In particular, the Agent can deviate from the effort
obligation and then choose a (possibly) non-truthful reporting strategy to her advantage. We call this form
of opportunism guile because the Agent knowingly alters the signal-generating process via reneging on the
contractual effort terms, and then tries to cover it up by manipulating her reports accordingly.
   A bit of matrix notation is required to formally write the guile constraint. Let N be the linear mapping
               2                                       2
from <n to <n with the feature that ~c = N p~S ∈ <n , where cts = pSs ∀t, s ∈ S.29 We want to represent the
Agent’s state-contingent payoff as a mapping that depends on her reporting strategy. Since the dimension
                                                                                                             2
of the state space is n2 , we can view a reporting strategy, denoted by Π, as a linear transformation from <n

28Note that in the authority-relationship analysis, prices refer to wages, whereas prices refer to costs here. To avoid confusion,
one should think of a price vector p ~ as always a n × 1 vector while wage w,   ~ cost ~c and conflict ~
                                                                                                       δ are always n2 × 1 vectors.
Under the authority contract, the wage vector w  ~ has only n degree of freedom due to ATR and hence, we let the wage be prices
there. Under the sales contract, it is the cost vector ~c that has only n degree of freedom due to PTR and hence, we let the cost
be prices here.
29N is a n2 × n matrix with the property that N
                                                      I(ts),s = 1 ∀t, s ∈ S and 0 otherwise. It is intuitive to think about the
complete wage schedule as a n × n square matrix in the (t, s)-space where the rows are t and the columns are s. Since costs are
independent of t, every row of the square cost matrix is (~   ps )T . Hence the linear transformation of N is essentially extending
    T
 p ) along the row dimension before flattening it into a n2 × 1 column vector.
(~s

                                                                  19
      2
to <n as follows. A complete reporting strategy of the Agent can be represented by a n × n matrix π whose
entries are either 1 or 0, each row has exactly one entry of 1, and πss0 = 1 means that the Agent reports
state s0 when the true state is s; the truthful-reporting strategy is represented by the identity matrix I.30
The transformation from π to Π is then as follows: for any s, s0 ∈ S, ΠI(ts),I(ts0 ) = 1 ∀t ∈ S if πss0 = 1, and
0 otherwise. Given this, the state-contingent wage vector associated with reporting strategy Π is:
                                                                                  2
(3.23)                                         Πw
                                                ~     =    Π N p~S − ~δS ) ∈ <n .

   In the absence of guile, the truthful-reporting strategy can be checked signal by signal. However, when
there is guile, the Agent can consider an effort deviation to ~λg 6= [λ, 0, . . . , 0] and then optimally misreport
only some signals. The profitability of the deviation needs to be computed given the planned reporting
strategy. Let Z be the set of possible reporting strategies of the Agent. For an allocation to be guile-free,
it must be the case that the Agent cannot benefit from jointly deviating from the effort obligation and the
truthful-reporting strategy:
                                  n         o
Definition 4. A contract ψ S = λ, p~S , ~δS is guile-free (GF) if ∀~λg ∈ [0, 1)m̄+1 , ∀Π ∈ Z:
                                                                                   
(3.24)                 ~Γ(λ) N p~S − ~δS − V (λ) ≥ ~Γ ~λg Π N p~S − ~δS − V ~λg .

   The left-hand side of (3.24) is the Agent’s ex-ante expected payoff of adhering to the contract effort
obligation and then reporting truthfully; the right-hand side is her expected payoff under effort ~λg and then
using reporting strategy Π.31 Under an authority contract, Πw      ~ is constant for all Π ∈ Z and hence, this
constraint is already implied by the incentive constraint for effort ICE (2.14) and no-malfeasance ICM (2.15).
                                                                                                            2
Definition 5. The set of sales contracts that implement λ is defined by ΨS (λ) ⊂ <n ×<n+ where RBC (2.7),
                                                                                           ~
       n ICEo(2.14), ICM (2.15), ATR (3.22), PTR (3.21) and GF (3.24) are satisfied for λ = [λ, 0, ..., 0]
PC (2.11),
          S ~S      S
for any p~ , δ  ∈ Ψ (λ).

  For any λ, the set of guile-free contracts (3.24) is convex.32 Hence ΨS (λ) is a convex set when it is not
empty. The program for finding the optimal sales contract is:
      Program-SC:
                                         
                                         min S S C λ, ψ S                     , if ΨS (λ) 6= ∅
                                  S∗         ψ ∈Ψ (λ)
(3.25)                           C (λ) =
                                          ∞                                    , if ΨS (λ) = ∅.

It remains true here that adding a constant to pSs ∀s will not affect any of the constraints and hence, under
the unlimited liability assumption on the Agent, the Principal will always set PC to bind under the optimal
sales contract.

3.2.1. The Guile Constraint: Notice that when ~λg in the guile constraint (3.24) is replaced by the contract
effort obligation, we have ATR (3.22). Also, when Π is replaced by the identity matrix (but allowing ~λg
30Throughout the paper, I denotes the identity matrix (with the appropriate dimension).
                                                         n      o
31In essence, the Agent’s ex-ante strategy here is a pair     ~λg , Π . This is related to the notion of “manipulative strategy”
in Myerson (1986). Myerson studies dynamic games where agents receive private information along the game and there is
communication with a mediator who helps to coordinate the players’ actions. Incentive compatibility there then requires each
player to have no profitable manipulative strategy via jointly mis-reporting her information and then disobeying the mediator’s
prescribed action.
32For each λ, the set of {~pS , ~
                                δ S } satisfying (3.24) for any ~λg and Π is convex, and the infinite intersection of convex sets is
convex.
                                                                20
to vary now), (3.24) implies ICE (2.14) and ICM (2.15). Hence the guile constraint (3.24) subsumes the
Agent’s truthful-reporting constraint and her incentive-compatibility constraint for effort obligation and
no-malfeasance.
   The representation in (3.24) implies that the guile constraint is an infinite set of inequalities due to the
need for (3.24) to be satisfied for all ~λg ∈ [0, 1)m̄+1 . This can be reduced to a finite set of inequalities by
observing that the Agent’s optimal choice of effort conditional upon her reporting strategy is unique. Since
the number of reporting strategies is finite, we then only have to check a finite number of inequalities under
the hypothesis that the Agent anticipates how she will report.
   To be precise, we first define the optimal effort function Λ : < → [0, 1) as:
                                                
                                                (V 0 )−1 (y) , if y > V 0 (0),
(3.26)                             Λ (y) =
                                                0              , if y ≤ V 0 (0).

          ~
Let y = Γ̂τ Πw~ denote the effort incentives for task τ under reporting strategy Π; Λ(y) thus defines the
Agent’s optimal effort level to be exerted on task τ . Next, given any wage vector w
                                                                                   ~ and reporting strategy
                                                             ∗      33
Π, it is optimal for the Agent to load all effort onto task τ where:
                                                                                 ~τ
(3.27)                                          τ ∗ (Πw)
                                                      ~    =   arg     max       Γ̂ Πw.
                                                                                     ~
                                                                      τ ∈{H}∪M

We can now define the “guile function”. Let

(3.28)                                           g̃(y) ≡ Λ (y) y − V (Λ(y)) .

It is readily verified that g̃ is strictly increasing and strictly convex for y > V 0 (0).34 The guile-function is
                       2
defined as g : Z × <n → <, where:
                                                          ~
                                                          ∗          
(3.29)                                             ~ = g̃ Γ̂τ (Πw)
                                             g(Π, w)             ~
                                                                   Πw~ .

Notice that ∀~λg = [λgH , λg1 , . . . , λgm̄ ] ∈ [0, 1)m̄+1 and for any Π ∈ Z, we have:
                                                                        ~
                                                             X                     
                                          g(Π, w)~     ≥                     ~ − V ~λg .
                                                                    λgτ Γ̂τ Πw
                                                           τ ∈{H}∪M

Thus we have the following result:

                                                                                                          S
Proposition
n            o 5. The guile constraint (3.24) consists of a finite set of inequalities. A sales contract ψ =
 λ, p~S , ~δS ∈ ΨS satisfies (3.24) for effort obligation λ if and only if:

(3.30)                                 ~Γ(λ)w
                                            ~ − V (λ) ≥ ~ΓL Πw
                                                             ~ + g(Π, w),
                                                                      ~              ∀Π ∈ Z

      ~ = N p~S − ~δS . ICE (2.14), ICM (2.15), ATR (3.22) are also satisfied when (3.30) is satisfied.
where w

   Since program-SC (3.25) is a convex program with a finite number of constraints, its solutions can be
characterized by the Kuhn-Tucker conditions. The following proposition provides
                                                                        n       oan existence result for the
                                                                          S ~S
                                               S
optimal sales contracting problem. Let G(λ) ⊂ Ψ be the set of contracts p~ , δ    such that w~ = N p~S − ~δS
satisfies (3.30) for effort obligation λ.


33If there are more than one tasks that achieves the maximum, then pick the task with the lowest index with H indexing 0.
34Λ is differentiable for y > V 0 (0). By the envelope theorem, g̃ 0 (y) = Λ(y) > 0. Hence g̃ 00 (y) = Λ0 (y) =    1
                                                                                                                         > 0; the more
                                                                                                                V 00 (y)
convex V is, the less is the convexity of g̃.
                                                                 21
Proposition 6. Suppose that the full support condition FSC holds at λ. There exists an optimal sales
contract that implements λ if and only if the set G(λ) is non-empty.

  Whenever the optimal sales contract exists, analogous to (3.15), we define the expected social loss of
implementing effort λ under the sales contract as:

(3.31)                                       Loss (λ) = ~Γ (λ) ~δS ,
           n            o
where ψ S = λ, p~S , ~δS is an optimal sales contract.

3.2.2. The Relaxed-Sales Contracting Problem: Before proceeding further, it is useful to define a relaxed-
version of the sales contracting problem that considers only the ex post constraints, as in the case of the
authority contract. In the Supplementary Appendix B, we use this relaxed problem to derive a “duality”
relationship between the authority and the sales contract. In section 4, we compare the optimal sales contract
with the optimal relaxed-sales contract; this allows us to illustrate when the set of guile-free sales contracts
is strictly smaller than the set of sales contracts that satisfy only the Agent’s truthful-reporting constraints.
                                                                                                                2
Definition 6. The set of relaxed-sales contracts that implement λ is defined by ΨSR (λ) ⊂ <n × <n+ , where
                                                                                           ~
       n PC o(2.11), ICE (2.14), ICM (2.15), ATR (3.22) and PTR (3.21) are satisfied for λ = [λ, 0, ..., 0]
RBC (2.7),
          S ~S      SR
for any p~ , δ ∈ Ψ (λ).

   The relaxed-sales program is:
      Program-SC-R:
                                      
                                      min SR SR C λ, ψ SR                 , if ΨSR (λ) 6= ∅
                            SR∗           ψ ∈Ψ (λ)
(3.32)                    C     (λ) =
                                       ∞                                   , if ΨSR (λ) = ∅.
3.3. Authority or Sales Contract: Complexity Considerations. Besides the potential efficiency gains
from using one contract over another, there is also the practicality concern of writing each contract. The
presence of the guile constraint in the sales contract makes it potentially more complex than writing an
authority contract. We provide a heuristic comparison of complexity between the two contracts by considering
the number of incentive constraints that each contract has to satisfy.

            Table 1. Number of Constraints for the Authority and Sales Contracting Problems

                            Number of Signals Authority Contract Sales Contract
                                   2               2+m+2                4
                                   5              20+m+2              3125
                                  10              90+m+2           10 billion


   For a signal space of size n with m possible malfeasance tasks, the authority contracting problem has a
total of n2 − n + m + 2 constraints to satisfy.35 On the other hand, from Proposition 5, the sales contract
has only the guile and participation constraints to satisfy. The number of constraints associated with the
guile constraint is the number of possible deviating reporting strategy which is given by |Z| − 1 = nn − 1.
Together with PC (2.11), there are thus a total of nn constraints. This implies that as n increases, the

35There are m constraints for ICM (2.15), 1 for ICE (2.14), n(n − 1) truth-telling constraints for PTR (3.2), and 1 for PC
(2.11).
                                                           22
number of constraints for the sales contracting problem increases exponentially faster than that for the
authority contracting problem.
    Table 1 illustrates the point that there is a profound effect upon the constraint space and complexity
by merely changing the order of information revelation in a Principal-Agent problem. Moreover, this has
not taken into account that the authority contracting problem is linear while the sales contracting problem
is non-linear because of the guile constraint; we know that algorithms for solving linear programs are very
efficient in general. This complexity observation is consistent with the intuition of Williamson (1975) that
guile and opportunism have serious implications for organizational design. Besides this apparent complexity,
the guile constraint by itself can be very restrictive on the feasible set of contracts. We study this in more
detail in section 4

3.4. Informed-Principal and Expert-Agent. Our general information structure covers the special cases
which we call the “informed-Principal ” and the “expert-Agent” environments.

Definition 7. The information structure is an informed-Principal (IP) environment if for all outcomes
o ∈ {L} ∪ {H} ∪ M, the probability of each state occurring can be represented by Γots = γto qts ∀t, s ∈ S,
where γto = s∈S Γots , and qts = P r[s|t] is the conditional probability of the Agent observing signal s when
            P

the Principal observes t.

   This implies that Γts (λ) = γt (λ)qts ∀λ, and the conditional probability qts , as defined in (2.5), is inde-
pendent of the Agent’s effort. The IP environment includes the information structure of cases where the
Agent has no information about the performance (Levin (2003) and Fuchs (2007)), and also cases where
the Agent’s information is a noisy signal of the Principal’s information (MacLeod (2003), Chan and Zheng
(2011) and Maestri (2012)).
   The flipped side of the IP environment is the expert-Agent environment:

Definition 8. The information structure is an expert-Agent (EA) environment if for all outcomes o ∈
{L} ∪ {H} ∪ M, the probability of each state occurring can be represented by Γots = βso rts ∀t, s ∈ S, where
βso = t∈S Γots , and rts = P r[t|s] is the conditional probability of the Principal observing signal t when the
     P

Agent observes s.

   The EA environment corresponds to models of “credence goods” (Darby and Karni (1973), Emons (1997)
and Dulleck and Kerschbamer (2006)), such as contracting for expert advice from physicians and consultants.
   A detailed analysis of the IP and EA contracting environments is provided in Supplementary Appendix
B. There, we show that in the EA environment, the set of optimal sales contracts corresponds to the set of
optimal relaxed-sales contracts. This illustrates that the problem of guile in the sales contract is not merely
an issue of asymmetric information, but arises in conjunction with the Agent’s ability to manipulate the
Principal’s information flow.
   We also develop a duality relationship between the authority and sales contracts. This relationship arises
because after the parties observe their private information, they are effectively playing a zero-sum game in
which the payoffs are determined by the correlation between their signals. We show that every optimal sales
contract in an EA environment can be mapped to an optimal authority contract in the dual IP environment.
However, despite the apparent symmetry in information structure between the EA and IP environments, the
optimal sales contract in the EA environment is not perfectly symmetric to the optimal authority contract in
the IP environment. This illustrates a difference in how information is utilized in the two types of contracts:
                                                       23
the authority contract uses only the Principal’s information to provide effort incentives for the Agent, whereas
the sales contract uses both the Agent’s and the Principal’s information to provide effort incentives.
   Finally, an important theme in organizational economics is the role of authority in the presence of asym-
metric information. A number of papers have developed the intuition that authority should be given to the
party with the superior information.36 We use the IP and EA environments to illustrate that this is not
necessarily the case here. When the cardinality of the signal space is greater than 2, it is possible that the
authority contract is more efficient than the sales contract in the EA environment in which the Agent has
the superior information about the performance, and vice versa. Existing models on credence goods typi-
cally consider only binary signals, and MacLeod (2003) has also shown that the authority contract is always
more efficient than the sales contract in the IP environment with only 2 signals.37 However, in practice,
parties to an agreement have access to a large number of signals of performance, ranging from peer reports
to random monitoring. These results illustrate that adding more signals is not an insignificant extension of
the Principal-Agent model.


                                                         4. Guile

    We now study the issue of guile in the sales contract in more detail. We begin with two examples to
illustrate the detrimental effects of guile on the efficiency of the sales contract. Section 4.1 considers a
2-signal, no-malfeasance and incentive-neutral (to be defined) environment. We solve for both the optimal
authority and sales contracts there and show that the guile constraint has an adverse effect on both the
complexity and efficiency of the contract. Next, section 4.2 provides an example illustrating the interplay
of guile and malfeasance. In that example, pure guile does not worsen the inefficiency of the sales contract
but it does restrict the contract form, while pure malfeasance also has no effect by itself. However, when
guile interplays with malfeasance, both efficiency and contract form are affected. We then provide a general
analysis of guile in section 4.3 and provide some general conditions under which guile is a binding constraint.

4.1. Example 1: Incentive-Neutral Information Structure with Two Signals. We put aside malfea-
sance (let M = ∅) and consider a simple example with two signals. Suppose that S = {U, E} with U denoting
an “unacceptable” performance, and E for an “excellent” performance. We assume full support in the low
outcome, ΓL ts ∈ (0, 1) ∀t, s ∈ {U, E}, with an incentive-neutral information structure where:

(4.1)                                    Γ̂H      H             H
                                           EU = Γ̂U E = 0 and Γ̂EE = ρ > 0.

This then implies that Γ̂HU U = −ρ. Such a signal structure is fully parametrized by ρ under the restriction
                                                           < 1.38 The incentive-neutral assumption means
                                                        
that: 0 < Γ̂EE = −Γ̂U U = ρ < min ΓL
            H           H                             L
                                           U U , 1 − ΓEE
that the Agent’s effort incentives are generated only via payments at states where the players agree on the
outcome. We will solve for optimal authority and sales contracts that implement an effort λ > 0 for a fixed
value of ρ.

36Gibbons (1987) illustrates that when the uninformed Principal has authority, it gives rise to an inefficient outcome and more
conflict. Kanemoto and MacLeod (1992) show that this can be solved by allocating power to the informed agent. Milgrom (1988)
makes this point regarding discretion in an organization, while Aghion and Tirole (1997) highlight the role that information
plays in determining real authority.
37See the appendix of MacLeod (2003).
38This restriction ensures that the probability distribution of the states under the high outcome ~
                                                                                                  ΓH is well-defined and given
     H     H      L              2
by Γts = Γ̂ts + Γts ∀ts ∈ {U, E} .
                                                              24
4.1.1. Optimal Authority Contract. Let wU and wE be the wages for the Agent when the Principal reports
U and E respectively under the authority contract. ICE (2.14) implies:

                                                ρwE − ρwU = V 0 (λ)
                                                                   V 0 (λ)
                                       =⇒     bA ≡ wE − wU =          ρ .

The low payment wU is then pinned down by the binding PC (2.11):

                                      wU + P r [t = E] bA − V (λ) − U 0 = 0
                                                                         V 0 (λ)
                            =⇒     wU = V (λ) + U 0 − ΓL       L
                                                        EU + ΓEE + λρ        ρ .

    The conflict vector ~δA is determined by the Principal’s truthful reporting constraint PTR (3.2). One can
verify that PTR is more stringent when the Principal sees an excellent performance (t = E), but wants to
lie that the performance is unacceptable to save on paying the bonus bA . To deter this, conflict has to occur
at state U E where the Principal believes performance is unacceptable but the Agent disagrees with this
assessment. The PTR constraint at t = E is:
                                                                                          
                          ΓL       L
                           EU + ΓEE + λρ     wU + bA ≤ ΓL               L
                                                           EU wU + ΓEE + λρ
                                                                                         A
                                                                                   wU + δU E
                                                                               0
                                           ΓL    L
                                                                       ΓL
                                                               
                                    A       EU +ΓEE +λρ A                      V (λ)
                 =⇒                δU E ≥     ΓL +λρ
                                                       b    =    1 + ΓL
                                                                        EU
                                                                          +λρ    ρ .
                                              EE                          EE


The optimal contract requires conflict to be as low as possible, and hence the above constraint must bind.
From this, the total expected deadweight-loss under an authority contract is:
                                                                           0
                                                                   ΓL
                                                                                   
                                                                              V (λ)
(4.2)                 LossA(in) (λ) = ΓL     δ
                                          UE UE
                                               A
                                                  =  Γ L
                                                       UE   1 +     EU
                                                                 ΓL
                                                                  EE + λρ       ρ
4.1.2. Optimal Relaxed-Sales Contract. Before considering the optimal sales contract, we first consider the
optimal relaxed-sales contract (solution to program-SC-R (3.32)), and then illustrate how guile constrains
it. Let cU and cE be the costs that the Principal pays when the Agent reports U and E respectively. One
can verify that since ρ > 0, the Agent’s truthful-reporting constraint ATR (3.22) is more stringent at s = U ;
that is, when she observes that her performance is unacceptable but wants to report that it is excellent to
get a higher price. To deter this behavior, conflict needs to occur at state U E where the Agent claims that
her performance is excellent but the Principal believes otherwise. Under these observations, the Agent’s ICE
(2.14) is:

                                                   ρcE − ρcU = V 0 (λ)
                                                               V 0 (λ)
(4.3)                               =⇒      bSR ≡ cE − cU =       ρ      = bA .

   The Agent’s truthful-reporting constraint ATR (3.22) at s = U is:
                                                                       
                            ΓL            L           L
                             U U − λρ + ΓEU cU ≥ ΓU U − λρ
                                                                      SR
                                                                cE − δU          L
                                                                        E + ΓEU cE
                                        ΓL        L
                                                                   ΓL      V 0 (λ)
                                                                        
                                SR       U U −λρ+ΓEU SR
(4.4)               =⇒         δU E ≥      ΓL −λρ
                                                    b    = 1 + ΓL EU −λρ      ρ
                                              UU                           UU


Setting this to bind gives the optimal relaxed-sales contract. The term ΓL    SR
                                                                         U E δU E is the expected deadweight
                                                                                               ΓL         ΓL
loss of the optimal relaxed-sales contract, and it is greater than LossA(in) (λ) in (4.2) if ΓL EU    > ΓL EU   .
                                                                                              U U −λρ    EE +λρ
Since the optimal relaxed-sales contract must be weakly more efficient that the optimal sales contract with
the guile constraint considered, we have:


                                                         25
Proposition 7. Under the incentive-neutral information structure (4.1), the optimal authority contract is
                                                                ΓL     L
                                                                 U U −ΓEE
more efficient than the optimal sales contract whenever λ >         2ρ    .

   This suggests that the authority contract is better than the sales contract when the effort obligation λ is
higher than the ratio of the information content of the low signal (ΓL            L
                                                                          U U − ΓEE ) relative to the high signal
(2ρ). In particular, if the ratio is negative, then it is never optimal to use a sales contract.


4.1.3. Optimal Sales Contract. Solving for the optimal authority and the optimal relaxed-sales contracts
here has been relatively easy. We consider the optimal sales contract with the guile constraint considered
now. We first show that the optimal relaxed-sales contract derived above is not guile-free and then illustrate
the additional layers of complexity that the guile constraint presents.
   To take into account guile (3.30), we have to consider all possible deviating reporting strategies of the
Agent, each of which is represented by a matrix Π as described in (3.23). We denote the Agent’s three
possible deviating reporting strategies by:

        • Π1 : always report E.
        • Π2 : always report U .
        • Π3 : always mis-report (reports E when sees U , and reports U when sees E).

 The truthful-reporting strategy is denoted by the identity matrix I.
    To see why the optimal relaxed-sales sales contract in (4.3) and (4.4) is not guile-free, we first let w ~ SR
 be the Agent’s wage vector under the optimal relaxed-sales contract. The Agent chooses her effort level in
 anticipation of the reporting strategy that she uses later. Her expected payoff for reporting strategy Π is
~ΓL Πw
                       
      ~ SR + g Π, w
                  ~ SR where the guile function g is defined in (3.29). Under w~ SR , the effort incentives under
                                    ~                                                        ~
 the truthful-reporting strategy is Γ̂H I w
                                          ~ SR = ρbSR . The effort incentives under Π1 is Γ̂H Π1 w  ~ SR = ρδUSR
                                                                                                               E.
 We then have:
                       ~ΓL w       ~                                   ~
(4.5)                      ~ SR + λΓ̂H w
                                       ~ SR − V (λ)   = ~ΓL Π1 w
                                                               ~ SR + λΓ̂H Π1 w
                                                                              ~ SR − V (λ)
                                                      < ~ΓL Π1 w
                                                               ~ SR + g Π1 , w
                                                                             ~ SR .
                                                                                 
(4.6)

The equality in (4.5) follows from the binding ATR at U under the optimal relaxed-sales contract. This
implies that, conditional on exerting the effort obligation λ, the Agent’s expected payoff under Π1 is the
same as that under the truthful-reporting strategy. The strict inequality in (4.6) follows from bSR 6= δU  SR
                                                                                                            E;
this implies that Π1 and the truthful-reporting strategy have different effort incentives and hence, the Agent
can do better by using an effort level that is different from λ under Π1 .
   We now compute a sales contract that is guile-free against Π1 . Notice that under the optimal sales
           S
contract, δEE  will be 0, since the highest payoff for the Agent is at state EE. Let bS ≡ cE − cU > 0; the
optimal sales contract must then take the following form:



    Agent’s Wage:
                        s=U           s=E
                            S
          t=U         cU − δU U   cU + bS − δU
                                             S
                                               E
                            S              S
          t=E         cU − δEU       cU + b
                                                        26
  Let w~ denote the Agent’s wage vector under this sales contract. Consider the Agent’s truthful-reporting
constraint ATR (3.22) at U :
                                                                                                
            ΓL
             U U − λρ
                              S
                        cU − δU       L        S          L
                                U + ΓEU cU − δEU ≥ ΓU U − λρ         cU + bS − δU
                                                                                S      L
                                                                                  E + ΓEU cU + b
                                                                                                   S

                                             S                                  
   ⇐⇒                         0 ≥ ΓLU U − λρ  b + δUS       S       L    S
                                                      U − δU E + ΓEU b + δEU
                                                                              S


Since ΓL                                      S   S      S
       EU > 0, this necessarily implies that b + δU U − δU E < 0 and hence:

                                             S
(4.7)                                       δU E   >    bS + δU
                                                              S
                                                                U > 0.

                                          ~
   Next, the effort incentive for Π1 is Γ̂H Π1 w~ = ρδUS
                                                         E , and the effort incentives for the truthful-reporting
            ~H                                                              ~
                                                                                ~ = V 0 (λ), and (4.7) then implies
                                 
               ~ = ρ b + δU U . The Agent’s ICE (2.14) requires that Γ̂H w
strategy is Γ̂ w       S      S

      ~         ~
                                                                                        
that Γ̂H Π1 w       ~ > V 0 (0). Hence g (I, w)
            ~ > Γ̂H w                         ~ = g̃ Γ̂H w
                                                         ~ and g (Π1 , w)~ = g̃ Γ̂H Π1 w  ~ , where g̃ is defined in
(3.28). For the contract to be guile-free against Π1 , it is required that:
                                                                             
(4.8)                            ~ΓL w
                                     ~ + g̃ Γ̂H w
                                                ~    ≥ ~ΓL Π1 w ~ + g̃ Γ̂H Π1 w
                                                                              ~ ,

where:
                        ~ΓL w   = cU − ΓL    S      L   S      L   S   S      L   S
                                                                          
(4.9)                       ~           U U δU U − ΓEU δEU + ΓU E b − δU E + ΓEE b ,
                     ~ΓL Π1 w   = cU + ΓL        L
                                                     S     S
                                                                    L    L
                                                                             S
(4.10)                      ~            U U + ΓU E   b − δU  E + ΓEU + ΓEE b .

                 S
   Notice that δEU  decreases ~ΓL w
                                  ~ but does not affect ΓL Π1 w
                                                              ~ nor the effort incentives of both Π1 and the
truthful-reporting strategy. Hence the most efficient way to maintain guile-free against Π1 entails setting
 S         S         S
δEU  = 0. δU U and δU E are then set to minimize the expected inefficiency:
                                                    S
(4.11)                                   ΓL                  L   S
                                          U U − λρ δU U + ΓU E δU E ,

while ensuring that the guile constraint against Π1 (4.8) holds.
   We relegate the rest of the details to Supplementary Appendix C.1. It is shown there that if:
                                                       2
(4.12)                                ΓL          S
                                       U U − Λ ρδU E ρ      ≥ ΓL      L
                                                                 U E ΓEU ,

             S
                                                                          S
where Λ ρδU    E is the optimal effort exerted under effort incentives ρδU E (see (3.26)), then the expected
                                             S      S            S
inefficiency (4.11) is minimized by setting δU U = δEU = 0, and δU E to satisfy:
                                                                                   V 0 (λ)
                               S      L     S
                                                   = g̃ (V 0 (λ)) − ΓL      L
                                  
(4.13)                    g̃ ρδU E − ΓU U δ U E                      U U + ΓEU              .
                                                                                       ρ
             0
with bS = V ρ(λ) .
    Although this sales contract is guile-free against Π1 , we still need to consider if it is also guile-free against
                                     S
both Π2 and Π3 . Moreover, when δU     E gets too high, the Agent’s truthful-reporting constraint at E might be
violated in which case, we might need to add conflict at state U U or EU . Without the explicit probabilities
and cost function, it is in general very difficult to determine if this sales contract is indeed feasible. This
illustrates that even in such a simple 2-signal environment, the issue of guile itself dramatically increases
the complexity of the design of sales contracts, which in turn may explain why it is so difficult to design
compensation schemes in sales relationship in practice! Nevertheless, we provide sufficient conditions for the
above contract to be feasible and hence optimal.



                                                         27
Proposition 8. Consider the 2-signal incentive-neutral information structure with effort obligation λ.
                                   0
Consider the sales contract bS = V ρ(λ) , δU
                                           S      S        S                   o             L   S
                                             U , δEU = 0, δU E > 0 and cU = U + V (λ) + ΓU E δU E −
                 
 ΓL      L         S                                                 S
  U E + ΓEE + λρ b . Suppose that the following four conditions for δU E hold:
         S
    (1) δU E satisfies (4.13), and (4.12) holds.
                            
    (2) ΓL         L
           U E +ΓEE n + λρ bS − o
                                  ΓL     S              o
                                    U E δU E − V (λ) − U ≥ 0.
         S                 ΓL
    (3) δU E ≤ min 1 +
                            EE
                           ΓL
                                × bS .
                               ,2
                           UE                 S
    (4) ΓL      L
         U E + ΓEE   + λρ cU ≤ ΓL      L            L    S
                                U E + ΓEE + λρ b − ΓU E δU E .

  Then this sales contract is optimal.

   The proof of Proposition 8 is in Supplementary Appendix C.1. Condition 1 of Proposition 8 characterizes
the optimal sales contract that is guile-free against Π1 . Conditions 2 and 3 are respectively sufficient
conditions that ensure that the contract is guile-free against Π2 and Π3 , while condition 4 is the ATR at E.
   What is particularly interesting about this result is that guile manifests itself with higher effort: the
reporting strategy Π1 in which guile binds induces the Agent to exert a higher effort level than the contract
obligation λ. This nicely fits into the example of the healthcare industry where there is a concern that
physicians might provide unnecessary procedures.
   The final question we address with this example is under what conditions will a sales contract be preferred
to an authority contract. Given that characterizing the optimal sales contract requires more information
about the explicit cost function, a general result that depends only upon the signal probabilities is not
possible. However, when the optimal sales contract takes the form characterized in Proposition 8, the
comparison is feasible. Moreover, from Proposition 7, the authority contract is always better with high
effort. Thus we only have to consider low effort levels:

Proposition 9. Suppose that V 0 (0) > 0. Let LossS(in) (λ) be the expected inefficiency of the sales contract
that satisfies the conditions in Proposition 8. If ΓL      L
                                                    U U > ΓEE , there exists  > 0 such that Loss
                                                                                                  S(in)
                                                                                                        (λ) <
     A(in)
Loss       (λ) for all λ ∈ (0, ).

   Recall from Proposition 7 that under neutral incentives, ΓL               L
                                                                   U U > ΓEE is a necessary condition for the
sales contract to be more efficient than the authority contract. Thus Proposition 9 illustrates that when
this necessary condition is satisfied, the sales contract is more efficient than the authority contract when the
effort obligation is sufficiently low.

4.2. Example 2: The Interplay of Guile and Malfeasance. We now consider an example that includes
malfeasance and show that the interplay between guile and malfeasance can lead to changes in both the
efficiency and form of the optimal sales contract. The detailed computations for this example are found in
Supplementary Appendix C.2.
    Suppose there are three possible signals now: S = {U, A, E}, where the signals U and E represent “unac-
ceptable” and “excellent” as before, and A represents a moderate signal that the performance is “acceptable”.
Representing the signal distribution via a 3 × 3 matrix in the (t, s)-space, we assume that the distribution
of states under outcomes L and H are respectively:
                                                                                       
                       ε ε ε                   0 0 0                          −ε −ε −ε
              ΓL =  ε η ε  ΓH =  0 η 0  ,                 =⇒ Γ̂H =  −ε 0 −ε  ,
                                                                                       

                      ε   ε   0               0   0   7ε                        −ε −ε      7ε
                                                       28
where the signals U , A, E are indexed in this order from top to bottom and left to right, with the assumption
that 0 < ε < η(= 1 − 7) < 7ε.39 We consider implementing an effort level λ > 0 with a sales contract in
this setting in the absence of malfeasance first. Notice that all states except for (A, A) and (E, E) indicate
that the outcome is more likely to be the low outcome L. Hence incentives should only be provided when s
is A or E.
   It can be verified that in the absence of malfeasance, a bonus is required to be given only when s = E.
To deter the Agent from constantly reporting E to obtain this bonus which we denote by bE , there must be
                                                                                   S      S
conflict when the Agent reports E while the Principal reports otherwise (i.e. δU     E , δAE > 0). Ignoring the
guile constraint for the moment, the optimal relaxed-sales contract minimizes the expected inefficiency due
     S         S
to δU  E and δAE , subject to the Agent’s truthful-reporting constraint ATR (3.22). This is achieved by the
set:
                             n                                              o
                                 S    S      S             S      S
(4.14)                        {δAE , δU E } δAE ≥ bE and δAE + δU E = 3bE ,

where bE is then pinned down by ICE (2.14).
   We consider the Agent’s guile constraint now. Recall the argument in (4.6) in the previous example that a
sales contract can be susceptible to guile if there is another reporting strategy that gives the Agent different
effort incentives than the truthful-reporting strategy. Under the contract in (4.14), if the Agent were to
report E when she actually observes U , her effort incentive is altered by an amount of:
                                                   S               S
(4.15)                                    −ε(bE − δU E ) − ε(bE − δAE ) − εbE .

This extra (dis-)incentive is 0 and hence is not a problem. But if the Agent were to report E when she
actually observes s = A, her effort incentive is altered by an amount of:
                                   S               S                         S
(4.16)                    −ε(bE − δU E ) − 0(bE − δAE ) − εbE     = −ε(bE − δU E ) − εbE .

                                           S
This extra (dis-)incentive is non-zero if δU E 6= 2bE , which will then alter the Agent’s effort incentive. In this
case, the Agent might benefit from decreasing effort slightly from the effort obligation λ and then reporting
E whenever she receives s = A.
                                                                                                             S
   To ensure that the Agent’s guile constraint is always satisfied, we need to shift some conflict from δAE      to
 S
δU E . In particular, setting:
                                                  S          S
(4.17)                                           δAE = bE , δU E = 2bE

satisfies (4.14) and will always be guile-free since the difference in effort incentives from the truthful-reporting
strategy is always 0 for (4.17). This illustrates how guile can restrict the type of sales contract observed,
even though there are other contracts (any contract that satisfies (4.14)) that achieves the same level of
efficiency in the absence of guile.
    Suppose now that there is also a seemingly “harmless” malfeasance task m with distribution of states
given by:                                                          
                                                          0 0 0
                                                Γm =  0 0 0 
                                                                   

                                                          1 0 0
Conditional on a “successful” malfeasance outcome m, the state is (E, U ) with certainty; that is, the Principal
believes that the performance is excellent while the Agent knows that it is unacceptable. This malfeasance
39In particular, this implies 7/14 >  > 1/14.

                                                           29
task is “harmless” because under the guile-free incentive scheme derived in (4.17), the Agent will never engage
in pure malfeasance (exert effort on m and then report her signal truthfully) since she has zero chance of
getting the bonus at outcome m, while effort on m decreases the probability of reaching outcome L.
    However, the Agent can benefit from engaging in a combination of malfeasance and guile. This involves
the Agent reporting E more often after exerting effort on task m, to fool the Principal that the state is (E, E)
when the true state is actually (E, U ). Intuitively, such interplay of malfeasance and guile is an example of
the Agent gaming the system to produce an excellent performance signal for the Principal and then lying
ex-post to cover it up. The ability of the Agent to create a signal t = E for the Principal via an activity
(task m) that the Principal does not value makes it difficult to load incentives at E now. This illustrates
the point that if a signal is easily gamed, it cannot be used to provide incentives. In such instances, some
incentives have to be provided via a less informative signal that is harder to game. In this case, incentive has
to be provided via the less informative signal A as well, which decreases the efficiency of the sales contract.
    Notice that this is not another example of the multi-tasking problem; instead it is one of information
manipulation via off-equilibrium play. Along the equilibrium path, there is indeed no gain from malfeasance:
if the Agent is going to be truthful, then it is optimal for her to set λm = 0 in which case, being truthful is
indeed optimal for her. It is only when the Agent explores deviation from the equilibrium that she receives
a benefit from engaging in malfeasance. This resonates well with the way that performance pay fails in
practice. Initially, the incentive scheme often works well until a party tries to explore deviation (engage in
malfeasance) and subsequently “fine-tune” it with guile. Such a form of gaming the system then implies
that incentives cannot always be loaded on the most informative signal and thus stands in contrast to the
conventional wisdom in Principal-Agent theory.


4.3. Guile and Performance Pay.


4.3.1. Guile and Performance Pay. Section 3.2 shows that the optimal sales contracting problem is convex
- plainly, the optimal sales contract can be characterized by its Kuhn-Tucker conditions. However, these
conditions might be difficult to interpret and thus unhelpful. It might then pay dividends to solve the (easier)
relaxed-sales contracting problem (3.32) and then check (and hope) that the guile constraint is not binding.
But even doing this can be difficult, as the two previous examples have illustrated.
   The purpose of this section is to explore general and easy-to-check conditions under which guile is a
binding constraint for a given sales contract. These conditions also provide a direction to approximate a
guile-free sales contract when the guile constraint is violated. For clarity of exposition, we fix the effort
obligation to be λ∗ throughout this section. n         o
   Consider a feasible relaxed-sales contract p~S , ~δS ∈ ΨSR (λ∗ ) and let w ~ = p~ − N ~δS be the associated
wage vector; thus w ~ satisfies ICE (2.14) for effort λ∗ and the Agent’s truthful-reporting constraint ATR
(3.22). We put aside the issues of malfeasance for the moment and illustrate the possibility of the Agent
engaging in guile when faced with w. ~
   Define:
                                                                          ~
                               n                                                          o
                         ~ = (wage, bonus) | wage = ~ΓL Πw,
                   W B (w)                                    ~ bonus = Γ̂H Πw,~ Π∈Z ,
as the set of possible (wage, bonus)-pairs under w
                                                 ~ that arise from different reporting strategies. Since the set
of reporting strategies Z is finite, W B(w)
                                          ~ contains a finite number of points. Notice that by decomposing
the Agent’s compensation into a fixed component (wage) and an effort-dependent component (bonus), we
                                                       30
can write the Agent’s ex-ante expected payoff under effort λ and (wage, bonus) as:

                                    U (wage, bonus, λ) = wage + λ × bonus − V (λ) .

The choice of reporting strategy Π then determines the (wage, bonus)-pair that the Agent receives. Denote
the corresponding payoffs from truthful-reporting by:

                                               wage∗    = ~ΓL w,
                                                              ~
                                                          ~H
                                              bonus∗    = Γ̂ w~ = V 0 (λ∗ ) .

Misrepresentation of information is thus equivalent to choosing a (wage, bonus)-pair in W B(w)      ~ that is
                    ∗       ∗
different from (wage , bonus ). If both parties truthfully reveal their information, the Agent’s optimal effort
is λ∗ by construction.


                                                    Figure 4.1. Guile
               wage


         U0 + V (λ∗ )
                             (wage) + λ∗ × (bonus) − V (λ∗ ) = U 0


                  U0
                                                  Π0



             wage∗




                   0    V 0 (0)                               bonus∗                               bonus
                                                                                wageg (bonus)


   Guile occurs when the Agent combines information misrepresentation with a change in effort. Referring to
Figure 4.1, the horizontal axis represents bonus and the vertical axis represents wage. Each (wage, bonus)-
pair associated to a reporting strategy is represented by a dot. Ignoring the dot denoted by Π0 for now,
the shaded area is the convex hull of W B(w).~ First, the Agent’s truthful-reporting constraint ATR (3.22)
requires that the Agent cannot gain from any reporting strategy holding effort fixed at λ∗ :

             U (wage∗ , bonus∗ , λ∗ ) ≥ wage + λ∗ × bonus − V (λ∗ ) , ∀ (wage, bonus) ∈ W B (w)
                                                                                             ~ .

This corresponds to requiring all points in W B (w)
                                                 ~ to be below the green dotted line in Figure 4.1.
  The guile constraint is more severe and requires that:

(4.18)                            U (wage∗ , bonus∗ , λ∗ ) ≥ wage + λg × bonus − V (λg ) ,
                                                               ~ , ∀λg ∈ [0, 1).
                                        ∀ (wage, bonus) ∈ W B (w)

From Proposition 5, it is sufficient to check condition (4.18) for λg = Λ (bonus), the optimal effort given
the bonus level - see (3.26). For each bonus level, there is thus an associated fixed wage wageg (bonus) that
makes the Agent indifferent between the equilibrium payoff U (wage∗ , bonus∗ , λ∗ ) = U 0 , and engaging in
                                                             31
guile:

(4.19)                   wageg (bonus) = U 0 − Λ (bonus) × bonus + V (Λ (bonus)) .

The wageg -curve is the solid concave curve in Figure 4.1. If the convex hull of W B (w)~ lies below this curve,
as is the case in Figure 4.1 (ignoring Π0 ), then the contract is guile-free. The following result is immediate:

                             ~ is not guile-free if there exists (wage, bonus) ∈ W B(w)
Proposition 10. Compensation w                                                       ~ such that wage >
 0
U .

   The following proposition provides a condition under which guile is more restrictive than the set of feasible
relaxed-sales contracts. We first introduce some terminologies for the proposition. We say that a reporting
strategy Π ∈ Z allows the Agent to misrepresent information at no cost if:

(4.20)                                       ~Γ (λ∗ ) Πw
                                                       ~ = ~Γ (λ∗ ) w.
                                                                    ~

We say that Π alters effort incentives if:
                                               ~H
(4.21)                                             ~ 6= V 0 (λ∗ ) .
                                               Γ̂ Πw

Proposition 11. Let ψ SR (λ∗ ) ∈ ΨSR (λ∗ ) be a feasible contract for the relaxed-sales program (Definition
6) for λ∗ . If there exists a reporting strategy Π ∈ Z that allows the Agent to misrepresent information at no
cost (4.20) and alters effort incentives (4.21), then ψ SR (λ∗ ) is not guile-free.

   Proposition 11 can be readily understood from Figure 4.1. In the absence of malfeasance, a reporting
strategy Π that allows the Agent to misrepresent information at no cost (4.20) implies that the corresponding
(wage, bonus)-pair lies on the green dotted line. If it also alters effort incentives (4.21), then it must be a
different point from (wage∗ , bonus∗ ). An example of such a strategy is depicted by Π0 in Figure 4.1; it
necessarily lies above the wageg -curve which thus allows the Agent to benefit from guile.
   Next we consider the effect of malfeasance. Analogous to the case for effort on the productive task H, we
say that Π provides strong malfeasance-effort incentives if:
                                                     ~
(4.22)                                                    ~ > V 0 (λ∗ ) .
                                    ∃m ∈ M such that Γ̂m Πw

Proposition 12. Let ψ SR (λ∗ ) ∈ ΨSR (λ∗ ) be a feasible contract of the relaxed-sales program (Definition 6)
for λ∗ . If there exists a reporting strategy Π ∈ Z that allows the Agent to misrepresent information at no
cost (4.20) and provides strong malfeasance-effort incentives (4.22), then ψ SR (λ∗ ) is not guile-free.

   This result shows that malfeasance can increase the potential for guile, even if the contract is guile-free
relative to the effort incentives on the productive task. Moreover, whenever the Agent has an incentive to
choose malfeasance, the result implies that total effort will be higher than effort upon the productive task
       ~
(since Γ̂m Πw~ > V 0 (λ∗ )). Again, our result resonates well with the observation that in healthcare markets,
there is a tendency for physicians to oversupply redundant services due to the additional compensation they
receive for such services (see Dafny (2005) and Chandra et al. (2012)).

                                                5. Discussion

   This paper extends the theory of optimal contracting with subjective evaluation to a more general class of
information structures. The model includes, as special cases, situations where the principal is better informed
and uses an authority contract (Levin (2003), MacLeod (2003) and Fuchs (2007)), and the expert-Agent
                                                        32
environment that uses a sales contract, corresponding to the case that has been studied in the credence good
literature (Darby and Karni (1973), Emons (1997) and Dulleck and Kerschbamer (2006)). This approach
yields a number of insights.
    First, it provides a way to integrate Williamson’s (1975) notion of guile into agency theory. Guile arises
when the Agent’s compensation can depend on her information about performance. This gives rise to
opportunistic behavior by the Agent in the form of deviation from the effort obligation (self-interest), followed
by mis-reporting her information ex-post (guile).
    Second, we find that authority contracts - ones that give the Principal the task of evaluating performance
- are computationally less complex than sales contracts - contracts in which the terms are set by the Agent.
In particular, when the signal space is large, the number of potential constraints for a sales contract is
astronomical - with just 10 signals, one has 10 billion constraints to consider! Our result may help to explain
why designing contracts for the efficient supply of services from professionals such as physicians and financial
advisors is so difficult. For example, for C-section procedures, a basic hospital record contains more than 20
separate recorded signals regarding patient condition, and the physician has to make a decision based upon
these and other unrecorded information. Not surprisingly, there is a great deal of worry regarding what is
the optimal C-section rate.
    Third, we show that guile is distinct from malfeasance. Guile can arise in the absence of malfeasance, but
malfeasance can exacerbate guile, particularly when it is not anticipated by the Principal. One avenue for
future research is to extend our analysis of malfeasance to allow for an interaction of objective measures of
performance with subjective evaluations, as in Baker et al. (1994) and Zabojnik (2014).
    Fourth, our results highlight the importance of modulating organizational conflicts. The early literature
on efficiency wages (Shapiro and Stiglitz (1984)) supposes that the efficient effort level can be elicited with
a simple dismissal threat. Levin (2003) extends this to a contract where the dismissal threat is given by
a fixed threshold for a one-dimensional performance metric. In contrast, the optimal conflict in our model
is a function of the correlation in signals that has no simple a priori structure. The marginal cost of
conflict in state ts is given by the probability of that state, Γts (λ), while the marginal deterrence benefit
                               A
from conflict is given by −vts   (3.17). To minimize inefficiency, conflict should occur only in specific states
                   A
where Γts (λ) + vts = 0. Lazear (1989) has shown that the potential for conflict can explain some features of
organizational form. Given the complexity of determining when conflict should occur to minimize inefficiency,
our result may help to explain why there is such great variation in organizational performance. It also
highlights the importance of work concerning the techniques that firms can use as a substitute for internal
conflicts (Dequiedt and Martimort (2015) and Khalil et al. (2015)).
    The results in this paper can be viewed as a call for more research. Using a reduced-form model of relational
contracting has allowed us to better understand how guile works. Future work includes integrating this work
into the theory of relational contracts as in Baker et al. (1994) and Levin (2003). One straightforward
extension would be to add constraints to the size of conflict and see how this affects the optimal contract
form. A more challenging item on the agenda would be to look at the dynamics of information feedback
in the relational contract as in Fuchs (2007), but allowing for the Agent to have information as well. Chan
and Zheng (2011) and Maestri (2012) have made progress on this front for the two-signal informed-Principal
environment. Our results suggest that extending this work to a more general information structure is likely
to be a challenge.



                                                       33
                                         Appendix A. Omitted Proofs

Proof of Proposition 1.

Proof. Condition (2.18) is the binding PC, while (2.19) and (2.20) are respectively the binding ICE (2.14),
and ICM (2.15). We prove the MFC        now. Suppose that w      ~ implements λ. Since V 0 (λ) > 0, (2.19) implies
     ~H                            ++                                             ~       ~
that Γ̂ w ~ > 0 and hence w  ~ ∈H        Γ̂ . (2.19) and (2.20) imply that (Γ̂H − Γ̂m )w
                                           H
                                                                                               ~ ≥ 0 for all m ∈ M and
                              
therefore w~ ∈ H+ ~ΓH − ~Γm ∀m ∈ M. Thus we get the MFC as a necessary condition.
                                                                                                              ~
   Conversely, suppose that the MFC condition is satisfied. Choose w         ~ 0 ∈ M F . This implies that Γ̂H w ~ 0 > 0,
                                                 ~H 0
and hence we can n choose b > 0 such that o bΓ̂ w  ~ = V 0 (λ) so that bw  ~ o satisfies ICE (2.14). Since b > 0, we
also have bw~ 0 ∈ ∩m∈M H+ ~ΓH − ~Γm            since this set is the intersection of positive cones. This implies that
 ~m 0       ~H 0
                                  
bΓ̂ w~ = bΓ̂ w  ~ − b ~ΓH − ~Γm w    ~ 0 ≤ V 0 (λ). bw~ 0 thus satisfies ICM (2.15). Let ~1 be a vector whose entries
are all 1. Observe that ~Γτ ~1 = 1 ∀τ since these are probability vectors. Thus, for all a ∈ <, (~ΓH − ~Γm )~1a = 0,
        ~
while aΓ̂H~1 = 0. Let w  ~ (a) = a~1 + bw  ~ 0; w~ (a) thus satisfies both ICE (2.14) and ICM (2.15), and hence
implements λ. Thus we have U A ({λ, w})    ~ = ~Γ (λ) w   ~ − V (λ) − U o = a + b~Γ (λ) w ~ 0 − V (λ) − U o , and we can
choose a to satisfy the PC (2.11).                                                                                     

Proof of Lemma 1.

Proof. Consider a contract where at state ts ∈ S 2 , xts is what the Principal pays out before the conflicts
take place, and let dA              P
                      ts > 0 and dts > 0 be the conflicts inflicted by the Agent and the Principal respectively.
Under this contract, cts = xts + dA                    P                         A      P
                                     ts , wts = xts − dts and δts = cts − wts = dts + dts . Next, consider a contract
                              0                      0
where x0ts = xts + dA       P      A       P        A
                      ts , dts = dts + dts , and dts = 0; this contract has only the Principal inflicting all the
                                                                               0
                                                                                                       P0
conflicts. It is readily verified that under this contract, c0ts = x0ts + dA               0    0
                                                                             ts = cts , wts = xts − dts = wts , and
          0      0
 0
δts = dA       P
        ts + dts = δts , and hence, the social loss and both parties’ payoffs are left unchanged. A contract
that has only the Agent inflicting all the conflicts can be constructed analogously.                               

Proof of Proposition 2.

Proof. Suppose a solution to program-AC (3.3) exists. Since wts = pA   t , constraints ICE (2.14), which must
bind, and ICM (2.15) can be rewritten respectively as ~γ̂ H p~A = V 0 (λ) and ~γ̂ m p~A ≤ V 0 (λ) ∀m ∈ M. An
argument similar to the proof of Proposition (1) implies the SMFC (3.4) as a necessary condition.
    Conversely, suppose SMFC (3.4) is satisfied and let p~0 ∈ SM F . There exists b > 0 such that b~γ̂ H p~0 =
V 0 (λ); b~
          p0 thus satisfies ICE (2.14). Notice also that b~
                                                          p0 ∈ SM F and hence satisfies ICM (2.15). Next
choose a ∈ < such that p~ = a~1 + p~ satisfies the PC (2.11). Adding a unit vector ~1 does not affect the
                             1         0

satisfaction of the ICE and ICM constraints. Next, let p̄ = maxt p1t and set δts  A
                                                                                      = p̄ − p1t ≥ 0. With this,
we now have cts = p̄ for all ts ∈ S 2 and hence PTR (3.2) is satisfied trivially. This demonstrates that the
feasible set ΨA (λ) is non-empty. Let Ĉ be the cost under this contract. Since there are a finite number
of states, the set of solutions with costs less than or equal to Ĉ can be restricted to a bounded set. The
linearity of the payoff function, combined with the fact that ΨA (λ) is a closed and convex set then implies
that a solution 0 ≤ C A∗ (λ) ≤ Ĉ to program-AC exists.                                                       

Proof of Proposition 3.

Proof. We write all the incentive constraints in “≤”-inequality form. This is a linear-programming problem
and so, the first-order conditions, along with the complementary-slackness conditions for multipliers and
                                                           34
 A
δts ≥ 0, provide necessary and sufficient conditions for the optimum. The Lagrangian of the problem is:
                                                                                 
                         X                                                                              
   LA ψ A , µ
            ~A =             γt (λ) pA            A      A 0
                                                                               pA  + µA     0    ~ H ~A
                                                   
                                     t + qts (λ) δts + µ0    U + V (λ) − ~γ (λ)~       1 V (λ) − γ̂ p
                                                             |       {z          }         |   {z      }
                            t,s∈S
                                                                                   PC                          ICE
                            X                                           
                       +            µA(ICM )       ~γ̂ m p~A − V 0 (λ)
                                     m
                                                    |        {z      }
                            m∈M
                                                         ICM
                                                                                                     
                                                                          !                         !
                            X       X                       X                       X
                                          µA            A                A      A                A
                                                                                                     
(A.1)                  +                   tt0 
                                                      pt +     qts (λ) δts − pt0 +     qts (λ) δt0 s 
                                                                                                      .
                            t∈S t0 ∈S/{t}                  s∈S                     s∈S               
                                                |                            {z                      }
                                                                             PTR

Using the duality theorem of linear-programming (see Lemma 4 in Supplementary Appendix D), µA        0 = 1 and
  A∗         0            A 0                                      A
C (λ) = U + V (λ) + µ1 V (λ). After taking into account that µ0 = 1, (3.5) to (3.14) are the first-order
conditions and corresponding complementary slackness conditions as described in the main text. These
conditions are necessary and sufficient for optimality (see Theorem 1 in Appendix). vtA = s∈S vts      A
                                                                                               P
                                                                                                         comes
                                                                                                           0
from the observation that s∈S qts (λ) = 1 ∀t. From (2.16) and C (λ) above, we have Loss (λ) = µA
                                                                A∗                           A
                          P
                                                                                                       1 V   (λ).
                                                                                            A
In order for the Principal to make pay vary with performance it must be the case that δts > 0 for some ts.
This combined with the full support assumption implies that the loss is strictly positive for λ > 0, and hence
ICE binds with µA 1 > 0.                                                                                       

Proof of Proposition 4.

Proof. From Proposition 2, there exists a solution to program-AC. The FSC for λ ∈ [0, λmax ] and the fact that
the SMFC condition is independent of effort λ implies that we can find a uniform bound on contract terms
                                                                                  2
for all effort levels. Hence, there exists a compact set X ⊂ <n × <n such that attention       n         o can be restricted
                                                                                                   A ~A
                     A∗                 A
to contracts in Ψ (λ) = X ∩ Ψ (λ). Consider any sequence λk → λ and let p~k , δk ∈ ΨA∗ (λk ) with
n          o    n          o
  p~A   ~A → p~A , ~δA . p~A ∈ <n implies p~A satisfies ATR (3.1). By noting that all other constraints are
    k , δk
                                          n         o
continuous, we can conclude that p~A , ~δA ∈ ΨA∗ (λ) . Hence ΨA∗ (λ) is upper-hemicontinuous.
                            n       o
    Next, any contract p~A , ~δA ∈ ΨA∗ (λ) satisfies ICE and ICM for λ. For λk → λ ∈ [0, λmax ], we can define
bk so that bk p~A satisfy ICE and ICM for λk and bk → 1. Let ak~1 be the corresponding value that ensures that
                                                                            0
                                                                                              A0
the PC (2.11) is satisfied for p~A  k = bk p ~ + ak~1, with ak → 0. Let ~δkA be such that δk,ts       A
                                                                                                   = δts + (pA    A
                                                                                                             t − pk,t ) for all
                     0                       0
                   A
t, s ∈ S, where δk,ts    is the entry of ~δkA corresponding to state ts, pA                     ~A
                                                                            k,t is the entry of p k corresponding to signal
                        0
t. All entries of ~δk are bounded above because
                       A
                                                         n of FSC.
                                                                 o To ensure the non-negativity of the conflicts, let
           A0             A0                                A ~A
δk,ts = δk,ts − min{δk,ts }. It is immediate that p~k , δk ∈ ΨA (λk ). Hence ΨA∗ (λ) is lower-hemicontinuous.
 A

By the maximum theorem, C A∗ (λ) is continuous in λ.                                                                        

Proof of Proposition 6.
                                                                           n       o
Proof. The “only if” direction is trivial. For the “if” direction, take p~S , ~δS ∈ G(λ); by Proposition 5,
n          o
  p~S , ~δS satisfies the guile-free constraint (3.24) together with ICE (2.14), ICM (2.15), ATR (3.22). Next,
                               n            o                                                   n           o
notice that for any a ∈ <, p~S + a~1, ~δS ∈ G(λ). The Agent’s expected payoff from contract p~S + a~1, ~δS
is ~Γ(λ) + a − V (λ) and a can be set to satisfy PC (2.11). This implies that ΨS (λ) is non-empty. Since the
                                                                     35
constraint set IC − Sales for any λ is closed and convex in the contract terms, with the same argument as
in Proposition 2, a solution exists.                                                                   

Proof of Proposition 9.
                                                   ΓL          V 0 (λ)
                                                          
Proof. Recall that LossA(in) (λ) = ΓL
                                    UE 1 +       ΓL
                                                    EU
                                                                  ρ      from (4.2). Next, consider the sales contract
                                                  EE +λρ
                                                                                        S
that satisfies the conditions in Proposition 8 for an effort obligation λ and let δU      E (λ) be the associated
                     Π1              S
                                           
conflict. Denote λ (λ) = Λ ρδU E (λ) , the Agent’s optimal effort choice under reporting strategy Π1 ,
where Λ is defined in (3.26). It is readily verified that limλ→0 λΠ1 (λ) = 0. δU S
                                                                                   E (λ) satisfies equation (4.13)
and hence:
                        V 0 (λ)
                                                      
                                − ΓL       L
                                               S
                                                          + λΠ1 (λ) ρδU
                                                                   S               Π1
                                                                                            
                  cU +             UU  + Γ UE  δ UE (λ)                 E (λ) − V λ     (λ) = U o
                           ρ                               |              {z                }
                                                                       g(Π1 ,w)
                                                                             ~
                |                  {z                   }
                                ~
                                ΓL Π1 w
                                      ~
                                                                         V 0 (λ)
By noting that cU = U o + V (λ) + ΓL     S             L      L
                                    U E δU E (λ) − ΓU E + ΓEE + λρ           ρ    , we have
                                                            !                                
                   S              1 − ΓL           L
                                           U E + ΓEE + λρ       V 0 (λ) V (λ) − V λΠ1 (λ)
                  δU E (λ) =                                           + L
                                      ΓLU U − [λ
                                                 Π1 (λ)] ρ         ρ        ΓU U − [λΠ1 (λ)] ρ
                                                                                         
                                                          V (λ) V (λ) − V λΠ1 (λ)
                                 L                      0
                                  ΓU U + ΓL   EU − λρ
                            =                                   + L
                                  ΓL
                                   U U − [λ
                                              Π1 (λ)] ρ     ρ        ΓU U − [λΠ1 (λ)] ρ
where the second equality follows from ΓL            L        L      L
                                            U E + ΓEE + ΓU U + ΓEU = 1. Hence
                                                                      
                                 lim LossS(in) (λ) − LossA(in) (λ)
                                λ→0
                                                                               0
                                                                       ΓL
                                                                                    
                                          L   S            L             EU     V (λ)
                            = lim ΓU E δU E (λ) − ΓU E 1 + L
                                λ→0                                  ΓEE + λρ      ρ
                                               L
                                                    0                     L
                                                                                0
                                             ΓEU V (0)                    ΓEU V (0)
                            = ΓL   UE 1 + L                   − ΓLUE 1 + L
                                             ΓU U        ρ                ΓEE      ρ
                                        0
                                              L            L
                                                               
                                      V (0) ΓEU           ΓEU
                            = ΓL   UE             L
                                                       − L       .
                                         ρ      ΓU U      ΓEE
                                                                        
Hence, if ΓL       L
           U U > ΓEE , then limλ→0 Loss
                                              S(in)
                                                    (λ) − LossA(in) (λ) < 0. LossA(in) (·) is clearly continuous.
                                                  S                                    S(in)
By noting that Λ(·) and g̃(·) are continuous, δU    E (·) is continuous and hence, Loss      (·) is also continuous.
                      S(in)              A(in)
The continuity of Loss      (λ) − Loss         (λ) thus establishes the result.                                   

Proof of Proposition 11.

Proof. Suppose Π allows the Agent to misrepresent information     at
                                                                    no cost and alters effort incentives which
             ~         ~                                     ~
                                                            
implies that Γ̂H Πw
                  ~ 6= Γ̂H w.                                    ~ ; λ̃ 6= λ∗ is the optimal effort level exerted
                           ~ Let λ̃ be set such that λ̃ = Λ Γ̂H Πw
by the Agent when choosing task H and reporting strategy Π. Since Π allows the Agent to misrepresent
information at no cost, we have
                                          ~                               ~
                              h                            i h                           i
                     0 = ~ΓL Πw    ~ + λ∗ Γ̂H Πw~ − V (λ∗ ) − ~ΓL w
                                                                  ~ + λ∗ Γ̂H w
                                                                             ~ − V (λ∗ ) ,
                                         ~                              ~
                              h                        i h                           i
                         < ~ΓL Πw  ~ + λ̃Γ̂H Πw~ − V λ̃ − ~ΓL w  ~ + λ∗ Γ̂H w
                                                                            ~ − V (λ∗ ) ,

and hence the contract is not guile free.                                                                           

Proof of Proposition 12.
                                                         36
Proof. Suppose Π allows the Agent to misrepresent information at no cost and provides strong malfeasance-
                      ~
                           ~ 6= V 0 (λ∗ ) then from Proposition 11 the contract is not guile free, and we are
effort incentives. If Γ̂H Πw
                                         ~
done. Consider now the case in which Γ̂H Πw   ~ = V 0 (λ∗ ). Since information can be misrepresented at no cost,
this implies ~ΓL Πw
                  ~ = ~ΓL w.
                          ~ Thus we have:
                       ~ΓL w      ~                                ~
                           ~ + λ∗ Γ̂H w
                                      ~ − V (λ∗ )    = ~ΓL Πw
                                                            ~ + λ∗ Γ̂H Πw
                                                                        ~ − V (λ∗ ) ,
                                                                   ~
                                                     < ~ΓL Πw
                                                            ~ + λ∗ Γ̂m Πw
                                                                        ~ − V (λ∗ )
                                                                     ~
                                                     ≤ ~ΓL Πw
                                                            ~ + λm∗ Γ̂m Πw~ − V (λm∗ ) ,

where  m is the malfeasance task that provides strong malfeasance-effort incentives (4.22), and λm∗ =
   ~
  
Λ Γ̂m Πw~ where Λ(·) is as defined in (3.26). In other words, putting all her effort into malfeasance rather
than the productive task makes the agent strictly better off, and hence the contract is not guile-free.   




                                                    References

Abreu, D. (1988). On the theory of infinitely repeated games with discounting. Econometrica, 56 (2),
 383–396.
—, Milgrom, P. and Pearce, D. (1991). Information and timing in repeated partnerships. Econometrica,
 59 (6), 1713–1734.
—, Pearce, D. and Stacchetti, E. (1990). Toward a theory of discounted repeated games with imperfect
 monitoring. Econometrica, 58 (5), pp.1041–1063.
Aghion, P. and Tirole, J. (1997). Formal and real authority in organizations. Journal of Political Economy,
 105 (1), 1–29.
Baker, G., Gibbons, R. and Murphy, K. (1999). Informal authority in organizations. Journal of Law
 Economics & Organization, 15 (1), 56–73.
—, — and Murphy, K. J. (1994). Subjective performance measures in optimal incentive contracts. The
 Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109 (439), 1125–1156.
—, — and — (2002). Relational contracts and the theory of the firm. Quarterly Journal of Economics,
 117 (1), 39–84.
Banerjee, A. V. and Duflo, E. (2000). Reputation effects and the limits of contracting: A study of the
 Indian software industry. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115 (3), 989–1017.
Becker, G. S. and Stigler, G. J. (1974). Law enforcement, malfeasance, and compensation of enforcers.
 Journal of Legal Studies, 3 (1), 1–18.
Brown, M., Falk, A. and Fehr, E. (2004). Relational contracts and the nature of market interactions.
 Econometrica, 72 (3), 747–780.
Bull, C. (1987). The existence of self-enforcing implicit contracts. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 102,
 147–159.
Carmichael, H. L. (1983). The agents-agents problem: Payment by relative output. Journal of Labor
 Economics, 1, 50–65.
Chan, J. and Zheng, B. (2011). Rewarding improvements: optimal dynamic contracts with subjective
 evaluation. Rand Journal of Economics, 42 (4), 758–775.
                                                        37
Chandra, A., Cutler, D. and Song, Z. (2012). Chapter six - who ordered that? the economics of
  treatment choices in medical care. In T. G. M. Mark V. Pauly and P. P. Barros (eds.), Handbook of Health
  Economics, Handbook of Health Economics, vol. 2, Elsevier, pp. 397–432.
Dafny, L. S. (2005). How do hospitals respond to price changes? The American Economic Review, 95 (5),
  1525–1547.
Darby, M. R. and Karni, E. (1973). Free competition and the optimal amount of fraud. Journal of Law
  and Economics, 16 (April), 67–88.
Dequiedt, V. and Martimort, D. (2015). Vertical contracting with informational opportunism. America
  Economic Review, 105 (7), 2141 – 2182.
Dulleck, U. and Kerschbamer, R. (2006). On doctors, mechanics, and computer specialists: the eco-
  nomics of credence goods. Journal of Economic Literature, 44 (1), 5–42.
Ely, J. C. and Välimäki, J. (2003). Bad reputation. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118 (3), pp.
  785–814.
Emons, W. (1997). Credence goods and fraudulent experts. Rand Journal of Economics, 28 (1), 107–119,
  article.
Eswaran, M. and Kotwal, A. (1984). The moral hazard of budget-breaking. RAND Journal of Economics,
  15 (4), 578–581.
Fast, N. and Berg, N. (1975). The Lincoln Electric Company. Harvard Business School Case 9-376-028,
  Harvard Business School, Cambridge Mass, rev July 29, 1983.
Frank, R. G. and McGuire, T. G. (2000). Economics and mental health. In Handbook of Health Eco-
  nomics, vol. 1, Part B, 16, Elsevier, pp. 893 – 954.
Fuchs, W. (2007). Contracting with repeated moral hazard and private evaluations. The American Eco-
  nomic Review, 97 (4), pp.1432–1448.
Gibbons, R. (1987). Piece rate incentive schemes. Journal of Labor Economics, 5, 413–29.
Goodman, S. F. and Turner, L. J. (2010). Teacher incentive pay and educational outcomes: Evidence
  from the new york city bonus program, discussion Paper, Columbia University.
Green, E. and Porter, R. H. (1984). Non-cooperative collusion under imperfect price information. Econo-
  metrica, 52, 87–100.
Greif, A. (1989). Reputation and coalitions in medieval trade - evidence on the Maghribi traders. Journal
  of Economic History, 49 (4), 857–882, times Cited: 79.
Grossman, S. J. and Hart, O. D. (1983). An analysis of the principal-agent problem. Econometrica,
  51 (1), 7–45.
Harris, M. and Raviv, A. (1979). Optimal incentive contracts with imperfect information. Journal of
  Economic Theory, 20, 231–259.
Hart, O. D. and Moore, J. H. (2007). Contracts as reference points. Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  123 (1), 1–48.
Holmström, B. (1979). Moral hazard and observability. Bell Journal of Economics, 10 (1), 74–91.
— (1982). Moral hazard in teams. Bell Journal of Economics, 13, 324–40.
Holmström, B. and Milgrom, P. (1991). Multi-task principal-agent analyses: Incentive contracts, asset
  ownership, and job design. Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization, 7, 24–52.
Kandori, M. (1992). Social norms and community enforcement. Review of Economic Studies, 59 (1), 63–80.
— (2002). Introduction to repeated games with private monitoring. Journal of Economic Theory, 102, 1–15.

                                                    38
— and Matsushima, H. (1998). Private observation, communication and collusion. Econometrica, 66 (3),
  627–652.
Kanemoto, Y. and MacLeod, W. B. (1992). The ratchet effect and the market for second hand workers.
  Journal of Labor Economics, 10, 85–92.
Kerr, S. (1975). On the folly of rewarding A, while hoping for B. Academy of Management Journal, 18 (4),
  769–783.
Khalil, F., Lawarrée, J. and Scott, T. J. (2015). Private monitoring, collusion, and the timing of
  information. The RAND Journal of Economics, 46 (4), 872–890.
Klein, B. and Leffler, K. (1981). The role of market forces in assuring contractual performance. Journal
  of Political Economy, 89, 615–641.
Kornhauser, L. A. (1983). Reliance, reputation, and breach of contract. Journal of Law and Economics,
  26 (3), 691–706.
Kranton, R. (1996). Reciprocal exchange: A Self-Sustaining system. American Economic Review, 86 (4),
  830–51.
Krueger, A. and Mas, A. (2004). Strikes, scabs, and tread separations: Labor strife and the production
  of defective bridgestone/firestone tires. Journal of Political Economy, 112 (2), 253–289.
Lazear, E. P. (1989). Pay equality and industrial politics. Journal of Political Economy, 97, 561–580.
Levin, J. (2003). Relational incentive contacts. American Economic Review, 93 (3), 835–857.
Li, J. and Matouschek, N. (2013). Managing conflicts in relational contracts. American Economic Review,
  103 (6), 2328–2351.
Luenberger, D. G. and Ye, Y. (2008). Linear and NonLinear Programming. New York, NY: Springer.
MacLeod, W. B. (2003). Optimal contracting with subjective evaluation. American Economic Review,
  93 (1), 216–240.
— and Malcomson, J. M. (1989). Implicit contracts, incentive compatibility, and involuntary unemploy-
  ment. Econometrica, 57 (2), 447–480.
— and Parent, D. (1999). Job characteristics and the form of compensation. Research in Labor Economics,
  18, 177–242.
Maestri, L. (2012). Bonus payments versus efficiency wages in the repeated principal-agent model with
  subjective evaluations. American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 4 (3), 34–56.
Malcomson, J. M. (1984). Work incentives, hierarchy, and internal labor markets. Journal of Political
  Economy, 92 (3), 486–507.
Mas, A. (2006). Pay, reference points, and police performance. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121 (3),
  783–821.
— (2008). Labour unrest and the quality of production: Evidence from the construction equipment resale
  market. Review of Economic Studies, 75 (1), 229–258.
McGuire, T. G. (2000). Physician agency. Handbook of Health Economics, vol. 1, Part A, 9, Elsevier, pp.
  461 – 536.
Milgrom, P. (1988). Employment contracts, influence actitivities, and efficient organizational design. Jour-
  nal of Political Economy, 96, 42–60.
Milkovich, G. T. and Wigdor, A. K. (1991). Pay for Performance: Evaluating Performance and Ap-
  praisal Merit Pay. Washington, D.C., U.S.A.: National Academy Press.
Myerson, R. B. (1986). Multistage games with communication. Econometrica, 54 (2), 323–58.

                                                     39
— and Satterthwaite, M. A. (1983). Efficient mechanisms for bilateral trading. Journal of Economic
  Theory, 29, 265–281.
Pondy, L. R. (1967). Organizational conflict: Concepts and models. Administrative Science Quarterly,
  12 (2), 296–320.
Prendergast, C. (1993). A theory of “yes men". American Economics Review, 83 (4), 757–770.
— (1999). The provision of incentives in firms. Journal of Economic Literature, 37 (1), 7–63.
— and Topel, R. H. (1996). Favoritism in organizations. Journal of Political Economy, 104 (5), 958–978.
Ross, S. (1973). Economic theory of agency: the principal’s problem. American Economic Review, 63,
  134–39.
Shapiro, C. and Stiglitz, J. E. (1984). Equilibrium unemployment as a worker discipline device. American
  Economic Review, 74 (3), 433–444.
Sobel, J. (2006). For better or forever: Formal versus informal enforcement. Journal of Labor Economics,
  24 (2), 271–297.
Telser, L. G. (1980). A theory of self-enforcing agreements. Journal of Business, 53 (1), 27–44, fLA
  00219398 University of Chicago Press Copyright 1980 The University of Chicago Press.
Williamson, O. E. (1975). Markets and Hierarchies: Analysis and Antitrust Implications. New York: The
  Free Press.
Zabojnik, J. (2014). Subjective evaluations with performance feedback. The RAND Journal of Economics,
  45 (2), 341–369.




                                                   40
                        Appendix B. Informed-Principal and Expert-Agent
                                 (For Online Publication Only)

    In this Supplementary Appendix section, we provide a detailed analysis on the informed-Principal (IP,
definition 7) and the expert-Agent (EA, definition 8) environments. We first show in section B.1 that
the Agent’s guile constraint, which is synonymous to the sales contract, is easily handled under the EA
environment. We fully characterize the optimal sales contract in the EA environment, and then consider an
example of the EA environment with symmetric correlation (to be defined) where we can obtain a closed-form
solution for both the optimal sales and optimal authority contract. This example has the intuitive property
that as the correlation in the parties’ signal approaches perfect correlation, the expected inefficiency of the
contract approaches zero.
    Next, in section B.2, we define a duality relationship between the two environments and show that
there is a one-to-one mapping between the optimal sales contract in an EA environment, with an optimal
authority contract in the dual IP environment. From this, we learn that even if the information structures
are symmetric, these contracts have quite different properties.
    Finally, in section B.3, we provide an example to illustrate that, perhaps counter-intuitively, the optimal
sales contract is not always more efficient than the optimal authority contract in the EA environment.
This illustrates that the informed-party need not always be allocated decision rights to improve contractual
efficiency.
    Additional details and omitted proofs of this section are found in section B.4.




B.1. The Expert-Agent and the Sales Contract. The following proposition characterizes the optimal
sales contract under the EA environment.




Proposition 13. Under the expert-Agent environment (Definition 8), any solution to the relaxed-sales
program (program-SC-R (3.32)) also satisfies
                                          n the guile
                                                    o constraint GF (3.30). If the full support condition
                                     S∗        S ~S
FSC holds at λ > 0, then a contract ψ = λ, p~ , δ     is an optimal sales contract implementing λ here if
                                                                                    S(ICM )
and only if there exist non-negative Lagrangian multipliers µS1 (for ICE (2.14)), µm          , m ∈ M (for ICM
                                                     B- 1
(2.15)) and µSss0 for s, s0 ∈ S and s0 6= s (for ATR (3.22)) such that:
                                                       S(ICM ) m
                               −µS1 β̂sH + m∈M µm             β̂s + vsS = 0,
                                             P
(B.1)                                                                                  ∀s
                                                             S(ICM ) m
                        βs (λ) rts + µS1 β̂sH rts − m∈M µm                  S
                                                     P
(B.2)                                                               β̂s + vts  ≥ 0,     ∀t, s
                                                                                !
                     S                                         S(ICM ) m
                          βs (λ) rts + µS1 β̂sH rts − m∈M µm                  S
                                                      P
(B.3)               δts                                               β̂s + vts   = 0, ∀t, s
                         "                                                                                #
                                                                                                   
                               pSs0                     S
                                                                          pSs                    S
                                                                                                                       , ∀s, s0 6= s
                                           P                                        P
(B.4)                                 −        t∈S rts δts0       −             −       t∈S rts δts           ≤0
                               "                                                                              #
                                                                                                       
                       µSss0        pSs0                    S
                                                                              pSs                   S
                                                                                                                       , ∀s, s0 6= s
                                               P                                        P
(B.5)                                      −       t∈S rts δts0       −             −      t∈S rts δts            =0

                                      m
                                   βˆs pSs − t∈S rts δts      − V 0 (λ) ≤ 0
                                P              P          S
                                                            
(B.6)                                 s∈S                                                                              , ∀m ∈ M
                                         ˆ m pS − P
                                hP                                            i
                        S(ICM )                                 S
                                                                       0
(B.7)                  µm           s∈S βs     s      t∈S rts δts − V (λ) = 0                                          , ∀m ∈ M
                                                                           
                        V (λ) + U 0 − s∈S βs λS pSs − t∈S rts δts         S
                                       P                      P
(B.8)                                                                         =0
                                    ˆ H pS − P                      0
                             P                            S
                                                            
(B.9)                          s∈S βs      s     t∈S rts δts − V (λ) ≥ 0

                                      ˆ H pS − P
                             hP                                           i
                                                                      0
                                                              
(B.10)                   µS1     s∈S βs      s
                                                            S
                                                   t∈S rts δts − V (λ) = 0

where
                                                            Xh                               i
                                                S
                                               vts    =               µSss0 rts − µSs0 s rts0 ,
                                                           s0 6=s
                                                              X                         Xh                        i
                                               vsS    = −                S
                                                                        vts =−                   µSss0 − µSs0 s
                                                                  t∈S                   s0 6=s

The expected social loss of implementing effort λ using the sales contract is:

(B.11)                                          LossS (λ) = ~Γ (λ) ~δS = µS1 V 0 (λ) ,

with LossS (λ) > 0 whenever λ > 0.
   Moreover, if the FSC holds for all λ ∈ [0, λmax ], the cost of the optimal sales contract, C S∗ (λ), is contin-
uous in λ ∈ [0, λmax ].

   The proof of Proposition 13 is found in section B.4.1. The proposition illustrates that the problem of guile
in the sales contract is not merely one of asymmetric information. Guile arises only in conjunction with the
Agent’s ability to manipulate the Principal’s information flow.

B.1.1. An Example of Expert-Agent with Symmetric Correlation. As an illustrative example, we consider
an expert-Agent environment with symmetric correlation (to be defined) next. Under this environment, a
closed-form solution for both types of contracts can be obtained. We solve for them and show that the
optimal sale contract is always more efficient than the optimal authority contract here.
   Consider an expert-Agent environment (EA - Definition 8) with a correlation information structure sat-
isfying the symmetric correlation condition:

                                                                            
                                                                            1 −  , if t = s
(B.12)                                             P r [t|s] = rts        =                    ,
                                                                                 , if t 6= s
                                                                              n−1
                                                                                B- 2
              
with 1 −  > n−1 ; this is equivalent to  < 1 − n1 . This assumption implies that the Principal is more likely to
agree with the Agent than not. When  → 0, the signals are perfectly correlated. For simplicity, we assume
that malfeasance is not possible here (M = ∅).

Optimal Sales Contract. From Proposition 13, the noptimal sales contract
                                                                o        is characterized
                                                                              n           by o
                                                                                             (B.1) - (B.5)
and (B.8) - (B.9) while setting M = ∅. Let S + = s ∈ S|β̂sH > 0 and S − = s ∈ S|β̂sH ≤ 0 . S + is the
set of signals indicating that the outcome is more likely to be H while S − is the set of signals indicating
that the outcome is more likely to be L. Next, let k = |S − |, the cardinality of set S − ; this then implies that
|S + | = n − k. Since s∈S β̂sH = 0, both S + and S − are non-empty sets and hence, 1 ≤ k ≤ n − 1. Finally,
                      P

let β̂ + = s∈S + β̂sH > 0.
           P

Proposition 14. Consider the expert-Agent environment (EAn- Definition  o     8) that satisfies the symmet-
                                                                  S ~S
ric correlation condition (B.12). The following sales contract p~ , δ     is an optimal sales contract that
implements effort λ:
                                                            
                          p̄S + b̄S , if s ∈ S +            δ̄ S , if t ∈ S − , s ∈ S +
(B.13)              pSs =                               S
                                                       δts =
                          p̄S       , if s ∈ S − ,          0     , if otherwise,
where:
                                                                β + (λ)
                                     p̄S    = U 0 + V (λ) −                  V 0 (λ)
                                                                     β̂ +
                                                                   V 0 (λ)
                                                                     
                                                        k
                                      b̄S   =       1+
                                                    n − 1 − n      β̂ +
                                                           0
                                                  n−1        V (λ)
                                     δ̄ S   =
                                                n − 1 − n     β̂ +
   Proposition 14 characterizes an optimal sales contract which has the intuitive feature of the Agent getting
a bonus b̄S whenever she reports that the outcome is more likely to be H, and conflict δ̄ S occurs when the
Principal disagrees with this assessment. The proof consists of a tedious process of checking the optimality
conditions in (B.1) to (B.9), and is found in section B.4.2 below.
   Importantly, given the form of the optimal sales contract in (B.13), it is without loss to consider just a
binary signal space S = {0, 1}, and let P r [t = 0|s = 0] = P r [t = 1|s = 1] = 1 − . It follows that when
s = 1, the Agent receives a bonus, and conflict occurs only at state ts = 01:

Corollary 3. In an expert-Agent environment (EA - Definition 8) that satisfies the symmetric correlation
condition (B.12), the optimal sales contracting problem (program SC - 3.25) for any signal space S is always
equivalent to a problem with signal space S 0 = {0, 1}, where s0 = 1 is the “good” signal with P r[s0 = 1|o] =
          o        0                                  0                   o
P                                                                P
   s∈S + βs , and s = 0 is the “bad” signal with P r[s = 0|o] =    s∈S − βs , for o ∈ {L, H}. Under the optimal
sales contract, the Agent receives a bonus if and only if she observes signal s0 = 1, and the Principal punishes
the Agent if and only if he observes the bad signal and the Agent reports the good signal (ts = 01).

   The corresponding optimal sales contract for the two-signal problem consists of a fixed wage and a bonus
paid to the Agent when he reports s = 1:
                                                                β1 (λ)
                                     p̄S    = U 0 + V (λ) −                 V 0 (λ) ,
                                                                 β̂1H
                                                 (1 − ) V 0 (λ)
                                     b̄S    =                    ,
                                                (1 − 2) β̂1H
                                                         B- 3
and the Principal inflicts a conflict δ̄ S at state ts = 01:
                                                            1    V 0 (λ)
                                                δ̄ S =
                                                         (1 − 2) β̂1H
Under this contract, the expected inefficiency is:
                                                                      1    V 0 (λ)
                                     LossS (λ)     = β1 (λ)                       .
                                                                   (1 − 2) β̂1H
   MacLeod (2003) shows that when only the Principal is informed, which is defined formally in Definition
7 later, the optimal authority contract converges to the first-best as the signals become more correlated.
Here, we provide a similar result for the optimal sales contract in the expert-Agent case: as the degree of
                                                                                                 
correlation in signals increases ( → 0), the expected inefficiency approaches zero LossS (λ) → 0 .

Optimal Authority Contract. For this two-signal problem, it is straightforward to compute the optimal
authority contract as the following (the details are found in section B.4.2): the Principal pays a bonus b̄A to
the Agent when he observes the good signal (t = 1), and the Agent inflicts a conflict δ̄ A when she sees s = 1
but is not paid the bonus (i.e. at ts = 01), with:
                                                  V 0 (λ)
                                    b̄A    =
                                             (1 − 2) β̂1H
                                                                   V 0 (λ)
                                                              
                                                      β0 (λ)
                                    δ̄ A   =  1+                              ,
                                                  β1 (λ)(1 − ) (1 − 2) β̂1H
and resulting in an expected inefficiency of:
                                                                         
                                           A                    β0 (λ)
                                    Loss (λ) = 1 +                          LossS (λ)
                                                            β1 (λ)(1 − )
   Thus, we see that here, it is more costly to implement an effort λ under the authority contract than under
the sales contract. This follows from the fact that the quality of the Agent’s information is better and hence,
harnessing her information is less expensive. However, although intuitive, we caution that this result does
not carry over in general when the problem cannot be reduced to a 2-signal environment. We elaborate more
on this in section B.3.

B.2. Duality between the IP and the EA Environments. We explore how the structures of the two
contracts compare by establishing a duality relationship between them - namely, by holding the relationship
between effort and productivity fixed while switching the signals. More precisely, we begin with the optimal
authority contract in an informed-Principal (IP) environment, and then ask if there is a “similar” sales
contract in the analogous expert-Agent (EA) environment. We show that there is indeed a “dual” (to be
defined) EA environment, but it involves a bit more than simply switching the signals. Our result thus
illustrates some fundamental differences between the authority and sales contracts in terms of how the
information of each party is utilized for effort provision. For simplicity, we assume no malfeasance (M = ∅)
throughout this section. The duality relationship in the two environments is defined as the following:

Definition 9. Consider an expert-Agent environment (Definition 8, with β~ o , o = H, L and rts , t, s ∈ S),
and an informed-Principal environment (Definition 7, with ~γ o , o = H, L and qts , t, s ∈ S). The two
environments are the dual environment for each other if (i) ~γ L = β~ H , (ii) , ~γ H = β~ L , and (iii) qts = rst
∀t, s ∈ S.
                                                            B- 4
   The assumption on the conditional probabilities imply that the signals that the Principal and the Agent
receive are switched in the two environments. For example, the state ts = 10 in the primal environment,
where the Principal observes 1 and the Agent observes 0, corresponds to the state in the dual environment
where the Principal observes 0 and the Agent observes 1 instead. The duality conditions for the outcome
                                ~
probabilities also implies that β̂ H = −~γ̂ H . Hence, when an effort λ is exerted on the dual EA environment,
the probability vector of the states is given by:
                                                   ~                  ~
                                                   β(λ)     = β~ L + λβ̂ H
                                                            = ~γ H − λ~γ̂ H
(B.14)                                                      = ~γ (1 − λ) ,

which is the probability vector of the states in the primal IP environment under effort 1 − λ instead. This
relationship implies a corresponding duality in payoffs as well. The payoff for the Principal in the IP
environment is:
                                                             X
                               U P (IP ) (ψ) = U P 0 + λBH −     γt (λ) qts cts ,
                                                                          t,s∈S
                                                                     40
while her payoff in the dual EA environment is given by:
                                                                              X
                                 U P (EA) (ψ) = U P 0 − (1 − λ) BH −                 βs (λ) rts cts .
                                                                             t,s∈S

Notice that the goal of effort in the dual EA environment is to reduce the probability of a loss BH rather
than increasing the probability of a gain; the marginal return to effort remains to be BH . The relationship
between the signals and whether or not BH occurs is the same, except that H now refers to an outcome of
a high loss rather than of a high reward. In other words, while H is the good performance in the IP primal
environment, L becomes the good performance in the EA dual environment.
   The duality relationship we wish to establish is with regards to the states in which a conflict occurs. More
precisely we first define a notion for two contracts to have the same pattern:
                                            n          o
Definition 10. A sales contract ψ S = λS , p~S , ~δS has the same pattern as an authority contract ψ A =
n               o
  λA , p~A , ~δA if there exits θ > 0 and α ∈ < such that:

(B.15)                                        pSs = −θpA
                                                       s +α           , ∀s ∈ S,
                                               S            A
(B.16)                                        δts =       θδst ,      , ∀t, s ∈ S.

   When the contracts have the same pattern, conflicts occur in the same states, and modulo the fixed term
α, relative prices in the two cases are the same. Under the assumption that there exist optimal authority
and sales contracts for the IP and the EA environment respectively, we have the following duality result:
                                        n         o
Proposition 15. (Duality) Let ψ A = λA , p~A , ~δA be an optimal authority contract that implements λA >
0 in the informed-Principal environment (IP - Definition 7) and suppose that effort satisfies 1 − λA ≥
LossA (λA )
  V 0 (λA )
            , the ratio of the deadweight loss to the marginal cost of effort. There exists an optimal sales
                  n           o
contract, ψ s = λS , p~s , ~δs , with the same pattern (as defined in Definition 10) that implements effort λS

40We have modified the Principal’s payoffs in U P (EA) (·) from the original definition in (2.9) to provide a more natural inter-
pretation about the problem. Notice that this interpretation does not alter any of the analysis previously since we have been
looking at the cost-minimization problem of implementing an effort level.
                                                              B- 5
in the corresponding dual (as defined in definition 9) expert-Agent environment (EA - Definition 8) , with:
                                             
                                LossA λA
(B.17)            λS = 1 −                       − λA ,
                                   V 0 (λA )
                                V 0 λS
                                        
(B.18)             θ =                         ,
                           V 0 (λA ) + DLA
                                                                                DLA
                                                                                     
                   α = U 0 (1 + θ) + V λS + θV λA + θLossA λA 2 + 0 A ,
                                                                       
(B.19)
                                                                               V (λ )
                             A 41
where DLA = ts∈S 2 γ̂tH qts δts . The mapping from ψ A to ψ S is summarized in Table (2).
               P


                                          Table 2. Contract Duality

                                          IP, Authority (Primal)           EA, Sales (Dual)
                                                       A
               P r[o = H]                            λ                            1 − λS 
                                                P0       A
           Principal’s Revenue                 U + λ BH                   U − 1 − λS BH
                                                                            P0

                  Signals                         t, s ∈ S                    t → s, s → t
          Conditional Probability              P r[s|t] = qts             P r[t|s]
                                                                                = rts = qst
                                                                     L
                                               L      A H
                                                                                                 
                    P r [ts|λ]                γt + λ γ̂t qts       β s + λ β̂s rts = γsH − λS γ̂sH qst
                                                                          S H

                 Price term                          pA
                                                      t                            pSs = −θpA s +α
                                                      A                                  S      A
                  Conflict                           δts                               δts = θδst
                                                                                   S          S      S
                                                  A                             wts = ps − δts
                     Wage                        wts = pA
                                                        t                                         A
                                                                                        = −θcst + α
                                                                                cSts =          pSs
                      Cost                     cA     A    A
                                                ts = pt + δts                                     A
                                                                                       = −θwst      +α
                                                                       V0     S
                                                                                           P        H      S
                                                                            λ        =       t,s∈S β̂s rts wts
                                          V 0 λA = t∈S γ̂tH pA
                                                 P
              Return to Effort                               t                                 0 A
                                                                                     = θ V (λ ) + DLA
       Truthful-Reporting Multipliers               µA
                                                     tt0                              µSss0 = µAss0
              ICE Multipliers                       µA1                                 µS1 = µA1
                                                     A                                    S     A
                 ∂T C/∂δts                          vts                                 vts = vst
                  ∂T C/∂p                           vtA                                vs = −vsA
                                                                                        S


 Superscript A denotes terms of the authority contract; superscript S denotes terms of the sales contract.


   The proof of Proposition 15 is found in section B.4.3. In constructing the dual sales contract from the
primal authority contract, we set the Lagrangian multiplier for ICE to be the same across the two contracting
                                                 LossA (λA )    LossS (λS )
problem (i.e. µA     S
               1 = µ1 ) which then implies that    V 0 (λA )
                                                              = V 0 (λS ) . Hence, we have:
                                                                n            o
Corollary 4. Consider the optimal authority contract ψ A = λA , p~A , ~δA in the informed-Principal envi-
ronment and suppose that the optimal sales contract inn the corresponding
                                                                   o        dual expert-Agent environment (as
                                                            S S ~S
                                                                                                    
characterized in Proposition 15) exists and is ψ = λ , p~ , δ . Then LossA λA ≤ LossS λS if and
                                                 S

only if λA ≤ λS .

   The duality result of Proposition 15 focuses on the pattern of conflicts; the quality of information on
the performance at states where conflicts take place are the same across the two environments. Recall
                  A    ∂T C (ψ A ,~
                                  µAP T R)
                                                                 
from (3.17) that vts =       ∂δ A          where T C ψ A , µ
                                                           ~A
                                                            P T R is the value of the Principal’s truthful-reporting
                                 ts
constraint under an optimal authority contract ψ A ; vts
                                                      A
                                                         is thus the marginal effect of conflict at state ts on

41Notice that from (3.15), LossA λA  = P         L      A     A  A         A   d       A λA .
                                                                                            
                                          ts∈S 2 γt qts δts + λ DL and so DL = dλA Loss
                                                             B- 6
                                        ∂T C (ψ A ,~
                                                   µAP T R)
the constraint. Notice that vtA =             ∂ptA          ; analogously, vtA is the marginal effect of wage-price pA
                                                                                                                     t on
the constraint.
                                    S
   We can similarly define vts        and vsS as respectively the marginal effects of δts      S
                                                                                                  and pSs on the Agent’s
truthful-reporting constraint constraint in the sales contract.42 The duality result of Proposition 15 (last
two rows in table 2) shows that the marginal effects of conflicts on the truthful-reporting constraints are the
same across the two contracts; the marginal effects of prices on the constraint work in opposite direction but
have the same magnitude as well.
   Moreover, in both environments, the effort incentives are provided based on the reports of the party who
has the superior information. That the two contracts are not perfectly symmetric (in the sense that we do
           S     A
not have δts  = δst ) suggests that the way each contract uses information to give incentives is different. This
difference is not due to guile; we have shown in Proposition 13 that the guile constraint is always satisfied
in the expert-Agent environment. Instead, the difference arises because the authority contract uses the
Principal’s information to provide effort incentives for the Agent, whereas the sales contract uses the Agent’s
information to provide effort incentives for herself! Notice that when conflict is high under the authority
                            A
                              (λA )
contract such that Loss V 0 (λA )
                                     ≥ 1 − λA , the dual sales contract does not exist. This arises because high
conflict in the authority contract implies that the quality of the information is very low which then limits
the Principal’s ability to discipline the Agent under the sales contract.

B.3. Sales or Authority? The literature on organizational economics suggests that the more informed
party should be allocated decision rights (Kanemoto and MacLeod (1992) and Aghion and Tirole (1997)).
In this section we show that this intuition does not generalize in our model in the sense that the sales contract
is not necessarily more efficient than the authority contract in an expert-Agent environment, and vice-versa
in an informed-Principal environment.
   Consider an expert-Agent environment with S = {0, 1, 2} and, for simplicity, no possibility of malfeasance
                                                                 ~
(M = ∅). Let β~ H = 0, 0, 1 and β   ~ L = 1 , 1 , 0 , and hence β̂ = − 1 , − 1 , 1 ; when the outcome is H, the
                                                                             
                                                 2 2                                 2    2
Agent receives signal s = 2 with probability 1, and when the outcome is L, she receives signals 0 and 1 with
equal probability but never receives signal 2. Next, let rts , the probability of the principal observing signal
t when the Agent observes s, be given by the following:

                                             r00 = 32 ,      r01 = 3ε ,     r02 =    1
                                                                                     6
                                             r10 = 3ε ,      r11 = 23 ,     r12 =    1
                                                                                     6
                                            r20 = 1−ε
                                                   3 ,      r21 = 1−ε
                                                                    3       r22 =    2
                                                                                     3

where ε > 0 assures that the full support assumption is satisfied.
   Since signal 2 is the only signal informative of outcome H, incentives should be loaded at signal 2.
With details found in section B.4.4, to implement λ > 0, the optimal sales contract is to pay the Agent a
                      0
bonus of bS = 2+ε
               1+ε V (λ) when the Agent reports s = 2, and conflicts occur only at states 02 and 12, with
 S
δ02    S
    = δ12    3
          = 1+ε V 0 (λ). The resulting expected social loss is then 1+ε
                                                                      λ
                                                                         V 0 (λ).
   On the other hand, the same effort level under this expert-agent information structure can be implemented
by an authority contract that pays the Agent a bonus bA = 1+ε   3
                                                                  V 0 (λ) only when the Principal reports t = 2,
                                                                                                                                        "
                     ∂T C (ψ S ,~
                                µSAT R )          ∂T C (ψ S ,~
                                                             µSAT R )
                                                                                                                                            
42That is, v S   =                         vsS =                        where T C   ψS , µ
                                                                                         ~S
                                                                                                 
                                                                                                     =
                                                                                                         P         P              S             pS  −
            ts                S
                            ∂δts
                                      and               ∂pS                               AT R               s∈S       s0 ∈S/{s} µss0            s0
                                                            s
                                     #
                                  
           S      S              S         ~S
P                     P                             S
  t∈S rts δts0 − ps −   t∈S rts δts    and µ AT R = µss0    s∈S,s0 ∈S/{s}
                                                                            is the vector of Lagrangian multipliers for the Agent’s

truthful-reporting constraint.
                                                               B- 7
                                                                                             
                                                       A      A              2λ         6   0     43
and conflicts happen only at states 10 and 01 with δ10    = δ01  = 1 + (1−ε)(1−λ)     1+ε V (λ) .    The resulting
                                                     
expected social loss is then 2ε (1−ε)(1−λ)+2λ
                                      1−ε2     V 0 (λ) , which can be verified to be smaller than 1+ε λ
                                                                                                        V 0 (λ), the
expected loss from the optimal sales contract, for small enough ε.
   While computing and understanding these contracts take a bit of work, the intuition behind can be readily
seen by taking ε to be 0.44 For a sales contract, to prevent the Agent from always reporting s = 2 to claim
the bonus, conflict needs to occur when the Principal does not observe t = 2 as well. Since states 02 and
12 occur with positive probability, the expected social loss is always non-zero. On other hand, λ can be
implemented with zero expected social loss via an authority contract that gives the Agent a bonus when the
Principal reports t = 2. To see how, first notice that when ε = 0, the probability of states 10 and states
                                       A        A
01 actually occurring is 0. Hence, δ10     and δ01  can be set arbitrarily large without causing any expected
social loss. Next, when the Principal observes t = 2, the probabilities of the Agent observing s = 0 and
                                                 A
s = 1 are both strictly positive. By setting δ10     sufficiently large, the Principal is deterred from reporting
                                  A
t = 1. Similarly, by setting δ01 sufficiently large, the Principal is deterred from reporting t = 0. The
Principal’s truthful-reporting constraint is thus satisfied with the threat of punishments that never occur on
the equilibrium path.
   An example illustrating that the sales contract is more efficient than the authority contract in an informed-
principal environment can be constructed analogously. In a 2-signal environment, MacLeod (2003) demon-
strates that the sales contract cannot be more efficient than the authority contract in the informed-Principal
environment.45 Thus, these examples rely upon having at least 3 signals. What this illustrates is that adding
more signals is not an insignificant extension of the model.


B.4. Additional Details and Omitted Proofs of Supplementary Appendix B. We provides the
omitted details and proofs of this section here.


B.4.1. Details for Section B.1.


Proof of Proposition 13.

Proof. We first prove the first statement that the relaxed-sales program solution is guile-free here. Notice
that the Agent’s truthful-reporting constraint ATR (3.22) here is:
                                            !                    !
                                 X                   X
(B.20)                     ps −           S
                                     rts δts − ps0 −     rts δts0 ≥ 0, ∀s, s0 6= s,
                                                              S

                                      t∈S                      t∈S
                                                           n       o
which is independent of the Agent’s effort. Next, let p~S , ~δS be an optimal relaxed-sales contract and
      n for aocontradiction, that there exists a reporting strategy Π ∈ Z that violates the guile constraint
suppose,
under p~S , ~δS . Let ~λΠ be the optimal effort level that attains the maximum expected payoff for the Agent
                                                                                                   
under reporting strategy Π; ~λΠ allows for positive effort on the malfeasance task. Let Ū ~λ, Π be the
Agent’s expected payoff for using an effort vector ~λ together with reporting strategy Π. Since adhering to


43We note that this is just a feasible authority contract which is not necessarily optimal.
44We have taken ε > 0 in order to satisfy the full support condition (FSC).
45See the appendix of MacLeod (2003).

                                                              B- 8
the contract terms gives the Agent an expected payoff of U o , we have:
                                                         
(B.21)                                 U o < Ū ~λΠ , Π
                                                        
(B.22)                                      ≤ Ū ~λΠ , I
(B.23)                                                     ≤ Ū ([λ, 0, . . . , 0] , I)
                                                           = U o,

where the first inequality in (B.21) follows from the assumption that the guile constraint is violated for Π,
the second inequality in (B.22) follows from (B.20) that the Agent is always weakly better off by truthfully
reporting at every signal regardless
                             n       of
                                     o the exerted effort, and the third inequality in (B.23) follows from ICE
                                S ~S
and ICM being satisfied for p~ , δ      under truthful-reporting. We thus have a contradiction.
   We have thus shown that the solution to program-SC-R suffices for the optimal sales contract. Program-
SC-R is a linear program and the Lagrangian of the problem is:
                                                                                         !!
                                                            X                X
                    L SR       ~ p +µ
                           = β(λ)~   S     S            o
                                               V (λ) + U −               S
                                                                βs (λ) p −       rts δ S
                                                    0                                                           s                     ts
                                                                                          s∈S                             t∈S
                                                                                                                !!
                                                           X               H                  X
                                     +µS1       0
                                               V (λ) −               βˆs            pSs   −                S
                                                                                                      rts δts
                                                           s∈S                                t∈S
                                                                                                                    !                  !
                                         X                       X            m                   X
                                     +         µS(ICM
                                                m
                                                      )
                                                                          βˆs         pSs     −              S
                                                                                                        rts δts                 0
                                                                                                                          − V (λ)
                                         m∈M                     s∈S                              t∈S
                                                                 "                                                                                #
                                         X      X                                  X                                       X               
                                     +                   µSss0           pSs0   −               S
                                                                                           rts δts0        −        pSs   −              S
                                                                                                                                    rts δts
                                         s∈S s0 ∈S/{s}                              t∈S                                       t∈S

The first-order conditions and their corresponding complementary slackness conditions provide necessary
and sufficient conditions for optimality. The rest of the proof is then analogous to Proposition 3 and is thus
omitted.
   To prove continuity, for a same argument as in Proposition 4, we can restrict attention to contracts in a
                                                                 n2
compact setnΨSR∗ (λ)                 SR                  n
                        o = X ∩ Ψ (λ) where X ⊂ < × < , and Ψ
                                                                          SR∗
                                                                               (λ) is upper-hemicontinuous.
                  S ~S         SR∗                            ~ S
   Next, let p~ , δ       ∈Ψ                      ~ = N p~ − δ . For any sequence λk → λ, we define p~k = bk p~ +~ak
                                   (λ) and denote w
                                                                                                      ~
and ~δkS = bk ~δs , with bk → 1 and ~ak → ~0. Denote w    ~ k = bk w                                      ~ = V 0 (λk ).
                                                                    ~ + N~ak . bk is set such that bk Γ̂H w
                ~
This implies Γ̂H w  ~ k = V 0 (λk ) and hence satisfies ICE for λk . It is immediate that it also satisfies ICM. ~ak
is set such that ~Γ(λk )w ~ k − V (λk ) = U o which thus satisfies PC. As for ATR, let pSk,s be the cost-price for
                                                                                                n        o
report s under p~S , and δ S be the conflict in state ts under ~δS . ATR is satisfied for p~S , ~δS which then
                  k           k,ts                                                                k
implies that ∀t, s, s0 ∈ S:

                                         pSs − t∈S rts δts
                                                        S
                                                           ≥ pSs0 − t∈S rts δts
                                                                             S
                                               P                     P
                                                                               0


                    ⇐⇒ bk pSs + ak − t∈S rts bk δts     S
                                                           ≥ bk pSs0 + ak − t∈S rts bk δts
                                                                                        S
                                             P                             P
                                                                                          0

                                     S               S        S                S
                                              P                       P
                    ⇐⇒             pk,s − t∈S rts δk,ts ≥ pk,s0 − t∈S rts δk,ts0
                               n            o                n         o
Hence ATR is also satisfied for p~Sk , ~δkS . We thus have p~Sk , ~δkS ∈ ΨSR∗ (λk ) for all k. This implies that
ΨSR∗ (λ) is lower-hemicontinuous By the maximum theorem, C S∗ (λ) is continuous in λ.                                                                 

B.4.2. Details for Section B.1.1.
                                                                           B- 9
Proof of Proposition 14 and Optimal Sales Contract for the EA Environment with Symmetric Correlation.
From Proposition 13, the optimal sales contract is characterized by (B.1) - (B.5) and (B.8) - (B.9) while
setting M = ∅. Substituting in (B.1), we can rewrite (B.2) and (B.3) as respectively:

                           βs (λ)rts + s0 ∈S/{s} µSs0 s (rts − rts0 ) ≥ 0
                                       P
(B.24)                                                                       , ∀t, s ∈ S,
                         "                                          #
                          βs (λ)rts + s0 ∈S/{s} µSs0 s (rts − rts0 ) δts
                                                                      S
                                      P
(B.25)                                                                   = 0 , ∀t, s ∈ S.

Notice that when t = s, the left-hand side of (B.24) becomes:
                                                                              X
(B.26)                           βs (λ)(1 − ) + (1 −  −     )                       µSs0 s ,
                                                          n−1
                                                                          s0 ∈S/{s}

                                                               ~ S ≥ ~0, because βs (λ) > 0 ∀s ∈ S and 1−− n−1
which is strictly positive for any choice of multiplier vector µ                                             
                                                                                                                ≥
                   S
0. From (B.25), δts must then be 0 when t = s which establishes the following result:




Proposition 16. In the Agent-informed environment (EA - Definition 8) where there is symmetric cor-
                                                   S
relation satisfying (B.12), there is no conflict (δts = 0) when the Principal and the Agent agree on the
performance (t = s).




  When t 6= s, the left-hand side of (B.24), instead, becomes:
                                                                      
                                     βs (λ)      + µSs0 s       − (1 − )                 s0 =t
                                            n−1            n−1
                                                                  
(B.27)                          = βs (λ)         +          − (1 − ) µSts .
                                            n−1      n−1
    S
If δts > 0, then (B.27) must be 0 under (B.25). In this case, µSts is uniquely pinned down by:
                                                                    
(B.28)                                µSts = βs (λ)                     .
                                                       (1 − )n − 1

n We areo now ready to provide a solution to the program and prove Proposition 14. Consider a sales contract
   S ~S
 p~ , δ   of the form in (B.13) with b̄S > 0 (to be derived), and let
                                                 (k − 1)               −1
(B.29)                                 δ̄ S =                + (1 − )         b̄S > 0.
                                                   n−1
The corresponding multiplier vector for the contract will be a µ   ~ S vector where µSss0 is set according to (B.28)
if ss0 ∈ S − × S + , and µSss0 = 0 otherwise.                                  n         o
    We now show that this multiplier vector µ ~ S , together with this contract p~S , ~δS , satisfy all the optimality
                                                                                                    S
conditions. From the analysis in (B.26) and (B.27), (B.24) is satisfied. Consider (B.25) now. When δts = 0,
                                     S                  −              +               S
(B.25) is trivially satisfied. When δts > 0, then t ∈ S and s ∈ S . Given that µts is set according to
(B.28), the term in the bracket of (B.25) is 0 and hence, (B.25) is still satisfied.
  We consider the ATR (B.4) now. When ss0 ∈ S + × S + or ss0 ∈ S − × S − :
                                                 X
                                      pSs − pSs0 −         S    S
                                                                    
(B.30)                                               rts δts − δts0   = 0.
                                                        t∈S
                                                          B- 10
When ss0 ∈ S + × S − :
                                      X                          X
                           pSs − pSs0 −       S     S
                                                          = b̄S −   rts δ̄ S
                                                        
                                         rts δts − δts0

                                          t∈S                                 t∈S −
                                                                               k S
                                                                    = b̄S −       δ̄
                                                                            n−1
                                                                            h (k − 1)          i
                                                                    > b̄S −            + (1 − ) δ̄ S
                                                                                n−1
(B.31)                                                              = 0.

                because s ∈ S + and hence, each t ∈ S − happens with probability n−1
                   k                                                                  
P
  t∈S −   rts =   n−1                                                                    . The inequality
                                                                           −1
                  
comes from 1− > n−1 , and the last equality follows from δ̄ S = (k−1)
                                                                  n−1 +(1−)    b̄S . When ss0 ∈ S − ×S + :
                                     X                           X
                          pSs − pSs0 −       S     S
                                                         = −b̄S +   rts δ̄ S
                                                       
                                        rts δts − δts0

                                         t∈S                                  t∈S −
                                                                                            
                                                                          S(k − 1)
                                                                   = −b̄ +          + (1 − ) δ̄ S
                                                                            n−1
(B.32)                                                             = 0

        rts = (k−1)                   0    −
P
  t∈S −        n−1 + (1 − ) because s ∈ S     so there exists t = s which happens with probability 1 − ,
                     −                                                       
and the rest of t ∈ S (there are k − 1 of them) happens with probability n−1     each. (B.30) to (B.32) thus
implies ATR (B.4) always holds.
  As for (B.5), from what we have just done, the term in the square bracket is 0 except when ss0 ∈ nS + × S −
                                                                                                            o,
but µSss0 = 0 when ss0 ∈ S + × S − . Hence (B.5) holds. Thus we have shown that the contract p~S , ~δS ,
together with the proposed multiplier vector µ   ~ S , satisfy the optimality conditions (B.1) - (B.5) . We are left
to pin down p̄S , b̄S and δ̄ S using the PC (B.8) and ICE (B.9).
   We first determine b̄S using the ICE. Let β̂ + = s∈S + β̂sH > 0. The ICE constraint implies that:
                                                         P
                                                               
                                                            k
                                          β̂ + b̄S − δ̄ S         = V 0 (λ) .
                                                          n−1
Combining with (B.29), we thus have:
                                                                     0
                                                              k         V (λ)
(B.33)                                         b̄S   =       1+
                                                          n − 1 − n      β̂ +
                                                                 0
                                                        n−1        V (λ)
(B.34)                                    δ̄ S =
                                                      n − 1 − n     β̂ +
where b̄S , δ̄ S ∈ (0, ∞).46 Finally, let β + (λ) = s∈S + = β(λ), we can determine p̄S using the PC:
                                                    P
                                                      
                          S    +        S      S    k
                        p̄ + β (λ) b̄ − δ̄                   = U 0 + V (λ) .
                                                   n−1
                                                                                        β + (λ)
(B.35)                                                   =⇒ p̄S       = U 0 + V (λ) −             V 0 (λ) .
                                                                                          β̂ +
Optimal Authority Contract for the EA Environment with Symmetric Correlation. Consider a contract where
the Principal pays a bonus b̄A to the Agent when he observes the good signal (t = 1). b̄A is obtained




46 < 1 − 1 implies that n − 1 − n > 0. Hence b̄S , δ̄ S ∈ (0, ∞).
          n
                                                                  B- 11
immediately from the ICE:
                                               h                     i
                                                β̂1H (1 − ) + β̂0H  b̄A = V 0 (λ)
                                                                     V 0 (λ)
                                     =⇒                   b̄A =    (1−2)β̂1H
                                                                              .

where the second line uses β̂0H = −β̂1H . Next, for  < 12 , it is readily verified that the PTR (3.2) is more
stringent at t = 1 and conflict needs to occur only at state ts = 01. Having PTR bind at t = 1 and noting
                    β1 (λ)(1−)
that q11 (λ) = β0 (λ)+β  1 (λ)(1−)
                                     , the PTR at t = 1 can be written as
                                                             β1 (λ)(1−)
                                               b̄A ≤    β0 (λ)+β1 (λ)(1−) δ̄
                                                                               A


which implies that
                                                              
                                                     β0 (λ)
                                    δ̄ A   =  1+                 b̄A
                                                 β1 (λ)(1 − )
                                                                     V 0 (λ)
                                                              
                                                     β0 (λ)
                                           =  1+
                                                 β1 (λ)(1 − ) (1 − 2) β̂1H
The corresponding expected level of conflict is then:

                                  LossA (λ)      = β1 (λ) δ̄ A
                                                                      
                                                              β0 (λ)
                                                 =  1+                   LossS (λ)
                                                         β1 (λ)(1 − )
B.4.3. Details for Section B.2.

Proof of Proposition 15.

Proof. First note that under the assumption on λA , λS as defined in (B.17), is non-negative. θ is also
                                     S
non-negative which implies that δts      ≥ 0.                                                       n           o
   Let vectors µ~ be the full vector of Lagrange multipliers for the optimal authority contract λA , p~A , ~δA ;
                 A
                   n            o
~ A together with λA , p~A , ~δA thus satisfies the optimality conditions (3.5) to (3.14) in the IP environment.
µ
                               n           o
Consider the sales contract λS , p~s , ~δs that satisfies the conditions in the proposition. Set µ ~S = µ~ A . The
                            n            o
proof entails showing that λS , p~s , ~δs together with µ
                                                        ~ S satisfy the sales contract optimality conditions (B.1)
                                                                                0
to (B.10) for the dual EA environment. First notice that µSss0 = µA    ss0 ∀s, s ∈ S implies that:
                                              X
                                     S
                                                   µSss0 rts − µSs0 s rts0
                                                                           
                                    vts  =
                                                       s0 6=s
                                                       X
                                                                µSss0 qst − µSs0 s qs0 t
                                                                                           
                                                =
                                                       s0 6=s
                                                       X
                                                                µA          A
                                                                                           
                                                =                ss0 qst − µs0 s qs0 t
                                                       s0 6=s
                                                   A
(B.36)                                          = vst

The second line comes from the dual environment condition that rts = qst , and the third line follows from
        ~S = µ
setting µ    ~ A . By the same argument, we also have vsS = −vsA .
   We begin checking the optimality conditions (B.1) to (B.10) now. (3.5) gives:

                                               −µA   H    A
                                                 1 γ̂t + vt = 0 ∀t ∈ S.
                                                                B- 12
Using µA       S    H       H                                      A     S
         1 = µ1 , γ̂t = −β̂t (the dual environment condition) and vt = −vt , and then transposing the
signals from t to s under the dual environment condition, we get

                                              µS1 β̂sH − vsS = 0 ∀s ∈ S,

which is (B.1).
  Next, (B.14) implies that:

                                      ~γ λA       = β~ 1 − λA
                                                                       
                                                                                           !
                                                            LossA λA
                                                  = β~  λ +     S
                                                               V 0 (λA )
                                                                ~
                                                  = β~ λS + µS1 β̂ H ,
                                                         
(B.37)
                                                                                                LossA (λA )
where the second line follows from (B.17), and the last line follows from µS1 = µA
                                                                                 1 =              V 0 (λA )
                                                                                                              from (3.15).
The left-hand side of (3.6) is:
                                    γt λA qts + vts
                                                  A
                                                    = γt λA rst + vst  S
                                                             
                                                                         ,
and transposing the signals under the dual environment condition and using (B.37), we have:

                              γs λA rts + vts
                                            S
                                              = βs λS rts + µS1 β̂sH rts + vts
                                                                            S
                                                     
                                                                               ,
                                                                            S        A
which is the left-hand side of (B.2). (B.2) is thus satisfied. Given that δts   = θδst and θ > 0, (3.7) implies
that (B.3) is also satisfied.
   Next, (3.8) implies that:
                                             !                       !
                                   X                   X
                               A
                              pt +         A       A
                                      qts δts − pt0 +       qts δt0 s ≤ 0, ∀t, t0 ∈ S.
                                                                 A

                                  s∈S                            s∈S

Notice that if we multiply the above by −θ < 0, add the constant α to pA   t (which does not affect the
inequality) and then transpose all s to t, we get:
                                            !                          !
                               X                           X
                       A
                   −θps + α −             A        A
                                    qst θδst − −θps0 + α −   qst θδs0 t ≥ 0, ∀s, s0 ∈ S.
                                                                   A

                                s∈S                                         s∈S

Using (B.15) and (B.16), and the dual environment condition that rts = qst , we get:
                                          !                    !
                                X                   X
                            S
                           ps −         S      S
                                   rts δts − ps0 −     rts δts0 ≥ 0, ∀s, s0 ∈ S
                                                            S

                                  t∈S                            t∈S
                                           0
which is exactly (B.4). µSss0 = µAss0 ∀s, s ∈ S and (3.9) then imply that (B.5) is also satisfied.
  (B.6) and (B.7) are vacuous since we assume that M = ∅. The ICE condition (B.9) is satisfied by the
appropriate choice of θ. (B.9) holds if:

                                                                     − V 0 λS = 0
                                              H
                                                                              
                                                 pSs − t∈S rts δts
                                                                S
                                      P                P
                                        s∈S β̂s
                                                                              0
                                          H
                                                                                   
                                             −θpA                     A
                                                                                 λS = 0
                                P                         P
                        ⇐⇒         s∈S β̂s       s +α−     t∈S rts θδst − V
                                                                            0
                                                                                 
                                 θ t∈S −γ̂tH −pA                     A
                                                                                λS = 0
                                   P                      P
                        ⇐⇒                            t −   s∈S qts δts − V
                                                                    V 0 (λS )
                        ⇐⇒                    θ=   P
                                                             γ̂tH pA
                                                                       P          H      A
                                                       t∈S         t +    t,s∈S γ̂t qts δts

                                                                    V 0 (λS )
                        ⇐⇒                        θ=   V 0 (λA )+
                                                                    P
                                                                                γ̂tH qts δts
                                                                                          A
                                                                       t,s∈S


                                                             B- 13
where the second line comes from (B.15) and (B.16), the third line follows from the dual environment
conditions and noting that t∈S γ̂tH α = 0, and the last line follows from (3.13) binding which thus implies
                             P
                      0
                           
that t∈S γ̂tH pA        λA .
    P
               t =V
   The last thing to check is the PC condition (B.8) which is satisfied by the appropriate choice of α:
                                            S
                                               S P            S
                                                                                  
                                                                    = U 0 + V λS
                                 P
                                   s∈S βs λ      ps − t∈S rts δts
                                        S
                                                                                        
                                            −θpA                     A      0          S
                             P                         P
                     ⇐⇒        s∈S βs λ          s +α−    t∈S rts θδst = U + V λ
                                                                                      
                              α = U 0 + V λS + θ s∈S βs λS pA                        A
                                                    P                     P
                     ⇐⇒                                              s +    t∈S rts δst

                                ~ λS = ~γ λA − µS β̂~ H = ~γ λA + µA~γ̂ H . Hence:
                                                              
Notice that (B.37) also implies β                 1                    1
                                                                     !
                              X                   A X
     α = U 0 + V λS + θ           γt λA + µA   H                  A
                                      
                                           1 γ̂t    pt +     qts δts
                                   t∈S                                    s∈S
                                                                                                         
                                                                                                          
                                  X                 X             X                      X                
               0        S                  A
                                             A   A       H A               A
                                                                                 A    A         H      A
         = U +V λ               +θ    γt λ pt + µ1      γ̂t pt +       γt λ qts δts +µ1       γ̂t qts δts 
                                  
                                                                                                          
                                  |t∈S {z     } |
                                                     t∈S
                                                       {z      } |
                                                                  t,s∈S                  t,s∈S             
                                                                           {z      }     |      {z       }
                                         =U o +V (λA )        =LossA (λA )          =LossA (λA )   =DLA
                                                                                       A
                                                                                          
                                                        DL
        = U 0 (1 + θ) + V λS + θV λA + θLossA λA 2 + 0 A ,
                                               
                                                       V (λ )
                                                                                      A 0
                                    A                                                     
where the second line on t∈S γt λ pt = U +V λ comes from (3.12) and µA
                                 A       o   A                                H A
                                                                                          λA =
                        P                                              P
                                                                     1  t∈S γ̂t pt = µ1 V
           
LossA λA from (3.15).                                                                       


B.4.4. Details for Section B.3.



Optimal Sales Contract for Section B.3. Let bS be the bonus paid when the Agent reports s = 2. To deter
lying at s = 1, the following must hold:

                                                         bS − r01 δ02
                                                                   S         S
                                                                      − r11 δ12 ≥0
                                             ⇐⇒           bS − 3ε δ02
                                                                   S
                                                                      − 23 δ12
                                                                            S
                                                                               ≥0

To deter lying at s = 0, the following must hold:

                                                         bS − r00 δ02
                                                                   S         S
                                                                      − r10 δ12 ≥0
                                             ⇐⇒           bS − 23 δ02
                                                                   S
                                                                      − 3ε δ12
                                                                            S
                                                                               ≥0
                                                                    S     S
Since Γ02 (λ) = Γ12 (λ), the condition can be satisfied by setting δ02 = δ12 = δ S with

                                                    δ S 2+ε
                                                            
                                                         3    = bS
                                                                         3 S
                                                    ⇐⇒         δS =     2+ε b

The effort incentives are then satisfied by:
                                             1 S
                                             6 (b − δ S ) + 61 (bS − δ S ) + 23 bS = V 0 (λ)
                                                                           
                                   ⇐⇒                 ε−1
                                                bS 6(2+ε)         ε−1
                                                            + 6(2+ε)   + 23 = V 0 (λ)
                                                                B- 14
which implies that:
                                                                  2+ε 0
                                                          bS =    1+ε V (λ),
                                                                   3   0
                                                           δS =   1+ε V (λ)

The expected social loss is then
                                                                                    
                                                 λ                  λ        3
                                           2        δS       =                  V 0 (λ)
                                                 6                  3       1+ε
                                                                     λ
                                                             =          V 0 (λ)
                                                                    1+ε
Optimal Authority Contract for Section B.3. We consider an authority contract where the Principal pays a
bonus bA when he reports t = 2, and conflicts only occurs at states 10 and 01. To satisfy the effort incentives,
bA must satisfy:
                                            2   1−ε    1−ε
                                                            b = V 0 (λ)
                                                            A
                                            3 − 6 − 6
                                                                         3   0
                                          ⇐⇒                 bA =       1+ε V (λ)

                                                          A
To deter the Principal from lying to t = 1 when t = 2, δ10    must be set such that:
                                                           A             A
                                            P
                                              s∈S Γ2s (λ)b ≤ Γ20 (λ)δ10
                               h                               i       h            i
                                 (1−ε)(1−λ)   (1−ε)(1−λ)    2λ    A      (1−ε)(1−λ)    A
                        ⇐⇒            6     +      6     +   3   b  ≤          6      δ10
                                                                            
                                         A              2λ          6     0
                        ⇐⇒              δ10 ≥ 1 + (1−ε)(1−λ)       1+ε V    (λ)
                                                          A
To deter the Principal from lying to t = 0 when t = 2, δ01    must be set such that:
                                                           A           A
                                            P
                                              s∈S Γ2s (λ)b ≤ Γ21 (λ)δ01
                               h                               i     h            i
                                 (1−ε)(1−λ)
                        ⇐⇒            6     + (1−ε)(1−λ)
                                                   6     + 2λ    A
                                                             3 b ≤
                                                                       (1−ε)(1−λ)
                                                                            6
                                                                                     A
                                                                                    δ01
                                                                         
                                         A              2λ         6    0
                        ⇐⇒              δ01 ≥ 1 + (1−ε)(1−λ)      1+ε V (λ)

Hence, we set                                                                             
                                 A         A                     2λ                  6   0
                                δ10   =   δ01   =       1+                              V (λ)
                                                           (1 − ε)(1 − λ)           1+ε
and the expected loss is then:
                                                                               
                                     ε(1 − λ)     (1 − ε)(1 − λ) + 2λ     6
                                 2                                           V 0 (λ)
                                         6           (1 − ε)(1 − λ)      1+ε
                                                               
                                      (1 − ε)(1 − λ) + 2λ 0
                            =    2ε                        V (λ)
                                             1 − ε2




                                                                  B- 15
                       Appendix C. Additional Details for Examples in Section 4
                                    (For Online Publication Only)

C.1. Details for Section 4.1. We provide the details for condition (4.13) which characterizes the optimal
 S
δU E first. From (4.8), (4.9) and (4.10), the most efficient way to maintain guile-free against Π1 entails setting
 S            S        S                                                             L
                                                                                              S       L    S
δEU  = 0. δU    U and δU E are then set to minimize the expected inefficiency ΓU U − λρ δU U + ΓU E δU E in
(4.11), while ensuring that the guile constraint against Π1 holds:
                                                                          
                                   ~ΓL w
                                       ~ + g̃ Γ̂H w
                                                  ~    − ~ΓL Π1 w
                                                                ~ + g̃ Γ̂H Π1 w
                                                                              ~    ≥0
                              S
                                            S    S
                                                                              
                  ⇐⇒ g̃ ρδU     E − g̃ ρ b + δU U       + ΓL    S     S     S         L
                                                           U U b − δU E + δU U + ΓEU bS ≤ 0

                         V 0 (λ)
   Using bS + δU
               S
                 U =        ρ from the ICE, this can then be written as
                                                  0                    0          
                         S
                                   0        L    V (λ)    S        L    V (λ)    S
(C.1)               g̃ ρδU E − g̃ (V (λ)) + ΓU U        − δU E + ΓEU           − δU U ≤ 0.
                                                    ρ                      ρ
We thus minimize (4.11) subject to (C.1). The Lagrangian of this minimization problem is:

           L = ΓL
                               S      L   S
                     U U − λρ δU U + ΓU E δU E
                                                   0                     0            
                             S
                                       0       L    V (λ)     S       L     V (λ)    S
                  +µ g̃ ρδU E − g̃ (V (λ)) + ΓU U          − δU E + ΓEU            − δU U
                                                       ρ                       ρ
where µ is the Lagrange multiplier. The first-order conditions are:
                                 S
                                                     0
                                          ΓL              S         L
                                                                     
(C.2)                         [δU  E] :     U E + µ g̃ ρδU E ρ − ΓU U = 0
                                 S
                                            ΓL              L
                                                      
(C.3)                         [δU  U] :      U U − λρ − µΓEU ≥ 0

                                 S                                                             ΓL
(C.2) holds with equality since δU E > 0 from (4.7); we thus have µ = − g̃ 0                              . Substituting this
                                                                                                 UE
                                                                                           (  S
                                                                                                 )
                                                                                            ρδU E ρ−ΓL
                                                                                                     UU
into (C.3) gives us:
                                                               ΓL
                                      ΓL                        U
                                                                E        ΓL
                                               
(C.4)                                  U U − λρ +            S        L    EU        ≥ 0.
                                                      g̃ 0 ρδU E ρ − ΓU U
                                              S
If (C.4) holds with strict inequality, then δU  U = 0. In this case, the most efficient sales contract that is
                                            S      S           S
guile-free against Π1 is the one that sets δU U , δEU = 0 and δU E to have (C.1) binding, which can then be
written as (4.13):
                                                                               V 0 (λ)
                                  S      L    S
                                                        = g̃ (V 0 (λ)) − ΓL      L
                                     
                             g̃ ρδU E − ΓU U δU E                         U U + ΓEU     .
                                                                                   ρ
    To understand when (C.4) holds with strict inequality, first recall that g̃ 0 ρδUS
                                                                                              S
                                                                                                  
                                                                                       E = Λ ρδU E , the effort
                                               S
exerted by the Agent under effort incentives ρδU E (see fn. 34); this is thus the Agent’s guile effort for Π1 .
            47                    S
                                           L
Since µ > 0, we know that Λ ρδU E ρ − ΓU U < 0 and thus, (C.4) holds with strict inequality if and only
if:

                              ΓL
                                         L            S
                                                                  > ΓL       L
                                                           
(C.5)                          U U − λρ   ΓU U − Λ ρδU   E ρ            U E ΓEU .

                   48
           S
               
Since Λ ρδU  E >λ     and ΓL
                           U U − λρ > 0, a necessary condition for (C.5) to hold is that:
                                                    2
(C.6)                                     ΓL
                                           U U − λρ    > ΓL     L
                                                           U E ΓEU ,


47We know that µ > 0 because the guile-free constraint against Π binds.
                                                                  1
48This comes from (4.7) which implies that the effort incentives for Π is strictly greater than that for truth-telling.
                                                                      1
                                                              C- 1
while a sufficient condition is the condition given in (4.12):
                                                         2
                                        ΓL           S
                                         U U − Λ ρδU E ρ      ≥ ΓL    L
                                                                 U E ΓEU .

   Suppose the necessary condition (C.6) holds; the sufficient condition (4.12) then requires that the Agent’s
                 S
                    
guile effort Λ ρδU E is not too much higher than the effort obligation λ. This will be the case when the cost
function is very convex such that Λ0 (·) is small (see fn. 34).

Proof of Proposition 8.

Proposition. 8: Consider the 2-signal incentive-neutral information structure with effort obligation λ.
                                   0
Consider the sales contract bS = V ρ(λ) , δU
                                           S      S        S                   o              L   S
                                             U , δEU = 0, δU E > 0 and cU = U + V (λ) + ΓU E δU E −
  L      L
                  S                                                 S
 ΓU E + ΓEE + λρ b . Suppose that the following four conditions for δU E hold:
         S
    (1) δU E satisfies (4.13) and (4.12) holds.
                            
    (2) ΓL         L
           U E +ΓEE n + λρ bS − o
                                  ΓL    S              o
                                   U E δU E − V (λ) − U ≥ 0.
         S                  ΓL
    (3) δU E ≤ min 1 +
                             EE
                            ΓL
                                 × bS .
                                ,2
                            UE                 S
    (4) ΓL      L
         U E + ΓEE    + λρ cU ≤ ΓL      L            L    S
                                 U E + ΓEE + λρ b − ΓU E δU E .

  Then this sales contract is optimal.

Proof. First note that the Agent’s effort incentives from each possible reporting strategies are respectively:
                                ~H         ~
                                      ~ = Γ̂H w
                                              ~ = ρ bS + δU   S
                                                                  
(C.7)                           Γ̂ I w                          U
                                         ~H             S
(C.8)                                    Γ̂ Π1 w
                                               ~    = ρδU E
                                         ~H              S      S
                                                                      
(C.9)                                    Γ̂ Π2 w
                                               ~    = ρ δU U − δEU
                                         ~H
                                                    = ρ −bS + δU
                                                               S      S
                                                                        
(C.10)                                   Γ̂ Π3 w
                                               ~                 E − δEU .

   bS and cU are respectively set such that the ICE holds and PC binds. As explained in the main text and
the observations above, the first condition implies that this sales contract is the most efficient among all
sales contract that is guile-free against Π1 .
   As for the second condition, notice that under the proposed sales contract, the effort incentives for
                         ~
reporting strategy Π2 , Γ̂H Π2 w
                               ~ in (C.9), is 0. Hence the Agent chooses 0 effort under Π2 and obtains cU for
sure. The second condition thus ensures that the expected payoff from doing so is less than U o , the expected
payoff of adhering to the contract terms. Hence it is guile-free against Π2 .
   For the third condition, notice that under the proposed contract,
                                   ~ΓL Π3 w
                                          ~ = cU + ΓL     S    S      L   S
                                                                 
(C.11)                                              U U b − δU E + ΓEU b .

              ΓL
                                                                        
 S
δU E ≤    1 + Γ
               EE
               L    bS (from condition 3) then implies that ΓL    S    S        L   S
                                                             U E b − δU E + ΓEE b ≥ 0. This, together with
              UE
(4.10) and (C.11), implies that ΓL Π3 w  ~ ≤ ΓL Π1 w.
                                                   ~ Moreover, we also have ΓL Π1 w  ~ < ΓL w~ . This is due to the
first condition which implies that (4.8) binds, and that g (Π1 , w) ~ > g (I, w);
                                                                               ~ this last inequality comes from
the effort incentives under Π1 (C.8) being higher than that of the truth-telling reporting strategy (C.7), and
                                                                                          S       S
g̃(·) as defined in (3.28) is strictly increasing in the effort incentives. In addition, δU E ≤ 2b (condition 3)
               ~         ~
implies that Γ̂H Π3 w         ~ These two results then jointly imply that ~ΓL Π3 w
                     ~ ≤ Γ̂H w.                                                                ~ < ~ΓL w
                                                                                   ~ + g (Π3 , w)      ~ + g (I, w)
                                                                                                                 ~
and hence, the contract is guile-free against Π3 .
    Finally, the fourth condition of the proposition is ATR at s = E.                                            
                                                       C- 2
  As mentioned, condition 1 in Proposition 8 is more likely to hold if g̃ is less convex (i.e. g̃ 00 (·) = Λ0 (·) is
                                        S
small). Conditions 2, 3 and 4 require δU  E not to be too large while satisfying equation (4.13). This also
                              49
happens when g̃ is less convex , which in turn is implied by the convexity of the cost function V .

C.2. Details for Section 4.2. It has been noted in the main text that incentives should only be loaded at
states s = A or E. Without loss of generality, we can consider only incentive schemes of the form:
                                              
                                              
                                              
                                               w̄       , if s = U
                                              
                                       ps = w̄ + bA , if s = A
                                              
                                              
                                              
                                               w̄ + bE , if s = E
    To better illustrate the point that guile can restrict the optimal contract form without affecting its
efficiency, let us assume that bA = 0, and then show later that this assumption is without loss of generality.
    To deter the Agent from constantly reporting E, there must be some conflict when the Agent reports
E while the Principal reports otherwise. In particular, to ensure that the Agent truthfully reports s = A
instead of E, the incentive scheme must satisfy:
                                                      S               S
                                       (1 − λ)ε(bE − δU E ) + η(bE − δAE ) + (1 − λ)εbE ≤ 0
                                                      S            η           S
(C.12)                         ⇐⇒             ε(bE − δU E) +      1−λ (bE   − δAE ) + εbE ≤ 0

To ensure that the Agent truthfully report s = U instead of E, the incentive scheme must satisfy:
                                                  S                      S
                                   (1 − λ)ε(bE − δU E ) + (1 − λ)ε(bE − δAE ) + (1 − λ)εbE ≤ 0
                                                        S               S
(C.13)                     ⇐⇒                   ε(bE − δU E ) + ε(bE − δAE ) + εbE ≤ 0.

                    S                                                     S
Note that bE ≤ δAE       must hold. To see why, suppose that bE − δAE         > 0. Then it must be true that
  S                                                    η
δU E > bE > 0 to satisfy both constraints. Since 1−λ > ε by assumption, (C.12) is more stringent than
                                                                   S      S      η
(C.13). As the expected inefficiency of the contract is (1 − λ)ε(δU  E + δAE ), 1−λ > ε then also implies that it
                                       S                 S                                              S
is always more efficient to increase δAE  and decrease δU  E to satisfy (C.12) which then contradicts δU E > 0.
                                           S
Hence, it must be the case that bE − δAE      ≤ 0, which in turn implies that (C.13) is more stringent than
(C.12).
                 S     S
    The set of {δAE , δU E } that minimizes the expected inefficiency while satisfying (C.12) and (C.13) is not
unique. Any:
                                    S     S                     S
(C.14)                            {δAE , δU E }-pair such that δAE ≥ bE and (C.13) binds,

will suffice and thus be a solution to program-SC-R (3.32). This corresponds to the set in (4.14).
   The main text has established that the contract in (4.17) is guile-free. To complete the contract specifi-
cation, bE will then be determined via the ICE (2.14):
                                                            S              S        0
                                             7εbE − ε(bE − δAE ) − ε(bE − δU E ) = V (λ)
                                                                         V 0 (λ)
(C.15)                              ⇐⇒                           bE =      8ε ,

49To see why a less convex g̃ function implies that δ S does not need to be too large to satisfy (4.13), we start from δ S =
                                                     UE                                                                 UE
V 0 (λ)
   ρ
          = bS ; under this, the left hand side of (4.13) is greater the right hand side, and we need to change δU
                                                                                                                 S
                                                                                                                   E to decrease the
left hand side. We know from (4.7) that δU  S          S                            S                                  S
                                              E > b and hence, the change in δU E is an increase from the value b . When doing
so, the marginal increase on g̃ is related to g̃ 0 (·), while the marginal decrease on −ΓL   δ
                                                                                          UU UE
                                                                                               S   is always a constant  −ΓLU U . If g̃ is
less convex, then the marginal increase on g̃ is small. Hence, a small increase in δU  S   can   quickly decrease the left hand  side of
                                                                                         E
(4.13) so that it equalizes the right hand side.
                                                                  C- 3
and w̄ is set to satisfy the PC (2.11). Under this contract, the expected inefficiency incurred is 38 (1−λ)V 0 (λ).
   Next, to illustrate that it is indeed without loss to have set bA = 0, we consider what happens when
allowing for bA > 0. Because there are also incentives at signal A, having some conflict there becomes
necessary now. In particular, when the underlying true performance is H and the Agent receives signal
s = A, the Principal must also be receiving t = A. Hence conflict should occur at s = A only when
the Principal disagrees with the Agent’s assessment. Since ΓEA (λ) = ΓU A (λ) and Γ̂H               H
                                                                                           EA = Γ̂U A , it is then
                                       S            S
without loss to have all conflict at δU  A and set δEA = 0. The expected inefficiency of this sales contract is
                  S       S     S
                                                         S      S        S
then (1 − λ) ε δU A + δU E + δAE where the values of δU     A , δU E and δAE are to be determined.
   To ensure that the Agent truthfully reports U instead of E or A, the incentive scheme must satisfy the
following two constraints:
                                             S
                                                                     S
                                                                        
                             (1 − λ)ε bE − δU  E + (1 − λ)ε bE − δAE + (1 − λ)εbE ≤ 0
                                                 S
                                                                 S
                                                                     
(C.16)                ⇐⇒                ε bE − δU  E + ε bE − δAE + εbE ≤ 0

and
                                                S
                                                   
                                 (1 − λ)ε bA − δU A + (1 − λ)εbA + (1 − λ)εbA ≤ 0
                                                   S
                                                      
(C.17)                   ⇐⇒                ε bA − δU A + εbA + εbA ≤ 0.

To ensure that the Agent truthfully reports A instead of E, the incentive scheme must also satisfy:
                                       S      S
                                                                 S
                                                                      
                 (1 − λ)ε bE − bA − δU   E + δU A + η bE − bA − δAE + (1 − λ)ε (bE − bA ) ≤ 0
                                                    η
                                     S      S
                                                                   S
                                                                        
(C.18)    ⇐⇒           ε bE − bA − δU  E + δU A + 1−λ bE − bA − δAE + ε (bE − bA ) ≤ 0

   Next, we consider the Agent’s effort incentives for task H when the Agent plays a non-truthful reporting
strategy. The change in effort incentives when the Agent reports E when she actually sees s = U is:
                                               S               S
                                                                
(C.19)                              − ε bE − δU  E − ε bE − δAE − εbE ,

the change in effort incentives when the Agent reports A when she actually sees U is:
                                                  S
                                                     
(C.20)                                  − ε bA − δU A − εbA − εbA ,

and the change in effort incentives when the Agent reports E when she actually sees s = A is:
                                                 S      S
                                                           
(C.21)                            − ε bE − bA − δU E + δU A − ε (bE − bA ) .

  By a similar argument as for (4.17), setting:
                                                S
                                               δAE    = bE − bA
                                                S
                                               δU E   =   2bE + bA
                                                S
(C.22)                                         δU A   =   3bA ,

can ensure that the truthful-reporting constraints (C.16) to (C.18) are satisfied while minimizing the total
expected inefficiency, and the change in effort incentive in (C.19) to (C.21) are all zero at the same time.
Hence this contract is definitely guile-free.
  The expected inefficiency associated with the contract is then:

(C.23)               (1 − λ) [ε (bE − bA ) + ε (2bE + bA ) + ε (3bA )] = 3(1 − λ)ε [bE + bA ] .

                                                        C- 4
The contract is required to provide effort incentive which is characterized by:

              V 0 (λ) = −ε bA − δU   S                      S               S
                                                                             
                                       A − εbA − ε bE − δU E − ε bE − δAE + 7εbE

                       = −ε (bA − 3bA ) − εbA − ε (bE − 2bE − bA ) − ε (bE − bE + bA ) + 7εbE
(C.24)                 = εbA + 8εbE

It is then immediate from (C.23) and (C.24) that the inefficiency is minimized by setting bA = 0 and
        0
bE = V 8ε(λ) as above. Hence there can be no gain from allowing for bA > 0.

Malfeasance. However, the presence of malfeasance task m prohibits bA from being 0. To see why, first let
the wage vector of the contract be denoted by w~ where the conflicts are set as in (C.22) to deter pure guile.
The marginal probabilities from effort on task m is:
                                                                 
                                                  −ε    −ε −ε
                                        Γ̂m =  −ε −η −ε 
                                                                 

                                                 1 − ε −ε 0
Consider the Agent exerting effort λm > 0 (to be determined) on task m and zero effort on task H, and
then playing a reporting strategy Π of reporting E when she sees s = U , reporting truthfully when she sees
s = A, and reporting U when she sees s = E.
   The Agent’s gain in expected payoff from doing so as opposed to adhering to the contract obligation can
be expressed as:
                      "            # "                                              #
                                                                               
(C.25)                 ~Γ (Π − I)w
                         L                     0                      0
                                  ~ + λm V (λm ) − V (λm ) − λV (λ) − V (λ)

                                         ~
where λm is characterized by V 0 (λm ) = Γ̂m Πw,
                                               ~ the Agent’s effort incentives on task m from her reporting
strategy Π. For there to be no incentives for the Agent to engage in malfeasance with guile this way, (C.25)
must be non-positive. The term in the first square bracket of (C.25) is:
                                                 ~ΓL (Π − I)w
                                                            ~ = εbE ,

which is strictly positive. Hence the term in the second square bracket of (C.25) must be strictly negative
which then implies that λm must be strictly less than λ. Notice that:
                         ~
           V 0 (λm )   = Γ̂m Πw
                              ~
                                  S             S                        S
                                                                          
                       = −ε bE − δU E − ε bE − δAE + (1 − ε)bE − ε bA − δU A − ηbA − εbA

                       = bE + (ε − η) bA ,

and V 0 (λ) has been derived in (C.24). Hence

                           V 0 (λm ) − V 0 (λ)   =   (bE + (ε − η) bA ) − (εbA + 8εbE )
                                                 =   (1 − 8ε) bE − ηbA
                                                 =   (η − ε) bE − ηbA

where the last equality follows from 1 = η + 7ε. With η − ε > 0, for λm to be strictly less than λ, it must
then be the case that bA > 0; incentives must thus be given at signal A as well.



                                                         C- 5
                  Appendix D. Linear Programming and the Optimal Contract
                                (For Online Publication Only)

   Program-AC (3.3) and program-SC-R (3.32) are linear programs and hence, we can characterize their
solutions using linear-programming techniques. This appendix states the well-known duality theorem and
describe how to convert program-AC and program-SC-R into standard-form linear programs.

D.1. Preliminaries. Consider a primal standard-form linear program given by:
  P

                                                 min~x∈<J ~v T ~x,
subject to:

                                                   A~x = ~b
                                                     x     ≥ ~0

where ~b ∈ <I , bi ≥ 0 ∀i ∈ {1, . . . , I}, ~v ∈ <J and A is a I × J matrix with I ≤ J. The dual to this problem
is then given by:
    D

                                                           ~ T ~b,
                                                 maxµ~ ∈<I µ
subject to:

                                                  ~ T A ≤ ~v T
                                                  µ
                                                     ~ ≥ ~0
                                                     µ

µi is the Lagrangian multiplier of the constraint corresponding to the i-th row of A~x = ~b.

Theorem 1. (Complementary slackness) Let ~x and µ    ~ be feasible solutions to the primal problem P and dual
problem D respectively. ~x and µ
                               ~ are also optimal solutions to their respective programs if and only if:

(D.1)                                             ~ T Aj )xj = 0 ∀j,
                                            (vj − µ

where Aj is the j-th column of matrix A.

Theorem 2. (Duality theory) If ~x∗ and µ
                                       ~ ∗ are optimal solutions to the primal problem P and dual problem
D respectively, then

(D.2)                                                       ~ ∗T ~b.
                                                 ~v T ~x∗ = µ

D.2. Converting the Optimal Contracting Problem into Standard-form Linear Programs. To
transform each program into standard form linear programming problems, we need to define ~x, ~c, ~b and
matrix A appropriately. Standard-form linear program requires that all constraints be equality constraints.
To convert an inequality constraint of the form:

                                      ai1 x1 + ai2 x2 + · · · + aiJ xJ ≤ bi ,

into an equality constraint, we will introduce a slack variable ηi and rewrite the inequality constraint as:

                                    ai1 x1 + ai2 x2 + · · · + aiJ xJ + ηi = bi .
                                                         D- 1
The slack variable ηi ≥ 0 will then be one of the choice variables. We will describe only the program
without malfeasance (M = ∅ ) to simplify the presentation. The addition of malfeasance is a straightforward
extension of adding constraints ICM (2.15) with an associated slack variable accordingly.


D.2.1. Program-AC. The ~x vector includes price-wage vector p~A , the conflict vector ~δA and the necessary
slack variable vector ~η (to be described). The standard-form linear program restricts that xi ≥ 0 ∀i. As
stated in the main text, it is without loss to consider only non-negative price-wage vector p~A .
   We can thus define the choice variable ~x for the problem as the contract terms and the slack variables:
                                                      
                                                      p~A
                                                    h Ai 
                                              ~x =   ~       ∈ <J
                                                    δ       
                                                       [~η ]

where J = n + n2 + n(n − 1). The dimension of ~η is n(n − 1) because there are n(n − 1) inequality constraints
which are the PTR (3.2). Define the index function Ĩ as Ĩ(tt0 ) = (n − 1)t + t0 . Each PTR constraint can
then be written as:
                                                 X
                             γt (λ)(pA    A
                                     t − pt0 ) +
                                                            A
                                                   Γts (λ)(δts − δtA0 s ) + ηtt0 = 0,
                                                             s∈S
                          0
where ηtt0 is the Ĩ(tt )-th entry of ~η . Including the PC (2.11) and ICE (2.14) constraints, there are a total
of I = 2 + n(n − 1) constraints. We describe the corresponding vectors ~v and ~b, and matrix A now. The ~v
vector is simply:
                                                                              T

                                    ~v = γ0 (λ), .., γt (λ), . . . γn−1 (λ),              ~0              
                                          |               {z               }              |{z}
                                                       first nterms                n2 +n(n−1)    terms

such that:
                                                                     X
                                                         ~v T ~x =         γt (λ)pA
                                                                                  t .
                                                                     t∈S

  Let A[i] ∈ <J be the i-th row of A with i = 0, 1, . . . , I − 1. A[0] is the PC constraint row; hence A[0] = ~v T
and b0 is V (λ) + U 0 .
  Next, A[1] is the ICE constraint row, where:
                                                                               

                                         A[1] = γ̂0 , .., γ̂t , . . . γ̂n−1 ,           ~0            
                                                 |            {z           }            |{z}
                                                          first nterms           n2 +n(n−1)    terms

such that:
                                                                       X
                                                          A[1]~x =           γ̂t pA
                                                                                  t .
                                                                       t∈S
b1 is then V 0 (λ).
   All subsequent rows will be PTR constraints. For a constraint ensuring that the Principal reports the
true signal t instead of some other t0 6= t, the corresponding row in matrix A is
                                                                                                                                   
          h           i
        A 2 + Ĩ(tt0 ) = 0, .., γt (λ), 0.., −γt (λ), 0, . . . , 0, .., ~Γt (λ),0,..., − ~Γt (λ), 0, . . ., 0, . . . , 1, 0, ..., 0
                                                                                                                                   
                          |                 {z                 }|                    {z                  } |            {z         }
                                               n terms                                  n2 terms                 n(n−1) terms

where ~Γt (λ) = [Γt0 (λ), . . . , Γt(n−1) (λ)]. γt (λ) is the t-th entry, −γt (λ) is the t0 -th entry, ~Γt (λ) forms the
(n + nt)-th to (n + nt + n − 1)-th entries, −~Γt (λ) forms the (n + nt0 )-th to (n + nt0 + n − 1)-th entries, and
                                                                     D- 2
the 1 is at the n + n2 + Ĩ(tt0 ) -th entry. The entries are inserted so that:
                                 
                        h            i                        X
                     A 2 + Ĩ(tt0 ) ~x = γt (λ) (pt − pt0 ) +             A
                                                                             − δtA0 s + ηtt0 .
                                                                                     
                                                                 Γts (λ) δts
                                                                                  s∈S
                               0
b2+Ĩ(tt0 ) will 0 for all t, t .

D.2.2. Program-SC-R. The ~x vector now includes price-cost vector p~S , the conflict vector ~δS and the neces-
sary slack variable vector ~η :                  
                                                 p~S
                                               h Si 
                                         ~x =   ~      ∈ <J
                                               δ      
                                                 [~η ]
where J = n + n2 + n(n − 1). The dimension of ~η is n(n − 1) because there are n(n − 1) inequality constraints
which are the ATR (3.22).
   It is more convenient to now index the states along s first before t. Hence, we abuse notation and now
let:                    h                                                                                       iT
                   ~Γo = ~Γo00 , . . . , ~Γo        ~o            ~o                ~o              ~o
                                           (n−1)0 , Γ01 , . . . , Γ(n−1)0 , . . . , Γ0(n−1) , . . . Γ(n−1)(n−1)

and do the same thing for ~δS :
                         h                                                                                   iT
                   ~δS = δ S , . . . , δ S        S             S                 S               S
                            00          (n−1)0 , δ01 , . . . , δ(n−1)1 , . . . , δ0(n−1) , . . . δ(n−1)(n−1)

The setup is then similar to program-AC. The ~v vector is:
                                                                                                              T

                               ~v = β0 (λ), .., βs (λ), . . . βn−1 (λ),            −~Γ(λ) ,             ~0
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                        |{z}   
                                     |               {z               }             | {z }
                                                  first nterms                    next n2 terms n(n−1) terms

such that:
                                                          X                       X
                                              ~v T ~x =         βs (λ)pSs −                     S
                                                                                        Γts (λ)δts .
                                                          s∈S                  ts∈S 2

   A[0] is the PC constraint row with A[0] = ~v T and b0 is V (λ) + U 0 . A[1] is the ICE constraint row with
b1 = V 0 (λ), where:                                                           
                                                                    ~     ~0
                            A[1] = β̂0 , .., β̂s , . . . β̂n−1 , −Γ̂H , |{z}
                                                                                
                                    |            {z           }   | {z }
                                                     first nterms           next n2 terms n(n−1) terms
such that
                                                                X                  X
                                                 A[1]~x =             β̂s pSs −            Γ̂H   S
                                                                                             ts δts .
                                                                s∈S               ts∈S 2

  All subsequent rows will be ATR constraints. Analogously, let ~Γs (λ) = [Γ0s (λ), . . . , Γ(n−1)s (λ)]. For a
constraint ensuring that the Agent reports the true signal s instead of some other s0 6= s, the corresponding
row in matrix A is

                                                                                                                                  
           h             i
        A 2 + Ĩ(ss0 ) = 0, .., βs (λ), 0.., −βs (λ), 0, . . . , 0, .., −~Γs (λ),0,...,~Γs (λ), 0, . . ., 0, . . . , −1, 0, ..., 0
                                                                                                                                  
                          |                 {z                 }|                  {z                  } |             {z         }
                                               n terms                                       n2 terms               n(n−1) terms

βs (λ) is the s-th entry, −βs (λ) is the s0 -th entry, ~Γs (λ) forms the (n + ns)-th to (n + ns + n − 1)-th entries,
−~Γs (λ) forms the (n + ns0 )-th to (n + ns0 + n − 1)-th entries, and the −1 is at the n + n2 + Ĩ(ss0 ) -th entry.
                                                                                                         

                                                                        D- 3
The entries are inserted so that:
                       h           i                       X
                     A 2 + Ĩ(ss0 ) ~x = βs (λ) pSs − pSs0 −           S     S
                                                                                 
                                                              Γts (λ) δts − δts0   − ηss0 .
                                                             t∈S

b2+Ĩ(ss0 ) will 0 for all s, s0 .

D.3. Properties of the Solutions. An important feature of the optimal solution is that it can be charac-
terized in terms of the basic feasible solution. Let x∗ be a solution to the primal problem. Then the optimal
basis is a set of indexes B ⊂ {0, ..., J} such that x∗j = 0 for j ∈
                                                                  / B and the matrix:

                                            AB = [Aj ]j∈B ∈ <I×I

is invertible. Then ~x∗B = x∗j j∈B is called the optimal basic solution and since A~x = ~b, we know that:
                           


                                                  ~x∗B = A−1~
                                                          B b.

Hence, once we have identified the optimal basis B, we can compute the optimal solution. Let

                                              vB = [vj ]j∈B ∈ <I

The complementary slackness condition (Theorem 1) implies that:
                                                   T
                                                 ~vB  ~ ∗T AB ,
                                                     =µ

from which we conclude that:
                                                µ∗T = A−1
                                                       B ~
                                                           T
                                                          vB .
If x∗j = 0 for some j ∈ B, then µ∗ , the solution to the dual, will not be unique in general.
   Recall that µ0 and µ1 are the Lagrangian multipliers of the PC and ICE respectively.

Lemma 4. Let µA∗ and µS∗ be the solutions to the dual program of program-AC and program-SC-R respec-
tively. Then µA∗       S∗
                0 = µ0 = 1, and the expected costs of the contract for program-AC and program-SC-R are
                               0                     S∗ 0
respectively U 0 + V (λ) + µA∗           0
                            1 V (λ) and U + V (λ) + µ1 V (λ).

Proof. From Theorem 2, v T x∗ = µ∗ b. Observe that for any constant α, p~∗ + α · ~1 also satisfies all the
constraints with the PC constraint modified to U 0 + V (λ)+α. Hence, ~δ remains unchanged, and this does
not change the solution for the dual problem. Thus we have:

                                v T x∗ + α = µ0 U 0 + V (λ) + α + µ1 V 0 (λ),
                                                               

for all α from which we conclude that µ0 = 1. The expected cost of the contract v T x∗ then follows directly. 

   Department of Economics, Columbia University. E-mail: bentley.macleod@columbia.edu. E-mail: teck.tan@columbia.edu




                                                      D- 4
