                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    THE DEPOSITS CHANNEL OF MONETARY POLICY

                                        Itamar Drechsler
                                           Alexi Savov
                                         Philipp Schnabl

                                      Working Paper 22152
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22152


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2016




We thank Siddharth Vij for excellent research assistance. We thank Robert Adams, Juliane
Begenau, Markus Brunnermeier, Douglas Diamond, Eugene Fama, Erik Gilje, Simon Gilchrist,
Gary Gorton, Anil Kashyap, Arvind Krishnamurthy, Sam Hanson, Daniel Paravisini, David
Scharfstein, Philip Strahan, Amit Seru, Adi Sunderam, Amir Sufi, Jeremy Stein, and seminar
participants at the AEA Meetings, Berkeley, Boston College, Chicago Booth, Chicago Federal
Reserve, Cornell University, Harvard University, IMF/Worldbank Joint Seminar, London School
of Economics, London Business School, NBER Asset Pricing, NBER Corporate Finance, NYU-
Columbia Junior Meeting, SFS Finance Cavalcade, Stanford University, UCLA, University of
Maryland, University of Montreal, and Temple University for helpful comments. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Itamar Drechsler, Alexi Savov, and Philipp Schnabl. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Deposits Channel of Monetary Policy
Itamar Drechsler, Alexi Savov, and Philipp Schnabl
NBER Working Paper No. 22152
April 2016, Revised January 2017
JEL No. E52,E58,G12,G21

                                         ABSTRACT

We present a new channel for the transmission of monetary policy, the deposits channel. We
show that when the Fed funds rate rises, banks widen the spreads they charge on deposits, and
deposits flow out of the banking system. We present a model where this is due to market power in
deposit markets. Consistent with the market power mechanism, deposit spreads increase more
and deposits flow out more in concentrated markets. This is true even when we control for
lending opportunities by only comparing different branches of the same bank. Since deposits are
the main source of liquid assets for households, the deposits channel can explain the observed
strong relationship between the liquidity premium and the Fed funds rate. Since deposits are also
a uniquely stable funding source for banks, the deposits channel impacts bank lending. When the
Fed funds rate rises, banks that raise deposits in concentrated markets contract their lending by
more than other banks. Our estimates imply that the deposits channel can account for the entire
transmission of monetary policy through bank balance sheets.


Itamar Drechsler                                Philipp Schnabl
Stern School of Business                        Stern School of Business
New York University                             New York University
44 West Fourth Street, 9-120                    44 West Fourth Street
New York, NY 10012                              New York, NY 10012
and NBER                                        and NBER
itamar.drechsler@stern.nyu.edu                  schnabl@stern.nyu.edu

Alexi Savov
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West Fourth Street, Suite 9-85
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
asavov@stern.nyu.edu
I    Introduction
We propose and test a new channel for the transmission of monetary policy, the deposits
channel. We show that when the Fed funds rate rises, banks widen the interest spreads they
charge on deposits, and deposits flow out of the banking system. Since banks rely heavily on
deposits for their funding, these outflows induce a contraction in lending. The relationships
we document are strong and their aggregate effects are large. We argue, both theoretically
and empirically, that they are due to banks’ market power over deposits.
    Our results are important for two reasons. First, the deposits channel provides an expla-
nation for how monetary policy impacts banks’ funding and the supply of bank lending in
the economy. Unlike existing theories of the bank lending channel (e.g. Bernanke and Blin-
der 1988), the deposits channel does not work through required reserves. This is important
because the required reserves mechanism has come to be viewed as implausible, throwing
the idea of a bank lending channel into question (Romer and Romer 1990, Bernanke and
Gertler 1995, Woodford 2010).
    Second, the deposits channel provides an explanation for how monetary policy affects
the supply of safe and liquid assets in the economy. Deposits are the main source of such
assets for households, and hence a major component of their aggregate supply. Another
major component are U.S. Treasuries (Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen 2012). When
the supply of deposits contracts, the liquidity premium on all safe and liquid assets, including
Treasuries, is predicted to rise. The deposits channel can thus explain the observed strong
relationship between the Fed funds rate and the liquidity premium (Nagel 2014).
    We provide a model of the deposits channel. In the model, households have a preference
for liquidity, which they obtain from cash and deposits. Cash is highly liquid but pays no
interest, while deposits are partially liquid and pay some interest, the deposit rate. The
deposit rate is set by banks that have market power over their local deposit markets. House-
holds can also invest in bonds, which provide no special liquidity and pay a competitive
open-market rate set by the central bank, the Fed funds rate. The Fed funds rate thus
equals the cost of holding cash, and the difference between the Fed funds rate and the de-
posit rate—the deposit spread—equals the cost of holding deposits. When the central bank


                                               1
raises the Fed funds rate, cash becomes more expensive to hold, and this allows banks to
raise deposit spreads without losing deposits to cash. Households respond by reducing their
deposit holdings, and deposits flow out of the banking system and into bonds.
   We test the predictions of the deposits channel in aggregate, bank-level, and branch-level
data for the U.S. At the aggregate level, deposit spreads increase strongly with the Fed funds
rate, suggesting substantial market power. Consistent with our model, the rise in spreads
is associated with large deposit outflows. Also consistent with our model, the effects are
stronger for the most liquid types of deposits (checking and savings). The fact that deposit
prices (spreads) and quantities (flows) move in opposite directions indicates that monetary
policy shifts banks’ deposit supply curve rather than households’ demand curve.
   The aggregate time series is subject to a common identification challenge: deposit supply
may be responding to contemporaneous changes in banks’ lending opportunities rather than
directly to monetary policy. For instance, if banks’ lending opportunities decline as the
Fed raises rates, then we would see banks make fewer loans and consequently take in fewer
deposits even absent a deposits channel.
   We address this identification challenge by exploiting geographic variation in an observ-
able determinant of market power, the concentration of local deposit markets. The deposits
channel predicts that when the Fed funds rate rises, banks in more concentrated areas should
increase deposit spreads by more and experience greater deposit outflows. Yet we cannot
simply compare deposits across banks because different banks may have different lending op-
portunities. To control for bank-specific lending opportunities, we compare deposit spreads
and flows across branches of the same bank located in areas with different concentration.
The identifying assumption for this within-bank estimation is that banks can raise deposits
at one branch and lend them at another.
   The results support the predictions of the deposits channel. Following a 100 bps increase
in the Fed funds rate, a bank’s branches in high-concentration areas increase their spreads
on savings and time deposits by 14 bps and 7 bps, respectively, relative to its branches in
low-concentration areas. The corresponding deposit outflows are 66 bps larger at the high-
concentration branches. These results are robust to a variety of specifications and also hold
when we compare branches of different banks.


                                              2
       Our estimates suggest that monetary policy has an economically large effect on the
aggregate deposit supply. The implied semi-elasticity of deposits with respect to deposit
spreads is −5.3. Since a 100-bps increase in the Fed funds rate induces on average a 61 bps
increase in spreads, it is expected to generate a 323 bps contraction in deposits. Aggregate
deposits stood at $9.3 trillion in 2014, hence a typical 400-bps Fed hiking cycle is expected
to generate $1.2 trillion of deposit outflows.
       To further establish a direct effect of monetary policy on deposit supply, we use weekly
data to conduct an event study of the precise timing of changes in deposit spreads. We
find that the difference in the responses of deposit spreads at high- versus low-concentration
branches occurs within a week of a change in the Fed funds rate target. This precise timing
makes it unlikely that our results are driven by something other than monetary policy.
       We also examine the effect of expected Fed funds rate changes on deposit supply. Since
deposits are short-lived, their rates should respond to a Fed funds rate change only when it
is enacted, even if fully expected. This allows us to control for information that is released at
the same time as the Fed changes rates. We find that our results for both deposit spreads and
flows are unchanged when we use only the expected component of Fed funds rate changes,
which is consistent with a direct effect of monetary policy on deposit supply.1
       We conduct several additional robustness tests of our findings. First, we show that proxies
for financial sophistication (age, income, and education), which our model shows is another
source of market power for banks beyond concentration, produce results that are similar to
our main findings. Second, the results are similar for small and large banks, consistent with
the large aggregate effects we document. And third, our results are robust to a variety of
deposit products beyond the most-widely offered ones, and to alternative ways of measuring
concentration and delineating the extent of a local deposit market.
       Next, we examine the effect of the deposits channel on lending. Our model predicts that
the contraction in deposits induced by a rate increase causes a contraction in lending as banks
cannot costlessly replace deposits with wholesale (non-deposit) funding. This assumption
   1
    In contrast to deposits, long-lived assets such as stocks and bonds incorporate expected rate changes in
advance and react only to unexpected rate changes. Existing empirical studies (e.g. Bernanke and Kuttner
2005) therefore cannot disentangle the impact of monetary policy from the impact of information that is
released contemporaneously with a rate change or conveyed through the rate change itself.



                                                     3
that deposits are special is standard in the banking literature. It can arise from the unique
stability and dependability of deposits (Hanson, Shleifer, Stein, and Vishny 2015), or from
an increasing marginal cost of wholesale funding (Stein 1998).
       We compute the exposure of bank lending to the deposits channel at the bank level
because banks can move deposits across branches. We do so by averaging the concentrations
of all of a bank’s branches. In order to ensure that banks face similar lending opportunities,
we compare lending by different banks within the same county.
       We implement this within-county estimation using data on small business lending by U.S.
banks. Small business lending is inherently risky and illiquid, which makes it particularly
reliant on stable deposit funding and hence especially useful for our analysis. We find that
when the Fed funds rate rises, banks that raise deposits in more concentrated markets reduce
their lending in a given county relative to other banks. We estimate that for a 100 bps increase
in the Fed funds rate, a one-standard deviation increase in bank-level concentration reduces
new small business lending by 230 bps.2
       We then aggregate our lending data up to the county level to examine the impact of the
deposits channel on overall lending and economic activity. We find that counties served by
banks that raise deposits in high-concentration markets experience a decrease in lending, as
well as lower subsequent employment growth. These results hold even when we control for a
county’s own deposit market concentration. Thus, they are identified from variation in the
concentration of the other markets where the county’s banks raise their deposits.
       We also verify that all of our results hold at the bank level using Call Reports data. We
find that banks that raise deposits in more concentrated markets increase deposit spreads
by more and contract deposits by more when the Fed funds rate rises. These banks partly
offset the contraction in deposits with wholesale funding, but the net effect is a significant
contraction in lending, securities, and total assets.
       Finally, we propose a novel measure of banks’ exposure to monetary policy. This measure
is the deposit spread beta, the amount by which banks are able to raise deposit spreads
when the Fed funds rate rises. Our model shows that deposit spread betas are a sufficient
   2
    The within-county estimation allows us to control for the direct effect of local deposit market concen-
tration using county-time fixed effects. We find no evidence that local deposit market concentration affects
lending, which supports our earlier identification assumption that banks can move deposits across branches.


                                                     4
statistic for banks’ market power, capturing not only the impact of concentration but also of
depositors’ financial sophistication, attentiveness, and willingness to switch banks. Deposit
spread betas thus represent a comprehensive measure of exposure to the deposits channel
and we use them to quantify its full economic impact.
       We estimate the deposit spread beta of each bank by regressing its deposit spread on
the Fed funds rate. The average deposit spread beta is 0.54, indicating substantial market
power. It is even higher (0.61) for the largest 5% of banks. We show that deposit spread betas
strongly predict the sensitivity of bank balance sheets to monetary policy. The relationships
are even stronger for large banks. We use the estimates for large banks to assess the aggregate
impact of the deposits channel. Relative to keeping rates unchanged, a typical 400-bps Fed
hiking cycle induces a 1,404 bps reduction in deposits and a 948 bps reduction in lending.
Based on 2014 figures, these numbers translate into a $1.3 trillion reduction in deposits and
a $727 billion reduction in lending.3 We show that our estimates are large enough to account
for the entire transmission of monetary policy through bank balance sheets documented by
the literature on the bank lending channel (Bernanke and Blinder 1992).
       The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section II discusses the related literature,
Section III presents aggregate evidence on deposits, Section IV presents the model, Section
V describes our data, Section VI presents results on deposits, Section VII presents results
on lending, Section VIII discusses broader implications, and Section IX concludes.



II        Related literature
Our paper relates to the large literature on the transmission of monetary policy to the
economy. The prevailing framework is the New Keynesian model (e.g. Woodford 2003).
While the deposits channel and the New Keynesian model may well work in tandem, there
are important differences in how they operate. One important difference is the role of the
short-term interest rate. In the New Keynesian model changes in the short rate matter
   3
    Since the Fed tends to raise rates during periods of high loan demand, the reduction in aggregate lending
one would actually observe is confounded by endogeneity and would be smaller than this estimate. In other
words, lending would grow much more strongly if rates were kept unchanged. This endogeneity problem is
the main reason we use cross-sectional analysis throughout the paper.



                                                     5
only insofar as they influence long-term rates. In contrast, in the deposits channel the short
rate matters in its own right because it affects the supply of liquid assets and the cost
and composition of banks’ funding. This can explain why the Fed adjusts rates gradually
rather than all in one shot (Bernanke 2004, Sunderam and Stein 2015). Another important
difference is that what matters in the deposits channel is the level of the short rate, not just
its deviation from the natural rate. Thus any rate change, even one that absorbs a change in
the natural rate or is fully expected, has an impact on the economy and therefore represents
an act of monetary policy.
   The deposits channel is closely related to the bank lending channel of monetary policy
(Bernanke 1983, Bernanke and Blinder 1988, Kashyap and Stein 1994). Existing theories of
the bank lending channel depend on required reserves: by setting their supply, the central
bank controls the size of bank balance sheets. Yet as the literature has long recognized,
reserves have been far too small to exert a meaningful influence on bank balance sheets
since at least the 1980s (Romer and Romer 1990, Bernanke and Gertler 1995, Woodford
2010). This has left the bank lending channel without plausible theoretical underpinnings.
Moreover, since 2008 the Fed has maintained a large balance sheet funded by interest-paying
excess reserves, making reserve requirements slack going forward. The deposits channel
provides a new mechanism for the bank lending channel: banks’ market power over deposits.
In doing so, it provides a new foundation for the large empirical literature on the bank
lending channel (Bernanke and Blinder 1992, Kashyap, Stein, and Wilcox 1993, Kashyap
and Stein 2000, Jiménez, Ongena, Peydró, and Saurina 2014).
   The deposits channel is also related to the balance sheet channel of monetary policy
(Bernanke and Gertler 1989, Kiyotaki and Moore 1997, Gertler and Kiyotaki 2010, He and
Krishnamurthy 2013, Brunnermeier and Sannikov 2014, Brunnermeier and Koby 2016). Un-
der the balance sheet channel, a surprise increase in interest rates causes banks’ assets to
decline by more than their liabilities, depressing net worth and forcing banks to shrink their
balance sheets. While the balance sheet channel works through surprise changes in long-term
interest rates, the deposits channel works through the level of the short rate. Moreover, while
the balance sheet channel predicts that banks cut all funding to shrink their balance sheets,
the deposits channel predicts that they increase wholesale funding to partly offset outflows


                                               6
of deposits, which is consistent with what we observe.4
       Our paper builds on work in the banking literature emphasizing the dual role of deposits
in providing liquidity to households (Diamond and Dybvig 1983, Gorton and Pennacchi
1990) and a stable and dependable source of funding for banks (Stein 1998, Kashyap, Rajan,
and Stein 2002, Hanson, Shleifer, Stein, and Vishny 2015). Our paper shows how monetary
policy drives the supply of deposits which in turn fulfills this dual role.
       Our paper also contributes to the literature on deposit pricing, which focuses on the
path of adjustment of deposit rates following interest rate changes (Hannan and Berger
1989, 1991, Diebold and Sharpe 1990, Neumark and Sharpe 1992, Driscoll and Judson 2013,
Yankov 2014). This literature shows that this adjustment is slow and asymmetric, more so in
concentrated markets. It has interpreted this as evidence of price rigidities, as emphasized in
the New Keynesian framework. In contrast, our theory and analysis focus on the permanent
changes in the level of deposit spreads induced by interest rate changes. Moreover, we
analyze deposit quantities, which are central to the deposits channel but are largely ignored
by this literature.5 Finally, we provide much improved identification using our within-bank
estimation, and we extend the analysis to look at the relationship between deposits and the
asset side of bank balance sheets.



III        Aggregate time series of deposit rates and flows
Panel A of Figure 1 plots the average deposit rate and the Fed funds target rate from 1986
to 2013. The deposit rate is measured as the average interest rate paid on core deposits,
obtained from bank balance sheet data. Core deposits are the sum of checking, savings,
and small time deposits and are considered to be banks’ most stable and dependable source
   4
      One might think that the deposits channel predicts that banks’ net worth rises with the short rate since
deposits become more profitable as banks charge higher spreads. However, the present value of deposit
profits does not rise because the higher profits are discounted at a higher rate. The deposits franchise is thus
similar to a floating rate bond; its cash flows increase with the short rate but its present value is unchanged.
In fact, the present value of the deposit franchise decreases due to the outflows triggered by higher spreads.
    5
      The papers that provide a model (e.g. Yankov 2014) predict that deposits flow in when interest rates
rise, which is the opposite of what we see. The reason is that these papers follow the Monti-Klein tradition
(Freixas and Rochet 2008, chapter 3), in which households can either consume or hold deposits, so when
deposit rates go up they consume less and hold more deposits. In our model, there is a third asset (bonds),
and so when rates rise and deposit spreads widen, deposits flow out and into bonds.



                                                       7
of funding (Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation 2011). They are also by far the largest
source of banks’ funding, totaling $9.3 trillion or 79% of bank liabilities in 2014.
   The figure reveals a striking fact: banks raise deposit rates far less than one-for-one with
the Fed funds rate. For every 100 bps increase in the Fed funds rate, the spread between the
Fed funds rate and the deposit rate increases by 54 bps. For instance, during the 425-bps Fed
hiking cycle of the mid 2000s, the deposit spread rose by 245 bps. This spread represents the
opportunity cost of holding deposits, hence deposits become much more expensive to hold
when the Fed funds rate rises.
   Panel B of Figure 1 plots the rate on the most widely-offered deposit product within
each of the three main categories of deposits: savings, checking, and small time deposits. In
2014, these categories accounted for $6.5 trillion, $1.7 trillion, and $1.1 trillion, respectively.
Savings and checking deposits are demandable and hence highly liquid, while time deposits
are locked in for term and hence relatively illiquid. We see that when the Fed funds rate
rises, the increase in spreads is much stronger for the more liquid deposits. For instance,
the spreads on savings and checking deposits increased by 340 bps and 470 bps, respectively,
during the mid 2000s, while the spread on time deposits increased by 105 bps.
   Figure 2 shows that deposit quantities respond strongly to these large price changes. It
plots the year-over-year change in the Fed funds rate against the percentage growth rate in
the aggregate amounts of core deposits (Panel A), savings (Panel B), checking (Panel C), and
small time deposits (Panel D). The relationships are clear and striking. From Panel A, the
growth rate of core deposits is strongly negatively related to changes in the Fed funds rate
(the correlation is −49%). The effects are economically large with year-over-year growth rates
range from −1% to +18%. Panels B and C show even larger effects for the liquid savings and
checking deposits (the correlations are −59% and −33%, respectively), while Panel D shows
the opposite relationship for the illiquid small time deposits (23% correlation). Thus, as the
Fed funds rate rises and liquid deposits become relatively more expensive, households partly
substitute towards less liquid deposits. Nevertheless, since checking and savings deposits are
much larger than small time deposits, the net effect is that total core deposits shrink.
   From Figures 1 and 2, monetary policy appears to shift banks’ supply of deposits rather
than households’ demand for deposits. This follows from the fact that prices (deposit


                                                8
spreads) and quantities (deposit growth) move in opposite directions. By contrast, a shift in
demand would cause prices and quantities to move in the same direction. The figures also
show that the shift is more pronounced for more liquid deposits. Hence, when the Fed funds
increases, the premium for liquidity rises and the supply of liquidity shrinks.



IV         A model of the deposits channel
We present a model to explain the observed relationships between monetary policy and
deposit supply, as well as derive their implications for bank lending.
      For simplicity, the economy lasts for one period and there is no risk. We think of it
as corresponding to a local market—a county in our empirical analysis. The representative
household maximizes utility over final wealth, W , and liquidity services, l, according to a
CES aggregator:

                                                                                     ρ
                                                                                    ρ−1
                                                                ρ−1          ρ−1
                                 u (W0 ) = max              W    ρ    + λl    ρ            ,                (1)


where λ is a share parameter, and ρ is the elasticity of substitution between wealth and
liquidity services. A preference for liquidity arises in many models. For example, it arises
from a cash-in-advance constraint (e.g., Galı́ 2009), or from a preference for extreme safety
(e.g., Stein 2012). In either case, it is natural to think of wealth and liquidity as complements,
hence we focus on the case ρ < 1.
      Liquidity services are themselves derived from holding cash, M , and deposits, D, also
according to a CES aggregator:

                                                                                 
                                                                                −1
                                                            −1          −1
                                   l (M, D) =           M        + δD                ,                    (2)


where  is the elasticity of substitution between cash and deposits and δ measures the liquid-
ity of deposits relative to cash. We think of cash as consisting of currency and zero-interest
checking accounts. We think of deposits as representing the relatively liquid types of house-
hold deposits, such as savings deposits.6 Because cash and deposits both provide liquidity,
  6
      We model a single type of deposits for simplicity. It is straight-forward to extend the model to allow for


                                                        9
they are substitutes, hence  > 1.
    Deposits are themselves a composite good produced by a set of N banks:
                                                                 η
                                                              ! η−1
                                                   N
                                                1 X η−1
                                     D =             D η              ,                                (3)
                                                N i=1 i

where η is the elasticity of substitution across banks. Each bank has mass 1/N and produces
deposits at a rate Di , resulting in an amount Di /N . If all banks produce deposits at the
same rate, then Di = D. Deposits at different banks are imperfect substitutes, 1 < η < ∞.
This gives banks market power, allowing them to sustain nonzero profits.7
    Households can also invest in a third class of assets, which provide no special liquidity
(or at least less so than cash and deposits). We refer to this asset class as “bonds”, but we
interpret it broadly as including not only bonds, but also other assets such as stocks and
different types of mutual funds. These assets trade in competitive markets, and can therefore
be thought of as offering a common risk-adjusted rate of return. We think of this rate as
being set (or at least influenced) by the central bank, hence we refer to it as the Fed funds
rate and denote it by f .
    Banks earn profits by raising deposits and investing in assets. For simplicity, we first
assume that banks can only invest in bonds, earning the competitive rate f . In Section
IV.B, we introduce profitable lending opportunities that allow banks to earn a spread in
excess of f . On the deposit side, each bank i charges a spread si , paying a deposit rate
f − si . The spread is set to maximize the bank’s profits, Di si , which gives the condition

                                           ∂Di /Di
                                                    = −1.                                              (4)
                                            ∂si /si

The bank raises its spread until the elasticity of demand for its deposits is −1, at which
point a further increase becomes unprofitable.
    To understand the representative household’s demand for deposits, it is useful to intro-
multiple deposits with varying degrees of liquidity.
   7
     Note that we are modeling the preferences of the representative household for the county. This rep-
resentative household can be interpreted as an aggregation of many individual households, each of whom
has a preference for holding deposits in whichever bank is most convenient. As a result, the representative
household substitutes deposits imperfectly across banks as in (3).


                                                    10
                                                1
                                                     PN    Di
duce the weighted average deposit spread s ≡    N      i=1 D si .   The household’s budget equation
can be written as


                               W = W0 (1 + f ) − M f − Ds.                                      (5)


Households earn the rate f on their initial wealth, forego f on their cash holdings, and pay
the deposit spread s on their deposit holdings.
   Using the fact that s captures the overall cost of deposits D, we can show that in a
symmetric equilibrium the elasticity of demand for bank i’s deposits is given by
                                                                
                          ∂Di /Di    1         ∂D/D              1
                                   =                       −η 1−     .                          (6)
                           ∂si /si   N          ∂s/s             N

Equation 6 shows that as bank i increases its spread si , it faces outflows from two sources.
The first is an aggregate effect: the increase in si raises the average deposit spread s at a
rate of 1/N , making deposits more expensive overall and inducing outflows from deposits to
other assets at a rate given by the aggregate elasticity (∂D/D) / (∂s/s). This effect is larger
in more concentrated markets because each individual bank’s spread si has a larger impact
on the overall cost of deposits s.
   The second source of outflows is inter-bank competition: when bank i raises its spread by
one percent, the average spread goes up by 1/N percent, and hence bank i’s deposit spread
increases by 1 − 1/N percent relative to the average. This then induces outflows from bank
i at a rate η, the elasticity of substitution across banks.
   Substituting (6) into (4), we get the equilibrium condition

                            ∂D/D
                        −         = 1 − (η − 1) (N − 1) ≡ M.                                    (7)
                             ∂s/s

The endogenous quantity M captures the market power of the banking sector as a whole
(i.e. of the representative bank). This market power is higher if there is less inter-bank com-
petition, either because the market is more concentrated (1/N is high) or because deposits
are less substitutable across banks (η is low). In the extreme, M = 1, and the representative
bank behaves like a pure monopolist.


                                                11
   To solve (7) for the equilibrium value of s, we need to obtain the aggregate deposit
elasticity. We can do so in closed form by letting λ → 0, which removes the impact of the
cost of liquidity on total wealth and simplifies the resulting expression:

                                                                                 f −1
                                   "                        #        "                  #
                      ∂D/D                      1                         δ     s
                    −       =                                   +                   −1 ρ.   (8)
                       ∂s/s                         f −1
                                                                               δ fs
                                                      
                                       1 + δ       s
                                                                         1+     



Equation (8) shows that households’ elasticity of demand for deposits is equal to a weighted
average of their elasticity of substitution to cash, , and bonds, ρ. The weight is a function of
the Fed funds rate f . When f is high, cash is a comparatively expensive source of liquidity,
hence any substitution out of deposits is almost entirely to bonds. Therefore, the elasticity
of demand is close to ρ, which is a low number since bonds do not provide liquidity. Thus,
a high f makes households’ demand for deposits relatively inelastic, allowing banks to set
a high spread s without incurring large outflows. Conversely, when f is low, cash becomes
a less expensive source of liquidity, and hence the elasticity of demand for deposits moves
toward , which is a high number since cash and deposits are substitutes. Deposit demand
is then relatively elastic, forcing banks to set a low spread to avoid large outflows.
   Combining (7) and (8) gives banks’ optimal spread and the following result:

Proposition 1. Let ρ < 1 < , η, let M = 1 − (η − 1) (N − 1) as in (7), and consider the
limiting case λ → 0. If M < ρ then the deposit spread s is zero. Otherwise,

                                                                   1
                                                                  −1
                                                       M−ρ
                                  s = δ    −1                            f.                   (9)
                                                        −M

It follows that
  (i) the deposit spread increases with the Fed funds rate f ;

 (ii) ∂s/∂f , the deposit spread beta, is increasing in banks’ market power M.

   Proposition 1 shows that the deposit spread rises with the Fed funds rate. A high Fed
funds rate makes demand for deposits more inelastic, effectively giving banks more market
power. Banks take advantage of this and optimally charge a higher deposit spread.
   Proposition 1 also shows that the deposit spread is more sensitive to f , i.e. the deposit
spread beta is higher, in areas where banks’ market power M is high. Where M is high,

                                                     12
banks compete less with each other and more with households’ alternative source of liquidity,
cash.8 Consequently, the deposit spread depends strongly on f (the cost of cash), and the
deposit spread beta is high. In contrast, where market power is low, banks compete mainly
with each other, and the deposit spread beta is low.
       In the empirical section we use this result to test the market power mechanism underpin-
ning our model. Although ideally we would be able to observe M directly, it is sufficient to
be able to measure one source of variation in M. The source we use is geographic variation
in the local level of market concentration. We proxy for this with the Herfindahl index of
banks’ shares of the deposit market in each county (which equals 1/N in the model).


       IV.A    Limited financial sophistication and market power

Concentration is only one source of market power. Another source, which is likely important
in practice, is households’ level of financial sophistication. In this section we extend the
model to incorporate this source. We consider two aspects of financial sophistication. The
first, which we analyze here, is that some households do not keep track of deposit rates
offered at other banks. They are therefore not a threat to leave their bank when it raises its
deposit spread. We call these households non-switchers. The second, which we leave for the
Appendix, is households who are not aware of, or do not participate in, the bond market. As
we show, in both cases the form of the solution is very similar to that of the baseline model,
but with the expression generalized to incorporate the influence of low financial sophistication
on banks’ market power. In the case of non-switchers, we have the following result:

Proposition 2. Let αns be the fraction of non-switchers. The solution for the deposit spread
remains as in (9), but with M replaced by
                                                                     
                                                        1
                          Mns     = 1 − (η − 1)                     −1 .                                  (10)
                                                αns + (1 − αns ) N1

It follows that the deposit spread beta ∂s/∂f
   8
    Although banks face competition from cash, in equilibrium they set the deposit spread so that outflows to
cash are small. Indeed, as the elasticity of substitution between cash and deposits  is increased, households’
equilibrium cash holdings become arbitrarily small and cash is in effect just an outside option.



                                                      13
  (i) increases in market concentration 1/N and the fraction of non-switchers αns ;

 (ii) increases less in market concentration if αns is high; and

(iii) remains positive even as market concentration approaches zero (1/N → 0), provided
         αns is sufficiently large (specifically, αns > (η − 1) / (η − ρ)).

       Part (i) of Proposition 2 shows that deposit spread betas increase with the proportion
of non-switchers, because they are an additional source of market power for banks.9 Spread
betas also increase with market concentration, just as in the baseline model. However,
part (ii) shows that non-switchers flatten the relationship between concentration and spread
betas. In particular, whereas in the baseline model spread betas converge to zero as market
concentration approaches zero, this is no longer the case with non-switchers (part (iii)).
With a sufficiently high proportion of non-switchers, spread betas remain strictly positive,
and can be large, even in areas with zero market concentration.
       Finally, Proposition 2 highlights that the deposit spread beta provides a comprehensive
measure of banks’ market power, even when it comes from multiple sources (e.g. concentra-
tion, non-switchers). This is also true for the second extension we develop in the Appendix.


       IV.B    Effects on lending and wholesale funding

In the baseline model banks earn the competitive rate f on their assets, and hence set the
size of their balance sheets solely to maximize deposit rents. We now enrich the model to
allow banks to earn an additional spread on their lending, subject to decreasing marginal
returns. We also allow them to borrow funds in wholesale (i.e., non-deposit) markets, subject
to a cost spread that is increasing in the amount borrowed. We model these two spreads
using a simple quadratic cost function, so that the bank’s problem is now
                                            
                                l1          h
               Πi = max f + l0 − Li Li − f + Hi Hi − (f − si ) Di ,                                     (11)
                    Di ,Hi      2           2
   9
    Despite this, non-switchers do not perceive an incentive to change their behavior since they pay the same
spread as switchers.




                                                     14
where Li = Hi + Di is total lending, H is the quantity of wholesale funding, and l0 , l1 , h > 0
are parameters that control the bank’s lending opportunities and wholesale funding costs.10
The bank earns a profit from lending (first term), pays a cost for wholesale funding (second
term), and earns profits from its deposit franchise (third term). If the bank has more
deposits than profitable lending opportunities, we assume it simply buys securities that pay
the competitive rate f .
       The case l1 > 0 captures the idea that the bank has a limited pool of profitable lending
opportunities. Similarly, h > 0 captures a limited pool of wholesale funding, which makes
the cost of wholesale funding increasing in the amount borrowed. This could arise because,
unlike deposits, wholesale funding is uninsured and hence subject to adverse selection (Stein
1998), or because it is unstable, so that the bank perceives relying on wholesale funding as
costly (Hanson, Shleifer, Stein, and Vishny 2015).11
       The optimality condition for wholesale funding is:

                                                    l0     l1
                                    Hi =               −       Di .                                 (12)
                                                 l1 + h l1 + h

Since it has profitable lending opportunities, the bank offsets a decrease in deposits with an
increase in wholesale funding. However, since wholesale funding is costly (h > 0), it is an
imperfect substitute for deposits and hence the offset is only partial (the Modigliani-Miller
theorem fails). Total lending thus depends on the level of deposits,

                                                    l0     h
                                    Li =               +       Di ,                                 (13)
                                                 l1 + h l1 + h

and a contraction in deposits induces a contraction in lending Li .
       The optimality condition for deposits is now
                                                                                         
                        ∂Πi                h                                      ∂si /si
                    0 =     =                        (l0 − l1 Di ) + si       1+                .   (14)
                        ∂Di             l1 + h                                   ∂Di /Di

The first term on the right is the marginal lending profit the bank earns from raising another
  10
   For simplicity, we include the bank’s equity funding in H.
  11
   The instability of wholesale funding is formally recognized by regulators (Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation 2011).


                                                       15
dollar of deposits. The second term is the marginal profit on the bank’s deposit franchise
from raising this dollar. In the baseline model (l0 = l1 = 0), the deposit franchise is the
bank’s only source of profits, so the bank increases deposits until this marginal profit is zero.
With profitable lending opportunities the bank goes further and continues raising deposits
until the marginal loss of deposit rents offsets the marginal profit from lending. The bank
thus gives up some of its deposit rents in order to fund a large balance sheet and take
advantage of profitable lending opportunities. Nevertheless, a change in the Fed funds rate
has the same effect as in the baseline model, as the following proposition shows:

Proposition 3. Let M > ρ and consider the limiting case λ → 0. Then the equilibrium
deposit spread is positive (s > 0) and increases in the Fed funds rate f . In response to an
increase in the rate f banks
  (i) reduce deposits D,

 (ii) increase wholesale funding H, and

(iii) reduce lending L.

    As in the baseline model, a higher interest rate increases banks’ effective market power
and induces them to contract deposit supply (the second term on the right of (14) is more
negative). They partially offset the contraction with the expensive wholesale funding, but
on net lending declines. Thus, the effect of the deposits channel on bank lending is the same
with profitable lending opportunities and access to wholesale funding.



V      Deposits data and summary statistics

    V.A    Data sources

Deposit holdings. The data on deposit quantities is from the Federal Deposit Insurance Cor-
poration (FDIC). The data covers the universe of U.S. bank branches at an annual frequency
from June 1994 to June 2014. The data set has information on branch characteristics such
as the parent bank, address, and geographic coordinates. We use the unique FDIC branch
identifier to match it with other datasets.


                                               16
   Deposit rates. The data on deposit rates is from Ratewatch. Ratewatch collects weekly
branch-level data on deposit rates by product from January 1997 to December 2013. The
data covers 54% of all U.S. branches as of 2013. We merge Ratewatch data with FDIC data
using the FDIC branch identifier. The data reports whether a branch actively sets deposit
rates or whether the branch uses rates that are set by another branch. We limit the analysis
to branches that actively set rates to avoid duplication of observations. The data contains
deposit rates on new accounts by product. Our analysis focus on the two most commonly
offered deposit products across all U.S. branches, money market deposit accounts with an
account size of $25,000 ($25K Money market accounts) and 12-month certificates of deposit
with an account size of $10,000 ($10K 12-month CDs). These products are representative of
savings and time deposits, which are the two main deposit types.
   Bank data. The bank data is from U.S. Call Reports provided by the Federal Reserve
Bank of Chicago. We use data from January 1994 to December 2013. The data contains
quarterly data on the income statements and balance sheets of all U.S. commercial banks.
We match the bank-level Call Reports to the branch-level Ratewatch and FDIC data using
the FDIC bank identifier.
   Small business lending data. We collect data on small business lending from the National
Community Reinvestment Coalition (NCRC). The data covers small business lending by
bank and county at an annual frequency from January 1996 to December 2013. We compute
total new lending as the total amount of new loans of less than $1 million. We include all
bank-county observations with at least $100,000 of new lending. We merge the data with
the Call Reports using the Call Reports identifier.
   Fed funds data. We collect the Fed funds target rate and the one-year T-Bill rate from
Federal Reserve Economic Data (FRED). We compute the average of the upper and lower
Fed funds rate target after the introduction of a target rate corridor in 2008. We collect Fed
funds futures rates from Datastream. We compute the expected component of the change in
the Fed funds rate in a given quarter as the difference between the three-month Fed funds
futures rate and the Fed funds rate target as of the end of the previous quarter.
   County data. We collect data on county characteristics from the 2000 U.S. Census and
County Business Patterns. We collect data on total employment and wage bill per county


                                             17
and year from the Bureau of Labor Statistics.


       V.B    Summary statistics

Our empirical analysis uses variation in market concentration, which we measure using a
standard Herfindahl index (HHI). This measure is used by bank regulators and the U.S.
Department of Justice to evaluate the effect of bank mergers on competition. The HHI
is calculated by summing up the squared deposit-market shares of all banks that operate
branches in a given county in a given year, and then averaging over all years. We then assign
to each bank branch in our data the HHI of the county in which it is located, and refer to it
as its Branch-HHI.
       Figure 3 presents a map of branch-HHI across the U.S. A lower number indicates a lower
level of concentration and hence a higher level of competition. There is significant variation
across counties, from a minimum Branch-HHI of 0.06 to a maximum of 1.
       Panel A of Table 1 provides summary statistics at the county level for all counties with
at least one bank branch. We find that low-concentration (low HHI) counties are larger
than high-concentration (high HHI) counties, with an average population of 150,081 versus
28,717. They also have a higher median household income ($45,657 versus $38,539), a lower
share of individuals over age 65 (14.2% versus 15.4%), and a higher share of college graduates
(18.7% versus 14.3%).
       Panel B presents branch-level summary statistics for the FDIC data. The average branch
holds $67 million worth of deposits. Branches in low concentration areas are slightly smaller
($59 million versus $75 million), and have higher deposit growth (8.6% versus 6.8%), than
branches in high-concentration areas. Panel C provides branch-level summary statistics for
the Ratewatch data. The average branch in Ratewatch is larger than those in the FDIC
data with average deposits of $142 million. The deposit spread is computed quarterly as
the difference between the Fed funds rate and the rate paid on a given type of deposit.12
Changes in savings deposit spreads ($25K money market accounts) have a mean of −3 bps
and a standard deviation of 49 bps (this includes variation in both the cross section and
  12
    In addition to the deposit spread, households also incur fees when holding deposits. Omitting fees does
not affect our analysis because they do not vary with the Fed funds rate (Stiroh 2004).


                                                    18
time series). For time deposits ($10K 12-month CDs) the mean is 0 bps and the standard
deviation is 37 bps.
       Panel D presents summary statistics at the bank level. For our bank-level analysis we
compute a bank-level measure of concentration, Bank-HHI, which is defined as the weighted
average of Branch-HHI across all of a bank’s branches, using branch deposits for the weights.
Banks with low Bank-HHI are slightly smaller, $825 million versus $1,316 million, and have
slightly fewer branches, 9 versus 11. Both low- and high-Bank-HHI banks are highly depen-
dent on deposits, which make up about 94% of their total liabilities.
       Panel E provides summary statistics on small business lending, which is reported at the
bank-county level. The average annual amount of new lending by a given bank in a given
county is $7.3 million. The average loan is made by a bank with total assets of $135 billion.



VI         Results on deposits
The aggregate evidence in Section III shows that a higher Fed funds rate is associated with an
inward shift of the deposit supply curve (higher prices, lower quantities). Yet showing that
this is a direct causal effect as implied by our theory is challenging because of the potential
for omitted variables. The most important omitted variable is banks’ lending opportunities.
If raising the Fed funds rate causes lending opportunities to decline, then this could explain
why banks contract deposit supply even absent a deposits channel.13 Thus, to establish
a direct causal effect of monetary policy on deposit supply, we must control for lending
opportunities.


       VI.A    Identification strategy

We address this challenge by turning to the cross section, where we exploit geographic vari-
ation in market power induced by differences in the concentration of local deposit markets.
Under the deposits channel, deposit supply should be more sensitive to monetary policy in
  13
    It is also plausible that lending opportunities are positively related to the Fed funds rate, since the Fed
tends to tighten when the economy is booming. Since better lending opportunities ought to increase deposit
supply, not decrease it, the aggregate time series may be understating the magnitude of the deposits channel.
Our cross-sectional estimates in Section VIII.B support this view.


                                                      19
more concentrated deposit markets. This prediction forms the basis of our analysis, and it
gets directly at the market power mechanism underpinning our theory.
    A valid test requires variation in concentration that is independent of banks’ lending
opportunities. We obtain such variation by comparing the supply of deposits across branches
of the same bank located in counties with different concentration. Since a bank can raise a
dollar of deposits at one branch and lend it at another, the decision of how many deposits
to raise at a given branch is independent of the decision of how many loans to make at
that branch. By comparing across branches of the same bank, we can control for the bank’s
lending opportunities and identify the effect of concentration on the sensitivity of deposit
supply to monetary policy. We refer to this approach as within-bank estimation.
    The identifying assumption behind our within-bank estimation is that banks allocate
funds internally to equalize the marginal return to lending across their branches.14 This
assumption is implied by the banks’ profit maximization motive. It is supported empirically
by our results on lending in Section VII, which show that a bank’s lending in a given county
is unrelated to local deposit-market concentration. It is also supported by the evidence in
the banking literature (Gilje, Loutskina, and Strahan 2013), which shows that banks channel
deposits to areas with high loan demand.


    VI.B      Branch-level estimation

Before implementing the within-bank estimation, we analyze the behavior of deposit spreads
and flows across all branches of all banks. We do so by running the following time-series
regression for each branch i:


                                      ∆yit = αi + βi ∆F Ft + εit ,                                         (15)


where ∆yit is either the change in the deposit spread or the log change in total deposits
(deposit flow) of branch i from t to t + 1, and ∆F Ft is the contemporaneous change in the
Fed funds target rate. The frequency is quarterly for deposit spreads (Ratewatch data) and
  14
     A slightly weaker version of the identifying assumption is that any frictions to allocating funds internally
are uncorrelated with concentration at the branch level.



                                                       20
annual for flows (FDIC data). Depending on the specification, we refer to βi as either the
spread or flow beta of branch i. It captures the sensitivity of the price of deposits (spread
beta) or quantity of deposits (flow beta) at branch i to changes in the Fed funds rate.15
       We relate these spread and flow betas to local concentration. We first average the betas
of all branches within each county, winsorizing at the 1% level to minimize the influence of
outliers. We then sort all counties into twenty equal-sized bins according to their concen-
tration as measured by their Herfindahl index (HHI). Each bin contains about 131 counties.
We look separately at the spreads on saving deposits ($25K money market accounts) and
small time deposits ($10K 12-month CDs), and at total deposit flows.
       Panel A of Figure 4 presents the results for savings deposit spreads. It shows that spreads
increase more with the Fed funds rate in more concentrated counties. The average spread
beta increases from 0.66 in low-concentration counties (HHI below the 10th percentile) to 0.76
in high-concentration counties (HHI above the 90th percentile). In other words, following
a 100 bps increase in the Fed Funds rate, savings deposit spreads rise by 10 bps more in
high-concentration counties than low-concentration counties. The relationship is roughly
linear across all bins, indicating that the result is robust.
       Panel B presents the results for small time deposit spreads. Here we use the one-year
T-Bill rate instead of the Fed funds rate to match the maturity of the deposit.16 As with
savings deposits, the spreads on time deposits increase more with the T-Bill rate in more
concentrated counties. The average spread beta is 0.19 in low-concentration counties and
0.24 in high-concentration counties. The fact that the spread betas for small time deposits
are lower than for savings deposits is consistent with the aggregate evidence in Figure 1.
       Panel C presents the results for deposit growth. It shows that deposits flow out more
when the Fed funds rate rises in more concentrated counties. The average flow beta is 0.18 in
low-concentration counties and −0.53 in high-concentration counties. Thus, following a 100
bps increase in the Fed Funds rate, deposits flow out by 71 bps more in high-concentration
counties than low-concentration counties.
  15
     We use the deposit spread as the outcome variable because it measures the price of deposits in terms of
foregone interest income. Using the deposit rate instead would give the same result because the sensitivity
of the deposit rate to changes in the Fed funds rate is by construction 1 − βi .
  16
     The results are robust to using the Fed funds rate instead.



                                                    21
       Taken together, Panels A, B, and C of Figure 4 show that when the Fed funds rate rises,
banks raise deposit spreads by more and experience greater outflows in more concentrated
markets.17 This shows that the sensitivity of deposit supply to monetary policy is increasing
in concentration, as predicted by the deposits channel.


       VI.C     Within-bank estimation

We now implement our within-bank estimation strategy to control for differential changes in
banks’ lending opportunities. We do so by including bank-time fixed effects (among others)
in the following panel regression:


                 ∆yit = αi + ζc(i) + λs(i)t + δj(i)t + γ∆F Ft × Branch-HHIi + εit ,                        (16)


where ∆yit is either the change in the deposit spread or the log change in total deposits
(deposit flows) of branch i from t to t + 1, ∆F Ft is the contemporaneous change in the Fed
funds target rate, Branch-HHIi is the concentration of the county where branch i is located,
δj(i)t are bank-time fixed effects for bank j which owns branch i, and αi , ζc(i) , and λs(i)t are
branch, county, and state-time fixed effects, respectively.18 We cluster standard errors at the
county level.
       The key set of controls are the bank-time fixed effects δj(i)t , which absorb all time-varying
differences between banks. Intuitively, we are comparing branches of the same bank and
asking whether, following an increase in the Fed funds rate, the bank’s branches in more
concentrated counties raise deposit spreads more and experience larger outflows relative to
its branches in less concentrated counties. Doing so controls for any changes in banks’
lending opportunities under our identifying assumption that banks are able to allocate funds
  17
     As with the aggregate time series, our cross-sectional results indicate a shift in the deposit supply curve
as prices (spreads) and quantities (deposit growth) move in opposite directions. They therefore cannot be
explained by changes in household demand for deposits. For instance, if deposit demand increased by more
in more concentrated counties, then deposit spreads in these counties would rise by more, but so would
deposit growth, which is the opposite of what we see.
  18
     By running our estimation in first differences we are implicitly assuming that deposit supply adjusts
contemporaneously to changes in the Fed funds rate. This is preferable to estimation in levels from an
identification standpoint because it controls for other factors that might vary with monetary policy over
longer periods of time or with a lag. As a robustness test, in the Internet Appendix we also run regressions
in levels, which allows for slower adjustments in deposit supply, and find similar results.


                                                      22
internally.
       The remaining sets of fixed effects serve as additional controls. Branch fixed effects
control for branch-specific characteristics (e.g., the quality of the branch’s management).
County fixed effects control for county-specific factors (e.g., local economic trends).19 We
also interact the county fixed effects with a dummy variable for the zero-lower bound period
(post December 2008) to control for regional differences during this prolonged period when
the Fed funds rate, our key right-hand variable, remained constant. State-time fixed effects
control for state-level changes in deposit markets (e.g., changing state-level regulation). Fi-
nally, whenever we take out the bank-time fixed effects, we add time fixed effects to absorb
average changes in deposit spreads and flows. We run several specifications with different
combinations of fixed effects to gauge their effects and the robustness of our results.
       As before, we use quarterly data for deposits spreads (Ratewatch data) and annual data
for deposit flows (FDIC data). We focus on the sample of banks with branches in at least
two counties because the coefficient of interest, γ, is not identified for single-county banks
when bank-time fixed effects are included. For comparison, we also provide estimates for the
full sample of banks but without the bank-time fixed effects.20
       Panel A of Table 2 reports the results for savings deposit spreads. Column 1 contains
our preferred specification with the full set of fixed effects. It confirms that the sensitivity
of savings deposit spreads to the Fed funds rate is increasing in concentration, even within
banks. When the Fed funds rate rises by 100 bps, banks raise deposit spreads by 14 bps more
at their branches in high-concentration counties than at their branches in low-concentration
counties.21 Column 2 omits the state-time fixed effects, while column 3 features only county
and time fixed effects. The coefficients are similar to those in column 1. Columns 4 to 6
estimate the same specifications as in columns 1 to 3 but for the full sample without bank-
time effects. The coefficients are slightly larger, consistent with the intuition that pricing
power varies somewhat more across banks than within them.
  19
     Branch and county fixed effects are highly collinear in joint specifications as very few branches (0.6%)
ever change counties.
  20
     By construction, when bank-time fixed effects are included the coefficient estimates for the full sample
are identical to those for the sample of banks with branches in at least two counties.
  21
     Using a different methodology and sample, Neumark and Sharpe (1992) estimate coefficients that imply
a similar sensitivity with respect to concentration.



                                                     23
       Panel B of Table 2 reports similar results for small time deposit spreads. As before,
we replace the Fed funds rate with the one-year T-Bill rate to match the maturity of time
deposits (results are similar if we use the Fed funds rate). Column 1 shows that the sensitivity
of small time deposit spreads to the T-Bill rate is 7 bps higher for high-concentration branches
than for low-concentration branches of the same bank. This result continues to hold when we
take out the state-time fixed effects (column 2) or include only county and time fixed effects
(column 3). As with savings deposit spreads, the coefficients for the full sample without
bank-time fixed effects (columns 4 to 6) are slightly larger.
       Table 3 presents the results for deposit flows. It confirms that an increase in the Fed
funds rate leads to bigger outflows in more concentrated markets. Column 1 shows that
a 100 basis point Fed funds rate increase leads to 66 bps greater deposit outflows at high-
concentration branches than at low-concentration branches belonging to the same bank. The
effect is slightly larger when we omit the state-time fixed effects (column 2) or include only
county and time fixed effects (column 3). The effect is also slightly larger for the full sample
without bank-time fixed effects (columns 4 to 6).
       The estimates in Tables 2 and 3 are consistent with profit maximization as required by
our model. In particular, our estimates imply that profits from deposit taking increase more
with the Fed funds rate in more concentrated markets.22
       The results in Tables 2 and 3 show the effect of concentration on the sensitivity of deposit
spreads and flows to monetary policy. Yet, as highlighted by the model, concentration is just
one source of market power. To help assess the overall effect of market power, we compute
the semi-elasticity of deposit flows to deposit spreads implied by our estimates. This semi-
elasticity is −5.3, hence there is a 530 bps contraction in deposits per 100 bps increase in
the deposit spread.23 Since deposit spreads on average rise by 61 bps per 100 bps rise in the
Fed funds rate, this number is economically large. As we show in Section VIII.A, we get a
very similar estimate using a comprehensive measure of market power that does not rely on
  22
     Assuming that the cost of operating a deposit franchise is largely fixed, the percentage change in profits
before fixed costs is equal to the percentage change in deposit spreads plus the percentage change in deposit
quantities. The average deposit spread in our sample is about 108 bps, hence the 14 bps increase in Table 2
represents a 13% increase in deposit spreads, which easily offsets the 66 bps outflow in Table 3.
  23
     The semi-elasticity is computed as the coefficient in column 1 of Table 3 divided by the weighted average
of the coefficients in column 1 of Panels A and B of Table 2 using the relative share of savings and small
time deposits as weights.


                                                      24
concentration, and this estimate can account for the entire transmission of monetary policy
to bank balance sheets documented by the bank lending channel literature.


       VI.D      Event study analysis

In this section we exploit the weekly frequency of our deposit rate data to conduct an event
study. Every six weeks or so, the Fed’s Open Market Committee (FOMC) announces an
updated target for the Fed funds rate. By looking at deposit spreads over a narrow window
around FOMC announcements, we can pinpoint the direct effect of monetary policy on
deposit pricing.
       We focus on savings deposits because they have zero maturity and hence their rates should
respond within a short period of a rate change.24 We run the event study by estimating the
following OLS regression:

                                              5
                                              X
                     ∆yit = αt + ζc(i) +              γτ Branch-HHIc(i) × ∆F Ft−τ + εit ,               (17)
                                              τ =−5


where ∆yit is the change in the deposit spread of branch i from week t to t + 1, ∆F Ft−τ
is the change in the Fed funds target rate from week t − τ to t − τ + 1, Branch-HHIc(i)
is the concentration of county c (i) in which branch i is located, αt are time fixed effects,
and ζc(i) are county fixed effects. We include five leads and lags of the change in the Fed
funds rate to encompass the full six-week FOMC window. We compute the running sum of
the coefficients γτ (i.e. tτ =−5 γτ , t = −5, . . . , 5), which captures the cumulative differential
                         P

response of deposit spreads to Fed funds rate changes in low- versus high-concentration
counties. We also compute the associated 95% confidence intervals, taking into account the
covariances between the errors in the coefficient estimates.
       Figure 5 plots the result. It shows that savings deposit spreads at high-concentration
branches rise relative to those at low-concentration branches in response to an increase in
the Fed funds rate. Importantly, the differential response occurs almost immediately at the
time of a Fed funds rate change in week 0. There is no differential response in the weeks
  24
       By contrast, time deposits have longer maturities and hence their rates should adjust ahead of time.



                                                        25
leading up to the rate change. In the week of the rate change, the differential response is
about 7 bps. It then accumulates to about 11 basis points over the next two weeks and
remains constant after that. The result is strongly statistically significant.
   This finding provides strong evidence for a direct effect of monetary policy on deposit
pricing that increases with market concentration. The cumulative magnitude is very close
to the estimates from the quarterly regressions in Table 2, suggesting that the effect is
permanent. The precise timing of the effect strongly suggests that it is a direct response to
the FOMC announcement.


   VI.E     Expected rate changes

The results of the event study establish a direct effect of monetary policy on deposit pricing.
This effect could come from the actual Fed funds rate change or new information that is
conveyed at the same time. Specifically, the Fed has access to private information (e.g.,
through its role as a bank supervisor) and FOMC announcements may contain news beyond
the change in the Fed funds rate target. Disentangling Fed funds rate changes from the news
they convey is a challenging problem that confounds nearly all empirical studies of monetary
policy (e.g. Kuttner 2001, Bernanke and Kuttner 2005). We are uniquely able to address it
in our setting by examining the impact of expected Fed funds rate changes.
   Expected rate changes by construction do not convey any news and therefore control for
the release of information. Yet typically they cannot be used because most assets (e.g., stocks
and bonds) are long-lived, hence their prices incorporate information about future rates in
advance and only react to unexpected rate changes. Savings deposits, on the other hand,
have zero maturity and should therefore react to a rate change when it occurs, regardless
of whether it is expected or unexpected. This allows us to disentangle the effect of the Fed
funds rate itself from any confounding news release.
   We implement this approach by replacing the total Fed funds rate change in the deposit
spreads regression (16) with its expected and unexpected components, which we compute
using Fed funds futures prices. Table 4 presents the results. As column 1 shows, a 100 bps
expected increase in the Fed funds rate raises deposits spreads in high-concentration counties


                                              26
by 22 basis points relative to low-concentration counties. The effect of an unexpected increase
is somewhat smaller at 11 basis points, but the difference is not statistically significant. The
results are similar in specifications without state-time fixed effects (column 2), with only
county and time fixed effects (column 3), and in the full sample (columns 4 to 6). The result
on expected rate changes in particular indicates that monetary policy affects deposit pricing
through the Fed funds rate itself, as implied by our model.


       VI.F    Financial sophistication and market power

Our tests so far exploit differences in market concentration as a source of variation in banks’
market power. Yet our model shows that market power is also a function of other charac-
teristics such as the financial sophistication and attentiveness of depositors (Proposition 2).
Our model predicts that deposits spreads are more sensitive to changes in the Fed funds rate
in areas with low levels of financial sophistication.
       We test this prediction using three common proxies for financial sophistication that are
available at the county level: age (share of individuals over 65), income (natural logarithm
of median household income), and education (share of college graduates). We include these
proxies interacted with the Fed funds rate change in our benchmark regressions (16) for
deposit spreads and flows.
       Panel A of Table 5 presents the results for savings deposit spreads. We use the full
sample and control for branch, county, and state-time fixed effects. We find that low finan-
cial sophistication has the same effect as market concentration. As columns 1 to 3 show,
branches in counties with an older population, lower median household income, and less
college education increase spreads by more than branches in other counties when the Fed
funds rate rises. When we include all three proxies in the same regression, college education
remains statistically significant while the other proxies lose their significance. The effect of
concentration remains statistically significant in all specifications.25
       Panel B of Table 5 presents the results for deposit flows, using the same sets of fixed
effects as in Panel A. Column 1 to 3 show that the financial sophistication proxies have
  25
     The statistical significance of the financial sophistication variables varies when we add bank-time fixed
effects. The effect of market concentration is robust across all specifications.


                                                     27
statistically significant effects and the expected signs. The joint specification in column 4
shows that age is the most informative of these proxies. The effect of market concentration
remains robust and statistically significant in all specifications.
   Overall, the results in Table 5 indicate that low financial sophistication is associated with
a higher sensitivity of deposit supply to monetary policy. This is consistent with our model
where low financial sophistication represents an additional source of market power for banks.


   VI.G      Robustness

We summarize the results from a number of robustness tests which we report in full in the
Internet Appendix. First, the results are similar for large banks, consistent with the large
aggregate effects in Figures 1 and 2. Second, the results are similar if we define a local
deposit market using a smaller geographic area than a county; if we use lagged time-varying
measures of concentration; and if we define concentration based on branch shares instead
of bank shares. Third, restricting the sample to the pre-crisis period does not change the
results. This is unsurprising since there is no variation in the Fed funds rate in our post-
crisis sample. Fourth, the results on deposit spreads are robust to using alternative deposit
products. And fifth, they are also robust to estimation in levels instead of changes.



VII       Results on lending

   VII.A      Identification strategy

In this section we analyze the effect of the deposits channel on lending. Our model predicts
that the contraction in deposit supply induced by a Fed funds rate increase should cause a
contraction in lending (Proposition 3). The key condition for this prediction is that deposits
are a special source of funding for banks, one that is not perfectly substitutable with wholesale
funding. Under this condition, when banks contract deposits to take advantage of greater
market power, they also contract their lending. And if firms cannot costlessly replace bank
loans with other funding, then real activity declines.
   Given that banks can allocate deposits across branches, the impact of the deposits channel

                                               28
on a bank’s lending is determined by the average concentration of its branches. We therefore
construct a bank-level measure of concentration, Bank-HHI, by averaging the concentrations
of a bank’s branches (Branch-HHI), weighing each branch by its share of the bank’s deposits.
Our model predicts that when the Fed funds rate rises, banks that raise deposits in high-
concentration markets (high Bank-HHI banks) should reduce lending relative to banks that
raise deposits in low-concentration markets (low Bank-HHI banks).
       Testing this prediction is challenging because it again requires controlling for differences
in lending opportunities. However, precisely because banks can allocate deposits across
branches, this time we cannot rely on our within-bank estimation strategy. Instead, we
compare the lending of different banks in the same county, ensuring that they face similar
local lending opportunities.
       This within-county estimation for lending is the analog of our within-bank estimation
for deposits. Moreover, it is fully consistent with our earlier identification assumption that
banks can allocate deposits across branches. In fact, we can use it to test this assumption
by including local market concentration as an additional control. If banks are indeed able
to allocate deposits, then their lending in a given county should depend on their bank-level
concentration (Bank-HHI), not on the local county’s concentration (Branch-HHI).26


       VII.B     Within-county estimation

We apply our within-county estimation strategy using data on small business lending, which
is available at the bank-county level.27 Small business lending is particularly well-suited for
our analysis because it is a highly illiquid yet economically important form of lending.
       We run the following OLS regression, which is analogous to our deposits regression (16):


               yjct = αjc + δct + βBank-HHIjt−1 + γ∆F Ft × Bank-HHIjt−1 + εjct ,                      (18)
  26
     Local lending can be affected by local lending concentration (Scharfstein and Sunderam 2014). We
control for this by including county-time fixed effects.
  27
     This dataset is heavily weighted towards large banks, as only banks with over $1 billion in assets are
required to report their small business lending (the reporting threshold was $250 million until 2004). In
addition, because the unit of observation is a bank-county, and because large banks are active in multiple
counties, they are further over-represented within the dataset itself.




                                                    29
where yjct is the log of new lending by bank j in county c from year t to t + 1, Bank-HHIjt−1
is the bank-level concentration of bank j in year t − 1, ∆F Ft is the change in the Fed funds
target rate from t to t + 1, αjc are bank-county fixed effects, and δct are county-time fixed
effects. We double-cluster standard errors at the bank and county level.
   The key set of controls are the county-time fixed effects, which absorb changes in local
lending opportunities. We also include county-bank fixed effects, which absorb time-invariant
characteristics such as local brand effects. In some specifications, we also include local
concentration (Branch-HHIc ) interacted with the Fed funds rate change to test whether
local concentration has a direct effect on lending.
   The results are presented in Table 6. Column 1 includes the full set of controls. It shows
that when the Fed funds rate rises, banks that raise deposits in more concentrated markets
reduce lending relative to banks that raise deposits in less concentrated markets: a one-
standard deviation increase in Bank-HHI reduces lending by 230 bps per 100 bps increase
in the Fed funds rate. Note that this estimate captures the change in new lending, not the
stock of loans on bank balance sheets. It is economically significant, as well as statistically
significant at the 1%-level. It provides strong evidence that the deposits channel affects the
provision of new loans.
   Column 2 includes local concentration (Branch-HHI) and interacts it with the Fed funds
rate change (this requires omitting the county-time fixed effects). We find that local con-
centration has no effect on the sensitivity of local lending to monetary policy. In contrast,
the coefficient on bank-level concentration (Bank-HHI×∆F F ) is almost unchanged from col-
umn 1 and remains statistically significant. This result indicates that lending decisions are
made at the bank level, validating our earlier assumption that banks allocate funds across
branches.
   Column 3 drops the county-bank fixed effects. The coefficient on the interaction of bank-
level concentration with the Fed funds rate change remains large and significant. Column
4 drops the control for local deposit concentration and finds the same coefficient. These
results indicate that the effect of bank-level concentration on the sensitivity of local lending
to monetary policy is robust.



                                              30
   VII.C     County-level lending and employment

In this section we aggregate our data at the county level and examine whether the deposits
channel generates changes in total lending and employment. Our left-hand variables are total
small business lending, employment, and total wages at the county-year level. Employment
and wages are from the Bureau of Labor Statistics, from 1996 to 2013.
   The key right-hand variable is a county-level concentration measure, County-HHI, defined
as the weighted average of Bank-HHI across all banks lending in a given county, using their
lagged lending shares as weights. This measure captures the extent to which a county is
served by banks that raise deposits in concentrated markets. Under the deposits channel,
high County-HHI should predict a reduction in lending and employment when the Fed funds
rate rises. We estimate the following OLS regression:


           yct = αc + δt + βCounty-HHIct−1 + γ∆F Ft × County-HHIct−1 + εct ,            (19)


where yct is the log of new lending, the log growth in employment, or the log growth in the
total wage bill in county c from date t to t + 1, County-HHIct−1 is the weighted average of
Bank-HHIbt−1 for all banks operating in county c weighted by their lending shares on date
t − 1, αc are county fixed effects and δt are time fixed effects. As in the previous section,
we also include local deposit concentration (Branch-HHI) interacted with the change in the
Fed funds rate, which improves identification by ensuring that we are using variation in
concentration coming from counties other than the one where the lending is taking place.
We cluster standard errors at the county level.
   Table 7 presents the results. Column 1 reports the benchmark specification using new
lending as the outcome variable. It shows that counties whose banks raise deposits in more
concentrated markets see a reduction in lending relative to other counties: a one-standard
deviation increase in County-HHI reduces new lending by 210 bps per 100 bps increase in
the Fed funds rate. The result is statistically significant. Column 2 adds local deposit
concentration as a control. The coefficient on County-HHI remains unchanged while local
deposit concentration has no effect, as predicted. These results support the prediction that
the deposits channel affects overall bank lending.

                                             31
       Columns 3 and 4 present the results for employment. We find that a one-standard
deviation increase in County-HHI reduces employment growth by 10 bps per 100 bps increase
in the Fed funds rate. The result is statistically significant. Column 4 adds the local
deposit concentration control. The coefficient on County-HHI is slightly reduced but remains
significant. Columns 5 and 6 find similar results using total wage growth as the outcome
variable. These results provide evidence that the contraction in lending induced by the
deposits channel reduces real economic activity.


       VII.D     Bank-level analysis

In this section we examine the effects of the deposits channel on the components of bank
balance sheets. This provides a more detailed picture of how banks absorb the contraction
in deposits induced by a rise in the Fed funds rate. It also allows us to verify the robustness
of our earlier results on deposits and lending using an entirely different data set (namely,
U.S. Call Reports). We run the following OLS regression, where the unit of observation is
now a bank-quarter:


               ∆ybt = αb + δt + βBank-HHIbt−1 + γ∆F Ft × Bank-HHIbt−1 + εbt ,                             (20)


where ∆ybt is the log change in a given balance sheet component (e.g. loans) of bank b from
date t to t + 1, ∆F Ft is the change in the Fed funds target rate from t to t + 1, Bank-HHIbt−1
is the bank-level deposit concentration of bank b at t − 1, αb are bank fixed effects and δt
are time fixed effects. We cluster standard errors at the bank level.28
       Panel A of Table 8 presents the results for deposits and other types of liabilities. Consis-
tent with our branch-level analysis, columns 1 and 2 show that when the Fed funds rate rises,
banks that raise deposits in more concentrated markets experience greater deposit outflows
and a greater increase in deposit spreads (measured as the Fed funds rate minus deposit
interest expense divided by total deposits). The estimated coefficients are similar to our
earlier estimates using branch-level data. Columns 3 and 4 show similar results for savings
  28
    Following the specification of the deposits regressions, we also include bank fixed effects interacted with
a post-2008 indicator to ensure that the results are not driven by the zero lower bound period.



                                                      32
and time deposits. Column 5 shows that banks partly offset the contraction in deposits by
raising wholesale funding. Nevertheless, as column 6 shows the net effect on total liabilities
is strongly negative.
   Panel B of Table 8 presents the results for loans and other types of assets. Column 1
verifies that total assets decline in line with total liabilities. Columns 2 and 3 show that
banks absorb part of this decline by reducing their cash and securities buffers (these two
categories represent 5% and 25% of the balance sheet, respectively). Even so, as column 4
shows, total loans also contract significantly. Finally, columns 5 and 6 show a strong decline
in the two main loan categories, real estate and commercial and industrial (C&I) loans.
   The results in Table 8 support the predictions of the deposits channel for lending as
given by Proposition 3. Banks face a tradeoff between maximizing profits from deposits
and financing a large balance sheet. Consistent with this tradeoff, we find that banks that
raise deposits in more concentrated markets contract their assets by more in response to
an increase in the Fed funds rate. The contraction occurs across the board, including in
securities and loans. Hence, the deposits channel gives rise to a bank lending channel.



VIII       Broader implications of the deposits channel

   VIII.A      A new measure of banks’ exposure to monetary policy

Under the deposits channel, a bank’s exposure to monetary policy depends on its market
power. One important determinant of market power which we use for identification through-
out the paper is market concentration. Yet, as our model shows, banks also derive market
power from other sources. These include product differentiation, the willingness of depositors
to switch banks, their rate of participation in other markets, and depositors’ financial so-
phistication and attentiveness. A comprehensive measure of a bank’s exposure to monetary
policy under the deposits channel must account for all of these sources of market power.
   Our model provides a simple way to construct such a measure. A sufficient statistic for a
bank’s market power is the sensitivity of its deposit spread to the Fed funds rate, which we
call the deposit spread beta (see Propositions 1 and 2). Intuitively, while all banks charge a


                                             33
low spread when the Fed funds rate is low, banks with a lot of market power are able to raise
their spreads more aggressively when the Fed funds rate rises, i.e. they have high deposit
spread betas. In Section VI.B, we calculated deposit spread betas at the branch level and
related them to concentration. In this section we calculate deposits spread betas at the bank
level and relate them to bank-level outcomes.
   We estimate bank-level deposit spread betas by running the following OLS regression for
each bank in the Call Report data:

                                              4
                                              X
                               ∆yit = αi +           βiτ ∆F Ft−τ + εit ,                    (21)
                                              τ =0


where ∆yit is the change in the deposit spread of bank i from date t to t + 1 and ∆F Ft is
the change in the Fed Funds target rate from t to t + 1. We allow for lags because the Call
Report data is based on average deposit interest expense and because it takes time for the
rates on non-zero maturity deposits to reset. Our estimate of bank i’s deposit spread beta,
Spread-βi , is the sum of the βiτ coefficients in (21).
   Our estimates show that banks have significant market power as they are able to substan-
tially raise deposit spreads when the Fed funds rate rises. The average deposit spread beta
is 0.54, i.e. on average banks raise deposit spreads by 54 bps per 100 bps increase in the Fed
funds rate. Deposit spread betas also differ substantially in the cross section. They range
from 0.31 at the 10th percentile to 0.89 at the 90th percentile. This large variation in exposure
to the deposits channel allows us to assess its ability to explain bank-level outcomes.
   We relate the deposit spread betas to the sensitivity of bank balance sheets to monetary
policy. We measure this sensitivity by re-running regression (21) with the log growth of
deposits, assets, securities, and loans as dependent variables. We refer to the estimated
sensitivities as flow betas.
   We provide a graphical representation of the relationship between spread betas and flow
betas by sorting banks into one hundred bins by their deposit spread betas (winsorized at
the 10% level to reduce the impact of outliers) and plotting the average flow beta within
each bin. The slope of this relationship measures the impact of increased exposure to the




                                                34
deposits channel on the various components of banks’ balance sheets.29
       Figure 6 presents the results. As shown in Panel A, banks with higher deposit spread
betas have more negative deposit flow betas. The effect is large: banks at the 90th percentile
of the spread beta distribution have a 276 bps greater outflow of deposits than banks at the
10th percentile for every 100 bps increase in the Fed funds rate. Panels B–D show similar
effects for total assets (194 bps), securities (237 bps), and loans (158 bps).
       Table 9 provides formal estimates from cross-sectional regressions of flow betas on spread
betas. Columns 1 to 4 correspond to the panels in Figure 6, while columns 5 and 6 break
out real estate and C&I loans (the two largest categories). The estimates, which can be
interpreted as semi-elasticities, are statistically significant and their magnitudes are large.
The semi-elasticity for deposits (−4.8) is very close to the one obtained from our within-bank
estimation in Section VI.C (−5.3). Overall, these results show that banks’ market power, as
measured by their ability to raise deposit spreads, strongly influences the sensitivity of bank
balance sheets to monetary policy.


       VIII.B     Large banks and aggregate effects

In order to have a significant aggregate effect, the deposits channel must affect large banks.
Since the aggregate time series is dominated by large banks, it shows that large banks raise
deposit spreads (Figure 1) and contract deposit supply (Figure 2) when the Fed funds rate
rises, as predicted by the deposits channel.30 Yet, because monetary policy is endogenous,
we cannot use the aggregate series to estimate its impact on large banks’ lending. Instead,
we again turn to the the cross section and re-estimate the relationship between spread betas
and flow betas for the subset of the 5% largest banks (this cutoff is commonly used in the
banking literature, e.g. Kashyap and Stein 2000).
       This analysis is informative because there remains substantial cross-sectional variation
in deposit spread betas even among large banks with a standard deviation of 0.35. Large
banks also appear to have substantial market power over deposits: their average spread beta
  29
     The level (or intercept) of the relationship is not identified because it includes the impact of lending
opportunities, which are likely to be positively correlated with increases in the Fed funds rate.
  30
     In Section VI.G, we also verified that our cross-sectional results on deposits are similar for large banks.



                                                      35
is 0.61, which is slightly higher than for the full sample.
   Figure 7 shows the relationship between the flow and spread betas of large banks. The
results are similar to the full sample, and are in fact somewhat stronger. Panels A and
B show that large banks with higher spread betas have greater deposit outflows and lower
asset growth following Fed funds rate increases. Panel C and D show that they also sell more
securities and contract loan growth by more. Table 10 provides the corresponding regression
estimates. The effect on lending is larger than in the full sample: banks at the 90th percentile
of the spread beta distribution reduce loan growth by 225 bps relative to banks at the 10th
percentile per 100 bps increase in the Fed funds rate.
   We can use the numbers in Table 10 to estimate the aggregate effect of the deposits
channel on bank lending. Given the average deposit spread beta of 0.61, a 100 bps increase
in the Fed funds rate is expected to induce a 351 bps outflow of deposits and a 237 bps
reduction in lending. These estimates imply that a typical 400-bps Fed hiking cycle induces
a 1,404 bps reduction in deposits and a 948 bps reduction in lending (relative to keeping rates
unchanged). Based on 2014 figures, these numbers translate into a $1.3 trillion reduction in
deposits and a $727 billion reduction in lending.
   To put these estimates in the context of the literature, we compare them to the seminal
work of Bernanke and Blinder (1992) on the bank lending channel. Using a VAR, Bernanke
and Blinder (1992) estimate that a one-standard-deviation increase in the Fed funds rate
(31 bps) induces deposit outflows of 81 bps, and reductions in securities and loans of 123
bps and 57 bps, respectively, over a one-year period. Our corresponding estimates are 108
bps, 173 bps, and 73 bps, respectively. This shows that the deposits channel can account
for the full magnitude of the transmission of monetary policy through bank balance sheets
as documented by Bernanke and Blinder (1992).


   VIII.C      Implications for the liquidity premium

The deposits channel also has important implications for the liquidity premium in financial
markets. Since deposits are the main source of liquid assets for households, the large fluc-
tuations in deposit supply induced by the deposits channel are likely to propagate to the


                                               36
prices of other liquid assets, such as Treasuries. Specifically, when interest rates rise and the
supply of deposits shrinks, the liquidity premium should rise.
   Since the liquidity premium is an aggregate variable, we cannot use cross-sectional data
to test this prediction, as we have done so far. It is nevertheless instructive to plot the
time series of the liquidity premium against the price of deposits. We measure the liquidity
premium as the spread between the Fed funds rate and the T-Bill rate. While both Fed funds
loans and T-Bills are extremely safe short-term securities, T-Bills provide a higher level of
liquidity services to a broader range of investors, and therefore command a liquidity premium.
Figure 8 plots this liquidity premium measure against the aggregate deposit spread, which
we compute from the Call Reports, for the period from 1986 to 2013. As the figure shows,
there is a striking positive relationship between the two series. Their correlation is 90% and
their co-movement is strong both in the cycle and in the trend.
   This result suggests that the deposits channel is a main driver of the liquidity premium.
This can explain the otherwise puzzling high correlation between the liquidity premium and
the Fed funds rate documented by Nagel (2014). To our knowledge, there is no plausible
alternative theory for the large fluctuations in the supply of liquid assets required to generate
this correlation. Ultimately, the liquidity premium affects all financial institutions that rely
on liquid assets as a buffer against a loss of funding. In addition to banks, these include
hedge funds, broker dealers, and mutual funds. As the liquidity premium fluctuates, it affects
their ability to take leverage, and consequently affects asset prices and firms’ cost of capital
(Drechsler, Savov, and Schnabl 2015). This general equilibrium effect of the deposits channel
is above and beyond the effect on lending discussed above.



IX      Conclusion
We show that monetary policy has a strong effect on the supply of deposits, a large and
important asset class. When the Fed funds rate rises, the spread between the Fed funds
rate and deposit rates also rises, triggering large deposit outflows. We argue that these
relationships are due to banks’ market power. When rates are low, banks face competition
from cash in supplying liquidity to households, which forces them to charge a low spread on


                                               37
deposits. When rates are high, banks’ competition is mainly from other banks, which allows
them to increase spreads, especially in markets that are concentrated, or where depositors are
financially unsophisticated and unlikely to switch banks. Households respond by decreasing
their deposit holdings. We call this mechanism the deposits channel.
   We provide evidence for the deposits channel using cross-sectional data on deposit rates
and flows. We control for changes in banks’ lending opportunities by comparing branches
of the same bank located in different markets. We find that when the Fed funds rate rises,
branches located in more concentrated markets raise their deposit spreads by more, and
experience greater outflows, than branches located in less concentrated markets.
   Deposits are the main source of funding for banks. Their stability makes them partic-
ularly well-suited for funding risky and illiquid assets. As a result, when banks contract
deposit supply they also contract lending. We find evidence to support this prediction in
both bank-level and disaggregated data on bank lending. Our estimates suggest that the
deposits channel can account for the entire transmission of monetary policy through bank
balance sheets. It does so without relying on required reserves, a foundation of existing
theories of the bank lending channel that has become quantitatively implausible.
   Deposits also represent the main source of safe and liquid assets for households. The
deposits channel therefore also affects the overall supply of safe and liquid assets in the
economy and the liquidity premium in financial markets.




                                             38
References
Bernanke, Ben, 2004. Gradualism. Remarks at an economics luncheon co-sponsored by the
  Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco (Seattle Branch) and the University of Washington,
  Seattle, Washington.
      , and Mark Gertler, 1989. Agency costs, net worth, and business fluctuations. The
  American Economic Review 79, 14–31.
Bernanke, Ben S, 1983. Nonmonetary effects of the financial crisis in the propagation of the
  great depression. The American Economic Review 73, 257–276.
      , and Alan S Blinder, 1988. Credit, money, and aggregate demand. The American
  Economic Review 78, 435–439.
       , 1992. The federal funds rate and the channels of monetary transmission. The Amer-
  ican Economic Review 82, 901–921.
Bernanke, Ben S, and Mark Gertler, 1995. Inside the black box: The credit channel of
  monetary policy. The Journal of Economic Perspectives 9, 27–48.
Bernanke, Ben S, and Kenneth N Kuttner, 2005. What explains the stock market’s reaction
  to federal reserve policy?. The Journal of Finance 60, 1221–1257.
Brunnermeier, Markus K., and Yann Koby, 2016. The reversal interest rate: The effective
  lower bound of monetary policy. Working paper.
Brunnermeier, Markus K., and Yuliy Sannikov, 2014. A macroeconomic model with a finan-
  cial sector. American Economic Review 104, 379–421.
Diamond, Douglas W, and Philip H Dybvig, 1983. Bank runs, deposit insurance, and liquid-
  ity. The Journal of Political Economy 91, 401–419.
Diebold, Francis X, and Steven A Sharpe, 1990. Post-deregulation bank-deposit-rate pricing:
  The multivariate dynamics. Journal of Business & Economic Statistics 8, 281–291.
Drechsler, Itamar, Alexi Savov, and Philipp Schnabl, 2015. A model of monetary policy and
  risk premia. Journal of Finance forthcoming.
Driscoll, John C, and Ruth A Judson, 2013. Sticky deposit rates. Federal Reserve Board
  Working Paper.
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, 2011. Study on Core Deposits and Brokered Deposits
  Submitted to Congress Pursuant to the DoddFrank Wall Street Reform and Consumer
  Protection Act Government Printing Office, Washington, DC.
Freixas, Xavier, and Jean-Charles Rochet, 2008. Microeconomics of banking MIT press.



                                            39
Galı́, Jordi, 2009. Monetary Policy, Inflation, and the Business Cycle: An Introduction to
 the New Keynesian Framework Princeton University Press.
Gertler, Mark, and Nobuhiro Kiyotaki, 2010. Financial intermediation and credit policy in
 business cycle analysis. Handbook of monetary economics 3, 547–599.
Gilje, Erik, Elena Loutskina, and Philip E. Strahan, 2013. Exporting liquidity: Branch
  banking and financial integration. Working Paper 19403 National Bureau of Economic
  Research.
Gorton, Gary, and George Pennacchi, 1990. Financial intermediaries and liquidity creation.
 Journal of Finance 45, 49–71.
Hannan, T. H., and A. Berger, 1989. The price-concentration relationship in banking. Review
  of Economics and Statistics 71, 291–299.
Hannan, Timothy H., and Allen Berger, 1991. The rigidity of prices: Evidence from the
  banking industry. The American Economic Review 81, 938–945.
Hanson, Samuel, Andrei Shleifer, Jeremy C. Stein, and Robert W. Vishny, 2015. Banks as
  patient fixed-income investors. Journal of Financial Economics 117, 449–469.
He, Zhiguo, and Arvind Krishnamurthy, 2013. Intermediary asset pricing. American Eco-
  nomic Review 103, 732–70.
Jiménez, Gabriel, Steven Ongena, José-Luis Peydró, and Jesús Saurina, 2014. Hazardous
  times for monetary policy: What do twenty-three million bank loans say about the effects
  of monetary policy on credit risk-taking?. Econometrica 82, 463–505.
Kashyap, Anil K, Raghuram Rajan, and Jeremy C Stein, 2002. Banks as liquidity providers:
 An explanation for the coexistence of lending and deposit-taking. The Journal of Finance
 57, 33–73.
Kashyap, Anil K., and Jeremy C. Stein, 1994. Monetary policy and bank lending. in Mone-
 tary PolicyNBER Chapters . pp. 221–261 National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
      , 2000. What do a million observations on banks say about the transmission of
  monetary policy?. American Economic Review 90, 407–428.
Kashyap, Anil K, Jeremy C. Stein, and David W. Wilcox, 1993. Monetary policy and credit
 conditions: Evidence from the composition of external finance. American Economic Review
 83, 78–98.
Kiyotaki, N., and J. Moore, 1997. Credit cycles. Journal of Political Economy 105, 211–248.
Krishnamurthy, Arvind, and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, 2012. The aggregate demand for
  treasury debt. Journal of Political Economy 120, 233–267.


                                            40
Kuttner, Kenneth N, 2001. Monetary policy surprises and interest rates: Evidence from the
 fed funds futures market. Journal of Monetary Economics 47, 523–544.
Nagel, Stefan, 2014. The liquidity premium of near-money assets. NBER Working Papers
  20265 National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Neumark, David, and Steven A. Sharpe, 1992. Market structure and the nature of price
  rigidity: Evidence from the market for consumer deposits. Quarterly Journal of Economics
  107, 657–680.
Romer, Christina D, and David H Romer, 1990. New evidence on the monetary transmission
  mechanism. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1990, 149–213.
Scharfstein, David, and Adi Sunderam, 2014. Market power in mortgage lending and the
  transmission of monetary policy. HBS Working Paper.
Stein, Jeremy C, 1998. An adverse-selection model of bank asset and liability management
  with implications for the transmission of monetary policy. RAND Journal of Economics
  29, 466–486.
      , 2012. Monetary policy as financial stability regulation. The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 127, 57–95.
Stiroh, Kevin J, 2004. Diversification in banking: Is noninterest income the answer?. Journal
  of Money, Credit, and Banking 36, 853–882.
Sunderam, A., and Jeremy C Stein, 2015. The fed, the bond market, and gradualism in
  monetary policy. Working Paper, Harvard University.
Woodford, Michael, 2003. Interest and prices: Foundations of a theory of monetary policy
 Princeton university press.
      , 2010. Financial intermediation and macroeconomic analysis. The Journal of Eco-
  nomic Perspectives 24, 21–44.
Yankov, Vladimir, 2014. In search of a risk-free asset. Federal Reserve Board Working Paper.




                                             41
X     Appendix
This Appendix contains proofs and derivations from the model in Section IV. The solution
to the household’s problem can be summarized by three first-order conditions. The first is
that the household must be indifferent between banks at the margin:

                                      Di    s −η
                                              i
                                         =         .                                    (A.1)
                                      D      s

As bank i increases its deposit spread relative to other banks, the household reduces its
deposits at bank i at the rate η, the elasticity of substitution across banks. The second
condition is that the household must be indifferent between cash and deposits at the margin:
                                                −
                                     D         s
                                           = δ       .                                  (A.2)
                                     M          f

When deposit spreads are high, households substitute away from deposits into cash at the
rate , the elasticity of substitution between cash and deposits. Finally, the household must
also be indifferent between liquidity and bonds at the margin:

                                       l
                                            = λρ s−ρ
                                                  l ,                                   (A.3)
                                       W

where sl ≡ Ml f + Dl s is the weighted average foregone interest or premium that households
pay to obtain liquidity. Using (A.2), we can write it solely in terms of f and s as s1−l   ≡
f 1− + δ  s1− . When the Fed funds rate f and deposit spread s are high, liquidity is more
expensive and households substitute away from liquid assets into bonds. Substituting (2)
and (A.2) into (A.3), differentiating with respect to s, and taking the limit λ → 0 gives (8).

Proof of Proposition 1. It follows from (7) that when banks are at an interior optimum, the
aggregate deposit elasticity satisfies

                             ∂D/D
                         −         = 1 − (η − 1)(N − 1) = M.                            (A.4)
                              ∂s/s

                                                                                    ∂s
Substituting (8) into this expression and solving for s gives (9). It is clear that ∂f > 0,
                                                                                ∂s
provided that  > 1 and M > ρ. The relationship between s and M is ∂M = s( −
1)−1 ( − M)−2 . Thus, s increases in M, given that  > 1. Moreover, M decreases in N and
                                     ∂s          ∂2s
η provided N, η > 1. Finally, using ∂f  > 0 and ∂M∂f  = 1s ∂f
                                                           ∂s ∂s
                                                              ∂M
                                                                 gives (iii).

Proof of Proposition 2. Let Di,ns be the deposits of non-switchers at bank i. The bank’s



                                             42
profit-maximizing condition becomes

                              ∂Di,ns /Di,ns              ∂Di /Di
                        αns                 + (1 − αns )          = −1,                                  (A.5)
                                ∂si /si                   ∂si /si

As in the baseline model, bank i sets its deposit spread so that it faces a demand elasticity
of −1. This demand elasticity is now a weighted average of the demand elasticities of the
two types of depositors. The weights coincide with the population shares because the two
types face the same terms and therefore hold the same amounts of deposits in equilibrium.
    The demand elasticity of switchers is the same as in the baseline model (see (6) and (8)).
The demand elasticity of non-switchers is different. Intuitively, non-switchers behave as if
there is only one bank in their area. As a result, their bank does not have to worry about
losing them to other banks, i.e. the inter-bank term in the deposit elasticity equation (6)
vanishes and only the aggregate term remains:

                                                                                           f −1
                                           "                         #        "                   #
         ∂Di,ns /Di,ns   ∂Dns /Dns                       1                         δ      s
                       =           =                                     +                    −1 ρ.   (A.6)
           ∂si /si         ∂s/s                              f −1
                                                                                        δ  fs
                                                               
                                                1 + δ       s
                                                                                  1+

Substituting into (A.5) and solving for s,
                                                                  1
                                                                 −1
                                                   Mns − ρ
                                  s = δ   −1                            f,                              (A.7)
                                                     − Mns
                                             −1    
where Mns ≡ 1 − (η − 1) αns + (1 − αns ) N1        − 1 . We again need Mns ≥ ρ for the
deposit spread to be positive.
   The deposit spread beta is increasing in Mns , which is itself increasing in 1/N and αns .
Hence, the deposit spread beta is increasing in 1/N and αns , proving (i). Calculate
                                                        −2
                    ∂Mns                               1
                            = (η − 1) αns + (1 − αns )       (1 − αns ) ,                                (A.8)
                   ∂ (1/N )                            N

which is decreasing in αns since N ≥ 1, giving (ii). Finally, when 1/N → 0, we have
                      −1
Mns → 1 − (η − 1) (αns   − 1), which is bigger than ρ, and hence implies ∂s/∂f > 0, provided
αns > (η − 1) / (η − ρ). Since ρ < 1, this cutoff is always within the unit interval as required,
proving (iii).




                                                    43
                          X.1   Limited bond market participation

We now allow for households who do not adjust their illiquid asset (bond) holdings as interest
rates change. We show that this is equivalent to having a lower elasticity of substitution
between liquid and illiquid assets.
    Suppose that a fraction of households do not substitute toward bonds when rates change,
i.e. they have a zero elasticity of substitution between bonds and liquid assets, ρ = 0.
Plugging into (8), their elasticity of demand for deposits is
                                                  "                        #
                             ∂Dnb /Dnb                         1
                                       =                                       ,       (A.9)
                               ∂s/s                                f −1
                                                                     
                                                      1 + δ       s


where we have again focused on the case λ → 0. All else equal, when the Fed funds rate is
high, cash is an expensive alternative to deposits. Since these households do not substitute
toward bonds, their demand for deposits becomes highly inelastic. Conversely, when the Fed
funds rate is low cash is inexpensive and their demand elasticity approaches that between
cash and deposits, .
    Plugging into the bank’s profit-maximizing condition, which is again a weighted average
as in (A.5), we get the following formula for the deposit spread:
                                                                        1
                                                                       −1
                                             M − ρ (1 − αnb )
                            s = δ   −1                                        f,      (A.10)
                                                 −M

where αnb is the deposit share of the non-adjusting households and M is as in the base-
line model. This expression shows that increasing the share of non-adjusting households is
equivalent to reducing the elasticity of substitution between liquid and illiquid assets. This
raises deposit spreads and makes them more sensitive to the Fed funds rate. Moreover, the
condition for positive spreads becomes M > ρ (1 − α0 ). Thus, deposit spreads can be posi-
tive and increasing in the Fed funds rate even if bonds and deposits are highly substitutable
for those households who actively adjust their bond portfolios (ρ can be high).
    While our model easily accommodates non-adjusting households, we note that having
at least some households who do adjust their bond portfolios is necessary to explain the
observed large outflows from deposits triggered by Fed funds rate increases. This important
feature underlies the effect of the deposits channel on bank lending.

Proof of Proposition 3. Before proceeding with the proof, we must scale the bank’s balance
sheet appropriately so that we can take the limit λ → 0 in a meaningful way (recall this limit
simplifies the model by removing wealth effects). Suppose that each bank has mass λρ W . In


                                                 44
other words, the bank has lending Li and wholesale funding Hi per unit of mass but dollar
lending Li λρ W and dollar wholesale funding Hi λρ W . Similarly, using the formulas from the
benchmark model, aggregate deposits per unit mass become

                                                           −1 !− −ρ
                                                                    −1
                                                           s
                                D = s−ρ            1+δ −
                                                                        .                                (A.11)
                                                           f

    We first show that M > ρ guarantees an interior optimum. Note that in this case it is
never optimal to raise zero deposits because the marginal profit of the first dollar of deposits
is positive. It remains to show that the equilibrium spread is positive, so that deposits are at
an interior optimum. There are two cases to consider: the marginal profitability of lending
at the optimum is positive, or it is zero. If it is positive deposits are are finite, hence at
an interior optimum, otherwise all profitable lending opportunities would be exhausted. On
the other hand, if the marginal profitability of lending is zero, then the optimality condition
is equivalent to that under the benchmark model. It follows from Proposition 1 that the
optimal deposit spread is positive and deposits are at an interior optimum. Therefore, M > ρ
implies an interior optimum for deposits and the deposit spread.
    Let Di? be the optimal level of deposits for bank i. Since all banks are identical, in
equilibrium Di? = D? for all i = 1, . . . , N . We are interested in signing the effect of monetary
policy on deposits, ∂Di? /∂f . We can do so using the first- and second-order conditions at an
interior optimum:

                           ∂Πi                   ∂ 2 Πi
                               (f, Di? ) = 0 and        (f, Di? ) < 0.                                   (A.12)
                           ∂Di                   ∂Di2

The first-order condition is
                                                                                 
      ∂Πi       ?           h               ?             ?        ∂si /si      ?
           (f, Di ) =             (l0 − l1 Di ) + si (f, Di ) 1 +          (f, Di )   = 0.(A.13)
      ∂Di                l1 + h                                   ∂Di /Di

Differentiating with respect to f , where Di? is itself a function of f ,

                                                  ∂ 2 Πi             ∂ 2 Πi              ?
                                        
               ∂         ∂Πi                                                      ? ∂Di
          0 =                (f, Di? )       =           (f, Di? ) +        (f, D i )      (f, Di? ) .   (A.14)
              ∂f         ∂Di                     ∂f ∂Di              ∂Di2             ∂f




                                                       45
The first term on the right is

    ∂ 2 Πi
                                                            
                ?      ∂            ?        ∂si /si       ?
           (f, Di ) =       si (f, Di ) 1 +           (f, Di )                             (A.15)
   ∂f ∂Di             ∂f                    ∂Di /Di
                                                                           ∂ 2 si /si
                                                         
                      ∂si        ?        ∂si /si
                    =     (f, Di ) 1 +            (f, Di ) + si (f, Di? )
                                                        ?                                   ?
                                                                                      (f, D(A.16)
                                                                                            i)
                      ∂f                 ∂Di /Di                          ∂f ∂Di /Di
                    < 0.                                                                   (A.17)

The argument for the final inequality is as follows. The partial derivative ∂si /∂f is positive
because when f rises, cash becomes more expensive, and hence the spread si has to increase
for deposits to remain constant at Di? . This can be seen by differentiating (A.11) with respect
to f and setting the resulting expression equal to zero.
    Next, the term in parentheses in (A.16) is weakly negative from the first-order condition
(A.13), because the marginal profitability of lending is weakly positive. Thus, the first term
in (A.16) is weakly negative. In the second term, the spread si is positive and the partial
derivative of the inverse elasticity is negative, as the following argument shows.
    To show that the inverse elasticity decreases in f , it is enough to show that the elasticity
increases in f . The elasticity of bank i is positively related to the aggregate elasticity

                                                                                  f −1
                                    "                        #        "                  # !
                   ∂D/D                          1                         δ     s
                         = −                                     +                   −1 ρ    (A.18)
                    ∂s/s                             f −1
                                                                                δ fs
                                                       
                                        1 + δ       s
                                                                          1+     



The aggregate elasticity increases (becomes less negative) as long as f rises relative to s. This
is indeed the case because if s rises one-for-one with f , deposits flow out as seen from (A.11),
while in this calculation deposits must be held fixed at D? . This is achieved by raising s less
than one-for-one with f , which causes the outflows to illiquid assets to be perfectly offset by
substitution from cash into deposits.
    To recap, to hold deposits at D? the bank raises its spread by less than one-for-one with
f . This causes the aggregate elasticity of deposit demand to rise (become less negative), and
the inverse elasticity in (A.16) to fall. This confirms the inequality (A.17).
    Plugging this result into (A.14) and using the second-order condition (A.12), we have

                                            ∂Di?
                                                 < 0.                                           (A.19)
                                             ∂f

Hence, a higher interest rate induces a contraction in deposits. This is implemented by
raising the deposit spread s. As deposits shrink, from (13) lending shrinks, proving (iii), and
from (12) wholesale funding expands, proving (ii).



                                                      46
                             Figure 1: Deposit rates and monetary policy

The figure plots the Fed funds rate and the average interest rate paid on core deposits. Panel
A plots the average deposit rate for the commercial banking sector. The data is from U.S.
call reports covering the years 1986 to 2013. Panel B plots the Fed funds rate and the rate
paid on new accounts for the three most widely-offered deposit products (checking, savings,
and small time deposits). The data are from RateWatch covering the years 1997 to 2013.

                                         Panel A: Average Deposit Rate
    10%

     9%

     8%

     7%

     6%

     5%

     4%

     3%

     2%

     1%

     0%
       1986 1987 1988 1990 1991 1992 1994 1995 1996 1998 1999 2000 2002 2003 2004 2006 2007 2008 2010 2011 2012
                                                    Deposit Rate       Fed Funds Rate




                              Panel B: Average Deposit Rate by Product

    7%


    6%


    5%


    4%


    3%


    2%


    1%


    0%
      1997   1998   1999   2000   2001   2002   2003   2004   2005   2006   2007   2008   2009   2010   2011   2012   2013
                                  Checking       Savings Deposit       Time Deposit        Fed Funds Rate




                                                                      47
                                      Figure 2: Deposit growth and monetary policy

This figure plots year-over-year changes in core deposits (Panel A), savings deposits (Panel
B), checking deposits (Panel C) and small time deposits (Panel D) against year-over-changes
in the Fed funds rate. Core deposits are the sum of checking, savings, and small time deposits.
The data are from the Federal Reserve Board’s H.6 release. The sample is from January
1986 to December 2013.

                                    Panel A: Core Deposits (checking + savings + small time)
                        18%                                                                                             4%

                        16%                                                                                             3%

                        14%
                                                                                                                        2%

                        12%
                                                                                                                        1%




                                                                                                                              ∆ Fed Funds Rate
      ∆ Core Deposits




                        10%
                                                                                                                        0%
                        8%
                                                                                                                        -1%
                        6%
                                                                                                                        -2%
                        4%

                                                                                                                        -3%
                        2%

                        0%                                                                                              -4%

                        -2%                                                                                             -5%
                           1986 1987 1989 1990 1992 1993 1995 1997 1998 2000 2001 2003 2005 2006 2008 2009 2011 2012
                                                            Core Deposits     Fed Funds Rate




                                                         Panel B: Savings Deposits
                        25%                                                                                             4%

                                                                                                                        3%
                        20%

                                                                                                                        2%
                        15%
                                                                                                                        1%
                                                                                                                                 ∆ Fed Funds Rate
      ∆ Core Deposits




                        10%                                                                                             0%


                         5%                                                                                             -1%

                                                                                                                        -2%
                         0%
                                                                                                                        -3%

                        -5%
                                                                                                                        -4%

                        -10%                                                                                            -5%
                            1986 1987 1989 1990 1992 1993 1995 1997 1998 2000 2001 2003 2005 2006 2008 2009 2011 2012
                                                           Savings Deposits    Fed Funds Rate



                                                                        48
                                                        Panel C: Checking Deposits
                        25%                                                                                             4%


                        20%                                                                                             3%

                                                                                                                        2%
                        15%
∆ Checkable Deposits




                                                                                                                        1%




                                                                                                                              ∆ Fed Funds Rate
                        10%
                                                                                                                        0%
                         5%
                                                                                                                        -1%
                         0%
                                                                                                                        -2%

                        -5%
                                                                                                                        -3%

                        -10%                                                                                            -4%

                        -15%                                                                                            -5%
                            1986 1987 1989 1990 1992 1993 1995 1997 1998 2000 2001 2003 2005 2006 2008 2009 2011 2012
                                                           Checking Deposits    Fed Funds Rate




                                                      Panel D: Small Time Deposits

                        25%                                                                                             4%

                                                                                                                        3%
                        15%
                                                                                                                        2%
∆ Small Time Deposits




                         5%                                                                                             1%

                                                                                                                        0%    ∆ Fed Funds Rate
                        -5%
                                                                                                                        -1%

                        -15%                                                                                            -2%

                                                                                                                        -3%
                        -25%
                                                                                                                        -4%

                        -35%                                                                                            -5%
                            1986 1987 1989 1990 1992 1993 1995 1997 1998 2000 2001 2003 2005 2006 2008 2009 2011 2012
                                                          Small Time Deposits   Fed Funds Rate




                                                                         49
                                        Figure 3: Concentration in local deposit markets

     This map shows the average Herfindahl index for each U.S. county. The Herfindahl is calculated each year using the deposit
     market shares of all banks with branches in a given county and then averaged over the period from 1994 to 2013. The underlying
     data are from the FDIC.
50




                                                                                                                 [0.06 - 0.19)

                                                                                                                 [0.19- 0.26)

                                                                                                                 [0.26 - 0.34)

                                                                                                                 [0.34 - 0.5)

                                                                                                                 [0.5-1]
        Figure 4: Spread and flow betas by market concentration

This figure shows the relationship between market concentration and the sen-
sitivities of deposit spreads and flows to the Fed funds rate. The figure is
constructed in two steps. The first is to estimate spread and flow betas using
a time-series regression for each branch i:

                          ∆yit = α + βi ∆F Ft + εit .

where ∆yt is either the change in the deposit spread or the log change in
deposits (deposit flow) from date t to t + 1 and ∆F Ft is the change in the
Fed funds target rate from t to t + 1. The second step is to average betas by
county, and then sort counties into twenty bins by market concentration and
compute average betas by bin. Panel A shows the results for savings deposit
spreads. Panel B shows the results for time deposit spreads. Panel C shows
the results for deposit flows. The data for Panels A and B are from Ratewatch
covering January 1997 to December 2013. The data for Panel C are from the
FDIC covering January 1994 to December 2013.

                        Panel A: Savings deposit spreads
  .8
  .75
  .7
  .65




        0          20             40              60           80        100
                           Percentile County Avg. Herfindahl




                                        51
               Panel B: Time deposit spreads
.26
.24
.22
.2
.18




      0   20            40              60           80   100
                 Percentile County Avg. Herfindahl



                 Panel C: Deposit growth
.2
0
-.2
-.4
-.6




      0   20            40              60           80   100
                 Percentile County Avg. Herfindahl




                              52
    Figure 5: Deposit spreads and monetary policy (event study)

This figure shows the effect of Fed funds rate changes on
                                                        Pdeposits spread at a
                                                          t
weekly frequency. The figure plots the coefficient sum −5 γτ , t = −5, . . . , 5
(week 0 corresponds to an FOMC meeting), and associated 95% confidence
interval, estimated from the regression
                                   5
                                   X
             ∆yit = αt + ζc(i) +           γτ Branch-HHIc(i) × ∆F Ft−τ + εit ,
                                   τ =−5

where ∆yit is the change in the savings deposit spread of branch i from week
t to t + 1, ∆F Ft−τ is the change in the Fed funds target rate from week t − τ
to t − τ + 1, and Branch-HHIc(i) is the concentration of county c (i) in which
branch i is located. The data are from Ratewatch covering January 1997 to
December 2013.
  .15
  .1
  .05
  0




        -5                                     0                                 5
                                              Week




                                             53
                                         Figure 6: Spread beta, deposits, and lending (all banks)

     This figure shows the relationship between exposure to the deposits channel and bank-level outcomes. The figure is constructed
     in two steps. The first is to estimate bank-level exposure to the deposit channel as the sensitivity of a bank’s deposit rate to
     the Fed funds rate (“spread beta”). The second step is to compute the corresponding sensitivity for bank-level outcomes (“flow
     beta”). The third step is to sort banks by spread beta into hundred bins and compute the average spread and flow beta by bin.
     Panel A shows the results for total deposits, Panel B shows the results for total assets, Panel C shows the results for securities,
     and Panel D shows the results for total loans. The sample is all U.S. commercial banks from 1994 to 2013 (11,134 banks).

                              Panel A: Deposits                                           Panel B: Total assets




                                                                          1
               1
               0




                                                                          0
               -1
54




                                                                          -1
               -2




                                                                          -2
               -3




                    .3   .4      .5        .6       .7   .8   .9                .3   .4       .5        .6       .7   .8   .9
                                      Spread Beta                                                  Spread Beta



                              Panel C: Securities                                           Panel D: Loans
               2




                                                                          2
                                                                          1.5
               1




                                                                          1
               0




                                                                          .5
               -1




                                                                          0
               -2




                                                                          -.5
               -3




                    .3   .4      .5        .6       .7   .8   .9                .3   .4       .5        .6       .7   .8   .9
                                      Spread Beta                                                  Spread Beta
                                     Figure 7: Spread beta, deposits, and lending (large banks)

     This figure shows the relationship between exposure to monetary policy and bank outcomes for large banks. Large banks are
     banks at or above the 95th percentile of the bank size distribution (614 banks). The figure is constructed the same way as
     Figure 6. Panel A shows the results for total deposits, Panel B shows the results for total assets, Panel C shows the results for
     securities, and Panel D shows the results for total loans.

                             Panel A: Deposits                                        Panel B: Total assets
             4




                                                                       2
             2




                                                                       0
             0




                                                                       -2
55




             -2
             -4




                                                                       -4
                   .3   .4     .5        .6       .7   .8   .9              .3   .4      .5        .6       .7   .8   .9
                                    Spread Beta                                               Spread Beta


                             Panel C: Securities                                        Panel D: Loans
             5




                                                                       4
                                                                       2
             0




                                                                       0
             -5




                                                                       -2
             -10




                                                                       -4




                   .3   .4     .5        .6       .7   .8   .9              .3   .4      .5        .6       .7   .8   .9
                                    Spread Beta                                               Spread Beta
                              Figure 8: The aggregate deposit spread and the liquidity premium

     This figure plots the aggregate deposit spread against the T-Bill liquidity premium. The deposit spread is equal to the Fed
     funds rate minus the value-weighted average deposit rate paid by banks, computed from the quarterly Call Reports. The T-Bill
     liquidity premium is equal to the Fed funds rate minus the 3-month T-Bill rate. Both the Fed funds rate and T-Bill rate are
     calculated as quarterly averages. The data are from January 1986 to December 2013.


            7.0%                                                                                                       1.4%


            6.0%                                                                                                       1.2%


            5.0%                                                                                                       1.0%


            4.0%                                                                                                       0.8%
56




            3.0%                                                                                                       0.6%


            2.0%                                                                                                       0.4%


            1.0%                                                                                                       0.2%


            0.0%                                                                                                       0.0%


            -1.0%                                                                                                      -0.2%
                 1986 1987 1988 1990 1991 1993 1994 1995 1997 1998 2000 2001 2003 2004 2005 2007 2008 2010 2011 2012
                                            Deposit Spread (left axis)   FF-T-Bill Spread (right axis)
                             Table 1: Descriptive statistics

This table provides summary statistics at the county, branch, county-bank, and bank levels.
All panels provide a breakdown by high and low Herfindahl (HHI) using the median HHI
for the respective sample. Panel A presents county characteristics for all U.S. counties with
at least one bank branch. The underlying data is from the 2000 Census. Panel B presents
data on deposit holdings and deposit growth. The underlying data is from the FDIC from
June 1994 to June 2013. Panel C presents data on deposit spreads. The underlying data
is from Ratewatch from January 1997 to December 2013. Panel D presents data on bank
characteristics. The underlying data are from the Call Reports from 1994 to 2013. Panel E
presents small business lending data. The underlying data are from the NCRC for the years
1996 to 2013.


                      Panel A: County characteristics (2000 Census)
                                 All                  Low Herfindahl          High Herfindahl
                          Mean    St. Dev.            Mean St. Dev.           Mean St. Dev.
 Population            90,845      294,719           150,081    394,457      28,717       85,292
 Area (sq. mile)        1,057        2,484               903      1,279       1,217        3,299
 Median income (in $) 42,183         9,844            45,657     10,125      38,539        8,071
 Older than 65 (in %)   14.78         4.14             14.22       4.03       15.35         4.17
 College degree (in %)  16.55         7.81             18.69       8.49        14.3         6.28
 Branch-HHI              0.36         0.21              0.21       0.05        0.51         0.21
 Obs. (counties)               3,104                         1,589                    1,515


                          Panel B: Branch characteristics (FDIC)
                                 All                 Low Herfindahl         High Herfindahl
                          Mean    St. Dev.           Mean St. Dev.          Mean St. Dev.
 Deposits (mill.)      67.18           878.19        59.47      271.53      74.89      1211.66
 Deposit growth (in %)  7.71            25.36         8.58       26.62       6.84           24
 ∆ FF                  −0.25             1.44        −0.25        1.44      −0.25         1.44
 Branch-HHI             0.22             0.11         0.15        0.03       0.29         0.11
 Obs. (branch×year)           1,310,111                   654,840                655,271




                                                57
                      Panel C: Branch characteristics (Ratewatch)
                              All                      Low Herfindahl              High Herfindahl
                          Mean St. Dev.                Mean St. Dev.               Mean St. Dev.
Deposits (mill.)         142.65       1108.02           113       407.85          172.52     1514.95
∆ Spread (savings)       −0.03           0.49         −0.03         0.48          −0.03         0.49
∆ Spread (time)            0.00          0.37          0.00         0.37          −0.01         0.37
Branch-HHI                 0.22          0.09          0.15         0.03            0.29        0.07
Obs. (branch×quarter)            410,955                      206,098                     204,857


                      Panel D: Bank characteristics (Call Reports)
                                  All                     Low Herfindahl             High Herfindahl
                              Mean St. Dev.              Mean St. Dev.              Mean St. Dev.
Assets (mill.)                1,071        22,527          825          13,160      1,316           29,011
Deposits/Liabilities (in %)   94.08          7.12        93.90            7.20      94.26             7.03
Branches                      10.07         82.42         9.09           72.28      11.05            91.43
Bank-HHI                       0.24          0.13         0.15            0.04       0.33             0.13
Obs. (bank×quarter)                555,853                      277,925                     227,928


                        Panel E: Small business lending (NCRC)
                            All                      Low Herfindahl              High Herfindahl
                        Mean St. Dev.                Mean St. Dev.               Mean St. Dev.
New lending (mill.)       7.23       26.86             7.79       28.61            6.68          25
Log (new lending)          7.3        1.51             7.33        1.53            7.26        1.49
Assets (bill.)          134.66      310.81           115.51      294.50          153.59      325.02
Bank-HHI                  0.25        0.13             0.17        0.04            0.32        0.15
Obs. (bank×quarter)           507,492                     252,276                     255,216




                                                58
                   Table 2: Deposit spreads and monetary policy

This table estimates the effect of Fed funds rate changes on deposit spreads. The data are
at the branch-quarter level and covers January 1997 to December 2013. In Columns 1 to 3
the sample consists of banks with branches in two or more counties. In Columns 4 to 6 the
sample consists of all banks. ∆ Spread is the change in branch-level deposit spread, which
is equal to the change in the Fed funds target rate minus the change in the deposit rate.
Branch-HHI measures market concentration in the county where a branch is located. ∆ FF
is the change in the Fed funds target rate. ∆ T-Bill is the change in the one-year T-Bill
rate. Panel A reports the results for savings deposits. Panel B reports the results for time
deposits. The data are from Ratewatch. Fixed effects (f.e.) are denoted at the bottom of
each panel. Standard errors are clustered by county.


                                  Panel A: Savings deposits
                                                     ∆ Spread
                                   ≥ 2 Counties                                All
                            (1)         (2)            (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)

  ∆ FF × Branch HHI      0.141***     0.101***       0.100***    0.199***    0.155***    0.159***
                          [0.033]      [0.031]        [0.043]     [0.028]     [0.026]     [0.026]

  Bank × quarter f.e.        Y           Y              N           N           N           N
  State × quarter f.e.       Y           N              N           Y           N           N
  Branch f.e.                Y           Y              N           Y           Y           N
  County f.e.                Y           Y              Y           Y           Y           Y
  Quarter f.e.               Y           Y              Y           Y           Y           Y
  Observations            117,701     117,701        117,771     412,037     412,037     412,037
  R2                       0.810       0.799          0.559       0.659       0.650       0.645

                                    Panel B: Time deposits
                                                      ∆ Spread
                                     ≥ 2 Counties                                All
                              (1)         (2)            (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)

 ∆ T-Bill × Branch HHI     0.073***    0.073***       0.155***    0.156***    0.119***    0.119***
                            [0.025]     [0.026]        [0.037]     [0.026]     [0.024]     [0.023]

 Bank × quarter f.e.           Y           Y              N           N           N           N
 State × quarter f.e.          Y           N              N           Y           N           N
 Branch f.e.                   Y           Y              N           Y           Y           N
 County f.e.                   Y           Y              Y           Y           Y           Y
 Quarter f.e.                  Y           Y              Y           Y           Y           Y
 Observations               122,008     122,020        122,100     430,080     430,080     430,080
 R2                          0.808       0.796          0.442       0.513       0.492       0.488

                                                59
                    Table 3: Deposit growth and monetary policy

This table estimates the effect of Fed funds rate changes on deposit growth. The data are
at the branch-year level and covers the years 1994 to 2013. In Columns 1 to 3 the sample
consists of all banks with branches in two or more counties. In Columns 4 to 6 the sample
consists of all banks. Deposit growth is the log change in deposits at the branch level.
Branch-HHI measures market concentration in the county where a branch is located. ∆ FF
is the change in the Fed funds target rate. The data are from the FDIC. Fixed effects are
denoted at the bottom of the table. Standard errors are clustered by county.


                                                     Deposit growth
                                   ≥ 2 Counties                              All
                          (1)           (2)           (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)

∆ FF × Branch HHI     −0.661*** −1.008*** −0.827*** −1.827*** −1.796*** −0.963***
                       [0.254]   [0.331]   [0.247]   [0.198]   [0.242]   [0.212]

Bank × year f.e.           Y            Y              N           N           N           N
State × year f.e.          Y            N              N           Y           N           N
Branch f.e.                Y            Y              N           Y           Y           N
County f.e.                Y            Y              Y           Y           Y           Y
Quarter f.e.               Y            Y              Y           Y           Y           Y
Observations           1,150,049    1,150,049      1,150,049   1,310,111   1,310,111   1,310,111
R2                       0.344        0.336          0.025       0.230       0.221       0.025




                                              60
       Table 4: Deposit spreads and expected changes in monetary policy

This table estimates the effect of expected Fed funds rate changes on deposit spreads. The
data are at the branch-quarter level from January 1997 to December 2013. In Columns 1
to 3 the sample consists of banks with branches in two or more counties. In Columns 4 to
6 the sample consists of all banks. The analysis focuses on savings deposits because they
have zero maturity. ∆ Exp. FF is the expected change in the Fed funds rate computed as
the Fed Funds target rate minus the three-month Fed funds futures rate at the start of a
quarter. ∆ Unexp. FF is the unexpected change in the Fed funds rate, computed as the
difference between the realized change and the expected change. The other variables are
defined in Table 2. Fixed effects are denoted at the bottom of each panel. Standard errors
are clustered by county.


                                                            ∆ Spread
                                         ≥ 2 Counties                         All
                                   (1)        (2)         (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)

 ∆ Exp. FF × Branch HHI   0.218***          0.151**     0.177** 0.256*** 0.187*** 0.190***
                           [0.074]          [0.071]     [0.075]  [0.047]  [0.046]  [0.045]
 ∆ Unexp. FF × Branch HHI 0.114*             0.080       0.040 0.200*** 0.156*** 0.161***
                           [0.061]          [0.056]     [0.069]  [0.040]  [0.035]  [0.036]

 Bank × quarter f.e.               Y           Y           N         N         N         N
 State × quarter f.e.              Y           N           N         Y         N         N
 Branch f.e.                       Y           Y           N         Y         Y         N
 County f.e.                       Y           Y           Y         Y         Y         Y
 Quarter f.e.                      Y           Y           Y         Y         Y         Y
 Observations                   117,701     117,701     117,701   412,037   412,037   412,037
 R2                               0.81       0.799       0.556     0.659     0.650     0.644




                                            61
         Table 5: Deposits, monetary policy, and financial sophistication

This table estimates the effect of financial sophistication on deposit spreads and deposit
growth. The data are at the branch-quarter level from January 1997 to December 2013.
Age is the county share of the population aged 65 or older. Income is the natural log of
county-level median household income. College is the county share of the population with
a college degree. All other variables are defined in Table 2. Panel A reports results on
saving deposit spreads. Panel B reports results for deposit growth. All regressions include
state-time, branch, and county fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by county.

                                  Panel A: ∆ Spread
                                   (1)        (2)            (3)      (4)
        ∆ FF × Branch HHI       0.138***    0.075**       0.078***  0.063**
                                 [0.030]    [0.030]        [0.029]  [0.029]
        ∆ FF × Age              0.410***                             0.022
                                 [0.071]                            [0.077]
        ∆ FF × Income                      −0.131***                −0.040*
                                            [0.015]                 [0.021]
        ∆ FF × College                                   −0.321*** −0.256***
                                                          [0.034]   [0.046]

        All f.e.                    Y           Y            Y            Y
        Observations             410,221     410,221      410,221      410,221
        R2                        0.658       0.659        0.659        0.659

                            Panel B: Deposit Growth
                               (1)          (2)        (3)      (4)
        ∆ FF   × Branch HHI −1.244*** −1.492*** −1.574*** −1.235***
                             [0.197]     [0.211]     [0.207]  [0.204]
        ∆ FF   × Age        −6.464***                        −6.472***
                             [0.681]                          [0.825]
        ∆ FF   × Income                 0.458***               0.064
                                         [0.157]              [0.243]
        ∆ FF   × College                            0.932***  −0.143
                                                     [0.310]  [0.471]

        All f.e.                    Y            Y           Y            Y
        Observations            1,299,505    1,299,505   1,299,505    1,299,505
        R2                        0.231        0.231       0.231        0.231




                                            62
         Table 6: Deposits channel and new lending (bank-county results)

This table estimates the effect of the deposits channel on new small business lending. The
data are at the bank-county level covering the years 1996 to 2013. Log(new lending) is the log
of the total amount of new small business loans originated by a given bank in a given county
and year. Bank HHI is bank-level average of Branch-HHI using lagged deposit shares across
branches as weights. All other variables are defined in Table 2. The regression includes a
control for Bank HHI (coefficient not shown). The data are from the NCRC. Fixed effects
are denoted at the bottom. Standard errors are clustered by bank and county.

                                                    Log(new lending)
                                       (1)           (2)        (3)        (4)

            ∆ FF × Bank HHI         −0.174** −0.172** −0.125** −0.125**
                                     [0.078]  [0.084]  [0.060]  [0.059]
            ∆ FF × Branch HHI                  0.010   -0.003
                                              [0.015]  [0.018]

            Time f.e.                   Y             Y         Y           Y
            County f.e.                 Y             Y         Y           Y
            Bank f.e.                   Y             Y         Y           Y
            County-Bank f.e.            Y             Y         N           N
            County-Time f.e.            Y             N         N           N

            Observations             512,576        512,576   512,576    512,576
            R-squared                 0.835          0.812     0.223      0.222




                                               63
Table 7: Deposits channel, new lending, and employment (county-level results)

This table estimates the effect of the deposits channel on new small business lending and
employment. The data are at the county-year level covering the years 1996 to 2013. Log(new
lending) is the log of the total amount of new small business loans originated by county per
year. ∆ Employment is the change in total employment by county and year. ∆ Wage Bill is
the change in the total wage bill by county and year. County HHI is county-level average of
bank-HHI using one-year lagged lending shares across banks as weights. All other variables
are defined in Table 2. The data are from the NCRC and the Bureau of Labor Statistics.
Fixed effects are denoted at the bottom. Standard errors are clustered by bank and county.


                           Log(new lending)           ∆ Employment                ∆ Wage bill
                            (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)            (6)

 ∆ FF × County-HHI      −0.168*** −0.167*** −0.014*** −0.008*** −0.011*** −0.010***
                         [0.027]   [0.030]   [0.003]   [0.003]   [0.003]   [0.004]
 ∆ FF × Branch-HHI                 −0.001             −0.004***            −0.001
                                   [0.009]             [0.001]             [0.001]

 Time f.e.                   Y            Y            Y           Y            Y              Y
 County f.e.                 Y            Y            Y           Y            Y              Y

 Observations              57,181      57,181       57,181       57,181       57,181       57,181
 R-squared                  0.934      0.934        0.197         0.198        0.264        0.264




                                               64
                      Table 8: Deposits channel, bank liabilities, and lending (bank-level results)

     This table estimates the effect of the deposit channel on bank-level outcomes. The data are at bank-quarter level and
     covers all commercial banks from January 1994 to December 2013. Panel A examines the change in bank liabilities.
     ∆ Total deposits, savings deposits, time deposits, wholesale funding, and total liabilities are the quarterly log change in
     total deposits, savings deposits, time deposits, wholesale funding, and total liabilities, respectively. ∆ Deposit spread is
     the change in the Fed funds target rate minus the change in the annualized deposit rate (computed as total domestic
     deposit expense divided by total domestic deposits) over a quarter. Panel B examines the change in bank assets. ∆ Total
     assets, cash, securities, total loans, real estate loans, and C&I loans is the quarterly log change in total assets, cash,
     securities, total loans, real estate loans, and C&I loans, respectively. All other variables are defined in Tables 2 and 6.
     Fixed effects are denoted at the bottom. Standard errors are clustered by bank.

                                                         Panel A: Liabilities
                                     ∆ Total      ∆ Deposit ∆ Savings         ∆Time         ∆ Wholesale      ∆ Total
                                     deposits      spread       deposits      deposits        funding       liabilities
                                        (1)          (2)           (3)           (4)             (5)            (6)
              ∆ FF × Bank HHI       −1.478***     0.076***     −1.209*** −2.144***           2.438***       −1.280***
65




                                      [0.224]      [0.010]       [0.242]       [0.212]         [0.945]        [0.138]

              Bank f.e.                  Y            Y             Y             Y               Y              Y
              Quarter f.e.               Y            Y             Y             Y               Y              Y
              Observations            558,502      558,502       558,502       558,502         558,502        558,502
              R2                       0.162        0.400         0.078         0.170           0.033          0.175

                                                       Panel B: Assets
                                     ∆ Total   ∆ Cash     ∆ Securities         ∆ Total  ∆ Real Estate        ∆ C&I
                                      assets                                    loans       loans             loans
                                       (1)       (2)           (3)               (4)         (5)               (6)
              ∆ FF × Bank HHI       −1.204*** −2.477*** −0.955***             −0.462***  −0.824***          −0.913***
                                     [0.123]   [0.666]       [0.335]           [0.150]     [0.196]           [0.350]

              Bank f.e.                  Y            Y             Y             Y               Y              Y
              Quarter f.e.               Y            Y             Y             Y               Y              Y
              Observations            558,502      558,502       558,502       558,502         558,502        558,502
              R2                       0.176        0.051         0.063         0.223           0.176          0.059
                            Table 9: Banks’ market power, deposits, and lending (all banks)

     This table analyzes the relationship between bank market power and bank-level outcomes. The analysis covers all U.S.
     commercial banks operating during the years 1994 to 2013. We measure bank market power using Spread-β, which is
     estimated as the sensitivity of a bank’s deposit rate to changes in the Fed funds rate. We compute the corresponding
     Flow-β as the sensitivity of bank-level outcomes to changes in the Fed funds rate. We estimate Flow-β for deposit growth
     (Column 1), asset growth (Column 2), log change in security holdings (Columns 3), loan growth (Column 4), real estate
     (RE) loan growth (Column 5) and commercial and industrial (C&I) loan growth (Column 6). We report coefficients
     from regressing Flow-β on Spread-β. We report robust standard errors.
66




                                 Deposit-β    Assets-β    Securities-β    Loans-β    RE loans-β    C&I Loans-β
                                    (1)         (2)           (3)           (4)         (5)            (6)

                 Spread-β       −4.768*** −3.351***        −4.101***     −2.739***   −2.671***      −3.716***
                                 [0.223]   [0.204]          [0.498]       [0.230]     [0.268]        [0.513]

                 Observations      11,134      11,134        11,134       11,134        11,134        11,134
                 R2                 0.103      0.064         0.015         0.031         0.022         0.013
                          Table 10: Banks’ market power, deposits, and lending (large banks)

     This table analyzes the relationship between bank market power and bank-level outcomes. The analysis is restricted to
     banks at or above the 95th percentile of the bank size distribution. We measure bank market power using Spread-β, which
     is estimated as the sensitivity of a bank’s deposit rate to changes in the Fed funds rate. We compute the corresponding
     Flow-β as the sensitivity of bank-level outcomes to changes in the Fed funds rate. We estimate Flow-β for deposit growth
     (Column 1), asset growth (Column 2), log change in security holdings (Columns 3), loan growth (Column 4), real estate
     (RE) loan growth (Column 5) and commercial and industrial (C&I) loan growth (Column 6). We report coefficients
     from regressing Flow-β on Spread-β. We report robust standard errors.
67




                                                   Bank size ≥ 95th percentile

                               Deposit-β    Assets-β    Securities-β    Loans-β    RE loans-β    C&I Loans-β
                                  (1)         (2)           (3)           (4)         (5)            (6)

                   Spread-β   −5.757*** −3.956***        −9.170***     −3.884***    −3.497***     −5.525***
                               [0.820]   [0.706]          [1.755]       [0.806]      [0.988]       [1.696]

                   Obs            556          556          556           556          556            556
                   R2            0.148        0.091        0.079         0.067        0.040          0.036
