                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     TEMPORARY MIGRATION AND ENDOGENOUS RISK SHARING IN VILLAGE
                               INDIA

                                       Melanie Morten

                                     Working Paper 22159
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w22159


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    April 2016




This paper is based on my PhD dissertation at Yale University. I am extremely grateful to my
advisors, Mark Rosenzweig, Aleh Tsyvinksi, and Chris Udry, for their guidance and support. I
would also like to thank the editor, four anonymous referees, Ran Abramitzky, Muneeza Alam,
Treb Allen, Lint Barrage, Arun Chandrasekhar, Alex Cohen, Camilo Dominguez, Patrick Kehoe,
Andy Newman, Michael Peters, Tony Smith, Melissa Tartari, and Snaebjorn Gunnsteinsson for
helpful comments and discussion. I have also benefited from participants at seminars and from
discussions with people at many institutions that are too numerous to mention. I am appreciative
of the hospitality and assistance from Cynthia Bantilan and staff at the ICRISAT headquarters in
Patancheru, India. Anita Bhide provided excellent research assistance. This work was supported
in part by the facilities and staff of the Yale University Faculty of Arts and Sciences High
Performance Computing Center. Part of this research was conducted while at the Federal Reserve
Bank of Minneapolis. Any views expressed here are those of the author and not necessarily those
of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Melanie Morten. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Temporary Migration and Endogenous Risk Sharing in Village India
Melanie Morten
NBER Working Paper No. 22159
April 2016
JEL No. D12,D52,D91,O12,R23

                                         ABSTRACT

When people can self-insure via migration, they may have less need for informal risk sharing. At
the same time, informal insurance may reduce the need to migrate. To understand the joint
determination of migration and risk sharing I study a dynamic model of risk sharing with limited
commitment frictions and endogenous temporary migration. First, I characterize the model. I
demonstrate theoretically how migration may decrease risk sharing. I decompose the welfare
effect of migration into the change in income and the change in the endogenous structure of
insurance. I then show how risk sharing alters the returns to migration. Second, I structurally
estimate the model using the new (2001-2004) ICRISAT panel from rural India. The estimation
yields: (1) improving access to risk sharing reduces migration by 21 percentage points; (2)
reducing the cost of migration reduces risk sharing by 8 percentage points;(3) contrasting
endogenous to exogenous risk sharing, the consumption-equivalent gain from reducing migration
costs is 18.9 percentage points lower. Third, I introduce a rural employment scheme. The policy
reduces migration and decreases risk sharing. The welfare gain of the policy is 55-70% lower
after household risk sharing and migration responses are considered


Melanie Morten
Department of Economics
Stanford University
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
memorten@stanford.edu
1    Introduction

Rural households in developing countries face extremely high year-to-year volatility in
income. Economists have long studied the complex systems of informal transfers that
allow households to insulate themselves against income shocks in the absence of formal
markets (Udry, 1994; Townsend, 1994). However, households can also migrate temporar-
ily when hit by a bad economic shock. In rural India, 20% of households have at least one
temporary migrant, with migration income representing 50% of total income for these
households. The possibility of migration offers a form of self-insurance, hence may fun-
damentally change the incentives for households of participating in informal risk shar-
ing. At the same time, informal risk sharing provides insurance against income shocks,
altering the returns to migrating. In order to appropriately understand the benefits of mi-
gration, and to think about policies to help households address income risk, it is therefore
important to consider the joint determination of risk sharing and migration.
    To analyze this interaction between risk sharing and migration I study a dynamic
model of risk sharing that incorporates limited commitment frictions and endogenous
temporary migration. Households take risk sharing into account when deciding to mi-
grate. Similarly, the option to migrate affects participation in informal risk sharing. My
model combines migration due to income differentials (Sjaastad, 1962; Harris and Todaro,
1970), and risk sharing with limited commitment frictions (Kocherlakota, 1996; Ligon,
Thomas and Worrall, 2002). First, I characterize the model and develop comprehensive
comparative statics with respect to migration, risk sharing and welfare. I demonstrate
theoretically the channels through which migration may decrease risk sharing, by chang-
ing the value of the outside option for households. I decompose the welfare effect of
migration into the change in income and the change in the endogenous structure of the
insurance market. I then show how risk sharing alters the returns to migration and deter-
mines the migration decision. Second, I apply the model to the empirical setting of rural
India. I structurally estimate the model using the second wave of the ICRISAT house-
hold panel dataset (2001-2004). The quantitative results are as follows: (1) introducing
migration into the model reduces risk sharing by 8 percentage points%; (2) contrasting


                                             1
endogenous to exogenous risk sharing, the consumption-equivalent gain in welfare from
introducing migration is 18.9 percentage points lower; (3) improving access to risk shar-
ing reduces migration by 21 percentage points. Third, I show that the joint determination
of risk sharing and migration of the household may have key policy implications. I sim-
ulate a rural employment scheme (similar to the Indian Government‘s National Rural
Employment Guarantee Act) in the model. Households respond to the policy by adjust-
ing both migration and risk sharing: migration decreases and risk sharing is reduced. I
show the welfare benefits of this policy are overstated if the joint responses of migration
and risk sharing are not taken into account. The welfare gain of the policy is 55-70% lower
after household risk sharing and migration responses are considered.
   A key focus is the analysis of temporary migration. Because migration is tempo-
rary, households remain part of the risk sharing network if they migrate. This differs
to the case of permanent migration, where households permanently leave the village and
exit the risk sharing network if they migrate (Banerjee and Newman, 1998; Munshi and
Rosenzweig, 2015). Temporary migration is the relevant migration margin to focus on
for the case of rural India because permanent migration is very low (Munshi and Rosen-
zweig, 2015; Topalova, 2010), but, as I document in this paper, temporary migration is
widespread. Because migrants remain in the risk sharing network, a key contribution
of this paper is to quantify how the risk sharing network adjusts to migration. As a
result, the model predicts that migration will affect the entire network, not only those
households who migrate, and analyzing the effect of migration on these households is
important to understand the full impact of migration.
   Another important contribution of the paper is the joint determination of migration
and risk sharing. Empirical tests reject the benchmark of perfect insurance, but find
evidence of substantial smoothing of income shocks (Mace, 1991; Altonji, Hayashi and
Kotlikoff, 1992; Townsend, 1994; Udry, 1994). Models of limited commitment endoge-
nously generate incomplete insurance because insurance is constrained by the fact that
households can walk away from any agreement (Kocherlakota, 1996; Ligon, Thomas and
Worrall, 2002; Alvarez and Jermann, 2000).1 Using the limited commitment framework,
  1 See also the application of limited commitment in labor markets (Harris and Holmstrom, 1982; Thomas




                                                  2
other studies have examined how endogenous risk sharing responds to changes in house-
holds’ outside option, including public insurance schemes (Attanasio and Rios-Rull, 2000;
Albarran and Attanasio, 2003; Golosov and Tsyvinski, 2007; Abramitzky, 2008; Krueger
and Perri, 2010), unemployment insurance (Thomas and Worrall, 2007), and options to
save (Ligon, Thomas and Worrall, 2000). However, these papers have not examined how
migration decisions are codetermined with risk sharing decisions.
    On the migration side, in a standard migration model households take into account
income differentials between the village and city and migrate if the utility gain of doing
so is positive (Lewis, 1954; Sjaastad, 1962; Harris and Todaro, 1970). In contrast, when
households are part of a risk sharing agreement, the relevant comparison is post-transfer,
rather than gross, income differentials. As a result, risk sharing has two effects on mi-
gration. In the model, households use migration as an ex post income smoothing mech-
anism, so those who migrate are the households who have bad income shocks. These
households would be net recipients of risk sharing transfers in the village. Risk shar-
ing reduces the income gain between the village and city and decreases migration. On
the other hand, migration is risky (Bryan, Chowdhury and Mobarak, 2014; Tunali, 2000).
Risk sharing can insure the risky migration outcome, facilitating migration. The paper
also fits into a broader literature examining the determinants and benefits of migration
and remittances2 ; I add to this literature by showing that to fully appraise the benefits
and costs of migration it is important to study how migration interacts with informal risk
sharing.
    Before proceeding to the structural estimation, I first establish five empirical facts re-
lating migration to risk sharing. First, migration responds to exogenous income shocks.
When the monsoon rainfall is low, migration rates are higher. This matches the mod-
and Worrall, 1988) and insurance markets (Hendel and Lizzeri, 2003).
   2 For example, In India Rosenzweig and Stark (1989) show that marriage-migration can be an important

income smoothing mechanism for households. Yang and Choi (2007) show that remittances from migrants
respond to income shocks. In a series of papers looking at rural-urban migration in China, Giles (2006,
2007); de Brauw and Giles (2014) show migration acts to reduce the riskiness of household income in the
destination, reduce precautionary savings, and potentially shift production into more risky activities. Bryan
et al. (2014) document large returns to migration in a randomized controlled trial in Bangladesh. Other
studies have investigated the role of learning in explaining observed migration behavior, particularly repeat
migration (Pessino (1991); Kennan (2013)).



                                                     3
eling assumption that migration decisions are made after income is realized. Second,
households move in and out of migration status. 40% of households migrate at least once
during the sample. However, on average, a migrant household only migrates half the
time. This is consistent with households migrating in response to income shocks, rather
than migration being a permanent strategy. Third, risk sharing is imperfect, and is worse
in villages where temporary migration is more common. This is consistent with an inter-
action between informal risk sharing and migration. Fourth, conditional on income, the
past history of transfer negatively predicts current transfers. This is consistent with the
limited commitment model (Foster and Rosenzweig, 2001). Fifth, although a household
increases their income by 30% during the years they send a migrant, total expenditure
(consumption and change in asset position) only increases by 85% of the increase in in-
come. This last fact is consistent with the migrant making transfers back to the network.
    To quantify the effects of the joint determination of migration and risk sharing I struc-
turally estimate the model. Empirically, households are more likely to migrate if they
have more males and if they have lower landholdings. To match this observed hetero-
geneity in migration across households, I allow for heterogeneity in land holdings to af-
fect village income and for households to face different costs of migration depending on
their household composition (in particular, the number of males in the household).3 Us-
ing the structural estimates I then construct quantitative counterfactuals to simulate the
effects of reducing the costs of migration on risk sharing, the costs of increasing access
to risk sharing on migration, and illustrate how the joint determination of migration and
risk sharing has key implications for understanding benefits of policies designed to ad-
dress the income risk faced by poor rural households, using the example of the Indian
Government’s National Rural Employment Guarantee Act.
    In the following section, I present the risk sharing model with endogenous migration.
Section 3 introduces the household panel used to estimate the model, and verifies that the
modeling assumptions hold in these data. Section 4 discusses how to apply the model to
   3 InSection 3 I discuss an alternative hypothesis that the reason males migrate more than females is
because of higher returns, rather than lower costs. However, using labor market data, I find, if anything,
evidence of higher returns to migration for females than males (although the number of females migrants is
small). For this reason I model that differential costs of migration is driving the heterogeneity in migration
rates.


                                                      4
the data, and Section 5 presents the structural estimation results and performs the policy
experiments. Section 6 concludes with a discussion of the findings.



2      Joint model of migration and risk sharing

Consider a two household endowment economy. All households have identical prefer-
ences.4 In each period t the village experiences one of finitely many events st that follows
a Markov process with transition probabilities π s (st |st−1 ). The village event determines
the endowment of each household in the village, ei (st ). Denote by st = (s0 , ..., st ) the
history of events up to and including period t. The probability, as of period 0, of any
particular history st is π s (st |s0 ) = π s (st |st−1 )...π s (s1 |s0 ). For shorthand, denote π s (r|s) =
π (st+1 = r|st = s). Households cannot borrow or save in autarky. Including savings
would introduce an additional state variable into the maximization problem. In the data,
I find that savings (including in both financial and physical assets such as livestock) are
small and importantly do not respond to migration. I therefore abstract from capital accu-
mulation to highlight the main mechanism of interest, the interaction between migration
and risk sharing.5
     Temporary migration is the choice to migrate away from the village for one period.
Migration is modeled at the household level, abstracting from within household issues.
This assumption implies that within-household risk sharing is Pareto efficient.6 I do not
explicitly model which household member migrates. However, I allow overall household
composition to matter for potentially affect the migration decision at the household level:
for example, households who have more land may have higher opportunity costs of mi-
grating, and households who have more males may face differential access to migration
opportunities. Household characteristics will be indexed by a vector zi ; where z contains
the characteristics of all households in the village.7
    4 Forpapers that analyze risk sharing when preferences are heterogeneous, see Mazzocco and Saini
(2012); Chiappori, Samphantharak, Schulhofer-Wohl and Townsend (2014) and Schulhofer-Wohl (2011).
   5 For papers that extend limited commitment to include asset accumulation, see for example Ligon et al.

(2000); Kehoe and Perri (2002); Krueger and Perri (2006); Abraham and Laczo (2014).
   6 For studies examining migration with intra-household incentive constraints, see Chen (2006); Gemici

(2011); Dustmann and Mestres (2010).
   7 The abstraction of which member migrates is for two reasons. First, in the data, there does not appear



                                                    5
    In period t the migration destination experiences also one of finitely many events qt .
The destination event determines the migration income for household i if they migrate,
mi (qt ). Assume that the probability of migration event qt is independent of the village
event, and is independent across time, π q (qt = q) = π q (q), ∀t.8
    Let Ii be an indicator variable for whether household i migrates. Each household ei-
ther sends or does not send a migrant so there are 4 possible migration outcomes, indexed
by j. Denote the migration status of household 1 and 2 by the vector I( j) = {I1 ( j), I2 ( j)}.
    The timing in the model is as follows. Households observe their endowment in the vil-
lage (state s) and decide whether to send a temporary migrant to the city. If a household
sends out a migrant they then realize their migration income (state q) and pay a utility
cost d( zi ), which captures both the physical costs (for example, costs of transportation)
and the psychic costs (for example, being away from friends and family) of migration
(Sjaastad, 1962).9 This timing assumption is based on two empirical facts which are docu-
mented in Section 3. First, the average migration rate depends on the rainfall realization,
consistent with households making migration decisions after observing the village level
income. Second, many migrants in the data experience unemployment in the destination,
consistent with migration income not being realized until after the migration decision
occurs.10
to be a large role for comparative advantage in migration inside the household: there are very small returns
to observable characteristics such as education, age, gender and experience in the destination labor market
(results available upon request). Second, within household, which members(s) migrate is highly correlated
over time: in 77% of households exactly the same members migrated together any time any one member
migrated, consistent with the choice of migrants being constant within household over time.
   8 This assumption is also supported empirically: in contrast to other studies such as Bryan et al. (2014), I

find no evidence of returns to migration experience.
   9 It is reasonable to think about whether households may have heterogeneous migration costs, such as in

Kennan and Walker (2011). A household who receives a low cost shock (e.g. a discounted bus ticket)
may be more likely to migrate conditional on the income realization. This introduces a difference be-
tween the ex-ante average migration cost for a household in the village, and the realized migration cost
for those who choose to migrate. While I don’t explicitly model this, there is a mapping between pref-
erence shocks and the estimation method I employ. If households had type 1 extreme value preference
                                                                                exp(Vmig )
shocks then the migration decision takes the form πmigrate =              exp(Vmig )+exp(Vno mig )
                                                                                                   .   When I estimate the
model I employ a smoothing estimator to approximate the discrete function (following the methodology
in Horowitz (1992); Keane and Smith (2004)). The probability of migration with this estimator is given by
                    exp(Vmig /λ )
πmigrate =   exp(Vmig /λ )+exp(Vno mig /λ )
                                              (which approximates the discrete case as λ → 0). Hence, the estimated
migration cost parameter can be interpreted as the expected ex-ante migration cost faced by households in
the village.
  10 The magnitudes are the following. (i) A realization of rainfall one standard deviation about the mean




                                                              6
       For state of the world st and migration outcome qt , ex-post income for household i
is given by yi (st , qt , jt ; zi ) = Ii ( jt )mi (qt ) + (1 − Ii ( jt ))ei (st ). Once all income is realized,
households make or receive risk sharing transfers, and consumption occurs. At the end
of the period the migrant returns back to the village. The same problem is faced the
following period.


2.1      Model of endogenous migration and risk sharing

First, I present the model of migration and risk sharing under full commitment. Following
the setup in Ligon et al. (2002), the social planner maximizes the utility of household 2,
given a state dependent level of promised utility, U (s), for household 1.
       The optimization problem is to choose migration, transfers, and continuation utility
to maximize total utility:


                                              V (U (s); z) = max ∑ Ṽ (U (s), j; z)
                                                                      j       j


       where Ṽ (U (s), j; z) is the expected value if migration decision j is chosen:


                                                                                                                                    
                                                                2                         2       2           s       0
Ṽ (U (s), j; z) =             max                   Eq u( ỹ (s, q, j) + τ (q, j)) − I ( j)d( z ) + β ∑ π (r|s)V (U (q, j, r; z))
                     τ (q, j),{U 0 (q, j,r;z)}rR=1                                                    r




       subject to a promise keeping constraint that expected utility is equal to promised util-
ity:
                                                                                                         
               1                                            1        1                s       0
       Eq u( ỹ (s, q, j; z) − τ (q, j)) − I ( j)d( z ) + β ∑ π (r|s)U (q, j, r; z) = U (s; z) ∀ j
                                                                                  r


       Let λ be the multiplier on the promise keeping constraint. The first order condition
yields the familiar condition that the ratio of marginal utilities of consumption are equal-
reduces village level migration by 3.6 percentage points. (ii) 37% of migrants report some involuntary un-
employment. Across all migrants the mean is 11 days out of an average trip length of 180 days; conditional
on reporting some unemployment, the mean is 31 days out of an average trip length of 192 days. See Section
3 for a full discussion.


                                                                          7
ized across all states of the world and migration states:11

                                       u0 (c2 (s, q, j; z))
                                                            = λ ∀s, q, j
                                       u0 (c1 (s, q, j; z))


2.2    Adding in limited commitment

Now introduce limited commitment constraints into the model. The key mechanism in
the limited commitment model is the value of walking away and consuming the en-
dowment stream (the “outside option”) (Kocherlakota, 1996; Ligon, Thomas and Worrall,
2002).12 In a world where agents can migrate, compared to a world where they cannot
migrate, the opportunity to migrate weakly increases the outside option of households
and will endogenously affect the amount of insurance that can be sustained.
    I study the constrained efficient joint decision of migration and risk sharing. That is, a
social planner chooses both migration and risk sharing transfers to maximize total utility,
conditional on satisfying two incentive compatibility constraints. These two constraints
correspond to the two potential times in which a household may wish to renege. The first
is at the time that migration decisions are made: the ex ante (before migration occurs)
expected value of following the social planner’s migration rule (and continuing to par-
ticipate in the risk sharing network) needs to be at least as large as the ex ante expected
value of making an independent migration decision and then being in autarky. The sec-
ond is after migration decisions have been made and all migration outcomes have been
realized. At this stage the final income has been realized and the ex post (after migration
has occured) value of following the social planner’s risk sharing transfer rule needs to be
at least as high as the ex post value of consuming this current income and then remaining
in autarky. This first incentive compatibility constrain is a new constraint I introduce to
capture the constrained efficient migration decision. The second constraint is similar to
the standard limited commitment constraint (such as in Kocherlakota (1996); Ligon et al.
  11 These  first order conditions only hold for interior solutions i.e. the the migration state that occurs with
positive probability. When I estimate the model I smooth the discrete objective function; doing so implies
that there is an interior solution for all j.
  12 See also Coate and Ravallion (1993); Kehoe and Levine (1993); Attanasio and Rios-Rull (2000); Dubois,

Jullien and Magnac (2008).



                                                       8
(2002)): the incentive to remain in the network after income uncertainty has been realized
depends on the realization of that income.
    To be precise, define the outside option at the two key points in time as follows. Ex-
ante autarky, Ω, is the value of deciding whether or not to migrate today, only knowing
the state of the world in the village (s), and then facing the same choice in the future:


            Ωi (s; zi ) = max{u( yi (s)); Eq [u(mi (q)) − d( zi )]} + β ∑ π s (r|s)Ωi (r; zi )
                                                                                    r

    Ex-post autarky, Ω̃, is the value of consuming period t income, conditional on the
migration choice ( j), the state in the village (s) and the state in the destination (q), and
then facing the ex-ante decision problem from period t + 1.


                Ω̃i (s, q, j; zi ) = u( ỹi (s, q, j; z)) − Ii ( j)d( zi ) + β ∑ π s (r|s)Ωi (r; zi )
                                                                                r


    The first set of incentive compatibility constraints are ex ante constraints that require
that the expected gain of participating in the risk sharing migration will be higher than
the expected value of being independent. These are:


                (βπ s (r|s)π (q)φ1q, j,r ) : U 0 (q, j, r; z) − Ω1 (r; z1 ) ≥ 0 ∀q, j, r
                (βπ s (r|s)π (q)φ2q, j,r ) : V (U 0 (q, j, r; z); z) − Ω2 (r; z2 ) ≥ 0 ∀q, j, r


    The second set of constraints, the ex post constraints (satisfied once migration deci-
sions are made and income realized), require that the current utility is at least as high as
the value of being in autarky:


(π (q)α 1 (q, j)) : u( ỹ1 (s, q, j) − τ (q, j)) − I1 ( j)d( z1 ) + β ∑ π s (r|s)U 0 (q, j, r; z) − Ω̃1 (s, q, j; z1 ) ≥ 0 ∀s, q, j
                                                                      r

(π (q)α (q, j)) : u( ỹ (s, q, j) + τ (q, j)) − I ( j)d( z ) + β ∑ π s (r|s)V (U 0 (q, j, r; z); z) − Ω̃2 (s, q, j; z2 ) ≥ 0 ∀s, q, j
        2                2                          2          1
                                                                      r




    It is convenient to rescale the multipliers for person 1 by their initial weight, λ. Then,




                                                           9
the first order conditions and envelope condition can be written as:

                       u0 (c2 (s, q, j; z))     1 + α 1 (q, j)
                                            = λ                  ∀s, q, j
                       u0 (c1 (s, q, j; z))     1 + α 2 (q j)
                                                  1 + α 1 (q, j) + φ1 (q, j, r)
                    V 0 (U (q, j, r; z); z) = −λ                                ∀s, q, r, j
                                                  1 + α 2 (q, j) + φ2 (q, j, r)
                           V 0 (U ( s ) ; z ) = − λ


    where the marginal utility is updated to take into account the outcome of uncertain
migration outcomes. The slope of the value function is updated depending on both the
ex-ante and the ex-post constraints:


                0                         0        1 + α 1 (q, j) + φ1 (q, j, r)
              V (U (q, j, r; z); z) = V (U (s); z)                               ∀s, q, r, j
                                                   1 + α 2 (q, j) + φ2 (q, j, r)


2.3     Comparative statics on migration, risk sharing, and welfare

This section derives results on migration, risk sharing and welfare.


2.3.1      Effect of improving access to risk sharing on migration

How does introducing access to risk sharing, compared to a world in which risk sharing
is not possible, affect migration decisions?13
    Under autarky, households compare the rural-urban wage differential, and migrate
if expected utility gain is positive. Under risk sharing, households compare the post-
transfer rural-urban income differentials instead of comparing the gross income differ-
entials. Improving access to risk sharing will have two offsetting effects on migration.
Households who migrate are the households who have bad income shocks. These house-
holds would be net recipients of risk sharing transfers in the village. Facilitating risk
sharing reduces the income gain between the village and city and decreases migration
  13 For example, assume that there is an exogenous per-unit cost, dτ to transfer resources between house-
holds, such that $1 sent from household yields $(1 − dτ ) for the recipient household. Introducing risk
sharing can be modeled as a reduction in this cost of transferring resources. In the extreme, when dτ = 1
households will never find it optimal to make risk sharing transfers. When dτ = 0 risk sharing transfers
are costless.



                                                      10
(the ‘home’ effect). On the other hand, migration is risky. Risk sharing can insure the
risky migration outcome, facilitating migration (the ‘destination’ effect). The net effect of
improving risk sharing (by reducing the cost of inter-household transfers) on migration
will depend on whether the destination effect is larger than the home effect.


2.3.2   The effect of reducing the cost of migration on risk sharing

The decision to migrate depends on the cost of migrating, d. Consider a reduction in the
cost of migrating. How does this affect risk sharing?
   Reducing the costs of migration may affect both the distribution of consumption and
the distribution of income across households in the village. Define risk-sharing, following
Krueger and Perri (2010), as the ratio of the variance of consumption, σ c , to the variance
of ex-post income, σ y . Both of these variances are endogenous objects and will depend
on the distribution of earnings in the village, FE , the distribution of earnings in the desti-
nation, FM , the cost of migration, d, and the cost of transferring resources between house-
holds, dτ .

                                                           σ c ( F ,F ,F ,d,d )
Definition 1. Risk sharing is defined as RSt = 1 − σ y ( FE ,FM ,FE ,d,dτ ) where σ c is the standard
                                                                E   M   C   τ

deviation of consumption and         σy   is the standard deviation of realized (ex-post of any
migration) income.

   This measure of risk sharing is bounded between 0 and 1, taking the value 1 if re-
sources are perfectly shared between households (σ c = 0) and the value 0 if there is no
transfer of resources (σ c = σ y ). The net effect of reducing the cost of migration on risk
sharing will depend on how reducing the cost of migration affects the distribution of
consumption relative to how it affects the distribution of income.
   Using the chain rule, decompose the change in risk sharing from an exogenous reduc-
tion in the cost of migrating, d, as:

                                 ∂σ c ( FE , FM , d, dτ )     ∂RSt ∂σ y ( FE , FM , d, dτ )
                                                                                         
              dRSt   ∂RSt
                   =                                        +
               dd     ∂σ c                  ∂d                ∂σ y            ∂d
                     |                  {z                } |             {z                }
                              Consumption effect                        Income effect




                                                   11
    The consumption effect represents the change in the standard deviation of consump-
tion as a result of the reduction in migration costs. The standard deviation of consump-
tion could change because of a change in the distribution of income, which will then affect
transfers and hence consumption. It could also change because the reduction in migration
costs changes the outside option of households, which changes the incentives for house-
holds to participate in risk sharing. For example, if it were the case that the reduction in
migration costs made autarky more attractive it may reduce the amount of risk sharing
transfers households make and increase the variance of consumption. This could occur
even if no households choose to exercise the option to migrate in which case the standard
deviation of income would be unchanged and so risk sharing would reduce. On the other
hand, if reducing the cost of migrating allowed households to migrate out in times of bad
aggregate shocks, this may make it easier to make transfers between households because
households have more income and hence lower marginal utilities (making participation
constraints easier to satisfy). This could reduce the distribution of consumption as well
as affecting the distribution of income and the net effect on risk sharing would depend
on the relative magnitude of the two effects.


2.3.3    Decomposition of the welfare effect of reducing the cost of migration

Total welfare depends on the distribution of consumption and total income. Total welfare
is maximized if all households have an equal share of consumption (if σ c = 0). I approx-
imate welfare for this economy as a function of the distribution of consumption (σ c ) and
moments summarizing the distribution of expost income FY :14


                          W = W (σ c ( FE , FM , dτ , d), µY ( FE , FM , dτ , d))


    Reducing migration costs will have two effects on welfare. First, it directly changes the
total resources available to the network. Second, it endogenously changes the distribution
of consumption among network members. Decompose the change in welfare into the
  14 Iuse a first order approximation for the effect of the income distribution on welfare. Higher order
moments of the income distribution may also be important for welfare and could easily be incorporated
into this formula.


                                                    12
change in risk sharing (summarized by σ c ) and the change in the income distribution µY :

                   dW  ∂W ∂σ c ( FE , FM , dτ , d) ∂W ∂µY ( FE , FM , dτ , d)
                      = c                         +
                   dd  ∂σ
                       |          {z ∂d          } |∂µY         ∂d
                                                             {z             }
                               Risk sharing effect         Income effect


   The risk sharing effect captures how the distribution of consumption changes. Total
welfare is maximized when the cross-sectional distribution of consumption is zero, and
                                                                  ∂W
welfare is lower when risk sharing is reduced. As a result,       ∂σ c   is negative. The sign of
the first term will therefore depend on the effect of reducing the cost of migrating on risk
sharing. The income effect captures the change in income as a result in the reduction cost
of migration. It is positive: higher income increases welfare. The net effect on welfare
from reducing the costs of migration depends on the relative magnitude of the income
and risk-sharing effects. A priori, the net welfare effect of migration can be either positive
or negative.


2.4    Summary of theoretical predictions

This section presents a model of limited commitment with endogenous temporary migra-
tion where migration and risk sharing were jointly determined. I derive three compara-
tive statics:

   1. Effect of reducing the cost of migration on risk sharing:   Reducing the cost of migra-
      tion will change both the distribution of income and the endogenous distribution
      of consumption. If the variance of consumption decreases relative to the variance
      of income, then risk sharing increases. Theoretically, the effect of migration on risk
      sharing is ambiguous. On one hand, the option to migrate increases the outside
      option of households, decreasing risk sharing. On the other hand, migration allows
      the network to act to smooth aggregate shocks, increasing risk sharing.

   2. Decomposition of the welfare effect of reducing the cost of migration: Welfare depends
      on total resources available to the network and the allocation of these resources be-
      tween members (the “size” and “slices” of the economic pie). The effect of reducing


                                                     13
        the cost of migration on welfare can be decomposed into an income effect and a risk
        sharing effect. In the first case, changing the income distribution while holding the
        allocation constant has a positive effect on welfare. At the same time, reducing the
        costs of migration affects the outside option of households, which may make it more
        difficult to satisfy incentive compatibility constraints and reduce the amount of risk
        sharing, in turn reducing welfare.

     3. Effect of reducing the cost of interhousehold transfers on migration: In the presence of
        any risk sharing, the migration decision depends on post-transfer income differen-
        tials between the village and city. There is a destination effect and a home effect.
        Households who migrate are the households who have bad income shocks. These
        households would be net recipients of risk sharing transfers in the village. Reducing
        the cost of interhousehold transfers improves risk sharing and reduces the income
        gain between the village and city and decreases migration. On the other hand, mi-
        gration is risky. Improving risk sharing by reducing the cost of transfers can insure
        the risky migration outcome, facilitating migration.

     Because the theoretical results are ambiguous, determining the net effect is an empir-
ical question. I now introduce the empirical setting of rural India, where I will estimate
the model.



3      Panel of rural Indian households

This paper uses the new ICRISAT data (VLS2) collected between 2001-2004 from semi-
arid India. The ICRISAT data are a very detailed panel household survey, with modules
covering consumption, income, assets, and migration.15
    15 The
         VLS2 data can be merged onto the original first wave (VLS1) ICRISAT data, covering 1975-1984.
Pooling the two waves yields a 30-year panel on rural households. While it would be interesting to study
the long run development of village economics between 1975 and 2004, the focus of the current paper is on
the joint determination of migration and risk sharing. For this reason, I focus on the second wave of the
data where both mechanisms are present.




                                                   14
3.1    Descriptive statistics of migration

Because of its short term nature, temporary migration is often undercounted in standard
household surveys. A key feature of the ICRISAT data is the presence of a specific mod-
ule on temporary migration. Such a module was included because temporary migration
is widespread: in the ICRISAT data, 20% of households participate in temporary migra-
tion each year. The prevalence of temporary migration varies over location, village and
time. For example, migration is much higher in the two villages in the state of Andhra
Pradesh due to their proximity to Hyderabad, a main migration destination. Figure 1
plots migration prevalence by village and year.
    It is reassuring to check that migration behavior observed in the ICRISAT villages is
consistent with other studies. Other household surveys in India find widespread tempo-
rary migration of up to 50% (Rogaly and Rafique, 2003; Banerjee and Duflo, 2007). Coffey
et al. (2014) survey households in a high-migration area in North India and find that 82%
of households had send a migrant in the last year. The nationally representative National
Sample Survey (NSS) asks about short term migration, defining it as trips between 30-180
days. However, there is evidence that the NSS may undercount shorter-term migration
episodes. Imbert and Papp (2015b) use NSS data and find national short term migration
rates of 2.5%; for the specific regions that overlap with the household survey in Coffey
et al. (2014) the short-term migration rate in the NSS data is 16%, compared with 30%
in the household survey. Taken together, these studies suggest that the migration rates
observed in the ICRISAT data, of approximately 20%, are consistent with other data from
India and Bangladesh.16
    Summary statistics for the sample are reported in Table 1. On average, a migration trip
lasts for 193 days (approximately six months) and 1.8 members of the household migrate.
40% of households have a migrant at least one of the four years of the survey. Migrants
are predominantly men: only 28% of temporary migrants are women. However, these
women are almost always accompanied by a male member of the household. If there is
  16 Forprevalence of temporary migration in other developing countries refer to de Brauw and Hari-
gaya (2007) (Vietnam); Macours and Vakis (2010) (Nicaragua); Bryan, Chowdhury and Mobarak (2014)
(Bangladesh).



                                                15
only one migrant from a household, 94% of the time this is a male migrant.
    Households who ever migrate are different than households who never migrate. Mi-
grating households have a slightly larger household, more adult males (2.2 vs 1.7), and
less land (4.5 vs 5.1 acres). A probability model for ever migrating is reported in Ap-
pendix Table 1. The number of males, controlling for household size, positively predicts
migration. The interaction between males and land owned negatively predicts migration.
This appears reasonable: households with more land have higher income in the village
and so lower returns to migrating, and households with more males may have surplus
labor and hence more likely to migrate.
    What is the source of the heavily skewed male migration? One hypothesis is that
males have higher returns to migrating than females. Another explanation could be that
there are differential costs to migrating, and women have higher migration costs.17 To
examine this I look at the individual labor market data to examine the differential re-
turns to observable characteristics for men and women. This is reported in Appendix
Table 2. While males have higher returns in the destination labor market (22 log points),
they in fact have differentially lower returns to migrating than women because the male
wage premium in the village is 69 log points. The returns to education are higher in the
destination for women than for men (10.8% vs 3.4%). However, the level of education
does not predict female migration (coefficient of 0.0). Taken together, this suggests that,
if anything, women have higher relative returns to migrating than men, so lower returns
shouldn’t be the explanation for lower rates of female migration. Given this, I make the
assumption that returns to migration are homogenous across individuals,18 but males
(and households with more males) face lower costs of migrating. These differential costs
of migrating will be the reason that households with more males have higher migration
  17 Forexample, one reason migration costs may be higher for women than for men could be due to mi-
gration being unsafe. In a survey of temporary migrants Coffey et al. (2014) found that 85% of migrants
had no formal shelter in the destination. It is easy to imagine that this environment could be more unsafe
for women than for men.
  18 With richer data on outcomes this assumption could plausibly be relaxed and heterogenous specific

migration returns could be calculated, at a substantial increase in the computational burden of the prob-
lem. However, since I find little evidence to differential returns on observable characteristics or migration
experience (results in Appendix Table 2) this does not seem to be a key component to understand the tem-
porary migration decision and so I focus on the key mechanism studied in this paper, namely the interaction
between migration and risk sharing.


                                                     16
rates than households with fewer males.


3.2    Five key facts linking migration and risk sharing

I verify five key facts in the data: (1) migration responds to exogenous income shocks;
(2) households move in and out of migration status; (3) risk sharing is imperfect, and
is worse in villages where temporary migration is more common; (4) risk sharing trans-
fers depend negatively on the history of past transfers; and (5) the marginal propensity
to consume from migration income is less than 1. Throughout the rest of the analysis I
scale all household variables to per adult equivalents, to control for household composi-
tion. I define household composition based on the first year in the survey to control for
endogenous changes due to migration.

   1. Migration responds to exogenous income shocks

       The summer monsoon rain at the start of the cropping season is a strong predictor of
       crop income (Rosenzweig and Binswanger, 1993). I verify the result of Badiani and
       Safir (2009) and show, in Figure 2, that migration responds to aggregate rainfall.
       When the monsoon rainfall is low, migration rates are higher.19 This matches the
       modeling assumption that migration decisions are made after income is realized.

   2. Households move in and out of migration status

       40% of households migrate at least once during the sample period. However, on
       average, a migrant household only migrates half the time. This is consistent with
       households migrating when their returns are highest – for example, if they receive
       a low idiosyncratic shock – rather than migration being a permanent strategy.

   3. Risk sharing is incomplete

       Risk sharing in the ICRISAT villages is incomplete, and worse in villages with
  19 Pooling  across villages, the coefficient on the standardized June rainfall is -0.036 without village fixed
effects, or -0.024 with village fixed effects; in both cases the constant in the regression is 0.18. Migration
caused by ex-post response to rainfall variation explains 13-19% of the cross sectional variation in migration
rates. In the model, the remaining variation in migration will be explained by the realization of idioysncratic
income shocks.



                                                      17
      higher temporary migration. To show this, I estimate a test for full risk sharing.
      I estimate the following regression for household i in village v at time t:



                                   log civt = α log yivt + βi + γvt + ivt ,


      where βi is a household fixed effect and γvt is a village-year fixed effect that captures
      the total resources available to the village at time t. The intuition of tests of full risk
      sharing is that individual income should not predict consumption, conditional on
      total resources (Townsend, 1994).

      Table 2 reports the results of the tests. Full risk sharing is rejected. The estimated
      income elasticity is 0.08. Column 2 interacts the mean level of migration in the vil-
      lage with income. The estimated coefficient is positive and statistically significant: a
      10% increase in the mean level of migration in the village increases the elasticity of
      consumption with respect to income by 0.025. In other words, villages with higher
      rates of temporary migration have lower rates of risk sharing. While this does not
      indicate causality, it is again consistent with the joint determination of risk sharing
      and migration.20

   4. Transfers are insurance

      Next I provide evidence that transfers provide insurance, and depend on the history
      of shocks. Transfers are defined as the difference between income and consump-
      tion.21 A key prediction of limited commitment models is that transfers should de-
      pend negatively on the history of transfers (see e.g. Foster and Rosenzweig (2001)).
      This holds in the ICRISAT data. I run the following specification that links transfers
      to the stock of received transfers and the income shock (see Foster and Rosenzweig
  20 Results in Table 2 are robust over alternative definitions of household size: defining the number of
household members as (adult-equivalent) baseline composition, adjusting for the number of migrants, and
adjusting for the number of migrants and trip length. Results available on request.
  21 Results are robust to defining transfers as the difference between income and expenditure, accounting

for any change in net asset position. Results are also robust to instrumenting income with rainfall. Results
available on request.




                                                    18
        (2001)) :
                                                             t−1
                                         τit = α1 yit + α2   ∑ τi j + it
                                                             j=0

        The results, both in levels and in first differences (to control for household-specific
        predictors of transfers) are shown in Table 3. The coefficient on income is negative,
        indicating the transfers provide insurance, and the coefficient on the stock of trans-
        fers, α2 is negative, indicating that current transfers depend on the history of shocks,
        as implied by limited commitment models.

     5. Marginal propensity to consume from migration income is less than 1:

        Table 4 decomposes the change in household expenditure for migrant households.
        Although a household increases their income by 30% during the years they send
        a migrant, total expenditure (consumption and change in asset position) only in-
        creases by 60% as much. I do not directly observe transfer data in the dataset,
        but this shortfall between income and expenditure is consistent with an increase
        in transfers from the household to the network.22

     These empirical facts provide some reduced form evidence for a relationship between
migration and risk sharing. However, the key feature of the model is the joint determi-
nation of risk sharing and migration. In order to quantify this interaction, I now estimate
the model structurally.



4       Structural estimation

This section describes identification of the model and the estimation procedure. There are
five groups of model parameters to be estimated:

     1. Income distribution in village: The income distribution in the village determines the
        income of households if they do not migrate. I allow for idiosyncratic income shocks
    22 Table
           4 reports results in per capita terms using the baseline household composition. A concern is this
may understate the increase in consumption due to migrants being absent from the household. I rerun an
alternative version of this table where I include gross (instead of net) migration income, and add migrant
expenditure to the consumption term. Using this definition, household expenditure increases by only 42%
of the increase in expenditure. Results available on request.

                                                    19
        and a common village-level aggregate shock.

   2. Income distribution if migrating:         The income distribution at the destination deter-
        mines the income of households if they migrate.

   3. Utility cost of migrating: The utility cost is a key determinant of migration.

   4. Preference parameters:       The coefficient of relative risk aversion will determine mi-
        gration. Both the coefficient of relative risk aversion and the discount factor will
        determine risk sharing.

   5. Heterogeneity parameters:        I aim to match the basic heterogeneity in the data, that
        households who have more males or less land are more likely to migrate. To match
        this I allow for two sources of heterogeneity. First, idiosyncratic income to depend
        on landholdings. Second, migration cost to depend on the number of males in the
        household.


4.1     Identification

This section details the identification of each group of parameters. I start by discussing
identification in a simplified model of migration, and a simplified model of risk sharing.
The full model of temporary migration with endogenous risk sharing is complex and it
may not be possible to prove identification analytically (in general, structural dynamic
models are not non parametrically identified (Rust, 1994)). I use the logic from the sim-
plified models to inform the identification discussion of the joint model of migration with
endogenous risk sharing.


4.1.1    Migration under autarky

This section presents a model of migration without risk sharing. Without risk sharing,
the migration problem is a standard selection model.23 Assume household i has land
  23 Park (2014) discusses how to non parametrically identify the extended Roy model. If there was no
uncertainty about the migration outcome, then the identification results of his paper would go through
and all parameters of interest can be non parametrically identified. However, in my model, agents make a
migration decision based on the ex-ante expected utility of migrating. As a result, the identification results


                                                     20
holdings x and number of males in the household z. I assume that income in the village
depends on land holdings, ev ∼ FEV |X . Income in the destination is not a function of
landholdings, m ∼ FM . The utility cost of migrating is a function of the number of males
in the household, d = d( z). Households have contemporaneous CRRA utility function
u ( c ).
     Household i migrates if:


                             Migrate = I{ E M u(m) − d( z) ≥ u(ev )}


Letting h( x) = u−1 ( x) denote the inverse of the utility function, this can be written as:


                                   Migrate = I{h( FM , z) ≥ ev }


     By assumption, the returns to migration are not a function of household characteris-
tics. Therefore, FM is identified as it is directly observed.
     From the selection equation above, the number of males in a household acts an instru-
ment for migration and allows h( FM , z) to be identified. The identifying assumption is
that the number of males in the household does not affect income (either in the village
or in the city) directly. As discussed earlier, this is a strong assumption. However, it is
consistent with the observed labor market evidence from the rich database on individual
earnings in both the city and the village. Variation in the number of males shifts the re-
turns to migration, which in combination with the observed migration income, FM , iden-
tify the function h. However, the h function contains both the contemporaneous utility
function and the cost of migrating and so does not separately identify the contempora-
neous utility function from the cost of migrating. This is because households who are on
average more risk averse will migrate less. But, households who face a higher migration
cost will also migrate less. Although there is variation in the total effect from the observed
migration behavior of households with more males, this does not separate the coefficient
of relative risk aversion from the cost of migrating.24
in Park (2014) paper cannot be directly applied to this model.
  24 One possible way to proceed would be to assume that the cost of migrating is a function of two in-




                                                  21
    The last distribution of interest is the income distribution in the village, FEV |X . Here
there is a classic selection problem: only the income for households who don’t migrate
is observed. From the theoretical framework, migration will be negatively selected on
income. As a result, only the upper tail of the income distribution is observed. I assume
a specific parametric distribution for income in in the village which allows the underly-
ing parameters of the distribution to be identified from the observed truncated income
distribution.25


4.1.2   Limited commitment risk sharing without migration

Now consider a simplified model of limited commitment without endogenous migration.
The model highlights the difficulty of separately identifying the discount factor from the
coefficient of relative risk aversion.
    Consider an economy where the income process is deterministic and alternating. The
agent who is currently rich has an income share α Ω of total resources Y. The income
stream for household A is:
                                         
                                          ( 1 − α Ω )Y
                                         
                                                           if odd period
                                  ei =
                                         α Ω Y
                                         
                                                           if even period

    and vice versa for agent B.
    Assume that the two agents have identical initial Pareto weights. In this case, the
two state economy will converge to an egodic set where consumption for the rich agent
is given by α c Y, for some α c ≤ α Ω . If perfect risk sharing is not feasible the participa-
struments: d = d( z1 , z2 ). For example, z1 could be the number of males in the household and z2 could be
the distance to the nearest large city. If we estimated the model across villages we could use the variation
in the distance to the nearest large city (under the assumption that this does not affect either the income
distribution in the village nor the income distribution in the city) as a second instrument for migration. This
would then let us separately identify the utility function and the cost of migrating. An alternative approach
would be to estimate the model within the village, fix one of the coefficient of relative risk aversion or the
mean migration cost, and estimate the other from the data.
   25 It could also be possible to use the instrument for migration to non-parametrically identify the home

income distribution. A household with very few males will face a high cost of migration, d( z), and so will
need to have a lower income at home to migrate. This generates variation in the threshold for the income
distribution and therefore variation in the observed income distribution in the village. With large enough
support for z, it would be possible to trace out the income distribution in the village to identify FEV |X .


                                                      22
tion constraint for the agent with the high income realization will bind each period and
equilibrium consumption is implicitly defined by the following equation:26

           ∞                                                  ∞
           ∑ β j (u((α c )Y) + βu((1 − α c )Y)) = ∑ β j (u((α Ω )Y) + βu((1 − α Ω )Y))
          j=0                                               j=0

                         u(α c Y ) + βu((1 − α c )Y ) = u(α Ω Y ) + βu((1 − α Ω )Y )


    Agents both discount the future, but also value smooth consumption across time. As a
result, the net present value of consuming their income stream for the agent who has the
good shock today is a concave function of the variability of income, α Ω . Depending on the
value of the discount factor and the coefficient of relative risk aversion, there will either
be no risk sharing, incomplete risk sharing, or perfect risk sharing. This is summarized
by the following proposition:

Proposition 4.1. For the two state deterministic economy, given a discount factor β and relative
risk aversion γ, there exists a lower bound on the size of the income shock α (β, γ ) and an upper
bound α (β, γ )such that consumption α c is given by
                
                 αΩ                       if α Ω < α (β, γ ) (Autarky)
                
                
                
                
                
                
           α c = α c (α Ω , β, γ )        if α Ω ∈ [α (β, γ ), α (β, γ )] (Imperfect risk sharing)
                
                
                
                                          if α Ω > α (β, γ ) (Perfect risk sharing)
                
                0.5
                


Further, the partial derivatives of α c with respect to its arguments are signed as following:
α1c (α Ω , β, γ ) < 0, α2c (α Ω , β, γ ) < 0, and α3c (α Ω , β, γ ) > 0.
Proof: See Appendix B.1

    This proposition says that whether perfect risk sharing, imperfect risk sharing, or no
risk sharing is observed will depend on the discount rate, the coefficient of risk aversion,
and the income process. If imperfect, then risk sharing improves (α c gets decreases and
so consumption becomes more equal across the two agents) if agents are more risk averse
or income is riskier (and vice versa).
  26 Perfect   risk sharing is feasible if (1 + β)u(0.5Y ) ≥ u(α Ω Y ) + βu((1 − α Ω )Y.


                                                         23
   Separately identifying the discount factor from the coefficient of relative risk aversion
is challenging because they move in opposite directions: if agents are more risk averse
they value insurance more. If agents care more about the future, they also value insurance
more. As a result, if imperfect risk sharing is observed it is possible to identify either the
discount factor or the coefficient of relative risk aversion, but not both. However, if perfect
risk sharing or no risk sharing is observed, then we cannot identify either parameter:
perfect risk sharing could occur either because agents have a very high discount factor or
are very risk averse, or because income is very risky.
   For the more general dynamic limited commitment model, it may be possible to sep-
arately identify the time discount factor and the coefficient of relative risk aversion using
additional intertemporal moments. However, in general, it is a very challenging problem
to separately identify these two parameters (see, for example, the extensive discussion in
Guvenen and Smith (2014)). In the estimation, I will proceed by fixing the coefficient of
relative risk aversion and estimating only the discount factor. I then provide extensive
robustness over the choice of the fixed parameter.


4.2   Identification of the dynamic model

The simplified models discussed above are helpful for thinking through the variation in
the data. However, the full model of temporary migration with endogenous risk sharing
is substantially more complex. To identify the dynamic model I make four parametric
assumptions:

  1. Village income follows a known distribution function FE∗            .
                                                                  V |X

                                                               ∗
  2. Destination income follows a known distribution function FM

                                c1−γ −1
  3. Utility is CRRA, u(c) =      1−γ

  4. The coefficient of relative risk aversion is known γ = γ ∗

   Table A summarizes how I match each parameter to the data. I estimate the model
for each village separately. For each village, I estimate 8 parameters, and set 3 param-
eters exogenously. Because I allow for heterogeneity in land holdings and household

                                              24
composition when estimating the model, it is necessary to have a large enough sample
size within each village. For this reason, I drop village 6 because its sample size is only
32 households. The final structural estimation sample is 5 villages. In total, I estimate 8
parameters for each village, yielding a total of 40 parameters to be estimated, and set 3
exogenously. The parameter vector θ = {θestimated , θexogenous } is a vector of 43 parameters
which fully characterizes the risk sharing and migration model.




                                             25
                              Table A: Parameter vector for structural model

 Type of parameter                         Symbol    Main source of variation in data

                                           µv        Mean income of non migrants
 Income distribution in village
                                           σv        Standard deviation of income for non-migrants

                                           µmig,v    Mean income of migrants
 Income distribution if migrating
                                           σmig,v    Standard deviation of income for migrants

 Utility cost of migrating                 dv        Mean households migrating

                                                     Correlation between income and consumption
 Discount factor                           βv        Mean consumption of migrants

                                                     Mean consumption of non migrants

                                            µ
                                           αland,v   Mean income of non-migrant land owners
 Heterogeneity parameters
                                            d
                                           αmale,v   Mean male households migrating

 Parameters set exogenously

 Scaling parameter good agg shock          µ         1.2

 Coefficient of relative risk aversion γ             1.6

 Income share from migration                         0.6

   Notes:   Table summarizes how the parameters match to data moments. Parameters with a v subscript are

   estimated at the village level.


4.2.1   Specific moments matched

This section discusses how the model parameters map to the moments in the data.
   Village income distribution: Household income depends on the aggregate income
shock, idiosyncratic income shock, migration decision and migration income. Exogenous
variation in income comes from monsoon rainfall, which determines the aggregate state

                                                26
of the world in the village. I make parametric assumptions for the income distribution
faced by the households in the village and in the city.
    Total household income depends on the migration decision. If the household does not
migrate, their income comes only from their village income draw, eivt . If the household
migrates, the migrant receives migration income draw, mivt , and total household income
is a combination of income earned by the migrant and by the non-migrants.
    Each household i in village v receives an income at time t that has an idiosyncratic ()
and aggregate (ν) component:
                                               eivt = νvtivt .

    The idiosyncratic shock is an iid draw from a village-specific log-normal distribution
                          2
with mean µ and variance σidio,v :

                                                          2
                                        log() ∼ N (µv , σidio,v ).


    I allow the village income distribution to be a function of land holdings. I scale the
                                    µ
mean of the income distribution by αland , estimated structurally, if the household is in the
top half of the land holding distribution within the village.
    Village aggregate shock:          The source of the aggregate shock for the villages is the
exogenous realization of rainfall. I use a historical rainfall database covering the years
1900-2008 to compute the long run rainfall distribution and to estimate the magnitude of
the aggregate shock. I estimate the effect of the rainfall shock on output using the earlier
VLS1 data, and then take this income process as given for the estimation.27 Appendix
Table 3 examines the effect of an aggregate shock on rainfall for the 1975-1984 ICRISAT
data. I compute 4 different shock measures: the arrival of the monsoon (measured as
the first day after June 1 with more than 20 mm of rain, following Rosenzweig and Bin-
swanger (1993)), a rainfall shock that falls in the 10% percentile of the long run rainfall
distribution, a rainfall shock in the 20% percentile and a shock in the 50% percentile. The
monsoon start date is a strong predictor of rainfall. However, to calculate the monsoon
  27 It is potentially feasible to estimate the aggregate shock process within the estimation procedure.
                                                                                                      How-
ever, as I only observe 4 realizations of the aggregate shock for each village, any such estimation would be
very noisy. As a result, I take this income process as given.


                                                     27
start date it is necessary to have data on daily rainfall, and this was unfortunately not
collected over 2001-2004 for the ICRISAT villages. Instead, I define the aggregate shock
as a rainfall event falling below the 20% percentile of the long run rainfall distribution.
This reduces output by 23%, and occurs with probability 0.28. I set the scaling parameter
to 0.2 and the probability of the shock to 0.3 for the structural estimation.28 I then use the
actual rainfall realization over the years 2001-2004 to characterize the realized aggregate
state in the model.
   Migration income distribution:            If agent i migrates from village v they receive an
                                                                            2
income draw m from a log-normal distribution with mean µmig,v and variance σmig,v . I
assume that all agents face the same ex-ante income distribution if they migrate:


                                                          2
                                    log(m) ∼ N (µmig,v , σmig,v ).

   To implement the estimation I discretize both income processes. To do this, I follow
Kennan (2006), and choose points of support in the distribution such that there is equal
probability placed on each support point.
   Utility parameters: I assume CRRA preferences. The discount factor β and the coeffi-
cient of relative risk aversion γ both affect risk sharing: households who are more patient
can share idiosyncratic risk more easily, and agents who are more risk averse also prefer
to share risk. Risk aversion also affects migration, as agents who are more risk averse
prefer certainty over uncertainty and require larger expected gains in order to migrate.
As per the discussion above, it is very difficult to separately identify the discount factor
for the coefficient of relative risk aversion.
   I proceed by setting the coefficient of relative risk aversion and then estimating the
discount factor to match the risk sharing moment. The baseline estimates set the coef-
ficient of relative risk aversion equal to 1.6 to match the estimate in Ligon et al. (2002),
and robustness over this value is performed. To capture risk sharing, I use the correlation
between income and consumption as the summary risk sharing moment. I also include
the mean of consumption (for both migrants and non migrants).
  28 As a robustness test I also define an aggregate shock as below-median rainfall. This occurs with π =
0.49, and reduces income by 10.4%.


                                                   28
   Cost of migrating: The direct utility cost, d, is unobservable to the econometrician
but is key to the household’s decision to migrate. d is identified by matching mean mi-
gration rates. Intuitively, if the direct utility cost were zero there would be a threshold
income level in the village below which agents would migrate. Increasing d increases this
threshold and increases the share of the village who have income below this threshold.
   In the data, the number of males in the household is a strong prediction of migration.
To match this fact, I allow for heterogeneity in the migration cost by the number of males
in the household. I assign a dummy indicator Imale if the household has more males than
the median for all households, and estimate a scaling parameter αmale corresponding to
the utility cost for these households. The specific moments I match in the data are the
mean migration rate overall and the mean migration rate of many-male households.


4.2.2   Simulation analysis

As a check on how well the identification arguments for the simple model apply to the
dynamic model I simulate the dynamic model for a range of parameter values. I vary
each parameter of interest and then plot the responses of each of the 8 main moments as
the parameter changes. For each plot, I normalize all moments to have the same relative
magnitude for the baseline value of the parameter, so the plot can be interpreted as the
relative effect on each moment. For each panel of the plot, I bold the moment that is most
closely related to the parameter of interest. The results are plotted in Appendix Figure 1.
   The figure shows that the intuition from the simple model holds for the dynamic case.
It also highlights the complex interactions between outcome variables in the dynamic
model. For example, Panel A shows the effect of increasing the mean of the village in-
come distribution. The main moment that captures this parameter is the mean income
of non-migrants, which is bolded. However, as village income increases, there are en-
dogenous responses both from migration and from risk sharing. First, migration rates
decreases, as the relative returns to migration drop. Both the mean migration rate and the
mean migration rate for many-male households decreases (the two lines are overlaid after
the initial point: overall migration and migration of many male households decrease at
the same relative rate). Second, as village income increases households get richer, which

                                            29
improves risk sharing. The risk sharing measures therefore decreases, reflecting that con-
sumption depends less on income.
   Panel B shows the effect of changing the standard deviation of the income process.
The primary moment that this parameter affects is the variance of non-migrant income.
However, changing the variance of the income process also changes risk sharing. As the
variance of income in the village increases insurance becomes more valuable, and risk
sharing endogenously improves, decreasing the risk sharing coefficient (which measures
the correlation between income and consumption). This is shown in the plot. The rela-
tionship between the discount factor and the risk sharing coefficient is clear from Panel
F. As the discount factor increases, the dominant effect is a reduction in the correlation
between income and consumption, along with an endogenous reduction in migration as
risk sharing improves.


4.3     Estimation

I estimate the model using simulated method of moments (McFadden, 1989). The aim
of the structural estimation is to generate a series of simulated data which matches the
observed data as closely as possible. I construct a vector of moments from the data, qs ,
relating to migration, income, and risk sharing. I then solve the model for a specific
value θ of the underlying parameters, generate a simulated dataset, and construct the
same moments from the simulated data. This section discusses the model solution and
estimation algorithms. Full details of both algorithms are contained in Appendix C.


4.3.1   Algorithm to solve the limited commitment model

The model presented in Section 2 was a two household model. The average village has
approximately 400 households of which I observe a sample of approximately 80 in the
dataset. The model can be extended to N agents by including each agent’s relative Pareto
weight as an additional state variable. However, this is computationally intensive. I
follow Ligon, Thomas and Worrall (2002) and other empirical applications of the lim-
ited commitment model (Laczo, 2015), and construct an aggregated “average rest of the


                                           30
village” household by taking the mean over N households who have the same income
process.29 The average rest of the village depends on the specific realization of the id-
iosyncratic shock for the household. For each state of the world s I construct the average
village member by assigning the income realization such that the sum of household H
and the rest of the village is equal to the average level of resources in the economy. This
assumes that the rest of the village is, on average, sharing risk perfectly between one
another. I show in Appendix C that this approximation method is very close to the con-
tinuum solution for a simplified version of the limited commitment model.30
    The limited commitment model is characterized by state-dependent intervals that give
the lower and upper bounds for Pareto weights for each state of the world (Ligon et
al. (2002)). In my case, I need to solve the model in two parts to find these intervals.
First, the ex-ante value function is solved on a grid indexing the state of the world in
the village and the household’s Pareto weight, (s, λ ). Second, the ex post value function
is solved on a grid indexing the state of the world in the village, the households Pareto
weight, the state of the world in the destination and the migration decision, (s, λ̂, q, j).
This procedure generates two sets of interval containing the lower and upper bounds of
the endogenous Pareto weights such that incentive compatibility constraints are satisfied:
ex ante intervals, [λ s , λ s ], ∀s, and ex post intervals, [λ̂ sq j , λ̂ sq j ], ∀s, ∀q, ∀ j.
    Once the intervals have been computed, I calculate the transition rule for the Pareto
weights such that the market clearing condition (that total consumption across all house-
holds equals total income across all households) is satisfied for all states. To do this, I com-
pute transition matrices between the ex-ante and ex-post states in the current period, and
then between the ex-post outcome in the current period and the ex-ante state in the fol-
lowing period. For agents that have binding constraints, whether in the ex-ante or ex-post
state, the Pareto weight is updated to the lower bound of the relevant interval. For agents
that don’t have binding constraints their Pareto weight is a value inside the interval. The
  29 I take N = 20 for the main specification; Appendix Table 5 shows robustness over the choice of N.
  30 Assuming that the rest of the village shares risk perfectly may seem to be a contradiction. However, the
assumption that the rest of the village is sharing risk perfectly is only used to generate the upper bound of
the interval. This upper bound is not used when computing simulated consumption: for each income real-
ization an economy-wide budget constraint needs to hold, and so consumption for individuals who do not
have a binding participation constraint will depend on their previous Pareto weight and the consumption
of all other members so that the budget constraint is satisfied.

                                                         31
first order conditions yield that the ratio of marginal utility growth across any two un-
constrained agents is constant; this implies that agents who are unconstrained this period
have a Pareto weight which is their previous Pareto weight multiplied by an economy-
wide scalar such that the first order condition is satisfied across all agents (agents with
a binding constraint have their Pareto weight determined by the lower bound of the rel-
evant interval). The algorithm solves for the value of the scaling factor such that the
invariant distribution of agents over the ex-post state of the world (s, λ̂, q, j) is equal
to the invariant distribution of earnings (both village earnings, e(s, λ̂, q, j), and earnings
from migration, m(s, λ̂, q, j), accounting for the invariant distribution of which agents mi-
grate).31 This procedure ensures that the aggregate resources constraint is satisfied across
all households and all ex post states.
   The specific steps to do this are:

(a) Solve the limited commitment algorithm for 2 households (household A and the “rest
    of the village” household) to find the ex-ante intervals [λ s , λ s ]∀s, and the ex-post inter-
    vals [λ̂ sq j , λ̂ sq j ], ∀s, ∀q, ∀ j and the migration rule I(s, λ ). In this step, the fixed point of
    the migration decision (which determines the total resources available to the network)
    is found.

     (a) Guess an initial migration rule I0 (s, λ ). Using this migration rule, construct the
          total resources available to the network.

     (b) Then, given these total resources, solve the ex-post allocation problem to find the
          constrained efficient level of transfers.

      (c) Then, solve the ex-ante decision to find the optimal migration decision, I1 (s, λ )
          satisfying the ex-ante participation constraint.

     (d) Complete Steps (a)-(c) until a fixed point of the migration decision is found.

(b) Once the fixed point of the problem is found, use the lower bounds of the computed
    ex ante and ex-post intervals to compute a transition matrix between ex ante and
    ex post states and the invariant distribution over income and earnings. The Pareto
  31 An alternative procedure to impose the aggregate budget constraint is inside the simulation step in-
stead of through adjusting the transition matrix. This is the approach taken by Laczo (2015).

                                                    32
    weights of constrained agents are pinned down by the lower bound of the interval.
    The Pareto weights of unconstrained agents are updated to be the previous Pareto
    weight rescaled by state-specific factors βs such that all agents have their participation
    constraint satisfied. In this step, the values of βs such that market clearing occurs are
    found for each value of the state.

      (a) Guess an initial rescaling factor for each state, β0s , ∀s.32

      (b) For each grid point (s, λ̂, q, j) compute the ex-post Pareto weight for each possi-
          ble ex post state of the world. This will be the lower bound of the interval if the
          participation constraint is binding. If the participation constraint is not binding
          this will be the current value of the Pareto weight, multiplied by an economy-
          wide scalar.
                                          λ̂0 (s, λ, q, j) = max[λ sq j , β0s λ ]

      (c) Now compute the ex-ante Pareto weight for the following period. This will be
          the lower bound of the relevant interval if the participation constraint is binding.
          If the participation constraint is not binding this will be the current value of the
          ex-post Pareto weight.


                                         λ1 (q, j, r) = max[λr , λ̂0 (s, q, j)]


     (d) Construct the transition matrices Qex-ante,ex-post : (s × λ ) × (s × λ × q × j) → [0, 1]
          and Qex-post,ex-ante : (s × λ̂ × q × j) × (r × λ 0 ) → [0, 1]. Using these transition ma-
          trices, find the invariant distribution of agents over the ex post states φ̂(s, λ̂, q, j).

      (e) Compute aggregate net demand in the economy. Iterate on βs until the budget
          constraint is satisfied for each state of the world.
  32 Because  a binding participation constraint in either the expost or the exante problem resets the Pareto
weight it is only necessary to search for one economy-wide scaling factor, not a separate factor for the exante
and the expost state.




                                                      33
4.3.2    Algorithm to estimate the model

After completing the above step and constructing the transition matrices the last step of
the estimation is to simulate a wide cross section and long time series of agents, and com-
pare simulated moments to real data moments. For a given value of the parameter vector,
θ, the solution of the limited commitment model yields the migration rule, updating rule
for the Pareto weight, and transfer rule, for each state of the world. It is necessary to
supply an initial Pareto weight. To minimize the effect of this initial weight, I construct a
long time series and discard the initial periods.
   The algorithm is as follows:

   1. Construct the vector of data moments qs .

   2. For the given θ solve the model and find the transition matrices Qex-ante,ex-post and
        Qex-post,ex-ante .

   3. Construct a history of T − 4 aggregate shocks for each village. Use the actual real-
        ization of the aggregate shocks in the data for the last 4 years of the series.

   4. Draw a history of T idiosyncratic shocks for N individuals in each village. Together,
        the idiosyncratic shock and aggregate shock determine the state of the world s for
        each T.

   5. Set the initial (t = 0) Pareto weight to a random number x ∈ [0, 1] for each house-
        hold.

   6. Use the transition matrices to simulate migration, income and consumption for the
        N agents over T years.

   7. Discard the first T − 4 years of data. Compute the simulated moments Q(θ ) using
        N individuals over 4 years where the aggregate shocks in the simulated data match
        the aggregate shocks in the data.

   8. Compute the criterion function ( Q(θ ) − qs )0 W −1 ( Q(θ ) − qs ), where W is a positive
        definite weighting matrix (the identity matrix is used in the estimation). Standard

                                                34
      errors are calculated by first approximating the discrete migration choice with a
      continuous formula, following Horowitz (1992); Keane and Smith (2004), and then
      utilizing numerical gradient methods to compute the covariance matrix.



5    Structural Results

This section presents the structural estimation results and performs a counterfactual pol-
icy analysis. The structural results highlight why it is quantitatively important to consider
migration and risk sharing jointly. First, I show the implications of endogenous migration
for estimating the returns to migration. I then use the model to quantify the comparative
statics between migration, risk sharing and welfare. Finally, I show that the joint deter-
mination of migration and risk sharing has key implications for policy.
    Table 5 shows the fit of the model to the data by village. The J test overidentification
test is not rejected for any of the five villages. The parameter point estimates from the
structural estimation are provided in Table 6. The parameters differ across village. This is
to be expected: for the income parameters, each village has its own income process and
additionally also sends migrants to different migrant destinations. The migration cost is
also estimated at the village level and captures all the costs associated with migration; this
also plausibly varies by village (for example, some villages are more or less connected to
main migration destinations).
    Migration has a higher mean return than village income (mean of the log-normal dis-
tribution is estimated to be 1.6 compared with 1.2), but is considerably riskier (standard
deviation of 1.2 compared with 0.8). The model matches migration rates with expected
income differentials through a utility cost of migrating. The mean cost, 0.22, is substantial,
equivalent to 21% of mean household consumption. For households with many males,
who face a lower utility cost, the cost is estimated to be approximately 18% of mean con-
sumption (scaling factor of -0.56). The estimated discount factor is 0.58. This is a low
value, especially compared with literature in developed countries which estimate an an-
nual discount factor closer to 0.9 (see, for example, Gourinchas and Parker (2002)). The
key moment pinning down the discount factor is risk sharing; with a higher value of


                                             35
the time discount factor then risk sharing would be better than what is observed in the
data. While the estimated value for β is low, it is not a priori clear what the discount
factor should be for low income countries. The point estimate of 0.58 is at the upper end
of the range of 0.4-0.6 elicited experimentally from individuals in the ICRISAT villages
(Pender, 1996). A discount factor of 0.58 would be equivalent to an interest rate of 75%
in a perfect market economy, which is reasonable with respect to interest rates charged
by micro finance organizations.33 Additionally, Ligon et al. (2002) estimate a discount
factors between 0.7-0.95 in their study of the same ICRISAT villages. To further explore
the discount factor magnitude I run two robustness tests: I allow for an autoregressive
income process and I change the value of the coefficient of risk aversion. The baseline
specification fits the model best (see the results in Appendix Table 5).


5.1    Selection and returns to migration

Both permanent heterogeneity and temporary income shocks affect migration. The selec-
tion of households into migration, as a function of their village income, is shown in Figure
3. The shaded area on each graph shows the selection of households into migration, and
shows the amount of selection into migration on income. I separate out the income dis-
tribution for good aggregate shocks and for bad aggregate shocks. Migration depends on
the realization of the aggregate shock. Migration allows the network to smooth aggregate
shocks, with the migration rate for a bad aggregate shock 5 percentage points higher than
the migration rate with a good aggregate shock. Migration also depends on permanent
characteristics of households. Landed households have a higher income in the village,
and so migrate less. Households with many males have a lower cost of migrating, and so
migrate more.
    Table 7 shows the effect of migration on migration and village income. There are three
results in the table. First, migration has a significant return. The mean income of migrant
households is 5600 rupees per equivalent adult (approximately $110 USD). Households,
on the whole, would have been considerably worse off had they not migrated. Counter-
  33 Forexample, micro finance APRs are 100% in Mexico Angelucci et al. (2015), 60% in the Philippines
Karlan and Zinman (2011), 30% in India Banerjee et al. (2015).


                                                 36
factual income (the income the household would have had in the village) is close to half
of actual income, at 2900 rupees ($58 USD). Second, migration is risky. Ex-post, not all
migrant households are better off migrating than they would have been staying in the vil-
lage. I estimate 67% of migrant households have higher income from migrating than they
would have if they had not migrated. However, 33% are ex-post worse off. This number
is consistent with the experimental findings in Bryan, Chowdhury and Mobarak (2014)
who estimate a 10-20% risk of “failure” from migration. The third result is that endoge-
nous migration biases the observed returns to migration. The income of households who
choose not to migrate is 5800 rupees per adult equivalent household member (approxi-
mately $116 USD). A naive estimate of the returns to migration would be to compare the
income of non-migrants to income of migrants. This would yield a negative return to mi-
gration: non-migrants have a household income of 5800 rupees, compared with migrant
income of 5600 rupees.34 However, this is not the correct comparison. The true return to
migration is the comparison of the income migrant households would receive if they did
not migrate; in this case, 5600 rupees compared with 2900 rupees.


5.2    Theoretical comparative statics

I now quantify the three comparative statics linking migration, risk sharing and welfare:

   1. Reducing the cost of migration increases the correlation between income and con-
      sumption (i.e. decreases risk sharing) by 8 percentage points.

   2. The welfare effect of introducing migration is large under autarky (equivalent to
      a 24% consumption-equivalent gain). However, the welfare effect of introducing
      migration is lower with exogenously incomplete markets and is lower again (in fact,
      is negative) with endogenously incomplete risk sharing.

   3. Allowing risk sharing transfers reduces the migration rate by 21 percentage points
      compared to the migration rate if households were in autarky.
  34 This
        difference holds if the compositional effects (i.e. permanent characteristics) of non-migrants and
migrants are controlled for.




                                                   37
5.2.1   Reducing the cost of migration reduces risk sharing

Theoretically, the effect of reducing the cost of migration on risk sharing is ambiguous.
On one hand, a lower cost of migration increases the outside option of households, de-
creasing risk sharing. On the other hand, a lower cost of migration allows the network to
smooth aggregate shocks, increasing risk sharing. I consider the introducing migration
into the model compared to the case where migration was not possible (a reduction in
the exogenous cost of migrating from a very large number such that no household ever
migrates to a finite cost that was estimated). The result of introducing migration on risk
sharing in Table 8. On average, the correlation between income and consumption is 14.4%
when migration costs are at a level such that no-one migrates, whereas with the cost es-
timated from the model, this correlation is 22.4%. With a lower cost of migration, house-
holds are more exposed to income risk, and I find the crowding-out effect dominates.
The net effect of reducing the cost of migration is to reduce risk sharing by 8 percentage
points%. Columns (3) and (4) make the same comparison with and without lower costs
of migration over the sample of agents who do not migrate. The households who do not
migrate have the same income in both states of the world, so the only change that occurs
is through the change in the distribution of consumption for these households. The same
pattern holds.
   The overall correlation masks a substantial degree of heterogeneity within group. The
group that has the largest change in risk sharing is the households that have many males,
and therefore can more easily migrate. For example, the correlation between income and
consumption for landed households with many males increases from 12.7% to 21.4% with
the lower cost of migration. This is the group of households who are least likely to migrate
because they face high opportunity costs as well as large migration costs.


5.2.2   Decomposition of the welfare effect of reducing the cost of migration

Migration both changes the resources available to the village, but also endogenously
changes risk sharing. The net welfare effect of reducing the costs of migration can be
decomposed into an income effect and a risk sharing effect. To decompose the welfare ef-


                                            38
fect I contrast a model with endogenously incomplete markets to a model with exogenously
incomplete markets. Specifically, I consider a model where households can borrow and
save a risk-free asset (as in Deaton (1991); Aiyagari (1994); Huggett (1993)). The key dif-
ference between the two environments is that a lower cost of migration does not alter the
structure of the insurance market if markets are exogenously incomplete as it does when
markets are endogenously incomplete.35 For ease of comparison I also show the effect
of migration under autarky, where households do not have access to any risk-smoothing
technology.
    The results for three regimes are shown in Table 9. The welfare benefits of reducing
migration costs are largest when households are in autarky and do not have access to
any risk smoothing technology: introducing migration is equivalent to a 24.0% increase
in average consumption. The benefit is positive with borrowing and saving, but smaller:
households already could mitigate income shocks and hence the additional mechanism
of migration is less valuable. I estimate the consumption equivalent gain to be a 17.0% in-
crease in average consumption. Finally, when markets are endogenously incomplete, the
welfare benefit of reducing the cost of migration is smaller again. First, migration is an
additional mechanism to informal risk sharing, so the level effect of migration is smaller
than under autarky. Second, the option to migrate endogenously changes the outside op-
tion of households and reduces informal insurance, so the welfare benefit is smaller than
under borrowing-savings. I estimate the benefit of reducing the cost of migration under
limited commitment to be negative, equivalent to a 9.9% decrease in consumption. Con-
trasting endogenous to exogenous risk sharing, the consumption-equivalent gain from
migration is 18.9 percentage points% lower.
    The table also shows the heterogeneous effects of migration by subgroup. The largest
relative benefits from migration are to the households with little land and many males
who are most easily able to migrate, and households with land and many males who were
on average wealthier and so benefit by being able to keep relatively more of their income
in the high states of the world when risk sharing worsens. However, under endogenous
  35 I set the risk free interest rate to 0.30 and an exogenous borrowing constraint of approximately 50% of

average annual income.



                                                    39
risk sharing both groups face a decrease in consumption: the landed households with
many males has a loss equivalent to 5.0% of consumption and landless households with
many males a loss equal to 5.3% of consumption.36


5.2.3    Increasing the ease of risk sharing reduces migration

If households are able to make transfers to share risk, the migration decision no longer
depends on the gross income differentials between the village and the city, but the post-
transfer income differential. I consider introducing risk sharing into the model (i.e. a
reduction in the cost of inter-household transfers for a cost of 100% to a cost of 0% or
moving from a autarkic world where no transfers are ever made, to a world where trans-
fers can occur costlessly). There are two potentially offsetting effects of reducing the costs
of transfers on migration: a home effect, that reduces migration, and a destination ef-
fect, increasing migration. Migration rates under alternative risk sharing regimes are
presented in the first panel of Table 9. With endogenous risk sharing, the mean migration
rate is 14.3%. Under autarky, migration rates would be 35.3%. The net effect of intro-
ducing risk sharing (for example, by reducing the cost of inter-household transfers) is to
reduce migration by 21 percentage points. Column (2) of the table estimates the migra-
tion rate under borrowing-saving; it is slightly lower than autarky, at 31.5%. Under this
latter regime, agents are able to self-insure negative migration outcomes through asset
accumulation, and can keep the full amount of migration-related earnings because they
do not need to make risk-sharing transfers.
  36 A large part of these welfare losses arise from the fact that households who migrate must pay a utility
cost of migrating. The utility cost is sunk at the time that the expost constraints are computed and so only
affects that decision to migrate and the value of the exante outside option, but is not directly insured by
the network in the case of a low migration outcome. Setting the migration cost equal to zero, but keeping
migration rates at the same level as estimated, yields a positive welfare gain of 6.5% under endogenous
risk sharing (44.6% and 17.0% under autarky and exogenously incomplete markets, respectively). Another
hypothesis is that this negative welfare gain is coming from the large variance of income if a household
migrates, but this does not explain the differential gain across the three market structures considered.




                                                    40
5.3      Robustness

I run several robustness tests for the model, which are summarized in Appendix Table 5.
First, I reestimate the model for different values of the coefficient of relative risk aversion.
As discussed above, the coefficient of relative risk aversion and the discount factor are
highly negatively correlated, making it difficult to separately identify the two parame-
ters. The baseline results set the coefficient of relative risk aversion to 1.6. Increasing the
correlation of relative risk aversion to either 2 or 2.5 decreases the estimated discount fac-
tor (to 50.2% and 47.7% respectively) as expected. The results on risk sharing and welfare
from introducing migration are robust: the net welfare gain from introducing migration
is 96.6% of the original. The second robustness check is to investigate the low estimated
discount factor by allowing the income process in the village to be autoregressive. Risk
sharing is determined by agents with high income shocks, and so persistent shocks in-
creases the value of autarky for an agent that has a high income shock today, reducing
risk sharing. When I estimate the model with an autoregressive coefficient of 0.1 the dis-
count factor slightly increases from 58% to 60%. However, I find little evidence in the data
that income is in fact autoregressive and the overall model fit worsens with autocorrela-
tion in income.37 The third robustness run of the model is to estimate the model assuming
a different number of households in the village. This affects how well insured the average
‘rest of village’ household is (averaging over more households reduces the idiosyncratic
component of income), lowering risk sharing. The main difference is that the estimated
discount factor is slightly higher, at 63%. The effects on the welfare effect of introduc-
ing migration (96.6% of the original level) are robust to the baseline run. However, this
parameterization does not fit the data as well (J statistic of 3.2 vs 1.8).


5.4      Policy implications

I now consider the policy implications of the joint determination of migration and risk
sharing. I first examine the Indian Government’s National Rural Employment Guarantee
  37 Iestimate a model of lagged income on household income using the VLS1 data, including household
fixed effects and correcting for dynamic panel bias. The coefficient on lagged income is small (0.08) and is
not statistically significant. Results are in Appendix Table 4.


                                                    41
Act (NREGA), a large-scale public works program. I then examine a set of separate poli-
cies that target migration itself: increasing economic growth in the city; decreasing the
utility cost of migrating; and decreasing the variance of migration income.


5.4.1   Effect of the NREGA policy

The NREGA, introduced in 2005, is the largest rural employment scheme in the world,
providing 55 million households with employment during 2010-11 (Government of India,
2011). The NREGA guarantees 100 days of work to each rural household. I model the
scheme as a form of insurance, providing a minimum income level in the village, and
examine the effect on migration and risk sharing.38
   What is the welfare effect of the change in risk sharing and the change in migration?
Other studies have documented how public transfers may crowd out informal risk shar-
ing and hence reduce the welfare gains of policies (Attanasio and Rios-Rull, 2000; Albar-
ran and Attanasio, 2003; Golosov and Tsyvinski, 2007; Thomas and Worrall, 2007; Krueger
and Perri, 2010). I show this effect is present in my model. The break-down in informal
risk sharing crowds out the welfare gain of the policy. However, in my model, there is
an additional dimension that is crowded out. The rural employment scheme increases
income in the village, directly substituting for migration. Comparing the effects of the
policy under exogenously incomplete markets to the effect under endogenously incom-
plete markets, the welfare gain of the policy is 50-65% lower after household risk sharing
and migration responses are considered. The key implication for policy is that house-
holds will adjust both risk sharing and migration, and it is necessary to consider both
margins to fully understand the welfare effects of this development policy.
   Table 10 shows the effect of the NREGA policy under alternative economic environ-
ments. I first consider the case when there is no migration. The policy will have the largest
effect if households are in autarky and do not have access to any income-smoothing tech-
nology. In this case, the NREGA will act as a targeted income transfer. Column (1) shows
  38 What follows can be interpreted as an ex-ante evaluation of the NREGA policy. Ex-post there were
many difficulties and irregularities in implementing the NREGA scheme. Additionally, (Imbert and Papp,
2015a) show that the NREGA has general equilibrium effects on wages. I abstract from this effect in the
analysis.


                                                  42
that under autarky and no migration the welfare benefit of the NREGA is equivalent to a
22.0% increase in average consumption. In comparison, if households are able to smooth
income shocks, the marginal benefit of the NREGA income transfer is smaller. I examine
this in two steps: a ‘level’ effect, by examining autarky to exogenously incomplete insur-
ance, and then a ‘crowding out’ effect’, comparing exogenously incomplete insurance to
endogenously incomplete insurance. Column (2) recomputes the benefit if households
have access to borrowing-saving (exogenously incomplete markets). The welfare benefit
of the policy is still large and positive, but smaller in magnitude than autarky: 12.4%. This
is because households were already able to smooth some of the welfare fluctuations of the
income shocks. Column (3) estimates the effect of the policy under limited commitment.
This takes into account the endogenous reduction in informal insurance as a result of the
NREGA. The welfare effect of the policy is smaller than under exogenously incomplete
markets, 4.7%, due to the crowd-out of informal insurance.
   Table 10 shows the welfare effects under migration. The NREGA increases income in
the village, reducing migration. The welfare effect of the NREGA policy is smaller, be-
cause migration is already a mechanism for households to smooth income shocks: house-
holds substitute away from migration towards the publicly provided insurance. The ben-
efit of the scheme is 4.8% if households are autarkic. Note the difference in the effect of
the NREGA when households are autarkic: 22.0% without migration, and 4.8% with mi-
gration. Accounting for endogenous migration is important, regardless of the insurance
environment. Columns (5) and (6) repeat the analysis for exogenously incomplete and
endogenously incomplete insurance. The same pattern as in the environment without
migration holds. The benefit of the policy when households can borrow or save is 4.0%,
and then once the endogenous change in insurance is taken into account, the final welfare
benefit of the NREGA is 2.1% under limited commitment with migration.
   The cost of the policy can be approximated from the migration response. If there is rel-
atively less migration, this means that fewer people are migrating, as so more households
will take up the NREGA work offer. The third panel of Table 10 shows that the largest
drop in migration is when markets are endogenously incomplete. Under limited commit-
ment, the overall migration rate is 86% of what it would have been without NREGA (i.e.


                                             43
a reduction of 14%) compared with 90% when markets are exogenously incomplete (i.e.
a reduction of only 10%). Therefore, not only is the benefit smaller, but the cost is also
larger.



6    Conclusion

Economists have long studied the complex systems of informal insurance between house-
holds in developing countries. Informal insurance is important because formal markets
are generally absent in these environments, leaving households exposed to a high degree
of income risk. However, studies of informal insurance have generally not considered
that households have access to other risk-mitigating strategies. This paper studies tem-
porary migration, a phenomenon that is both common (20% of rural Indian households
have at least one migrant) and economically important (migration income is more than
half of total household income for these households). Temporary migration provides a
way for households to self-insure, hence it may fundamentally change incentives to par-
ticipate in informal insurance. At the same time, informal insurance changes the returns
to migration. For this reason, this paper has argued that it is necessary to consider the
migration decision of the household jointly with the decision to participate in informal
risk sharing networks.
    The analysis proceeds in three steps. First, I characterize a model of endogenous lim-
ited commitment risk sharing with endogenous temporary migration, in which risk shar-
ing and migration are jointly determined. In the limited commitment model, the key
determinant of risk sharing is the household’s outside option. Migration changes the out-
side option, hence changing the structure of endogenous risk sharing. I demonstrate how
the welfare effect of reducing the costs of migration can be decomposed into an income
effect and a risk-sharing effect. I then show how improving access to risk sharing alters
the returns to migration, and determines the migration decision.
    Second, I estimate the model structurally on the new wave of the ICRISAT panel
dataset. I allow for heterogeneity in landholdings and household composition to match
migration rates across groups. The quantitative results are: (1) reducing migration costs


                                            44
reduces risk sharing by 8 percentage points; (2) contrasting endogenous to exogenous
risk sharing, the consumption-equivalent gain of reducing migration costs migration is
18.9 percentage points lower; (3) improving access to risk sharing reduces migration by 8
percentage points.
   Third, the fact that households make both risk sharing and migration decisions jointly
has key implications for development policy. For example, policies that address income
risk will have direct effects, but may also have indirect effects, such as crowding out in-
formal risk sharing. It is important to account for both the direct and indirect effects in
welfare calculations. This point has been made for other contexts, such as public insur-
ance in the PROGRESA villages (Attanasio and Rios-Rull, 2000). I demonstrate that it is
also important to consider how policy affects migration decisions. Using the example of
the Indian Government’s NREGA policy, the largest-scale public works program in the
world, I show the policy substitutes for informal insurance, reducing risk sharing. In
addition, the rural employment scheme increases income in the village, substituting for
migration. I illustrate how the welfare benefits of this policy are overstated if the joint
responses of migration and risk sharing are not taken into account. The welfare gain
of the policy is 55-70% lower after household risk sharing and migration responses are
considered.
   This paper has shown that it is both theoretically important and empirically relevant
to consider the joint determination of migration and risk sharing. While the current focus
has been migration, it is reasonable to think that many other decisions that households
make may also be jointly determined with informal insurance. Additionally, an impor-
tant open question is that of the determinants of the long run changes observed between
the first wave of the VLS in 1975 and the second wave in 2001: what caused the large
increase in temporary migration over this time period and how did this increase in tem-
porary migration affect the long run development of India’s village economies? Fruitful
avenues for future research may be to examine the implications of the joint determination
of informal risk sharing and investment or production decisions as well as examining the
determinants of the long run changes observed in India’s village economies.



                                            45
References
Abraham, Arpad and Sarolta Laczo, “Efficient Risk Sharing with Limited Commitment
 and Hidden Saving,” 2014, pp. 1–40.

Abramitzky, R, “The limits of equality: Insights from the Israeli Kibbutz,” The Quarterly
 Journal of Economics, 2008, 123 (3), 1111–1159.

Aiyagari, S, “Uninsured Idiosyncratic Risk and Aggregate Saving,” The Quarterly Journal
  of Economics, 1994, 109 (3), 659–684.

Albarran, Pedro and Orzaio Attanasio, “Limited Commitment and Crowding out of Pri-
  vate Transfers: Evidence from a Randomized Experiment,” Economic Journal, 2003, 113
  (486), C77–C85.

Altonji, J, F Hayashi, and L Kotlikoff, “Is the Extended Family Altruistically Linked? Di-
  rect Tests Using Micro Data,” The American Economic Review, 1992, 82 (5), 1177–1198.

Alvarez, F and U Jermann, “Efficiency, Equilibrium, and Asset Pricing with Risk of De-
  fault,” Econometrica, 2000, 68 (4), 775–797.

Angelucci, Manuela, Dean Karlan, and Jonathan Zinman, “Microcredit Impacts: Evi-
 dence from a Randomized Microcredit Program Placement Experiment by Compar-
 tamos Banco,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2015, 7 (1), 151–182.

Attanasio, Orzaio and Jose-Victor Rios-Rull, “Consumption Smoothing in island
  Eeconomies: Can Public Insurance Reduce Welfare?,” European Economic Review, 2000,
  44, 1225–1258.

Badiani, Reena and Abla Safir, “Coping with Aggregate Shocks: Temporary Migration
  and Other Labor Responses to Climatic Shocks in Rural India,” in Priya Deshingkar
  and J. Farrington, eds., Circular migration and Multilocational Livelihood Strategies in Rural
  India, Oxford University Press, 2009.

Banerjee, Abhijit and A Newman, “Information, the Dual Economy, and Development,”
  Review of Economic Studies, 1998, 65 (4), 631–653.

   and Esther Duflo, “The Economic Lives of the Poor,” Journal of Economic Perspectives,
  2007, 21 (1), 141–167.

  , , Rachel Glennerster, and Cynthia Kinnan, “The Miracle of Microfinance? Evidence
  from a Randomized Evaluation,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2015, 7
  (1), 22–53.

Bryan, Gharad, Shyamal Chowdhury, and Ahmed Mushfiq Mobarak, “Under-investment
  in a Profitable Technology : The Case of Seasonal Migration in Bangladesh,” Economet-
  rica, 2014, 82 (5), 1671–1748.



                                              46
Chen, Joyce, “Migration and Imperfect Monitoring: Implications for Intra-Household Al-
 location,” The American Economic Review, 2006, 96 (2), 227–231.

Chiappori, Pierre-Andre, K Samphantharak, Sam Schulhofer-Wohl, and Robert M
 Townsend, “Heterogeneity and Risk Sharing in Village Economies,” Quantitative Eco-
 nomics, 2014, 5 (1), 1–27.

Coate, Stephen and Martin Ravallion, “Reciprocity Without Commitment: Characteri-
 zation and Performance of Informal Insurance Arrangements,” Journal of Development
 Economics, 1993, 40, 1–24.

Coffey, Diane, John Papp, and Dean Spears, “Short-term Labor Migration from Rural
 North India: Evidence from New Survey Data,” Population Research and Policy Review,
 2014, 34 (3), 361–380.

de Brauw, A and T Harigaya, “Seasonal Migration and Improving Living Standards in
  Vietnam,” American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 2007, 89 (2), 430–447.

de Brauw, Alan and John Giles, “Migrant Labor Markets and the Welfare of Rural House-
  holds in the Developing World: Evidence from China,” 2014.

Deaton, Angus, “Saving and Liquidity Constraints,” Econometrica, 1991, 59 (5), 1221–1248.

Dubois, Pierre, Bruno Jullien, and Thierry Magnac, “Formal and Informal Risk Sharing in
 LDCs: Theory and Empirical Evidence,” Econometrica, 2008, 76 (4), 679–725.

Dustmann, Christian and Josep Mestres, “Remittances and Temporary Migration,” Jour-
 nal of Development Economics, 2010, 92 (1), 62–70.

Foster, Andrew and Mark Rosenzweig, “Imperfect Commitment, Altruism and the Fam-
  ily: Evidence from Transfer Behavior in Low-Income Rural Areas,” Review of Economics
  and Statistics, 2001, 83 (3), 389–407.

Gemici, A, “Family Migration and Labor Market Outcomes,” Mimeo, 2011.

Giles, J, “Is Life More Risky in the Open? Household Risk-Coping and the Opening of
  China’s Labor Markets,” Journal of Development Economics, 2006.

  , “Precautionary Behavior, Migrant Networks, and Household Consumption Decisions:
  An Empirical Analysis Using Household Panel Data from Rural China,” The Review of
  Economics and Statistics, 2007.

Golosov, M and A Tsyvinski, “Optimal Taxation With Endogenous Insurance Markets,”
 The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2007, 122 (2), 487–534.

Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier and Jonathan A Parker, “Consumption Over the Life Cycle,”
 Econometrica, 2002, 70 (1), 47–89.

Government of India, “Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act,
 2005: Annual Report: 2010-11,” 2011.

                                           47
Guvenen, Fatih and Anthony Smith, “Inferring Labor Income Risk From Economic
 Choices,” Econometrica, 2014, 82 (6), 2085–2129.

Harris, John and Michael Todaro, “Migration, Unemployment and Develpment: A Two-
 Sector Analysis,” The American Economic Review, 1970, 60 (1), 126–142.

Harris, Milton and Bengt Holmstrom, “A Theory of Wage Dynamics,” The Review of Eco-
 nomic Studies, 1982, 49 (3), 315–333.

Hendel, I and A Lizzeri, “The Role of Commitment in Dynamic Contracts: Evidence from
 Life Insurance,” The Quarterly Jouranl of Economics, 2003, 118 (1), 299–328.

Horowitz, Joel L., “A Smoothed Maximum Score Estimator for the Binary Response
 Model,” Econometrica, 1992, 60 (3), 505–531.

Huggett, M, “The Risk-Free Rate in Heterogeneous-Agent Incomplete-Insurance
 Economies,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 1993.

Imbert, Clement and John Papp, “Labor Market Effects of Social Programs - Evidence
  from India s Employment Guarantee,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
  2015, 7 (2), 233–263.

   and , “Short-term Migration, Rural Workfare Programs and Urban Labor Markets:
  Evidence from India,” Mimeo, 2015.

Karlan, Dean and Jonathan Zinman, “Microcredit in Theory and Practice: Using Random-
  ized Credit Scoring for Impact Evaluation,” Science, 2011, 332, 1278–1284.

Keane, Michael and Anthony Smith, “Generalized Indirect Inference for Discrete Choice
  Models,” Mimeo, 2004, pp. 1–28.

Kehoe, P and F Perri, “International Business Cycles with Endogenous Incomplete Mar-
  kets,” Econometrica, 2002, 70 (3), 907–928.

Kehoe, T and D Levine, “Debt-Constrained Asset Markets,” The Review of Economic Stud-
  ies, 1993, 60 (4), 865–888.

Kennan, J, “A Note on Discrete Approximations of Continuous Distributions,” 2006.

   and J Walker, “The Effect of Expected Income on Individual Migration Decisions,”
  Econometrica, 2011, 79 (1), 211–251.

Kennan, John, “Open Borders,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 2013, 16 (2), L1–L13.

Kocherlakota, N, “Implications of Efficient Risk Sharing without Commitment,” Review
 of Economic Studies, 1996, 63 (4), 595–609.

Krueger, D and F Perri, “Does Income Inequality Lead to Consumption Inequality? Evi-
  dence and Theory,” Review of Economic Studies, 2006, 73 (1), 163–193.


                                          48
   and , “Public versus Private Risk Sharing,” Journal of Economic Theory, 2010, 146 (3),
  920–956.

Laczo, Sarolta, “On Risk Sharing in Village Economies: Structural Estimation and Test-
  ing,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 2015, 13 (2), 265–292.

Lewis, W A, “Economic Development with Unlimited Supplies of Labour,” The Manch-
  ester School, 1954, 22 (2), 139–191.

Ligon, E, J P Thomas, and Tim Worrall, “Mutual Insurance, Individual Savings, and Lim-
  ited Commitment,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 2000, 3 (2), 216–246.

Ligon, Ethan, Jonathan Thomas, and Tim Worrall, “Informal Insurance Arrangements
  with Limited Commitment: Theory and Evidence from Village Economies,” The Review
  of Economic Studies, 2002, 69 (1), 209–244.

Mace, B J, “Full Insurance in the Presence of Aggregate Uncertainty,” Journal of Political
 Economy, 1991, 99 (5), 928–956.

Macours, Karen and Renos Vakis, “Seasonal Migration and Early Childhood Develop-
 ment,” World Development, 2010, 38 (6), 857–869.

Marcet, A and R Marimon, “Recursive Contracts,” 2011.

Mazzocco, M and S Saini, “Testing Efficient Risk Sharing with Heterogeneous Risk Pref-
 erences,” American Economic Review, 2012, 102 (1), 428–468.

McFadden, D, “A Method of Simulated Moments for Estimation of Discrete Response
 Models Without Numerical Integration,” Econometrica, 1989, 57 (5), 995–1026.

Munshi, Kaivan and M Rosenzweig, “Networks and Misallocation: Insurance, Migration,
 and the Rural-Urban Wage Gap,” American Economic Review (Forthcoming), 2015.

Park, Byoung, “Nonparameteric Identification and Estimation of the Extended Roy
  Model,” 2014.

Pender, John L, “Discount Rates and Credit Markets: Theory and Evidence from Rural
  India,” Journal of Development Economics, 1996, 50 (2), 257–296.

Pessino, C, “Sequential Migration Theory and Evidence from Peru,” Journal of Develop-
  ment Economics, 1991.

Rogaly, Ben and Abdur Rafique, “Struggling to Save Cash: Seasonal Migration and Vul-
  nerability in West Bengal, India,” Development and Change, 2003, 34 (4), 659–681.

Rosenzweig, Mark and H Binswanger, “Wealth, Weather Risk and the Composition and
  Profitability of Agricultural Investments,” The Economic Journal, 1993, 103 (416), 56–78.

  and Oded Stark, “Consumption Smoothing, Migration, and Marriage: Evidence from
  Rural India,” The Journal of Political Economy, 1989.

                                            49
Rust, J, “Structural Estimation of Markov Decision Processes,” in Robert Engle and Dan
  McFadden, eds., Handbook of Econometrics, Elsevier, 1994, chapter 51, pp. 3081–3143.

Schulhofer-Wohl, S, “Heterogeneity and Tests of Risk Sharing,” Journal of Political Econ-
  omy, 2011, 119 (5), 925–958.

Sjaastad, L, “The Costs and Returns of Human Migration,” The Journal of Political Economy,
  1962, 70 (5), 80–93.

Thomas, J and Tim Worrall, “Self-Enforcing Wage Contracts,” The Review of Economic Stud-
  ies, 1988.

   and , “Unemployment Insurance under Moral Hazard and Limited Commitment:
  Public versus Private Provision,” Journal of Public Economic Theory, 2007, 9 (1).

Topalova, P, “Factor Immobility and Regional impacts of Trade Liberalization: Evidence
  on Poverty from India,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2010, 2 (4), 1–41.

Townsend, Robert M, “Risk and Insurance in Village India,” Econometrica, 1994, 62 (3),
  539–591.

Tunali, I, “Rationality of Migration,” International Economic Review, 2000, 41 (4), 893–920.

Udry, Christopher, “Risk and Insurance in a Rural Credit Market: An Empirical Investi-
 gation in Northern Nigeria,” The Review of Economic Studies, 1994, 61 (3), 495–526.

Yang, D and H Choi, “Are Remittances Insurance? Evidence from Rainfall Shocks in the
  Philippines,” The World Bank Economic Review, 2007, 21 (2), 219–248.




                                             50
Figures and Tables


                          .5
          Mean share of village migrating
          .1      .2      0   .3       .4




                                            2001                           2002            2003   2004
                                                                                    Year
                                             Each observation is a village-year.



Figure 1: Migration varies over space and time: Temporary migration in the six ICRISAT
villages over time.

Notes: The figure plots the share of households with a temporary migrant in each of the six ICRISAT
villages by year.




                                                                                   51
                        .5        .4
           Village Migration Rate
                 .2     .1
                        0 .3




                                                -1                        0                   1   2
                                                                         Standarized June Rain
                                       Each observation is a village-year.
                                       Coefficient: -0.036, t-stat: -1.766



Figure 2: Verifying model assumptions: Temporary migration responds ex-post to income
shocks.

Notes: The figure plots the relationship between the mean village migration rate and the standardized
monsoon (June) rainfall in the six ICRISAT villages between 2001-2004. Monsoon rainfall is a strong pre-
dictor of crop income for the coming year. Migration decisions are made after the monsoon rainfall and
respond to expected income shocks. The unit of observation is a village-year; there are 24 observations. A
regression line is included in the figure.




                                                                               52
                                        Landless, few males                                                           Landed, few males
    Distribution of income shock




                                                                              Distribution of income shock
     0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5




                                                                               0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5
                                                         Migrants
                                                        Bad agg shock
                                                        Good agg shock




                                   -1   0       1        2          3                                        -1   0         1        2    3
                                            Income shock                                                                Income shock


                                        Landless, many males                                                      Landed, many males
    Distribution of income shock




                                                                              Distribution of income shock
     0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5




                                                                               0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5




                                   -1   0       1        2          3                                        -1   0         1        2    3
                                            Income shock                                                                Income shock



Figure 3: Structural estimation: Income distribution and selection into migration by pop-
ulation subgroup

Notes: The figure plots the migration and income distribution for each subgroup (males/land) for good
and bad aggregate shocks. Computed from structural estimation results. The shaded area represents the
agents who migrate in each period. Because the income process is discretized, I use the median income of
migrants as the threshold to highlight the differences between aggregate and idiosyncratic shocks.




                                                                         53
                        Table 1: Summary statistics
                                     (1)           (2)                (3)
Mean/sd                              All      Ever Migrate       Never Migrate
Total income                        22.64          23.45               22.12
                                   (18.23)        (17.57)             (18.63)
Non-migration income                21.46          18.64               23.24
                                   (22.64)        (22.08)             (22.82)
Migration income                     2.38           6.19                0.00
                                    (6.10)         (8.55)              (0.00)
Total consumption                   26.73          26.71               26.74
                                   (16.22)        (15.56)             (16.63)
Per capita consumption               6.78           6.25                7.11
                                    (4.24)         (4.43)              (4.09)
Owned land                           4.81           4.39                5.08
                                    (5.57)         (5.85)              (5.37)
Household size                       5.08           5.82                4.61
                                    (2.44)         (2.57)              (2.23)
Number adults                        3.72           4.23                3.40
                                    (1.64)         (1.65)              (1.56)
Number adult males                   1.91           2.23                1.72
                                    (1.08)         (1.08)              (1.03)
Number migrants                                    1.77
                                                  (0.96)
Share household migrating                          0.33
                                                  (0.19)
Migration length (days)                           192.98
                                                 (102.67)
Number households                    439            171                 268
  Notes: Summary statistics calculated from VLS2. All financial variables in ’000s of
  rupees. Per capita consumption computed in adult equivalent terms. Migration
  variables computed only for years in which the household migrates.




                                        54
                     Table 2: Test for perfect risk sharing
                                                          (1)         (2)
           Dep. variable: Consumption                    b/se        b/se
           Income                          0.070*** 0.029
                                            (0.016) (0.022)
           Mean village migration X Income          0.234*
                                                    (0.122)
           Village-Year FE                                Yes         Yes
           Household FE                                   Yes         Yes
           R-squared                                     0.627       0.629
           Number observations                           1443        1443
              Notes: OLS regressions of log income on log consumption.
              Standard errors clustered at village-year level for all columns.
              VLS2 is ICRISAT data 2001-2004. Mean village migration in-
              teracts the average village level of temporary migration with
              individual income.




                        Table 3: Transfers are insurance
                                            In levels             In first difference
                                         (1)         (2)            (3)          (4)
Dep. variable: (Diff) Transfers         b/se        b/se           b/se         b/se
Total Income                          -0.967***    -0.845***
                                       (0.031)      (0.033)
Stock of transfers                                 -0.261***
                                                    (0.024)
D.Total Income                                                   -0.971***       -0.736***
                                                                  (0.033)         (0.034)
D.Stock of transfers                                                             -0.497***
                                                                                  (0.033)
Village-Year FE                          Yes           Yes          Yes             Yes
Household FE                             Yes           Yes          No              No
r2                                      0.729         0.753        0.534           0.650
N                                       1446          1236          919             824
  Notes: Source: VLS2. Transfers are defined as the residal between income and con-
  sumption. Stock of transfers measures the combined value of transfers received, setting
  2001 equal to zero.




                                          55
              Table 4: Change in household income and expenditure when migrate
                              (1)           (2)                  (3)                (4)               (5)
Dep. variable:              Income      Consumption         ∆ Fin. Assets      ∆ Phy. Assets      Expenditure
                             b/se          b/se                 b/se               b/se              b/se
Dummy if migrate              1451            602                 404                339               1104
                              (492)          (521)               (317)              (490)              (902)
Household FE                   Yes            Yes                 Yes                Yes               Yes
Mean dep. variable            5828           6856                -598                292              6247
R-squared                     0.650          0.512               0.215              0.304             0.369
Number observations           1446           1449                1490               1490              1510
Number households              438            438                 437                437               438
  Notes: OLS regressions with standard errors clustered at village-year. Calculated from ICRISAT data 2001-
  2004. Change in financial assets is change in savings less change in debt. Change in physical assets is change in
  value of durables, farm equipment, and livestock. Change variables calculated 2002-2004. Expenditure is sum
  of columns 2-4, assigning predicted change in assets for year 2001. Mean dependent variable calculated over
  non-migrants.




                                                  56
                        Table 5: Goodness of fit of model to data, by village
                                            Village 1         Village 2         Village 3         Village 4         Village 5
                                         (1)        (2)    (3)        (4)    (5)        (6)    (7)        (8)    (9)        (10)
                                        Data      Model   Data      Model   Data      Model   Data      Model   Data      Model

Mean of non-migrant income              8.201    7.848    5.220    5.912    5.001    5.229    5.026    5.163    5.075     5.322
Std dev non-migrant income              4.672    4.269    3.225    3.196    4.130    4.384    3.937    4.073    3.680     3.906
Mean of non-migrant income: own land    8.959    9.449    5.281    5.942    5.401    5.289    5.843    5.433    6.076     5.866
Mean of migrant income                  6.796    6.596    5.028    4.942    6.696    6.922    5.832    5.579    5.605     5.496
Std dev migrant income                  3.897    4.629    3.195    3.730    4.462    4.623    3.770    4.095    5.290     4.640
Mean migration rate                     0.238    0.265    0.454    0.379    0.078    0.002    0.074    0.031    0.078     0.053
Mean migration rate: male hh            0.553    0.472    0.536    0.567    0.105    0.004    0.109    0.044    0.125     0.106
Correlation of consumption and income   0.215    0.217    0.240    0.236    0.154    0.208    0.325    0.308    0.108     0.129
Mean non-migrant consumption            8.378    7.691    5.303    5.464    5.159    5.138    5.137    5.116    5.129     5.294
Mean migrant consumption                6.227    6.602    4.928    5.494    4.823    4.392    4.435    4.626    4.967     5.299

J statistic                                      2.433             2.222             2.365             1.040              0.867
J statistic (p value)                            0.296             0.329             0.307             0.594              0.648

 Notes: Table reports how well the model matches the data by moment. All monetary
 values are 000’s of rupees per adult equivalent in household.




                                                              57
                            Table 6: Structural point estimates (by village)
                                                  A          B          C          D          E        Average
                                                 b/se       b/se       b/se       b/se       b/se       b/se
Village income
Mean of village shock process                    1.392      1.120      1.173      1.120      1.120       1.185
                                                (0.045)    (0.008)    (0.248)    (0.003)    (0.064)     (0.052)
Std. dev of village shock process                0.537      0.780      0.922      0.874      0.811       0.785
                                                (0.058)    (0.025)    (0.162)    (0.009)    (0.005)     (0.035)
Migration income
Mean of migration income process                 1.517      1.419      1.885      1.794      1.544       1.632
                                                (0.079)    (0.185)    (0.181)    (0.174)    (0.006)     (0.064)
Std. dev of migration income process             1.287      1.203      1.038      1.015      1.281       1.165
                                                (0.037)    (0.062)    (0.014)    (0.152)    (0.014)     (0.034)
Utility cost of migrating
Utility cost of migrating                        0.089      0.132      0.390      0.281      0.226       0.223
                                                (0.116)    (0.026)    (0.038)    (0.277)    (0.061)     (0.062)
Preference parameters
Discount factor                                  0.659      0.567      0.546      0.528      0.614       0.583
                                                (0.010)    (0.039)    (0.203)    (0.183)    (0.020)     (0.055)
Heterogeneity parameters
Scaling utility cost for male                   -0.945     -0.884     -0.277     -0.134     -0.571      -0.562
                                                (0.337)    (0.119)    (0.108)    (0.187)    (0.047)     (0.084)
Scaling mean for land                            0.746      0.012      0.023      0.137      0.262       0.236
                                                (0.186)    (0.026)    (0.113)    (0.131)    (0.016)     (0.051)
Coefficient of relative risk aversion            1.600      1.600      1.600      1.600      1.600       1.600
Scaling factor good aggregate shock              0.200      0.200      0.200      0.200      0.200       0.200
Share of income from migration                   0.600      0.600      0.600      0.600      0.600       0.600
  Notes: Table gives point estimates and standard errors from simulated method of moment estimation.
  Columns (1)-(5) yield village-specific estimates. Column (6) averages across villages (note: standard error
  for the average does not take into account covariance across village as this was not estimated). Three parame-
  ters are set exogenously: the coefficient of relative risk aversion, the share of household income from migration
  and the scaling effect of a good aggregate shock.




                                                   58
          Table 7: Effect of migration on village income and income of mi-
          grants
                                                                        (1)       (2)
                                                                       Data      Model
           Income of Migrants
           Observed mean income                                        5.802     5.615
           Mean income if stayed in village                                      2.856
           Share of migrants with income gain                                    0.674
           Village Income
           Observed mean income of non-migrants                        5.837     5.785
           Mean of untruncated village income distribution                       5.357
              Notes: Model column calculated using structural estimates. All monetary
              values are 000’s of rupees per adult equivalent in household. Migration is
              endogenous: the agents with the lowest income realizations migrate. This
              causes the income distribution in the village to be left-truncated.




               Table 8: Effect on risk sharing of reducing the cost of migration
                                    Whole sample                         Only non-migrants
                                (1)            (2)                      (3)            (4)
Risk sharing: corr( y, c)   No migration With migration             No migration With migration
                               mean           mean                     mean           mean
Overall                          0.144               0.224               0.150              0.231
Landless, few males              0.139               0.207               0.143              0.205
Landed, few males                0.127               0.214               0.129              0.215
Landless, many males             0.146               0.199               0.169              0.210
Landed, many males               0.124               0.202               0.138              0.207
  Notes: Table compares risk sharing in an economy with the cost of migration very high so that noone
  migrates to the same economy with the cost of migration as estimated in the model. The risk sharing
  measure is the correlation between consumption and income. Columns 1 and 2 compute the statistic for the
  whole sample. Columns 3 and 4 compute the statistic only for households who don’t migrate when they
  have the option: this keeps income constant. Risk sharing is crowded out by the increase in households’
  outside option with migration.




                                                59
Table 9: Effect of reducing the cost of migration under different risk sharing regimes
                             (1)                (2)                        (3)
                           Autarky      Exogenous incomplete       Endogenous incomplete
Migration rate
Overall                      0.353                 0.315                      0.143
Landless, few males          0.319                 0.265                      0.066
Landed, few males            0.227                 0.166                      0.046
Landless, many males         0.466                 0.477                      0.275
Landed, many males           0.399                 0.353                      0.186
Welfare gain relative to no migration
Overall                      1.132                 1.070                      0.959
Landless, few males          1.128                 1.061                      0.941
Landed, few males            1.093                 1.040                      0.945
Landless, many males         1.178                 1.106                      0.974
Landed, many males           1.131                 1.072                      0.976
Consumption equivalent gain relative to no migration
Overall                      0.240                 0.170                      -0.099
Landless, few males          0.216                 0.137                      -0.150
Landed, few males            0.166                 0.094                      -0.142
Landless, many males         0.326                 0.262                      -0.053
Landed, many males           0.253                 0.185                      -0.050
  Notes: Table shows change in welfare with migration compared to no migration for whole sample
  and by subgroup. Endogenous incomplete markets is the limited commitment model. No risk shar-
  ing is autarky. Exogenous incomplete markets considers a Hugget (1993) economy where agents can
  buy and sell a risk-free asset.




                                              60
              Table 10: Effect of NREGA under different regimes
                             Without migration                 With migration
                             (1)     (2)     (3)             (4)     (5)      (6)
                           Autarky Exog Endog              Autarky Exog Endog
Consumption equivalent gain with NREGA
Overall                      0.220      0.124    0.047       0.048     0.040     0.021
Landless, few males          0.242      0.136    0.051       0.056     0.049     0.026
Landless, many males         0.198      0.111    0.047       0.047     0.044     0.023
Landed, few males            0.242      0.136    0.045       0.049     0.037     0.020
Landed, many males           0.198      0.111    0.044       0.040     0.031     0.015
Correlation between income and consumption with NREGA relative to pre-NREGA
Overall                                          1.448                           1.172
Landless, few males                              1.424                           1.220
Landless, many males                             1.475                           1.204
Landed, few males                                1.415                           1.132
Landed, many males                               1.478                           1.133
Migration rate with NREGA relative to pre-NREGA
Overall                                                      0.895     0.903     0.862
Landless, few males                                          0.800     0.867     0.749
Landless, many males                                         0.750     0.854     0.801
Landed, few males                                            1.000     0.947     0.933
Landed, many males                                           1.000     0.946     0.965
  Notes: NREGA policy enacts an income floor in the village. The policy is computed allow-
  ing for migration and not allowing for migration. Endog. is limited commitment. Exog. is
  exogenously incomplete markets. Autarky is no risk-sharing.




                                          61
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION


Appendices
A      Appendix Tables and Figures

                       Panel A                         Panel B                           Panel C                           Panel D                      Panel E




             1            1.5          2     0.4      0.6      0.8      1     1.4      1.6       1.8     2           0.6      0.8      1         0    0.1      0.2    0.3
            Mean of Village Income Process   SD of Village Income Process    Mean of Migration Income Process   SD of Migration Income Process       Migration Cost




                       Panel F                         Panel G                           Panel H




                                                                                                                       Mean income non−migrants
                                                                                                                       Mean income non−migrants: high land HH
                                                                                                                       SD income non−migrants
                                                                                                                       Mean income migrants
                                                                                                                       SD income migrants
                                                                                                                       Mean migration rate
                                                                                                                       Migration rate: many male HH
                                                                                                                       Risk sharing coefficient




             0.5   0.6   0.7   0.8             −0.8 −0.6 −0.4 −0.2             0.2      0.4      0.6     0.8
                    Discount Rate            Scaling Cost for Many−Male HH    Scaling Income for Lot−Land HH




 Appendix Figure 1: Model identification: effect of moments from changing parameters

Notes: This figure shows graphically how the moments in the model change as a function of the parameters.
For each plot, I scale the moments so that they are equal for the initial parameter value. The x axis is the
value of the parameter and the y axis yields the normalized value of the moment. For each plot, I scale the
moments so that they are equal for the initial parameter value.



                                                                                          62
           Appendix Table 1: Characteristics of migrant households
                                                                                     (1)                  (2)
               Dependent variable: Ever migrate                                     b/se                 b/se
               Number Males                                                        0.197***        0.203***
                                                                                    (0.036)         (0.034)
               Land Owned                                                           -0.004           0.002
                                                                                    (0.006)         (0.006)
               LandXMale                                                           -0.010**        -0.011***
                                                                                    (0.004)         (0.004)
               HHsize                                                              0.035***        0.038***
                                                                                    (0.010)         (0.010)
               Village FE                                                            No                   Yes
               R-squared                                                            0.110                0.213
               Number observations                                                   446                  446
                     Notes: Dependent variable is a dummy for whether a household
                     participates at least once in the temporary migrant labor market
                     between 2001 and 2004.




  Appendix Table 2: Returns in the village and migrant labor market
                                   Village Labor Market           Migrant Labor Market                   Decision to Migrate
                               (1)           (2)        (3)     (4)        (5)       (6)          (7)            (8)          (9)
                              Male        Female      Both     Male     Female      Both         Male          Female        Both
Dep. variable: Log Wage       b/se          b/se      b/se     b/se       b/se      b/se         b/se           b/se         b/se

Age                           0.001*     -0.000     0.001**     0.004    -0.004       0.002     -0.005***     -0.003***   -0.004***
                              0.001      0.000       0.000      0.004     0.007       0.003       0.001         0.001       0.001
Years of education           0.010***     0.003     0.007***   0.034**   0.108**     0.038***   0.021***       -0.000     0.019***
                              0.003      0.004       0.002      0.015     0.049       0.013       0.004         0.005       0.003
Years of education missing    -0.007      0.016      0.003      0.151     0.242       0.141     0.114***       0.069**    0.122***
                              0.028      0.020       0.017      0.145     0.232       0.119       0.032         0.029       0.022
Yrs experience in sector     0.038***    -0.005     0.015**     0.020     0.066       0.025
                              0.010      0.007       0.006      0.050     0.078       0.042
Male                                                0.683***                         0.214**                               0.199***
                                                     0.012                            0.085                                 0.015
Vill-Year FE                   Yes         Yes         Yes      Yes       Yes          Yes        Yes           Yes           Yes
N                             1121        1172        2293      416       154          570       1448          1260          2708
r2                            0.172       0.277      0.690     0.284     0.330        0.295      0.309         0.160        0.261

 Notes: Sample is VLS2. Sectoral experience omitted in migration decision specifica-
 tion to avoid mechanical correlation and bad control problem.




                                                               63
       Appendix Table 3: Effect of aggregate shocks on income
                                       (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)
Dep. variable: Log Income             b/se         b/se         b/se         b/se
Number days monsoon late           -0.009***
                                    (0.001)
Bottom 10% shock                                 -0.923***
                                                  (0.103)
Bottom 20% shock                                              -0.231***
                                                               (0.064)
Bottom 50% shock                                                           -0.104**
                                                                            (0.050)
Household FE                           Yes          No           No           No
Long run prob. shock                                0.14         0.28         0.49
R-squared                             0.606        0.625        0.591        0.586
Number observations                    931          931          931          931
  Notes: OLS regressions using VLS1 (1975-1984). Rainfall shocks computed using
  the distribution of rainfall 1900-2008 from the University of Delaware precipitation
  database, and these thresholds applied to the ICRISAT colllected rainfall for 1975-
  1984. Monsoon start date is computed as the first day with more than 20 mm of
  rain after June 1, following Rosenzweig and Binswanger (1993).




          Appendix Table 4: No evidence of income persistence
                                         (1)               (2)
                                        OLS      Arellano-Bond estimator
   Dep. variable: Log Income            b/se              b/se
   Lagged income                       -0.044                 0.081
                                       (0.036)               (0.077)
   I hh                                 0.000                 0.000
                                          (.)                   (.)
   Number observations                   719                   719
      Notes: Regressions using VLS1 (1975-1984). Household fixed effects in-
      cluded in both specifications. Column (1) estimates the system by OLS.
      Column (2) estimates the system by Arellano-Bond system GMM to con-
      sistently estimate lagged effect in presence of fixed effect.




                                        64
                         Appendix Table 5: Robustness: Structural point estimates (by village)
                        nhh = 4, ρ = 0                        nhh = 20, ρ = 0                        nhh = 4, ρ = 0.1                       nhh = 20, ρ = 0.1
            γ = 1.4   γ = 1.6     γ=2    γ = 2.5   γ = 1.4   γ = 1.6     γ=2    γ = 2.5   γ = 1.4   γ = 1.6     γ=2     γ = 2.5   γ = 1.4   γ = 1.6     γ=2     γ = 2.5
               b         b          b       b         b         b          b       b         b         b          b        b         b         b          b        b

Village 1

Beta        0.569      0.644     0.458    0.476     0.583     0.659     0.563    0.422     0.694     0.444     0.458    0.503      0.708     0.688     0.563     0.601
J stat      32.208     2.725     4.884    6.353     5.892     2.424     2.800    7.393     3.275    14.171     8.138    12.238     9.307     1.663     2.086     7.003

Village 2

Beta         0.645     0.659    0.497     0.601     0.645     0.567     0.458    0.422    0.507      0.684      0.684    0.601     0.684     0.614     0.578     0.422
J stat       2.465     3.594    38.196    3.547     3.326     2.222     4.851    3.804    38.182     2.091     10.467    2.903     8.886     1.492     4.070     5.764

Village 3

Beta         0.645     0.625     0.625    0.625     0.583     0.546     0.472    0.491     0.819     0.871     0.645     0.635     0.708     0.663     0.812     0.746
J stat       0.546     1.395     1.840    2.176     2.430     2.365     3.806    1.656     3.700     2.884     0.482     6.017     1.015     0.939     8.526     3.745

Village 4

Beta         0.658     0.542     0.497    0.625     0.520     0.528     0.562    0.491     0.569     0.573     0.495     0.562     0.708     0.458     0.760     0.491
J stat       2.058     2.708     1.667    3.679     2.459     1.040     2.155    1.880     3.143     2.417     2.875     4.811     4.726     2.661     10.927    1.621

Village 5

Beta         0.614     0.684     0.625    0.500     0.583     0.614     0.453    0.559     0.835     0.809     0.625     0.562     0.708     0.583     0.528     0.625
J stat       1.483     5.936     2.499    3.070     6.468     0.867     1.933    3.401     6.296     5.734     2.034     4.310     2.956     4.754     2.469     5.096

Average

Beta         0.626     0.631     0.540    0.565     0.583     0.583     0.502    0.477     0.685     0.676     0.581     0.573     0.703     0.601     0.648     0.577
J stat       7.752     3.272     9.817    3.765     4.115     1.784     3.109    3.627    10.919     5.459     4.799     6.056     5.378     2.302     5.616     4.646

 Notes: Table gives point estimates of beta and the critical value from simulated method of moment estimation.




                                                                        65
B     Theoretical appendix
B.1   Proof of Proposition 4.1
For a given discount factor β and relative risk aversion γ, there exists a lower
bound on the size of the income shock α (β, γ ) and an upper bound α (β, γ )such
that consumption α c is given by
        
           Ω
        α
                          if α Ω < α (β, γ ) (Autarky)
  α c = α c (α Ω , β, γ ) if α Ω ∈ [α (β, γ ), α (β, γ )] (Imperfect risk sharing)
        
          0.5              if α Ω > α (β, γ ) (Perfect risk sharing)
        

Further, the partial derivatives of α c with respect to its arguments are signed as
following: α1c (α Ω , β, γ ) < 0, α2c (α Ω , β, γ ) < 0, and α3c (α Ω , β, γ ) > 0.

  Proof:
The participation constraint for the rich agent is given by:
           u(α c Y ) + βu((1 − α c )Y ) = u(α Ω Y ) + βu((1 − α Ω )Y )
Assuming CRRA utility, this simplifies to:
             (α c )1−σ + β(1 − α c )1−σ = (α Ω )1−σ + β(1 − α Ω )1−σ
     The RHS of the above expression is a concave function of α Ω . Taking the
derivative with respect to α Ω and rearranging yields that α (β, γ ) = 1+β1 1/γ .
The upper bound where full risk sharing becomes optimal is defined as
the α (β, γ ) that solves (1 + β)0.51−γ = α 1−γ + β(1 − α )1−γ . Then, by the
                                                                         ∂α c
implicit function theorem, if α Ω ∈ [α, α ], α c = f (α Ω , β, γ ) where ∂α Ω < 0
(risk sharing is better, meaning that consumption is closer to 0.5, if income
                c
is riskier), ∂α
              ∂β < 0 (risk sharing is better if agents are more patient), and
∂α c
 ∂γ > 0 (risk sharing is worse if agents are more risk averse).


C     Computational appendix
This computational appendix discusses the extension to the N household
case and the approximation errors with estimating the model as if there
were only two households; the algorithm to solve the limited commitment
model; and the algorithm to find the transition matrices that satisfy the
market clearing conditons.

                                        66
C.1          Extending the model from 2 to N agents
The model presented in Section 2 was for two households. Here I show
how to extend the model to N agents and then discuss the aggregation
issues from solving a N agent games as if there were two households in
the village.

C.1.1        Model with N agents

The model easily extends from 2 to N agents. Denote by H the numeraire
household in the economy. We can write the model as:
                                                                                                                                                                                   
 V   H
         (Us1 , ..., UsH −1 ; s)   =                    max                      ∑ ∑ π j πq             u(csHjq ) − I H
                                                                                                                      j d+β        ∑ πsr V         H
                                                                                                                                                       (Uq1jr , ..., UqHjr−1 ; r)
                                        {cis jq }∀i ;{U ijqr }∀i6= H j                q                                                r
                                                   "                                                                                         #
                                               i
                          PK:      ∑ λ ∑ ∑ π j πq                                    u(cis jq ) − Iij d + β      ∑    πsr U ijqr       − Usi
                                   i6= H                    j        q                                            r
                                                                                                   h              i
               Ex ante IC:         ∑       ∑ ∑ ∑ π j πq λiβπsrφijqr U ijqr − Ωri
                                   i6= H j              q        r
                                                                                                                                                  
               Ex post IC:         ∑ ∑∑                         π j πq λ iαsi jq         u(cis jq ) − Iij d + β    ∑      πsr U ijqr   − Ω̂is jr
                                   i6= H j              q                                                             r
                                                                                         h                                             i
                                                                                                                H −1
         Ex ante IC (H) :          ∑ ∑ ∑ π j πqβπsrφ Hjqr                                    V (U 1jqr , ..., U jqr  ; r) − ΩrH
                                    j      q        r
                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                       H −1
          Ex post IC (H):          ∑∑              π j πqαsHjq               u(csHjq ) − I H
                                                                                           j d+β            ∑   πsr V (U 1jqr , ..., U jqr  ; r) − Ω̂sHjr
                                    j      q                                                                r
                                                                         "                              #
 Budget constraint:                ∑ ∑ π j πqγ jq ∑ cis jq − ∑ eis jq
                                    j      q                                 i                 i



     The first order conditions yield:

            ∂
             H
                  : π j πq u0 (csHjq ) + π j πqαsHjq u0 (csHjq ) = −π j πqγ jq
           ∂cs jq
            ∂
             i
                  : λ i π j πq u0 (cis jq ) + π j πqαsi jq u0 (csHjq ) = −π j πqγ jq
           ∂cs jq
           ∂                                      H −1
             i
                 : π j πqβπsr ViH (U 1jqr , .., U jqr  ; r) + λ i π j πqβπsr + π j πqβπsrφijqr + π j πq λ iαsi jqβπsr
          ∂U jqr
Envelope : ViH (Us1 , ..., UsH −1 ; s) = −λi

                                                                                                   67
   Rearranging the FOC yields:


                   u0 (csHjq )         i
                                           1 + αsi jq
                                  =λ                                                                  (1)
                   u0 (cis jq )            1 + αsHjq

                                       H −1
                                                                              (1 + αsi jq + φijqr )
                   ViH (U 1jqr , .., U jqr  ; r)                = −λ      i
                                                                                                      (2)
                                                                              (1 + αsHjq + φ Hjqr )
                   ViH (Us1 , ..., UsH −1 ; s) = −λi                                                  (3)

C.1.2   Aggregating to a ‘rest of village’ household

It would be computationally difficult to keep track of N agents in the opti-
mization procedure because it would be necessary to track each additional
household’s relative pareto weight and income realization. Instead, I fol-
low Ligon, Thomas and Worrall (2002) and most other empirical applica-
tions of the limited commitment model (Laczo (2015)) and construct an
aggregated “rest of the village” household. To see this, consider the set of
first order conditions that would result from a N person game, where the
relative pareto weight is with respect to household H

                              u0 (csHjq )               i
                                                            1 + αsi jq
                                                   =λ                         , ∀i 6 = H
                              u0 (cis jq )                  1 + αsHjq
   Then, by CRRA utility
                                                                                ! σ1
                                       c   i
                                                                i
                                                                  1 + αsi jq
                                          =                 λ
                                       cH                        1 + αsHjq
   And, we can sum over all i 6= H
                                                                                         ! σ1
                                  ∑i 6= H c    i                          1   + αsi jq
                                            = ∑                      λi
                                      cH      i6= H                       1   + αsHjq
    Define the average member of the village, relative to agent H, as c− H =
  1           i
N −1 ∑i 6= H c .




                                                                68
                                                                            ! σ1
                        c−  H
                         s jq           1                    i
                                                               1 + αsi jq
                                  =                      λ
                         csHjq        N − 1 i∑
                                             6= H             1 + αsHjq
   Then, let λ − H =     1
                       N −1   ∑i6= H λ −i , and α − H =             1
                                                                  N −1   ∑ i 6 = H α −i :

                                            !σ
                                    c−  H
                                     s jq             −H
                                                           1 + αs−jqH
                                                 =λ
                                    csHjq                    1 + αsHjq
                                 u0 (csHjq )        −H
                                                         1 + αs−jqH
                                               =λ
                                 u0 (c−  H
                                      s jq )
                                                         1 + αsHjq

   That is, the ratio of marginal utilities of the average member of the vil-
lage excluding household H and household H can be expressed in terms
of the relative pareto weight and the ex post constraints of the rest of the
village.
   Solving the model with the 2 household approximation assumes that
the rest of the village is sharing risk perfectly with each other, and consid-
ers imperfect risk sharing between household i and the rest of the village.
However, this assumption is not directly used when simulating the econ-
omy. Rather, I examine incentive constraints for each household one at a
time, and then undertake an iterative process to ensure the economy-wide
budget constraint is satisfied.

C.1.3   Accuracy of the discrete approximation

It is possible to check the accuracy of the approximation method against
an alternative method of assuming that there are a continuum of agents
and solving the limited commitment model and comparing the simulated
distributions of consumption. The following section does this. I do this
for the case of the standard limited commitment model. It is necessary to
shut down aggregate shocks to solve the continuum model because of the
standard problem that the total resources will be an infinitely-dimensioned
object. I use the algorithm for the continuum case outlined in Krueger and
Perri (2010). Table 6 compares the two solution methods, solved for both
the continuum and the discrete case. The number of households represents
how many households are averaged to construct the “rest of the village”

                                                 69
       Appendix Table 6: Comparison of discrete approximation to continuum
                                          Continuum                    Discrete
                                             (1)           (2)       (3)     (4)          (5)
                                                          4 HH     10 HH 30 HH          50 HH
  Mean income                                 1.500        1.500    1.500     1.500      1.500
  Mean consumption                            1.500        1.500    1.500     1.500      1.500
  Min consumption                             1.073        1.099    1.099     1.099      1.099
  Max consumption                             1.765        1.807    1.790     1.694      1.631
  Standard deviation consumption              0.160        0.315    0.301     0.222      0.163
  Correlation income, consumption             0.808        0.976    0.964     0.876      0.806
  Risk sharing beta                           0.324        0.767    0.726     0.486      0.328
    Notes: Table compares the limited commitment solution calculated two different methods.



household. The correlation between the solution found in the continuum
and discrete case is high.




                                               70
C.2       Algorithm to solve the limited commitment problem
This section documents algorithm to find the state-specific ex-ante inter-
vals for the pareto weight [λ s , λ s ]∀s, the ex-post intervals for the pareto
weights [λ̂ sq j , λ̂ sq j ], ∀s, ∀q, ∀ j and the migration rule I(s, λ ).
   The algorithm is solved in two steps:
  1. Solve the limited commitment algorithm for 2 households (household
     A and the “rest of the village” household39 ) to find the ex-ante inter-
     vals [λ s , λ s ]∀s, and the ex-post intervals [λ̂ sq j , λ̂ sq j ], ∀s, ∀q, ∀ j and the
     migration rule I(s, λ ). In this step, the fixed point of the migration de-
     cision (which determines the total resources available to the network)
     is found.
  2. Once the fixed point of the problem is found, use the lower bounds
     of the computed ex ante and ex-post intervals to compute a tran-
     sition matrix between ex ante and ex post states and the invariant
     distribution over income and earnings. The pareto weights of con-
     strained agents are pinned down by the lower bound of the interval.
     The pareto weights for unconstrained agents have to satisfy the first
     order constraint. In order to satisfy the economy-wide budget con-
     straint, the pareto weights of unconstrained agents are rescaled by
     state-specific factors βs such that all agents have their participation
     constraint satisfied. In this step, the values of βs such that market
     clearing occurs are found for each value of the state.
The model presented in the text followed the notation of Ligon et al. (2002)
and presented the problem in terms of a social planner’s value function
where the state variable was the expected utility for the household. When
computing the model it is more straightforward to work directly with a
value function for each agent; as Marcet and Marimon (2011) have shown
the two formulations of the problem are equivalent.

C.2.1      Step 1: Find the pareto intervals

Define the following, all computed recursively:
 39 I   use N = 20 in the estimation. Appendix Table 5 shows robustness over the value of N.



                                                     71
• The ex-ante participation constraint
          i
         Ωex-ante (s) = max{u(ei (s)), Eu(mi (q)) − d} + βEΩex-ante
                                                            i
                                                                    (s0 )

• The ex-post participation constraint
        i
       Ωex-post (s, q, Ii ) = Ii u(mi (q)) + (1 − Ii )u(ei (s)) + βEΩex-ante
                                                                     i
                                                                             (s0 )

• First-best risk-sharing (no migration)

                    i                     e A (s) + e B (s)      i
                   Vfirst-best (s)   = u(                   ) + Vfirst-best (s)
                                                  2
1. Construct an ex-ante grid over the state of the world and the pareto
   weight (s, λ ) and an ex-post grid over the village state of the world,
   the ex post pareto weight, the migration state of the world, and the
   migration outcome (s, λ̂, q, j).
2. Construct an initial guess for the value of ex-ante utility for agent A,
   V0A (s, λ ) and the utility of agent B, V0B (s, λ ). A good initial guess is to
   take the max of perfect risk sharing and autarky.
3. Guess an initial migration rule, I0 (s, λ ).
4. Compute the total resources for the economy, taking into account the
   expected level of migration.
5. For each ex-post grid point (si , λ j , qk , j).
   (a) Construct the sub-value function if agent A does not migrate ( j =
       0):
              V̂0A (si , λ j , qk , 0) = u(c A (si , λ j )) + β ∑ πsr V0A (r, λ j )
                                                                   r

   (b) Construct the sub-value function if agent A migrates ( j = 1):

             V̂0A (si , λ j , qk , 1) = u(c A (si , λ j , qk )) − Id + β ∑ πsr V0A (r, λ j )
                                                                         r

   (c) Construct the same values for agent B. Note we only consider
       the migration decision for agent A because B is the rest-of-village


                                              72
             household; the average migration rate will be captured through
             the total resources available to the network.

                           V̂0B (si , λ j , qk , 0) = u(c B (si , λ j )) + β ∑ πsr V0B (r, λ j )
                                                                                 r
                       V̂0B (si , λ j , qk , 1)   = u(c (si , λ j , qk )) + β ∑ πsr V0B (r, λ j )
                                                          B
                                                                                 r

     (d) For each of the q migration outcomes find the intervals that satisfy
         both agents’ ex-post participation constraints if A migrates:

                                     λ̂ s,q,1 := V̂0A (λ ∗ , q, 1) = Ω̂ A (s, q, I)

                                         λ̂ s,q,1 := V̂0B (λ ∗ , q, 1) = Ω̂ B (s, q)
     (e) Find the intervals that satisfy both agents’ ex-post participation
         constraints if A does not migrate):

                                           λ̂ s,q,0 := V̂0A (λ ∗ , 0) = Ω̂ A (s)

                                              λ̂ s,q,0 := V̂0B (λ ∗ , 0) = Ω̂ B (s)

         (f) For values of λ̂ 6∈ [λ̂ sq j , λ̂ sq j ], ∀s, ∀q, ∀ j replace the value function
             with the value of ex-post autarky for both agent A and B.
6. For each ex-ante grid point (si , λ j ).
     (a) Construct the total expected utility of agent A and B if agent A
         migrates:

                   V̂ (si , λ j , 1) =   ∑ πqm V̂0A (si , λ j , qk , 1) + ∑ πqm V̂0B (si , λ j , qk , 1)
                                                  k                                  k
                                          k                                  k

     (b) Construct the total expected utility of agent A and B if agent A
         does not migrate:40

                   V̂ (si , λ j , 0) =   ∑ πqm V̂0A (si , λ j , qk , 0) + ∑ πqm V̂0B (si , λ j , qk , 0)
                                                  k                                  k
                                          k                                  k
40 The   expectation does not depend on value of q, but it is defined over the same grid for completeness.




                                                         73
        (c) Now construct the migration vector. We use a smoothed version
            of the discrete choice with smoothing parameter β. As β → 0 this
            collapses to the discrete choice rule:

                                                                 exp(V̂ (si , λ j , 1)/β)
                      I1 ( s i , λ j ) =
                                            exp(V̂ (si , λ j , 0)/β) + exp(V̂ (si , λ j , 1)/β)

        (d) Update the ex-ante value functions
               V1A (si , λ j ) = I(si , λ j ) ∑ πqmk V̂0A (si , λ j , qk , 1) + (1 − I(si , λ j )) ∑ πqmk V̂0A (si , λ j , qk , 0)
                                              k                                                      k
                V1B (si , λ j ) = I(si , λ j ) ∑ πqmk V̂0B (si , λ j , qk , 1) + (1 − I(si , λ j )) ∑ πqmk V̂0B (si , λ j , qk , 0)
                                               k                                                      k


        (e) Find the ex-ante interval [λ s , λ s ] that satisfy both agents’ ex-ante
            participation constraint:

                                                   λ s := V1A (λ ∗ ; s) = Ω A (s)

                                                   λ s := V1B (λ ∗ ; s) = Ω B (s)
        (f) For values of λ 6∈ [λ s , λ s ], replace the exante-value function with
            the value of ex-ante autarky for both agent A and B.
  7. Compare {V1A (s, λ ), V1B (s, λ )} with {V0A (s, λ ), V0B (s, λ )}. Repeat Steps
     5 to 6 until convergence.
  8. Compare I1 (s, λ ) with I0 (s, λ ). Repeat Steps 4 to 6 until convergence.

C.2.2    Step 2: Find the transition matrices

Once the ex ante intervals [λ s , λ s ]∀s, the ex-post intervals [λ̂ sq j , λ̂ sq j ], ∀s, ∀q, ∀ j
and the migration rule I(s, λ ) have been constructed, this step finds the
transition matrices that are used to simulate the economy. Additionally
we find state-dependent ex post scalars βs to ensure that the economy-
wide budget constraint (that total consumption is equal to total earnings,
including earnings from migration) is satisfied for each point in time.

  1. Start with a guess for each βs e.g. βs = 1, ∀s
  2. For each grid point on the ex post grid (si , λ j , qk , j)


                                                              74
  (a) Compute the updating rule for the pareto weight. This will be
      the lower bound of the interval if the participation constraint is
      binding. If the participation constraint is not binding this will be
      the current value of the pareto weight, multiplied by an economy-
      wide scalar.
                        λ̂ (si , λ j , qk , j) = max[λ sq j , βs λ j ]
  (b) Find the two neighboring points λl , λh on the grid for λ such that
      λ̂ (si , λ j , qk , j) = xλl + (1 − x)λh
   (c) Define a transition matrix between ex-ante and ex-post within the
       period

                        Qex-ante,ex-post : (s × λ ) × (s × λ × q × j) → [0, 1]

        as
                                                              
                                                                  m
                                                              π (qk )π ( j) x                                 if λ̂ = λl
                                                                          I
                                                              
         Qex-ante,ex-post ((si , λ j ), (si , λ j , qk , j)) = π m (qk )π I ( j)(1 − x)                        if λ̂ = λh
                                                              
                                                                0                                              otherwise
                                                              

                               λ1 (si , λ j , qk , j) = max[λ si , λ̂ (si , λ j , qk , j)]
  (d) Find the two neighboring points λl , λh on the grid for λ such that
      λ1 (si , λ j , qk , j) = xλl + (1 − x)λh
  (e) Define a transition matrix between the current ex-post and tomor-
      row’s ex-ante state:

                       Qex-post,ex-ante : (s × λ̂ × q × j) × (s0 × λ 0 ) → [0, 1]

        as
                                                           
                                                               e
                                                            π ( si ) x
                                                                                                   if λ 0 = λl
            Qex-post,ex-ante ((s, λ̂, q, j), (s0 , λ 0 )) = π e (si )(1 − x)                        if λ 0 = λh
                                                           
                                                             0                                      otherwise
                                                           

3. Construct the full transition matrix Q. This matrix has dimension
   ( NS , Nλ ) × ( NS , Nλ )
  Q : (s, λ ) × (r × λ 0 ) → [0, 1] = Qex-ante,ex-post ((s, λ ), (s, λ̂, q, j)) × Qex-post,ex-ante ((s, λ̂, q, j), (r, λ 0 ))


                                                        75
4. Then solve the matrix equation

                                                  φ = Q Tφ

  where φ(s, λ ) gives the steady state probability of being in state (s, λ ).
5. Using φ(s, λ ) compute the steady state ex post probability of being in
                            T
   state φ̂(s, λ̂, q, j) = Qex-ante,ex-postφ(s, λ )
6. Compute the excess demand function
                                                                                               
  d(βs ) =                ∑                    c(s, λ̂, q, j) − e(s, λ̂, q, j) − m(s, λ̂, q, j) φ̂(s, λ̂, q, j)
             (s,λ̂,q, j)∈( NS ,Nλ ,Nq ,N j )


7. Repeat Steps 2 to 6 and use a Newton procedure to find βs such that
   d(βs ) = 0 so that market clearing is satisfied.




                                                    76
