                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        CANARY IN A COAL MINE:
     INFANT MORTALITY, PROPERTY VALUES, AND TRADEOFFS ASSOCIATED
                 WITH MID-20TH CENTURY AIR POLLUTION

                                          Karen Clay
                                         Joshua Lewis
                                        Edson Severnini

                                      Working Paper 22155
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22155


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                           April 2016, Removed June 2019


We thank Martha Bailey, Antonio Bento, Claudia Goldin, Michael Greenstone, Walker Hanlon,
Matthew Kahn, Brian Kovak, Nicolai Kumino, Gary Libecap, Granger Morgan, Joseph Shapiro,
Lowell Taylor, and seminar participants at Carnegie Mellon, Oxford, LSE, RAND, UCLA,
Warwick, U.S. EPA, Yale, the 2015 NBER Summer Institute (Children, DAE), 3rd Northeast
Workshop on Energy Policy and Environmental Economics, 10th Meetings of the Urban
Economics Association, 15th Occasional Workshop in Environmental and Resource Economics
at UCSB, 27th Conference of the ISEE, 50th Meetings of the CNEH, 3rd Economics of Low-
Carbon Markets Workshop at USP, 37th Meetings of the Brazilian Econometric Society, the 61th
North American Meetings of the RSAI, and the 2015 PAA Meetings for valuable comments and
suggestions. The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support from the Center for Electricity
Industry Studies, Heinz College, and the Berkman fund at Carnegie Mellon University, from the
National Science Foundation Grant SES-1627432, and from the University of Montreal. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Karen Clay, Joshua Lewis, and Edson Severnini. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Canary in a Coal Mine: Infant Mortality, Property Values, and Tradeoffs Associated with
Mid-20th Century Air Pollution
Karen Clay, Joshua Lewis, and Edson Severnini
NBER Working Paper No. 22155
April 2016, Removed June 2019
JEL No. I18,N22,Q52,Q53

                                           ABSTRACT

Investments in local development and infrastructure projects often generate negative externalities
such as pollution. Previous work has either focused on the potential for these investments to
stimulate local economic activity or the health costs associated with air pollution. This paper
examines the tradeoffs associated with the historical expansion in coal-fired electricity generation
in the United States, which fueled local development but produced large amounts of unregulated
air pollution. We focus on a highly responsive measure of health tradeoffs: the infant mortality
rate. Our analysis leverages newly digitized data on all major coal-fired power plants for the
period 1938-1962, and two complementary difference-in-differences strategies based on the
opening of power plants and new generating units at existing sites. We find that coal-fired power
plants imposed large negative health externalities, which were partially offset by the benefits
from local electricity generation. We uncover substantial heterogeneity in these tradeoffs, both
across counties and over time. Expansions in coal capacity led to increases in infant mortality in
counties with high base- line access to electricity, but had no effect in low-access counties. Initial
expansions in coal capacity led to decreases in infant mortality, but subsequent additions led to
increases in infant mortality. These evolving tradeoffs highlight the importance of accounting for
both current and future payoffs when designing environmental regulation.

Karen Clay                                        Edson Severnini
Heinz College                                     Carnegie Mellon University
Carnegie Mellon University                        4800 Forbes Ave #2114B
5000 Forbes Avenue                                Pittsburgh, PA 15213
Pittsburgh, PA 15213                              ersevernini@gmail.com
and NBER
kclay@andrew.cmu.edu

Joshua Lewis
University of Montreal
Département de sciences économiques
3150 rue Jean-Brillant
Montréal, QC, H3T 1N8
joshua.lewis@umontreal.ca
1     Introduction

    Societal investments in local development and infrastructure projects can attract indus-
try, create jobs, and increase local economic activity. But these projects can also generate
negative externalities such as local air pollution. Empirical studies have either focused on
the potential for these investments to stimulate economic activity or the health costs associ-
ated with air pollution. A theoretically grounded assessment of net value includes not only
the potential of a project to produce the desired economic outcomes relative to the up-front
costs, but also the externalities that are created. Policy analysis in this context can entail
complex tradeoffs, since economic beneficiaries will typically differ from those bearing the
external costs, and the benefits and costs may accrue differentially across generations.
    This paper examines the tradeoffs associated with the historical expansion in coal-fired
electricity generation in the United States. The mid-twentieth century witnessed a sharp rise
in electricity generated by coal-fired power plants, which fueled local industrial activity, cre-
ated jobs, and brought electricity to American households, but also produced large amounts
of unregulated air pollution. This context provides a unique opportunity to evaluate the
negative externalities and local benefits associated with a large scale investment project. We
combine newly digitized detailed data on the location, year of opening, and characteristics
of all major coal-fired power plants with annual county-level infant mortality rates for the
period 1938-1962. Infants are acutely sensitive to contemporaneous environmental air pollu-
tion and the benefits arising from electricity access. Thus the infant mortality rate provides
a measure of these tradeoffs, with infants serving as the proverbial “canary in a coal mine”.
    Our study brings together the two distinct literatures on the effects of local economic
development projects and on the health externalities from air pollution. We assess both the
local costs and benefits of coal-fired electricity generation, an important driver of local devel-
opment and a major source of pollution. On the one hand, empirical work has demonstrated
the potential for these projects to create jobs, stimulate economic activity, and generate
local economic spillovers, but has largely overlooked the adverse side effects (Greenstone,

                                                1
Hornbeck and Moretti, 2010; Kline and Moretti, 2014; Donaldson and Hornbeck, 2016).1
On the other hand, previous studies have estimated large health costs associated with air
pollution, but typically do not account for the potential benefits from polluting activities
(Chay and Greenstone, 2003a; Currie and Neidell, 2005; Currie and Walker, 2011; Schlenker
and Walker, 2016). The mid-twentieth century expansion in coal-fired generation allows us
to contrast the benefits from local electricity access against the costs from unregulated pol-
lution. Additionally, wide differences in initial county conditions and an extended 25-year
horizon allow us to explore the sources of these tradeoffs and track their evolution over time.
    Our empirical analysis relies on two complementary difference-in-differences estimation
strategies. Our first strategy relies on the sharp change in local amenities resulting from
new power plant openings in an event-study framework. We compare changes in infant
mortality rates between exposed counties to changes in infant mortality rates in counties at
slightly further distances that trended similarly along observable characteristics, but which
were largely unaffected by either the increase in electricity generation or air pollution. Our
second strategy relies on variation in local capacity from both new power plant openings
and the openings of new generating units at existing sites. We compare relative changes in
infant mortality rates across counties exposed to different capacity changes within the same
state that trended similarly along a range of baseline observable characteristics.
    We combine these research strategies with two additional sources of variation to shed
light on the tradeoffs associated with coal-fired generation. First, we exploit differences
in baseline generating capacity to investigate treatment heterogeneity according to initial
county access to electricity. We also leverage the 25-year period to track the evolution of the
health tradeoffs as local coal-fired generating capacity expanded.
    The results reveal clear tradeoffs associated with coal-fired generation. In counties with
low baseline access to electricity, infant mortality was unaffected by coal capacity changes,
   1
     Other major infrastructure projects examined by previous studies include electricity Dinkelman (2011),
Lipscomb, Mobarak and Barham (2013), and Allcott, Collard-Wexler and O’Connell (2016), railways (Haines
and Margo, 2008; Atack et al., 2010; Donaldson, 2018), highways (Baum-Snow, 2007; Michaels, 2008; Faber,
2014), and dams (Duflo and Pande, 2007; Severnini, 2014).

                                                    2
consistent with the health benefits from increased access having offset the health costs from
air pollution.2 Similarly, we estimate that hydroelectric capacity – which expanded electric-
ity access, but produced no emissions – led to decreases in infant mortality. In contrast, in
high-access counties, coal capacity expansions increased infant mortality significantly. These
patterns are consistent with Hanlon (2016), who shows that urban development during Eng-
land’s Industrial Revolution was significantly slowed by pollution externalities. At the same
time, our findings highlight the potential for electricity infrastructure investments to spur
growth in underdeveloped regions, and to expand household electricity access (Kline and
Moretti, 2014; Lewis, 2018).
    We show that the mid-twentieth century witnessed a remarkable reversal in the relation-
ship between coal-fired generation and infant mortality. Prior to 1950, coal-fired genera-
tion was associated with net decreases in infant mortality; after 1950, coal-fired generation
was associated with net increases in infant mortality. This shift could reflect national-level
changes, such as the broad expansion of transmission infrastructure, which extended electric-
ity services more broadly. Since plant emissions remained locally concentrated, a diffusion
of benefits may have increased the net local costs of coal-fired generation.3 Alternatively,
the reversal could reflect decreasing marginal benefits from generating capacity as electricity
infrastructure expanded locally. To explore the forces underlying the reversal, we exploit
within-county heterogeneity according to the timing of capacity additions. We estimate
models that allow the effects of new capacity additions to vary according to the vintage of
the existing local stock, controlling for the national-level evolution in health tradeoffs. We
find that within the first decade of a plant opening, capacity expansions led to decreases in

   2
       The health benefits may have arisen through both household electricity access – improved sanitation
from modern appliances, improved indoor air quality from the elimination of coal cookstoves – and broad-
based local economic development. Meanwhile, the pollution costs per unit of generating capacity were
largely similar across localities. Prior to the passage of the 1963 Clean Air Act, electric utilities took
virtually no steps to limit emissions. Innovations in boiler efficiency did reduce the emissions produced per
ton of coal burned, and a modest rise in smokestack heights further decreased local exposure. We explore
these possibilities in the analysis.
     3
       Notably, the evolving tradeoffs run counter to other innovations in power plants, such as improved
efficiency and increased smokestack heights, which should have mitigated the local health costs of emissions.

                                                     3
infant mortality; beyond 10 years, subsequent capacity additions led to increases in infant
mortality. These results suggest that the reversal in the coal capacity-infant mortality rela-
tionship can largely be attributed to a decline in the marginal benefits of capacity additions
as the existing local stock expanded, rather than the broad-based expansion of the electricity
grid.
    The striking reversal in the coal capacity-infant mortality relationship highlights the chal-
lenges facing policymakers. While demand for intervention may arise only when the negative
externalities exceed the perceived local benefits, efficient regulations must account for the
discounted stream of future benefits and costs. Given the lifespan of power plants and the
high cost to retrofit these facilities with emissions controls, contemporary regulatory deci-
sions may have consequences for decades. These results are particularly relevant for energy
and environmental policies in developing countries today, where pollution concentrations are
elevated and continue to rise, and where new coal-fired power plants continue to open with
little or no emissions controls (Alpert, Shvainshtein and Kishcha, 2012; Zhang, 2016).4
    The findings lead us to examine a variety of alternative mechanisms that might account
for the local tradeoffs associated with coal-fired generating capacity. We explore the benefits
arising from two channels: the potential for coal capacity to increase household electricity
access and to stimulate local economic activity. To shed light on the first channel, we focus
on potential benefits from improvements in household hygiene that emerged from access
to pumped water, refrigeration, and washing machines, and improvements in household air
quality caused by the elimination of coal cookstoves. The evidence supports both these mech-
anisms: expansions in coal-fired capacity had differentially positive effects on infant health
in locations that had higher incidence of sanitation-related mortality and where households
   4
     A further contribution of this study is to provide comprehensive evidence on the impacts of air pollution
on infant health in an era when air pollution was severe, unregulated, and comparable to the levels in modern
developing countries. Much of the previous research has focused on the post-Clean Air Act U.S., when air
pollution levels were substantially lower and less variable across locations (Currie and Walker, 2011; Currie
et al., 2015; Schlenker and Walker, 2016; Severnini, 2017). Our analysis complements previous studies
examining the consequences of historical air pollution in the U.S. and the U.K. (Clay and Troesken, 2011;
Hanlon and Tian, 2015; Hanlon, 2018; Beach and Hanlon, forthcoming), and current pollution in developing
countries (Jayachandran, 2009; Arceo-Gomez, Hanna and Oliva, 2012).

                                                      4
were more reliant on coal for cooking in the baseline.5 To assess the second channel, we
estimate the effects of coal capacity on a range of local economic outcomes. We find little
evidence of a broad expansion in the local economy, as captured by employment, wages,
or population demographics. Instead, the effects were concentrated in the manufacturing
sector, where expansions in coal-fired capacity stimulated modest employment growth in
low access counties, consistent with Kline and Moretti (2014). Taken together, the results
suggest that both changes in household technology and local economic development may
have contributed to improvements in infant health in low access areas.
    The paper proceeds as follows: Section 2 discusses the tradeoffs from mid-twentieth
century coal-fired generation. Section 3 describes our data. Section 4 presents our empirical
framework. Section 5 reports our findings. Section 6 discusses the historical implications of
the findings, and relevance for the developing world. Section 7 concludes.



2       Costs and Benefits of Coal-fired Generation

    Coal-fired electricity generation rose substantially during the mid-twentieth century. Be-
tween 1938 and 1962, the U.S. experienced a seven-fold increase in electricity production,
primarily driven by the expansion in coal-fired electricity generation (Figure 1a). This expan-
sion was associated with important local tradeoffs: the costs from exposure to unregulated
power plant emissions, and the benefits from increased local generating capacity. In this
section, we briefly discuss why infant health is a useful indicator of these tradeoffs, and then
describe the costs and benefits associated with coal-fired generation in greater detail.
    Our analysis of the tradeoffs associated with coal-fired electricity generation focuses on
infant health as measured by the infant mortality rate. Infants are acutely sensitive to
contemporaneous environmental conditions, and given their young age, concerns regarding
unmeasured past exposure are largely mitigated. The infant mortality rate has been widely

    5
     These findings support evidence on the effects of indoor air pollution both historically and in the current
developing countries context (Barreca, Clay and Tarr, 2014; Hanna, Duflo and Greenstone, 2016).

                                                       5
used to measure the effects of air pollution (Chay and Greenstone, 2003a,b; Currie and
Neidell, 2005; Currie et al., 2014).6 There is also a growing literature that documents the
numerous benefits of electricity access for infant health (Barron and Torero, 2017; Lewis,
2018). Although the costs and benefits of coal-fired generation may accrue to other age
groups, the infant mortality rate provides a highly responsive summary measure of the local
tradeoffs.7
    Coal-fired power plants were an important contributor to air pollution.8 From 1938 to
1962, the share of domestic coal consumption by electric utilities increased from 15 to 54
percent, as other uses such as coal for home heating and coal for railways declined (Figure
1b). Air pollution from coal-fired power plants was locally concentrated. Figure 2 plots the
average density of PM2.5 by distance to the source, based on nine power plants in Illinois in
1988 (Levy et al., 2002). Virtually all exposure was concentrated within 30 miles of plant: the
average resident within 30 miles was exposed to concentrations that were 11 times greater
than the average resident located between 30 and 90 miles from a plant.9 Prior to the
passage of the 1963 Clean Air Act, electric utilities did little to mitigate the consequences
of air pollution. Experimentation with scrubbing did not begin until the late 1960s in the
United States (Biondo and Marten, 1977). The height of power plant smokestacks – a
key determinant of pollutant dispersion – was relatively constant from 1938 to 1962 and
considerably below current levels (see Figure A.1a).10
    6
      Infant health is affected by air pollution through both prenatal exposure (Currie and Walker, 2011),
and postnatal exposure (Woodruff, Darrow and Parker, 2008; Arceo-Gomez, Hanna and Oliva, 2012).
    7
      Unlike effects on all-age mortality, which may be concentrated among individuals who were very ill
(Spix et al., 1993; Lipfert and Wyzga, 1995), results found for infant mortality are also likely to represent
meaningful impacts for life expectancy, which has been another outcome of interest in recent studies (Chen
et al., 2013; Ebenstein et al., 2017).
    8
      Monitoring of air pollution was rare before the 1950s, but sporadic readings during the first half of
the twentieth century suggest that air pollution was severe and comparable to levels found in cities in
developing countries today (see Table A.1). Data for a sample of 85 counties from 1957-1962 also show a
strong relationship between local coal-fired capacity and TSP concentrations (Table A.4).
    9
      This dispersion pattern is similar to more recent estimates conducted by the EPA (EPA, 2011).
   10
      The sole mitigation of pollution came from siting larger plants farther from population centers, as
advances in transmission technology allowed electricity to be shipped over longer distances (see Figure A.1b
for the changes in power plant size over time). As transmission constraints eased, cost factors – such as local
availability of fuel and water sources – played an increasingly important role in power plant site selection.
Similarly, the desire to integrate the grid across markets led to the siting of plants in locations accessible to

                                                       6
    Proximity to power plants played a critical role in determining whether households elec-
trified, which brought direct benefits to infant health (Lewis, 2018).11 Electric lights replaced
kerosene lamps, which were highly polluting (Lam et al., 2012; Barron and Torero, 2017).
The substitution of electric ranges for coal cookstoves also contributed to a better household
air quality.12 Although less harmful than open hearth cooking, as is common in many de-
veloping countries today, properly ventilated coal stoves still produce substantial amounts
of residential air pollution (Evans et al., 2002; Hanna, Duflo and Greenstone, 2016).
    Electricity also brought access to a range of new household technologies that indirectly
benefited infant health. Modern appliances, such as vacuum cleaners, electric ranges, and
washing machines, reduced the time required for basic housework, which allowed women to
reallocate time to activities that promoted child health (Mokyr, 2000).13 Without electricity,
clothes washing and ironing alone required 9 to 11 hours of work per week (USDA, 1944).
In rural areas, electric pumps brought access to indoor water, greatly reducing the time-cost
and physical ardor of housework.14 Many modern technologies also brought improvements
to home sanitation. The diffusion of washing machines led to more frequent laundering,
including of diapers (Wilson, 1929). Access to pumped water allowed for hygienic food
preparation, increased hand washing, and sterilization of bottles. Refrigerators reduced
exposure to food-borne bacteria (Meckel, 1990).
    Expansions in coal-fired electricity generation may have improved infant health indirectly
through their impact on local economic conditions (Hoynes, Miller and Simon, 2015). In-
creased local electricity infrastructure may have stimulated growth in the manufacturing

multiple markets. However, there is little evidence that concerns over public health played a significant role
in this trend.
   11
      In 1940, less than three-quarters of U.S. households had access to electricity.
   12
      In 1940, only 5.4 percent of the households had electric ranges. That percentage increased considerably
to 15 in 1950 and 30.8 in 1960 (USBC, 1963, p. XL, Table U). This increase mirrored the decline of coal
cookstoves, which decreased from 11.5 percent in 1940 to 7.8 percent in 1950 to 1.1 percent in 1960 (USBC,
1963, p. XL, Table U).
   13
      Messages that encouraged mothers to improve household health and hygiene were common in popular
magazines and promoted by federally funded publicity campaigns (Ewbank and Preston, 1989; Moehling
and Thomasson, 2012).
   14
      A study of a half-million farm households found that without electricity, the average family used 1,400
gallons of well-drawn water per week, and spent more than 10 hours in water collection (Luff, 1940, p.9).

                                                      7
industry (Lipscomb, Mobarak and Barham, 2013; Kline and Moretti, 2014). Rural elec-
trifiaction may have also increased higher agricultural revenue (Rud, 2012; Fishback and
Kitchens, 2015; Lewis and Severnini, 2017).
     Figure 3 illustrates the benefit-cost tradeoffs of increased coal-fired electricity generation
as a function of current generating capacity.15 In the absence of pollution abatement, ex-
pansions in coal-fired capacity should have similar effects on local air quality, independent
of pre-existing generating capacity. In contrast, as local generating capacity increases, the
marginal benefits from further capacity additions should decrease as the scope to expand
electricity access diminishes. Together, the constant marginal cost and decreasing marginal
benefit curve result in the inverted-U relationship between coal-fired capacity and infant
mortality: at low levels of local access, expansions in capacity should tend to decrease infant
mortality; at high levels of access, expansions in capacity should tend to increase infant
mortality.
     This simple framework highlights two ways in which the effects of coal-fired capacity
are expected to vary. First, comparing across localities, expansions in coal-fired capacity
should have more negative or less positive effects on infant health in places that had more
generating capacity in the baseline period. Second, comparing within localities, expansions
in coal-fired capacity should have more negative or less positive effects on infant health over
time, since the diminishing marginal benefits from continued expansion is more likely to be
overwhelmed by the constant marginal pollution costs. We explore these two predictions in
the empirical analysis.



3         Data

     To study the effects of coal-fired power plants on infant mortality, we digitized annual
information on location, nameplate capacity, electricity generation, fuel consumption, first
year of operation, and other characteristics of power plants that operated during the period
    15
         In Appendix B.1, we present the microfoundations for this tradeoff.

                                                        8
1938 to 1962 (see Appendix B.2). In 1938, the Federal Power Commission began collect-
ing detailed annual information on roughly 500 of the largest steam-electric power plants,
representing over 90 percent of all coal-fired electricity generation nationwide (FPC, 1947,
1948-62, 1963). These data allow us to identify 270 coal-fired power plants that opened
between 1938 and 1962, and more than 1,000 new generating unit openings at existing sites.
   Our main outcome variable is the infant mortality rate per 1,000 live births. These data
are drawn from annual volumes of the Vital Statistics of the United States.16 Figure 4 displays
trends in infant mortality, which decreased substantially from 1938 to 1962, particularly prior
to 1950. Other outcome variables of interest are obtained from the Census of Housing and
Population and the Census of Manufactures (Haines and ICPSR, 2010; USDOC and ICPSR,
2012). We obtain county-level data for decadal years 1940, 1950, and 1960 for the following
outcomes: median dwelling rent, total and manufacturing employment, manufacturing and
retail payroll per worker, percentage of whites, and percentage of population aged at least
25 years with a high school degree. Summary statistics are reported in Tables A.2 and A.3.
   We compile information on baseline county-level characteristics including total popula-
tion, total employment, manufacturing employment, an indicator for whether a county was
recommended to receive a highway from the 1944 Interstate Highway System Plan (Baum-
Snow, 2007; Michaels, 2008), and the total mileage of rail tracks in 1911 (Atack, 2016). Ad-
ditionally, we assemble information on annual county climatic conditions from the National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) including annual precipitation, average
temperature, degree days below 10 degrees Celsius, and degree days above 29 degrees Celsius.




  16
     Fishback et al. (n.d.) generously provided the data from 1938-1951. We digitized additional data for
the period 1952-1958 (USHEW, 1952-1958b), and assembled the available microdata at the county level for
the period 1959-1962 from the NBER Public Use Data Archive. These data are now available at ICPSR
(Bailey et al., 2016).

                                                   9
4        Empirical Strategy

4.1      Analysis based on Coal-fired Power Plant Openings

     The first research strategy is based on estimating average changes in infant mortality in
counties ‘near’ a coal-fired power plant relative to changes in infant mortality in counties
located slightly farther away before and after the plant opening. We define counties within
30 miles of a power plant as treatment counties, and counties 30 to 90 miles from a plant
as control counties, based on the dispersion of particulate matter around coal-fired power
plants (see Figure 2).17 Figure A.2 depicts the 1,969 counties that form the basis of the
analysis, with the dark grey shade identifying treatment counties and white representing
control counties.18
     We estimate the following regression model:

                                                                                                          
           IM Rcpt = α + β · 1[P P Operating]pt + δ · 1[P P Operating]pt × 1[N ear]cp

                     + ψXcpt + θ · (Zcp × t) + ηcp + λst + cpt                                                    (1)


where IM Rcpt denotes infant mortality rate in county c associated with plant p in year t.
For each plant, there are two types of observations per year: treatment counties (within 30
miles of the plant) and control counties (30-90 miles from the plant).19
     The variable 1[P P Operating]pt is an indicator for whether plant p is operating in year
t, and 1[N ear]cp is equal to one for counties within 30 miles of a plant site. The model
includes a vector of county-plant pair fixed effects, ηcp , to control for time-invariant determi-
nants of infant mortality at a given distance from each plant.20 It also includes a vector of


    17
       In the empirical analysis, we explore the sensitivity of the results to these cutoffs.
    18
       The treatment sample excludes counties exposed to multiple plant openings, while the control sample
excludes counties ever treated by a plant opening.
    19
       In the robustness checks, we exclude counties located 30 to 60 miles from a plant to alleviate concerns
regarding spatial spillovers.
    20
       In practice, the treatment indicator, 1[N ear]cp , is collinear the county-plant pair fixed effects, ηcp , so it
is suppressed from equation (1).

                                                          10
state-by-year fixed effects, λst , to control for state-level trends in infant mortality. The term
(Zcp ×t) denotes a vector of time trends based on geographic characteristics (county-centroid
longitude and latitude), baseline economic conditions (log of population, employment, and
manufacturing employment, all measured in 1940), transportation infrastructure (an indica-
tor for whether a county was recommended to receive a highway from the 1944 Interstate
Highway System Plan, the total mileage of rail tracks in 1911), and the fraction of households
with electric lighting in 1940. Xcpt denotes a vector of time-varying controls for hydroelec-
tric capacity, and climatic covariates that may have influenced the dispersion of pollutants
including annual precipitation, average temperature, degree days below 10 degrees Celsius,
and degree days above 29 degrees Celsius. Equation (1) includes two additional research
design covariates: (i) A time trend based on the distance between the county centroid and
power plant. This variable ensures that identification is based on sharp changes in infant
mortality following a power plant opening, rather than differential trends in outcomes based
on power plant distance. (ii) Annual nameplate capacity of each coal-fired power plant.
This variable ensures that all estimates capture the impact of an average sized power plant
opening, so that treatment heterogeneity cannot be attributed to differences in the size of
plants that opened in different locations or at different points in times.
   The coefficient of interest, δ, captures the average change in the infant mortality rate
following a coal-fired power plant opening in counties within 30 miles, relative to the average
change in counties 30 to 90 miles away. The inclusion of the county-plant pair fixed effects,
ηcp , ensures that δ is identified solely by the timing of the opening of power plants. Our iden-
tifying assumption is that infant mortality would have trended similarly in counties nearer
and farther from a particular plant site in the absence of opening. In practice, this assump-
tion must hold after allowing for differential trends according to baseline characteristics. We
assess the validity of the approach in the next section.
   The average treatment effect captured by δ may mask substantial treatment heterogene-
ity. Given the absence of abatement efforts, the local costs of coal-fired power plant emissions


                                               11
were likely to have been similar across localities. Nevertheless, the benefits from increased
coal-fired generation may have differed based on pre-existing electricity infrastructure. To
explore this potential treatment heterogeneity, we classify counties according to two mea-
sures of baseline electricity access: total baseline (coal and hydro) generating capacity within
30 miles in 1940, and the fraction of households with electricity in the baseline (reported in
the 1940 census of population). We classify counties as either low (L) or high (H) access
according to whether they had below- or above-median values. We then estimate generalized
versions of equation (1), in which the effects of power plant openings (δL and δH ) are allowed
to differ across the two groups. These models allow us to explore underlying heterogeneity
in the treatment effects according to pre-existing electricity infrastructure.
   Two additional estimation details are worth nothing. First, all regressions are weighted
by the number of live births. Second, robust standard errors are clustered at the county-level
to adjust for heteroskedasticity and within-county serial correlation.21


4.2       Analysis Based on Local Variation in Coal-fired Capacity

   Our second empirical strategy relies on local variation in coal-fired capacity driven by
both new power plant openings and the opening of new generating units at existing facilities.
This research approach offers several advantages over the ‘event-study’ design. Because the
analysis relies on changes in coal-fired capacity due to both new power plant openings and
openings of generating units at existing facilities, there is substantially more variation. The
opening of new generating units at existing sites accounted for more than 80 percent of the
nationwide expansion in coal-fired generating capacity from 1938 to 1962 (Figure 7a), and
there were 10 times more capacity upgrades than new plant openings (Figure 7b). This
additional variation allows us to identify effects over a larger sample of counties, rather than
just those exposed to a plant opening. The richer variation in coal capacity also enables us to
explore treatment dynamics over an extended 25-year time horizon. Figure A.3 displays the

  21
       Similar results are found when standard errors are clustered at the plant level.

                                                       12
2,027 sample counties within 90 miles of a coal-fired power plant by the end of our sample
period. Counties are shaded according to the change in coal-fired capacity from 1938 to
1962, darker shades indicating larger increases in capacity.
   We adopt a continuous difference-in-differences framework, comparing changes in out-
comes in counties ‘near’ a capacity change to changes in outcomes in counties not exposed
to a capacity change. Formally, we estimate the following regression model:


                  IM Rct = α + β · CoalCapacityct + ψXct + θt Zc + ηc + λst + ct .                   (2)


where IM Rct denotes the infant mortality rate in county c in year t. The model includes
county fixed effects, ηc , and state-by-year fixed effects, λst , to account for state-level trends
in infant health. Both the time varying covariates, Xct , and the time trends based on
the invariant covariates, Zc , are the same as those described in equation (1). The main
explanatory variable, CoalCapacityct , denotes coal-fired capacity within 30 miles of the
county centroid.22
   The coefficient of interest, β, captures the average change in the infant mortality rate
in counties within 30 miles of a capacity change, relative to the average change in infant
mortality in counties within the same state that did not experience a capacity change. We
estimate both the average treatment effect, β, and the heterogenous treatment effects (βL
and βH ), based on generalized versions of equation (2) that allow for treatment heterogeneity
according to baseline generating capacity, and baseline household electricity access. We also
estimate the evolving treatment effects based on generalized versions of equation (2) that
allow for heterogeneity according to the timing of the openings and expansions of electricity
generating capacity.
   The identifying assumption requires that counties within the same state with similar
baseline characteristics would have experienced similar trends in infant mortality in the ab-
sence of coal capacity changes. The local exogeneity of coal-fired capacity is supported by the
  22
       In the empirical analysis, we explore the sensitivity of the results to alternate distances.

                                                        13
conclusions of historians of the power industry, who emphasize that geographical constraints
and the incentive to develop an interconnected grid were the primary determinants of power
plant investment decisions, rather than local demand. For example, Hughes (1993) argues
that electric utilities were “massing generating units near economic sources of energy and
near cooling water, and transmitting electricity to load centers” (p. 270) using high voltage
transmission lines. We explore this question in more detail in the next section.



5        Results

5.1      Coal-fired Power Plant Openings and Infant Mortality

     To motivate the regression analysis, and evaluate the validity of the common trends
assumption of the difference-in-differences strategy, we first present event study graphs based
on the timing of power plant openings. These graphs are based on a generalized version of
equation (1), that allows the coefficients δ to vary with event time t ∈ {−10, 6}.23 We
distinguish three time periods: prior to power plant construction, t ∈ {−10, −5}, likely
construction, t ∈ {−4, 0}, and post-opening, t ∈ {1, 6}.24 To examine both the costs of air
pollution and the benefits of increased generating capacity, we report the estimates separately
across counties that had above- and below-median generating capacity in 1940.
     Figures 6a and 6b report the event study graphs. The estimates support the underlying
research design. In both high- and low-capacity counties, there is no evidence of differential
pre-trends in infant mortality.25 Throughout the five-year period prior to plant construction,
infant mortality rates trended similarly in both treatment and control counties. From t ∈

    23
      Following Kline (2012), we estimate equation (1) for the period t ∈ {−11, 7} but suppress the endpoint
coefficients, which place unequal weight on power plants that opened early or late in the sample period.
Results based on a shorter time horizon are similar in both magnitude and significance.
   24
      The Federal Power Commission reports cite construction times ranging from two to four years, although
they do not specify the construction period by plant. During construction, local air quality was substantially
impacted by dust, equipment exhaust, and burning emissions (EPA, 1999, p1-1). Since we lack information
on the exact month of opening, period t = 0 is assigned to the pre-opening period.
   25
      Graphs for the overall effects, and by baseline household electricity access are reported in Figures A.4
and A.5, and show little evidence of pre-trends in infant mortality.

                                                     14
{−4, 0}, infant mortality rates rose modestly in treatment counties, consistent with increased
air pollution from plant construction.
    Figures 6a and 6b show striking differences in infant mortality rates post-opening. In
counties with high baseline generation capacity, power plant openings are associated with
increases in mortality. The relative infant mortality rate rose sharply in the first full year
of power plant operation, and the gap widened with time. The timing of these increases
coincides with the annual changes in power plant coal consumption post opening (Figure 4).
These results are consistent with the health costs from increased pollution having outweighed
the marginal benefits from increased generating capacity. In contrast, in counties with low
baseline generating capacity, there was a sharp decrease in infant mortality beginning two
years after a plant opening, suggesting that the benefits from increased electricity genera-
tion overwhelmed the pollution costs. Interestingly, the timing of the mortality decreases
coincides with the typical lag in appliance adoption following household electrification.26
    Table 1 presents the regression estimates from the difference-in-differences estimation
strategy based on new power plant openings.27 Column 1 includes county-plant pair fixed
effects, state-by-year fixed effects, and geographic controls. Column 2 includes controls for
1940 manufacturing employment interacted with a time trend to allow for differential trends
in mortality according to the initial size of the manufacturing sector, a competing source of
air pollution. The last column includes the full set of controls in equation (1).
    Power plant openings led to a net increase in infant mortality. Across all three specifica-
tions in Panel A, the point estimates are positive and statistically significant. The inclusion
of county covariates reduces the estimates somewhat, consistent with trends in infant mortal-
ity according to initial manufacturing employment and local infrastructure over the 25-year
period.28 The preferred point estimates (col. 3) imply that an operating power plant is
  26
      A 1939 survey of 72,000 farm households found that within a year of electrification, the median household
had purchased just one major modern appliance (Beall, 1940, p.805).
   27
      We conservatively set t = −1 as the reference year in all regressions. Given the modest rise in infant
mortality during construction (Figures 6a and 6b), the coefficient estimates reflect a lower bound for the
health damage attributable to power plant openings.
   28
      The event study design exploits sharp changes in the immediate aftermath of a plant opening, rather

                                                      15
associated with an increase of 0.6 additional infant deaths per 1,000 live births in ‘nearby’
counties per year of operation, a 2.1 percent increase in the infant mortality rate.29
    Next, we explore heterogeneity in the mortality tradeoffs according to initial county
characteristics. We estimate generalized versions of equation (1) that allow the coefficient
estimates to differ according to generating capacity in 1940 (Panel B), and the fraction
of households with electricity in 1940 (Panel C).30 The results show that the impact of
coal-fired power plant openings on infant mortality was larger in places with more pre-
existing electricity infrastructure. In low access counties, whether measured by baseline
generating capacity or the fraction of households with electricity, power plant openings had
no significant impact on mortality rates, and the point estimates are generally negative.
These results are striking, given the sharp increase in coal-fired emissions post-opening and
the strong link between air pollution and infant mortality. The findings are consistent with
the health benefits from increased electricity generation having offset the pollution costs.
In contrast, in counties with high baseline access, power plant openings are associated with
large and significant increases in infant mortality, consistent with the pollution costs having
overwhelmed the marginal health benefits from increased electricity generation. In all four
specifications, the hypothesis that the coefficients are equal is rejected.
    The results in Table 1 are robust to a range of alternative specifications (Table A.5).
We first explore the sensitivity of the results to the 30-mile cutoff. Although pollution
was locally concentrated, the benefits of increased electricity access likely extended beyond
30 miles. To explore this issue, column 2 reports estimates from regressions that exclude
counties located 30 to 60 miles from a power plant. The results are similar, albeit somewhat
less positive, suggesting that the benefits extended beyond the 30 mile radius. In columns
3-4, we further explore the sensitivity of the results to alternate distance cutoffs. The results

than these long-run secular trends (see Figure A.4).
   29
      This result was found by dividing the estimated coefficient by the average infant mortality rate in
the ‘nearby’ counties in our ‘event-study’ sample (2.1 = 0.609/29.1). For comparison, the current infant
mortality rate in the United States is roughly 6 infant deaths per 1,000 live births.
   30
      The cross-county correlation baseline generating capacity and the fraction of households with electricity
in 1940 is 0.4.

                                                      16
are qualitatively similar. In column 5, we re-estimate models based on the logarithm of infant
mortality. The results are similar in both magnitude and statistical significance. In the final
two columns we further evaluate whether air pollution is the underlying determinant of the
mortality increases. Columns 6-7 allow the estimated impacts of plant openings to vary
according to power plant size. The results show that the negative effects on infant health
were driven by large power plants.31 In columns 8-9, we allow the effects of power plant
openings to vary according to whether counties were downwind from plants. The estimated
effects are systematically larger in downwind counties.


5.2     Coal Capacity and Infant Mortality

    In this section, we use variation in both new plant openings and expansions at existing
sites to identify the impact of coal-fired generation on infant mortality over a larger sample
of counties, and to explore the evolving effects over an extended 25-year time horizon. Anal-
ogous to the ‘event-study’ design, the empirical approach compares changes in outcomes
in counties ‘near’ a capacity change to changes in outcomes in counties not exposed to a
capacity change.
    The identifying assumption that infant mortality would have trended similarly in the
absence of capacity additions is supported by two pieces of evidence. First, the size of
new generating units at existing sites was comparable to initial capacity at plant openings
(Figure 7b), an indication of the common features in the decision making process (Cirillo
et al., 1977), that suggests that the parallel trends assumption underlying the ‘event-study’
analysis will continue to hold. Second, there is little evidence that pre-trends in county
socioeconomic conditions predict subsequent capacity expansions. Table 2 reports the re-
lationship between baseline county characteristics and within-state capacity changes from
1938 to 1962.32 Although capacity expansions appear to be related to 1940 levels of county
  31
      Large power plants may also have differentially benefited infant health through greater electricity gen-
eration post-opening, although the amount of electricity required to meet household demand could easily
have been met by the smaller plants.
   32
      This evaluation of pre-trends is similar to Bailey (2006) and Hornbeck and Naidu (2013).

                                                     17
socioeconomic conditions, changes in those socioeconomic conditions from 1930 to 1940 have
very little predictive power for subsequent capacity changes.33
    Table 3, Panel A, reports the net effects of coal capacity on infant mortality. Across
all three specifications, the point estimates are positive and statistically significant. Our
preferred estimates in column 3 imply that a one standard deviation increase in coal capacity
is associated with roughly 2 additional infant deaths per 1,000 live births, a 6.5 percent
increase in the infant mortality rate.34
    The estimated effects in Table 3 are similar in magnitude to the results from the event
study. Rescaling the ‘event-study’ estimates by the average amount of coal-fired capacity
post-opening, we calculate that a 100 megawatt increase in coal capacity is associated with a
0.24 increase in infant mortality rate; an effect that compares similarly to the 0.188 average
effect reported in Table 3.35 The similarity across the two different estimation strategies,
each based on different sources of variation, provides additional confidence in the finding.
    Table 3, Panels B and C, show substantial heterogeneity in the health effects according to
baseline electricity infrastructure. The broad patterns support the ‘event-study’ results. In
counties with high baseline electricity access, increases in coal-fired capacity are associated
with higher infant mortality rates. In low-access counties, where there was greater scope
for expansions in electricity generation to benefit health, the point estimates are small and
generally negative. These patterns are consistent with the converging overall trends in infant
mortality (Figure 4).
    The results in Table 3 are robust to a range of alternate specifications (Table A.6).
The effects are similar when all counties within 150 miles of a power plant at the end of
   33
      Consistent with the historical narrative of the power industry, coal-fired capacity expansions were con-
centrated in counties that were more urban, had larger manufacturing sectors, and higher wages and property
values. Nevertheless, given the extended lifespan of these facilities, infrastructure investment decisions were
largely unresponsive to contemporaneous trends in economic outcomes, consistent with the negligible R-
squared values reported in columns 3 and 4.
   34
      The first result was found by multiplying the estimated coefficient by the standard deviation of coal
capacity (1.98 = 0.188 × 10.55). The second result was found by dividing the 1.98 by the average infant
mortality rate in our coal capacity sample (6.5 = 1.98/30.4).
   35
      This result was found by dividing the estimated coefficient by the average increase in coal capacity after
the power plant openings in our ‘event-study’ sample (0.24 = 0.609/2.55).

                                                      18
our sample period are included in the analysis (col. 1), and when we restrict the sample
to counties within 30 miles of a power plant (col. 2). Notably, the latter set of results
are based solely on within-county variation in the timing of capacity expansions, since all
counties belong to the ‘treatment’ sample. Columns 3 and 4 show that the effects are similar,
albeit smaller in magnitude, under alternate 50-mile and 100-mile treatment radii, consistent
with the localized dispersion of pollutants around power plants. We also find qualitatively
similar results based on the logarithm of infant mortality (col. 5). Finally, the last two
columns report the results from regressions based on local hydroelectric capacity. Hydro
capacity, which produced emissions-free electricity, is associated with net decreases in infant
mortality.36
   Next, we explore the evolving relationship between coal-fired capacity and infant mor-
tality. Table 4, Panel A, reports the results from regressions that allow the effect of coal
capacity to differ across the pre- and post-1950 periods. The results show a striking reversal
in the coal capacity-infant mortality relationship: prior to 1950, coal-fired generation was
associated with decreases in infant mortality; after 1950, coal-fired generation was associated
with increases in infant mortality.
   To shed light on this reversal, Panel B allows the evolving effects of coal capacity to vary
according to baseline generating capacity. The pre-1950 point estimates for coal capacity
are negative for both low-access and high-access counties. The magnitude and significance
of the effects is larger in low-access counties, consistent with the increased ability to ex-
pand access in these areas relative to high-access counties. In high-access counties, the coal
capacity-infant mortality relationship becomes positive and statistically significant in the
post-1950 period. In low-access counties, the relationship remains negative but is statisti-
cally insignificant, and resembles the pre-1950 relationship in high-access counties. These
results are consistent with the tradeoffs depicted in Figure 3: As the marginal benefits of
additional capacity diminished, they were overwhelmed by the (constant) marginal health
  36
     Given the limited number of hydroelectric power plant openings, there is not enough variation for us
to estimate the results separately by baseline electricity access in Panels B and C.

                                                   19
damage from power plant emissions.37 This shift appears to have occurred in both high- and
low-access counties, albeit at different points along the cost-benefit curve.
    The results in Table 4, Panels A and B, point to a broad decrease in net benefits from
additional coal-fired capacity post-1950.38 This shift could reflect national-level changes,
such as the expansion in high voltage transmission in the 1950s, that reduced the reliance
on local generating infrastructure (Brown and Sedano, 2004). Alternatively, it could reflect
a decline in the marginal benefits from capacity additions as the stock of local electricity
infrastructure increased.39
    To separate the role of national-level changes from evolution in the local benefits, we
estimate within-county models that allow the effects of coal capacity expansions to differ
according to the vintage of pre-existing generating infrastructure. Specifically, we re-estimate
equation (2), allowing the effects of coal capacity to differ according to whether a power
plant had previously operated for at least ten years. These models also control for changes
in the coal capacity-infant mortality relationship before and after 1950, implicitly allowing
for national-level trends in the health tradeoffs.
    Panel C shows that within the first ten years of power plant operations, coal capacity
is associated with significant decreases in infant mortality, consistent with higher marginal
benefits at lower levels of access.40 After ten years, additional expansions in coal capacity
led to significant increases in infant mortality. Together these results suggest that the post-
1950 shift in the coal capacity-infant mortality relationship was primarily driven by local
evolution in the tradeoffs: as access to electricity infrastructure became widespread, the
marginal benefits from subsequent additions diminished.
  37
      In fact, research on the relationship between ambient air pollution and mortality indicate that the
concentration-response function is concave, so that the health damage from a marginal increase in power
plant emissions was more severe pre-1950 (Goodkind, Coggins and Marshall, 2014; Pope III et al., 2015).
   38
      It is unlikely that the shift was related to changes in health costs from power plant emissions. In fact,
to the extent that newly built plants were more efficient, we would expect the coal capacity-infant mortality
relationship to become more negative in the post-1950 period, exactly the opposite of these findings.
   39
      By 1950, 94 percent of American homes were electrified (Lebergott, 1976, p.279), and industrial access
was universal.
   40
      These effects are derived from variation in capacity due both to the initial plant opening and any
subsequent expansions in capacity within the first ten years of operation.

                                                      20
5.3     Coal-fired Capacity, Household Technology, and Infant Health

    The previous results show that the health effects of coal-fired generation varied widely,
both across counties and over time. Since efforts at pollution abatement were largely absent
during this time period, this variation can largely be attributed to differences in the benefits
associated with local coal-fired generation. In this section, we explore the extent to which
electricity access and its effects on household technology can account for these heterogeneous
benefits.
    Expansions in local coal-fired generation may have benefited infant health through
changes in household technology, which brought access to a range of modern technologies
that may have benefited infant health. We focus on two broad categories of possible benefits:
improvements in household hygiene and decreases in household air pollution.
    The previous literature has emphasized the importance of sanitation improvements from
access to pumped water, refrigeration, and washing machines for infant health. To explore
the importance of this channel, we evaluate how the relationship between coal-fired capacity
and infant mortality varied according to baseline sanitation conditions. Using state-level
data on mortality by cause, we calculate the fraction of infant deaths due to diarrhea and
enteritis in 1930.41 These deaths are primary attributable to environmental factors, such
as poor sanitation, poor hygiene, and unsafe drinking water (WHO, 2009, p.9). We use
this measure to construct indicators for above- and below-median baseline hygiene-related
mortality, and interact the main effects of coal capacity with these measures.42
    Among low-access counties, there were large differences in the effects of coal capacity
according to baseline hygiene conditions. Table 5 shows that in counties with below-median
hygiene mortality, the net effect on mortality is positive and statistically significant. In
contrast, the infant mortality effects are significantly smaller in counties that had above-


  41
     We compiled data on infant mortality by cause from USBC (1930).
  42
     By focusing on the fraction of infant deaths due to diarrhea-enteritis rather than the overall infant
diarrhea-enteritis mortality rate, this analysis relies on heterogeneity based on cause-of-death given a par-
ticular mortality rate, rather than differences across counties in the baseline infant mortality rate.

                                                     21
median baseline hygiene mortality, where there was greater scope for modern technologies
to improve health.
    A second benefit may have occurred through reductions in household air pollution, as coal
stoves were replaced by modern stoves. There were wide baseline cross-county differences
in the use of coal for cooking: on average just 13 percent of households had coal stoves,
but the gap between counties at 90th versus the 10th percentile was 36 percentage points.43
We exploit these baseline differences in coal stove ownership to assess the importance of
improvements in household air quality for infant health. We construct indicators for above-
and below-median ownership rates of coal stoves in 1940, interact the main effects of coal
capacity with these variables.44
    Table 5 column 3 shows that for low-access counties, the infant mortality effects are
significantly smaller in counties that were initially more reliant on coal for cooking, where
there was more scope to improve household air quality. Among counties with low access to
electricity that were also heavily reliant on coal for cooking, increases in coal-fired generating
capacity led to reductions in infant mortality, despite having contributed to local air pollution
through power plant emissions. Although the amount of coal burned for home cooking was
substantially less than for electricity generation, the concentration of these emissions in
residential neighborhoods increased exposure by a factor of ten (Smith, 1993; Evans et al.,
2002).


5.4      Coal-fired Capacity, Property Values, and Economic Activity

    Expansions in coal-fired generation may have influenced health indirectly through im-
provements in local economic conditions or changes in demographic composition. In this
section, we explore the role of these non-household channels for infant mortality, and ex-
plore the extent to which the local tradeoffs were capitalized into property values (Chay and
  43
      By 1960, coal stoves had been all but eliminated from American households, replaced by electric and
gas stoves, with ownership rates were 30 and 64 percent, respectively.
   44
      We compiled data on the share of households share of households reporting coal as the primary cooking
fuel in 1940 from Bailey and Collins (2011).

                                                    22
Greenstone, 2005; Mendelsohn and Olmstead, 2009).
    Table 6 reports the estimated effects of coal-fired capacity on various outcomes, estimated
separately by baseline access and by baseline capacity. All results are estimated for decadal
years 1940, 1950, and 1960.45 For reference, column 1 reports the estimates for infant
mortality based on the decennial sample. Column 2 shows that the effects in the housing
market mirror those found for infant mortality. At low levels of access, coal-fired generation
has positive effects on rental values. At high levels of baseline access, the effects are negative.
Similarly, Panel C shows that initial expansions in coal-fired capacity led to increases in
property values, while subsequent expansions led to decreases.46 Together, these findings
suggest that local residents traded off the benefits of local generation against power plant
emissions.
    We find some evidence of residential sorting consistent with the housing market response
(Banzhaf and Walsh, 2008; Davis, 2011). In low-access counties, coal capacity expansions
are associated with modest increases in the percent of white residents and the percent with
a high school diploma, while in high-access counties the effects are insignificant (cols. 7-8).
These demographic changes are too small to explain the heterogeneous patterns of mortality
reported in Table 3. Combining the estimated changes in racial and educational composition
with underlying group differences in mortality, we calculate that just 9 to 19 percent of the
observed heterogeneity in mortality can be attributed to sorting.4748
   45
      All regressions are weighted by the number of live births to match the infant mortality analysis. Qual-
itatively similar results are found in unweighted regressions.
   46
      We focus on rental values because they reflect contemporaneous conditions, whereas housing values
also capture the anticipated future discounted flow of benefits and costs (Banzhaf and Farooque, 2013).
Qualitatively similar results are found based on dwelling values.
   47
      Changes in the racial composition account for 7 to 17 percent of the mortality gap, while sorting by
education account for just 2 percent, consistent with the wide disparities in white/non-white infant mortality
during this time period, gaps that dominated other socioeconomic indicator (Collins and Thomasson, 2005).
To the extent that racial differences in mortality are partly attributable to educational differences, the sum
of the two effects will overstate their combined influence.
   48
      These estimates are derived by comparing the differential estimates in Table 3 (col. 3) to the differential
estimates in Table 6 (col. 7 and 8) combined with overall differentials in infant mortality in 1950 by race
and education. For example, the differential impact of coal capacity on the percent white is −0.19 =
(−0.051 − 0.139). Combined with a white versus non-white infant mortality rate differential of -17.7 in 1950,
the implied mortality difference is 0.034 = (17.7 × 0.0019), which accounts for 17% = 0.034/(0.195 − 0.001) of
the mortality differential. Following Collins and Thomasson (2005), and assuming that the individuals with

                                                       23
    Coal capacity expansions stimulated employment growth in both low- and high-access
counties (cols. 3 and 4). The effects on manufacturing employment were particularly low-
access counties, consistent with electricity infrastructure fostering industrial activity in un-
derdeveloped regions (Kline and Moretti, 2014). In contrast, we find no evidence that coal
capacity expansions increased local wages (cols. 5 and 6). The effects are small and statis-
tically insignificant in low access counties, and negative in counties with high access. These
patterns are in line with Hanlon (2016), who finds that air pollution during the Industrial
Revolution had negative effects on worker productivity.49 Taken together, these results in-
dicate that local economic development in low-access areas may also have contributed to
improvements in infant health, in addition to the household channel.



6     Discussion

    Our results show that there were important tradeoffs associated with coal-fired electricity
generation in mid-twentieth century United States. On the one hand, unregulated power
plant emissions had substantial negative effects on health. On the other hand, increases in
local electricity generation appear to have improved health. These tradeoffs were not static.
Instead, the marginal health benefits appear to have diminished as the stock of generating
capacity increased, and by the mid-1950s, coal-fired generation was responsible for thousands
of infant deaths per year.
    Historically, there were technologies that could have mitigated the pollution from power
plants. Although experimentation with scrubbing did not begin until the mid-1960s, effec-
tive pollution abatement technologies were available by mid-century. In particular, fabric
filtration systems had already been shown to be effective at removing substantial amounts of

a high school diploma obtained four more years of education than those without it, we calculate a mortality
differential of 4.7 across individuals with and without a high school diploma.
                                                                                Together with the estimates
in Table 6 (col. 8), we calculate that 2% = (−0.014 − 0.099)/100 × 4.7 (0.195 − 0.001) of the mortality gap
can be attributed to sorting by education.
   49
      Evidence on the impact of air pollution on labor productivity in recent years is provided by Graff Zivin
and Neidell (2012), Chang et al. (2016), Chang et al. (forthcoming), and He, Liu and Salvo (forthcoming).

                                                     24
particulate matter (Silverman, 1950).50 Given their high cost and the limited enforcement of
clean air legislation in this period, it is not surprising that electric utilities did not voluntarily
adopt these systems.51 Nevertheless, comparing the cost of abatement to the estimated mor-
tality effects, back-of-the-envelope calculations imply a cost per infant life saved of $102,000
to $210,000 (1990 USD), well below the estimated $1 million value of a statistical life (VSL)
for the period (Costa and Kahn, 2004).
    The historical U.S. context provides a point of comparison to the challenges in many
developing countries today, where policymakers must balance the negative externalities as-
sociated with power plant pollution with their potential to stimulate local development.
There were large potential gains from expansions in electricity infrastructure in both con-
texts (Dinkelman, 2011; Lipscomb, Mobarak and Barham, 2013; Lewis, 2018). In particular,
given the ubiquity of open hearth cooking, the scope to improve indoor air quality may be
substantially larger in developing countries today, since exposure from indoor sources of pol-
lution may be more than 7 times greater than exposure from neighborhood sources (Smith,
1993).
    In the intervening half century, there have been major advances in emission control that
could be used to mitigate the local health impacts of coal-fired generation.52 These new
systems are both more effective at pollution mitigation and less costly. Moreover, significant
improvements in the transmission and distribution of electricity have allowed plants to oper-
ate in more remote areas farther from population centers. Despite these advances, however,
   50
       In these systems, exhaust is passed through a series of fabric filters known as bags. Particulates are
removed from the air as they adhere to the fibers. Periodically the accumulation of these particulates, known
as fly ash, is then removed from the system.
    51
       There were two primary costs associated with these systems: installation costs and fly ash disposal. For
a typical large power plant the installation costs, annualized over the expected 15-year lifespan, could range
from $110,000 to $750,000 (1990 USD) per year depending on the desired airflow (USHEW, 1969). The cost
of fly ash disposal for electric utilities was $3.70 per ton, and the typical power plant in the sample produced
between 165,000 and 198,000 tons of fly ash per year. Thus the annual cost of pollution abatement ranged
from $720,000 to $1.48 million per plant.
    52
       These include advances in SO2 control technologies that absorb pollutants (e.g., wet and dry flue gas
desulfurization systems); advances in NOx control technologies such as combustion modification that reduce
oxidation of nitrogen in the fuel (e.g. low-NOx burners, flue gas recirculation) and post-combustion processes
that capture NOx after it has been produced (e.g., selective and nonselective catalytic reduction processes);
and modern electrostatic precipitators that remove more than 99.9 percent of particulate matter.

                                                      25
coal-fired power plants continue to be opened in India and China with little or no control of
emissions.
    Our results highlight the challenges facing regulators in modern developing countries.
Prior to the adoption of the 1970 Clean Air Act Amendments, new power plants continued
to open with virtually no emissions controls, even as the health benefits from electricity
generation were overwhelmed by the pollution costs. Whereas optimal regulation requires
a consideration of both the current and future stream of benefits and costs, the American
experience highlights how environmental regulation can be slow to respond to these evolving
tradeoffs. Short-term political incentives that promote economic development over environ-
mental concerns may heighten these challenges. Given the longevity of power plants, and the
high costs of retrofitting abatement technology, our findings highlight how current decision-
making of energy mix can have long-lasting health effects. In fact, many of the power plants
built before 1970 were exempted from legislation, and continued to produce unregulated
emissions for decades (Ackerman et al., 1999).



7     Conclusion

    Economic development is often powered by polluting industries. While it is imperative
to understand how the health externalities should be weighed against the benefits of the
polluting activity along the process of development, empirical evidence on the subject is
scarce. This paper represents a first step toward understanding these issues, focusing on
the local tradeoffs associated with coal-fired power plants in mid-twentieth century America,
large scale investment projects that stimulated local development and produced massive
amounts of pollution. We combine a research design that leverages new power plant openings
and upgrades at existing facilities with a newly digitized dataset on all major coal-fired power
plants.
    Expansions in coal-fired generating capacity are estimated to have imposed substantial



                                              26
health costs through local emissions, but also brought significant benefits through increased
local electricity infrastructure. The benefits appear to have arisen primarily through house-
hold access to a range of new technologies that improved hygiene and eliminated the use of
coal cookstoves. Although coal-fired generation initially improved infant health, as the stock
of local generating capacity expanded the marginal benefits from subsequent installations
diminished, and by the 1950s the pollution costs outweighed the benefits of increased elec-
tricity access. Despite the negative impact on health, it took several decades for restrictions
on power plant emissions to emerge, with thousands of infant lives lost in the interim.
   This paper raises broader questions about the role of air pollution in the process of
economic development. In many contexts, the demand for policy intervention may only
emerge when the negative externalities are significantly larger than the perceived benefits,
and industrial firms often use losses in local economic activity as a justification for limiting
environmental regulation. As developing countries such as China and India industrialize,
with its corresponding effects on both income levels and air quality, these challenges become
ever more urgent. Understanding how best to implement environmental policies that limit
emissions without unduly inhibiting development is a critical area for future research.




                                              27
References

Ackerman, Frank, Bruce Biewald, David White, Tim Woolf, and William
  Moomaw. 1999. “Grandfathering and Coal Plant Emissions: The Cost of Cleaning Up
  the Clean Air Act.” Energy Policy, 27(15): 929–940.

Allcott, Hunt, Allan Collard-Wexler, and Stephen D O’Connell. 2016. “How do
  electricity shortages affect industry? Evidence from India.” The American Economic Re-
  view, 106(3): 587–624.

Almond, Douglas, Yuyu Chen, Michael Greenstone, and Hongbin Li. 2009. “Win-
  ter Heating or Clean Air? Unintended Impacts of China’s Huai River Policy?” American
  Economic Review, 99(2): 184–90.

Alpert, Pinhas, Olga Shvainshtein, and Pavel Kishcha. 2012. “AOD Trends over
  Megacities Based on Space Monitoring Using MODIS and MISR.” American Journal of
  Climate Change, 1(3): 117–131.

Arceo-Gomez, Eva, Rema Hanna, and Paulina Oliva. 2012. “Does the Effect of Pol-
  lution on Infant Mortality Differ Between Developing and Developed Countries? Evidence
  from Mexico City.” NBER Working Paper #18349.

Atack, Jeremy. 2016. “Historical Geographic Information Systems (GIS) Database
  of U.S. Railroads for 1911.” Available at https://my.vanderbilt.edu/jeremyatack/data-
  downloads/.

Atack, Jeremy, Fred Bateman, Michael Haines, and Robert A. Margo. 2010. “Did
  Railroads Induce or Follow Economic Growth? Urbanization and Population Growth in
  the American Midwest, 1850-1860.” Social Science History, 34(2): 171–197.

Bailey, Martha. 2006. “More Power to the Pill: The Impact of Contraceptive Freedom on
  Women’s Life Cycle Labor Supply.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121(1): 289–320.

                                           28
Bailey, Martha, and William Collins. 2011. “Did Improvements in Household Technol-
  ogy Cause the Baby Boom? Evidence from Electrification, Appliance Diffusion, and the
  Amish.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 3(2): 189–217.

Bailey, Martha, Karen Clay, Price Fishback, Michael Haines, Shawn Kantor,
  Edson Severnini, Anna Wentz, and Inter-university Consortium for Political
  & Social Research ICPSR. 2016. “U.S. County-Level Natality and Mortality Data,
  1915-2007.” Ann Arbor, MI:Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research.

Banzhaf, H. Spencer, and Omar Farooque. 2013. “Interjurisdictional Housing Prices
  and Spatial Amenities: Which Measures of Housing Prices Reflect Local Public Goods?”
  Regional Science and Urban Economics, 43(4): 635–648.

Banzhaf, H. Spencer, and Randall P. Walsh. 2008. “Do People Vote with Their Feet?
  An Empirical Test of Tiebout.” American Economic Review, 98(3): 843–863.

Barreca, Alan, Karen Clay, and Joel Tarr. 2014. “Coal, Smoke, and Death: Bituminous
  Coal and American Home Heating.” NBER Working Paper #19881.

Barron, Manuel, and Maximo Torero. 2017. “Household Electrification and Indoor Air
  Pollution.” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 86: 81–92.

Baum-Snow, Nathaniel. 2007. “Did Highways Cause Suburbanization?” Quarterly Jour-
  nal of Economics, 122(2): 775–805.

Beach, Brian, and W. Walker Hanlon. forthcoming. “Coal Smoke and Mortality in an
  Early Industrial Economy.” Economic Journal.

Biondo, S. J., and J. C. Marten. 1977. “A History of Flue Gas Desulphurization Systems
  Since 1850.” Journal of the Air Pollution Control Association, 27(10): 948–961.

Brown, Matthew H., and Richard P. Sedano. 2004. Electricity Transmission: A
  Primer. Denver, CO:National Council on Electricity Policy (NCEL).

                                           29
Chang, Tom Y., Joshua Graff Zivin, Tal Gross, and Matthew Neidell. 2016. “Par-
  ticulate Pollution and the Productivity of Pear Packers.” American Economic Journal:
  Economic Policy, 8(3): 141–69.

Chang, Tom Y., Joshua Graff Zivin, Tal Gross, and Matthew Neidell. forthcoming.
  “The Effect of Pollution on Worker Productivity: Evidence from Call Center Workers in
  China.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics.

Chay, Kenneth Y., and Michael Greenstone. 2003a. “The Impact of Air Pollution on
  Infant Mortality: Evidence from Geographic Variation in Pollution Shocks Induced by a
  Recession.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(3): 1121–1167.

Chay, Kenneth Y., and Michael Greenstone. 2003b. “Air Quality, Infant Mortality,
  and the Clean Air Act of 1970.” NBER Working Paper #10053.

Chay, Kenneth Y., and Michael Greenstone. 2005. “Does Air Quality Matter? Evi-
  dence from the Housing Market.” Journal of Political Economy, 113(2): 376–424.

Chen, Yuyu, Avraham Ebenstein, Michael Greenstone, and Hongbin Li. 2013.
  “Evidence on the impact of sustained exposure to air pollution on life expectancy from
  Chinas Huai River policy.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
  States of America (PNAS), 110(32): 12936–12941.

Cirillo, R.R., T.D. Wolsko, R.O. Mueller, P.A. Dauzvardis, M.J. Senew, K.
  Camauf, and D.A. Seymour. 1977. “An Evaluation of Regional Trends in Power Plant
  Siting and Energy Transport.” Argonne National Laboratory, Energy and Environmental
  Systems Division. Available at osti.gov/servlets/purl/6654924.

Clay, Karen, and Werner Troesken. 2011. “Did Frederick Brodie Discover the World’s
  First Environmental Kuznets Curve? Coal Smoke and the Rise and Fall of the London
  Fog.” In The Economics of Climate Change: Adaptations Past and Present, ed. Gary
  Libecap and Richard H. Steckel, pp. 281–310. Chicago, IL:University of Chicago Press.

                                           30
Cohen, Aaron J., H. Ross Anderson, Bart Ostro, Kiran Dev Pandey, Michal
  Krzyzanowski, Nino Knzli, Kersten Gutschmidt, C. Arden Pope III, Isabelle
  Romieu, Jonathan M. Samet, and Kirk R. Smith. 2004. “Urban Air Pollution.”
  In Comparative Quantification of Health Risks: Global and Regional Burden of Disease
  Attributable to Selected Major Risk Factors, ed. Majid Ezzati, Alan D. Lopez, Anthony
  Rodgers and Christopher J.L. Murray, Vol. 2. Geneva:World Health Organization.

Collins, William J., and Melissa A. Thomasson. 2005. “The Declining Contribution
  of Socioeconomic Disparities to the Racial Gap in Infant Mortality Rates, 1920-1970.”
  Southern Economic Journal, 70(4): 746–776.

Costa, Dora L., and Matthew E. Kahn. 2004. “Changes in the Value of Life, 1940-1980.”
  Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 29(2): 159–180.

Currie, Janet, and Matthew Neidell. 2005. “Air Pollution and Infant Health: What
  Can We Learn From California’s Recent Experience?” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  120(3): 1003–1030.

Currie, Janet, and W. Reed Walker. 2011. “Traffic Congestion and Infant Health:
  Evidence from E-ZPass.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 3(1): 65–90.

Currie, Janet, Joshua Graff Zivin, Jamie Mullins, and Matthew Neidell. 2014.
  “What Do We Know About Short- and Long-Term Effects of Early-Life Exposure to
  Pollution?” Annual Review of Resource Economics, 6(1): 217–247.

Currie, Janet, Lucas W. Davis, Michael Greenstone, and W. Reed Walker. 2015.
  “Environmental Health Risks and Housing Values: Evidence from 1,600 Toxic Plant Open-
  ings and Closings.” American Economic Review, 105(2): 678–709.

Davis, Lucas W. 2011. “The Effect of Power Plants on Local Housing Values and Rents.”
  Review of Economics and Statistics, 93(4): 1391–1402.


                                           31
Dinkelman, Taryn. 2011. “The Effects of Rural Electrification on Employment: New
  Evidence from South Africa.” American Economic Review, 101(7): 3078–3108.

Donaldson, Dave. 2018. “Railroads of the Raj: Estimating the Impact of Transportation
  Infrastructure.” American Economic Review, 108(4-5): 899–934.

Donaldson, Dave, and Richard Hornbeck. 2016. “Railroads and American Economic
  Growth: A “Market Access” Approach.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 131(2): 799–
  858.

Duflo, Esther, and Rohini Pande. 2007. “Dams.” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  122(2): 601–646.

Ebenstein, Avraham, Maoyong Fan, Michael Greenstone, Guojun He, and
  Maigeng Zhou. 2017. “New evidence on the impact of sustained exposure to air pol-
  lution on life expectancy from Chinas Huai River Policy.” Proceedings of the National
  Academy of Sciences of the United States of America (PNAS), 114(39): 10384–10389.

EPA, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 2011. “Final Response to Petition From
  New Jersey Regarding SO2 Emissions From the Portland Generating Station; Final Rule.”
  Federal Register, 76(215): 69051–69077.

Evans, John S., Scott K. Wolff, Kanchanasak Phonboon, Jonathan I. Levy, and
  Kirk R. Smith. 2002. “Exposure Efficiency: An Idea Whose Time Has Come?” Chemo-
  sphere, 49: 1075–1091.

Ewbank, Douglas C., and Samuel H. Preston. 1989. “Personal Health Behaviour and
  the Decline in Infant and Child Mortality: The United States, 1900–1930.” In What We
  Know About Health Transition: The Cultural, Social and Behavioural Determinants of
  Health, ed. John et al. Caldwell, Vol. 1, pp. 115–49. Canberra:The Australian National
  University.


                                            32
Faber, Benjamin. 2014. “Trade Integration, Market Size, and Industrialization: Evidence
  from China’s National Trunk Highway System.” Review of Economic Studies, 81(3): 1046–
  1070.

Fishback, Price, and Carl Kitchens. 2015. “Flip the Switch: The Impact of the Ru-
  ral Electrification Administration 1935-1940.” Journal of Economic History, 74(4): 1161–
  1195.

Fishback,    Price,    Michael Haines,         Shawn Kantor,            and Joseph Cullen.
  n.d..   “County     and   City   Mortality        Data,   1921   to    1950.”   Available   at
  econ.arizona.edu/faculty/fishback.asp.

FPC, U.S. Federal Power Commission. 1947. “Steam-Electric Plant Construction Cost
  and Annual Production Expenses, 1938-1947.” Washington, DC:U.S. Federal Power Com-
  mission.

FPC, U.S. Federal Power Commission. 1948-62. “Steam-Electric Plant Construction
  Cost and Annual Production Expenses (Annual Supplements).” Washington, DC:U.S.
  Federal Power Commission.

FPC, U.S. Federal Power Commission. 1963. “Principal Electric Power Facilities in the
  United States (Map).” Washington, DC:U.S. Federal Power Commission.

Gartner, Scott Sigmund, et al. 2006. In Historical Statistics of the United States, ed.
  Susan B. Carter, Scott Sigmund Gartner, Michael R. Haines, Alan L. Olmstead, Richard
  Sutch and Gavin Wright. New York, NY:Cambridge University Press.

Goodkind, Andrew L., Jay S. Coggins, and Julian D. Marshall. 2014. “A Spatial
  Model of Air Pollution: The Impact of the Concentration-Response Function.” Journal of
  the Association of Environmental and Resource Economists, 1(4): 451–479.




                                               33
Graff Zivin, Joshua, and Matthew Neidell. 2012. “The Impact of Pollution on Worker
  Productivity.” American Economic Review, 102(7): 3652–3673.

Greenstone, Michael, and B. Kelsey Jack. 2015. “Envirodevonomics: A Research
  Agenda for an Emerging Field.” Journal of Economic Literature, 53(1): 5–42.

Greenstone, Michael, Richard Hornbeck, and Enrico Moretti. 2010. “Identifying
  Agglomeration Spillovers: Evidence from Winners and Losers of Large Plant Openings.”
  Journal of Political Economy, 118(3): 536–598.

Haines, Michael, and Robert A. Margo. 2008. “Railroads and Local Economic Devel-
  opment: The United States in the 1850s.” In Quantitative Economic History: The Good
  of Counting, ed. Joshua L. Rosenbloom, pp. 78–99. London, UK:Routledge.

Haines, Michael R., and Inter-university Consortium for Political & Social Re-
  search ICPSR. 2010. Historical, Demographic, Economic, and Social Data: The United
  States, 1790-2002. Ann Arbor, MI:Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social
  Research, icpsr.org.

Hales, Jeremy M. 1976. “Tall Stacks and the Atmospheric Environment.” EPA Publica-
  tion, No. EPA-450/3-76-007.

Hanlon, W. Walker. 2016. “Coal Smoke and the Costs of the Industrial Revolution.”
  NBER Working Paper #22921.

Hanlon, W. Walker. 2018. “London Fog: A Century of Pollution and Mortality, 1866-
  1965.” NBER Working Paper #24488.

Hanlon, W. Walker, and Yuan Tian. 2015. “Killer Cities: Past and Present.” American
  Economic Review Papers & Proceedings, 105(5): 570–75.




                                           34
Hanna, Rema, Esther Duflo, and Michael Greenstone. 2016. “Up in Smoke: The
  Influence of Household Behavior on the Long-Run Impact of Improved Cooking Stoves.”
  American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 8(1): 80–114.

He, Jiaxiu, Haoming Liu, and Alberto Salvo. forthcoming. “Severe Air Pollution
  and Labor Productivity: Evidence from Industrial Towns in China.” American Economic
  Journal: Applied Economics.

Hornbeck, Richard, and Suresh Naidu. 2013. “When the Levee Breaks: Black Migra-
  tion and Economic Development in the American South.” American Economic Review,
  104(3): 963–990.

Hoynes, Hilary, Doug Miller, and David Simon. 2015. “Income, the Earned Income
  Tax Credit, and Infant Health.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 7(1): 172–
  211.

Hughes, Thomas. 1993. Networks of Power: Electrification in Western Society, 1880–
  1930. Baltimore, MD:Johns Hopkins University Press.

Ives, James Edmund, Rollo H. Britten, David William Armstrong, Wirt Alvin
  Gill, and Frederick Herbert Goldman. 1936. “Atmospheric Pollution of American
  Cities for the Years 1931 to 1933 with Special Reference to the Solid Constituents of
  the Pollution.” U.S. Treasury Department, Public Health Bulletin No 224, Washington,
  DC:Government Printing Office.

Jayachandran, Seema. 2009. “Air Quality and Early-Life Mortality: Evidence from In-
  donesia’s Wildfires.” Journal of Human Resources, 44(4): 916–954.

Kline, Patrick. 2012. “The Impact of Juvenile Curfew Laws on Arrests of Youth and
  Adults.” American Law and Economics Review, 14(1): 44–67.




                                           35
Kline, Patrick, and Enrico Moretti. 2014. “Local Economic Development, Agglomer-
  ation Economies, and the Big Push: 100 Years of Evidence from the Tennessee Valley
  Authority.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(1): 275–331.

Lam, Nicholas L., Kirk R. Smith, Alison Gauthier, and Michael N. Bates. 2012.
  “Kerosene: A Review of Household Uses and Their Hazards in Low- and Middle-income
  Countries.” Journal of Toxicology and Environmental Health - Part B: Critical Reviews,
  15(6): 396–432.

Lave, Lester, and Eugene Seskin. 1972. “Air Pollution, Climate, and Home Heating:
  Their Effects on U.S. Mortality Rates.” American Journal of Public Health, 62: 909–916.

Lebergott, Stanley. 1976. The American Economy: Income, Wealth and Want. Princeton,
  NJ:Princeton University Press.

Levy, Jonathan I., John D. Spengler, Dennis Hlinka, David Sullivan, and Dennis
  Moon. 2002. “Using CALPUFF to Evaluate the Impacts of Power Plant Emissions in
  Illinois: Model Sensitivity and Implications.” Atmospheric Environment, 36: 1063–1075.

Lewis, Joshua. 2018. “Infant Health, Women’s Fertility, and Rural Electrification in the
  United States.” Journal of Economic History, 78(1): 118–154.

Lewis, Joshua, and Edson Severnini. 2017. “Short- and Long-Run Impacts of Rural
  Electrification: Evidence from the Historical Rollout of the U.S. Power Grid.” IZA Dis-
  cussion Paper #11243.

Lipfert, Frederick W., and Ronald E. Wyzga. 1995. “Air Pollution and Mortal-
  ity: Issues and Uncertainties.” Journal of the Air & Waste Management Association,
  45(12): 949–966.




                                           36
Lipscomb, Molly, Mushfiq A. Mobarak, and Tania Barham. 2013. “Development
  Effects of Electrification: Evidence from the Topographic Placement of Hydropower Plants
  in Brazil.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 5(2): 200–231.

Luff, Willard J. 1940. “Water Systems and Bathrooms for Farm Homes.” Rural Electrifi-
  cation News, September.

Meckel, Richard A. 1990. Save the Babies: American Public Health Reform and the
  Prevention of Infant Mortality, 1850–1929. Ann Arbor, MI:University of Michigan Press.

Mendelsohn, Robert, and Sheila Olmstead. 2009. “The Economic Valuation of En-
  vironmental Amenities and Disamenities: Methods and Applications.” Annual Review of
  Environment and Resources, 34: 325–347.

Michaels, Guy. 2008. “The Effect of Trade on the Demand for Skill: Evidence from the
  Interstate Highway System.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 90(4): 683–701.

Moehling, Carolyn, and Melissa A. Thomasson. 2012. “The Political Economy of
  Saving Babies: The Politics of State Participation in the Sheppard-Towner Program.”
  Journal of Economic History, 72(1): 75–103.

Mokyr, Joel. 2000. “Why “More Work for Mothers?” Knowledge and Household Behavior,
  1870–1945.” Journal of Economic History, 60(1): 1–41.

Pope III, C. Arden, Maureen Cropper, Jay Coggins, and Aaron Cohen.
  2015. “Health Benefits of Air Pollution Abatement Policy: Role of the Shape of the
  Concentration-Response Function.” Journal of the Air & Waste Management Associa-
  tion, 65(5): 516–522.

Rud, Juan Pablo. 2012. “Electricity and Industrial Development: Evidence from India.”
  Journal of Development Economics, 92(2): 352–367.




                                            37
Schlenker, Wolfram, and W. Reed Walker. 2016. “Airports, Air Pollution, and Con-
  temporaneous Health.” Review of Economic Studies, 83(2): 768–809.

Severnini, Edson. 2014. “The Power of Hydroelectric Dams: Agglomeration Spillovers.”
  IZA Discussion Paper #8082.

Severnini, Edson. 2017. “Impacts of Nuclear Plant Shutdown on Coal-fired Power Gener-
  ation and Infant Health in the Tennessee Valley in the 1980s.” Nature Energy, 2(17051).

Silverman, Leslie. 1950. “Filtration Through Porous Materials.” American Industrial Hy-
  giene Association Quarterly, 11(1): 11–20.

Smith, Kirk R. 1993. “Fuel Combustion, Air Pollution Exposure, and Health: The Situa-
  tion in Developing Countries.” Annual Review of Energy and the Environment, 18: 529–
  566.

Spix, Claudia, Joachim Heinrich, Douglas Dockery, Joel Schwartz, Gisela
  Volksch, Kurt Schwinkowski, Christel Collen, and H. Erich Wichmann. 1993.
  “Air Pollution and Daily Mortality in Erfurt, East Germany, 1980–1989.” Environmental
  Health Perspectives, 101(6): 518–526.

USBC, U.S. Bureau of the Census. 1930. “Mortality Statistics).” US Department of
  Commerce, Bureau of the Census.

USBC, U.S. Bureau of the Census. 1963. “1960 Census of Housing – Volume I, States
  and Small Areas (Part 1, United States Summary).” US Department of Commerce, Bureau
  of the Census.

USDA, U.S. Department of Agriculture. 1944. “The Time Costs of Homemaking –
  A Study of 1,500 Rural and Urban Households.” Agricultural Research Administration,
  Bureau of Human Nutrition and Home Economics.




                                               38
USDOC, U.S. Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census, and Inter-
  university Consortium for Political & Social Research ICPSR. 2012. “County
  and City Data Book (United States) Consolidated File: County Data, 1947-1977.” Ann
  Arbor, MI:Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research, ICPSR07736-v2.

USHEW, U.S. Department of Health, Education & Welfare. 1952-1958b. “Marriage,
  Divorce, Natality, Fetal Mortality and Infant Mortality Data.” Vital Statistics of the
  United States (Volume I), Washington, DC:Government Printing Office.

USHEW, U.S. Department of Health, Education & Welfare. 1958a. “Air Pollution
  Measurements of the National Air Sampling Network: Analyses of Suspended Particulates,
  1953-1957.” Public Health Service Publication No. 637, Washington, DC:Government
  Printing Office.

USHEW, U.S. Department of Health, Education & Welfare. 1969. “Control Tech-
  niques for Particulate Air Pollution.” Public Health Service Protection and Environmental
  Health Service, Washington, DC:Government Printing Office.

Wilson, Maud. 1929. “Present Use of Time in Households and by Homemakers: Complete
  Report of Purnell Study.” Oregon State Agricultural Experiment Station.

Woodruff, Tracey, Lyndsey Darrow, and Jennifer Parker. 2008. “Air Pollution and
  Postneonatal Infant Mortality in the United States, 1999-2002.” Environmental Health
  Perspectives, 116(1): 110–115.

Zhang, Xing. 2016.




                                            39
Tables and Figures

 Table 1: The Effect of Coal-fired Power Plant Openings on Infant Mortality, 1938-1962

                                                         Dependent variable: Infant Mortality Rate
                                                   (1)                      (2)                       (3)
Panel A: Overall effects
1(Plant Operating) × Near                       0.877***                  0.780***                 0.609***
                                                 (0.215)                   (0.215)                  (0.192)
R-squared                                    0.673                 0.673                             0.679
Panel B: Effects by Generating Capacity in 1940: Below vs. Above median
1(Plant Operating) × Near                       -0.620*                    -0.540                     -0.194
  × Below                                       (0.366)                   (0.354)                    (0.319)
1(Plant Operating) × Near                       1.303***                  1.197***                 0.870***
  × Above                                        (0.252)                   (0.266)                  (0.236)
P-value: Test βBelow = βAbove                    0.000                     0.001                     0.007
R-squared                                    0.673                   0.673                           0.679
Panel C: Effects by Household Electricity Access in 1940: Below vs. Above median
1(Plant Operating) × Near                        -0.437                    -0.396                     0.018
  × Below                                       (0.325)                   (0.315)                    (0.291)
1(Plant Operating) × Near                       1.525***                  1.419***                 0.936***
  × Above                                        (0.268)                   (0.292)                  (0.265)
P-value: Test βBelow = βAbove                    0.000                     0.000                     0.021
R-squared                                           0.673                    0.673                   0.679
Observations                                      132,000                   132,000                132,000
County-plant pairs                                  5,280                    5,280                   5,280
Counties                                            1,969                    1,969                   1,969
County-Plant FE                                       Y                        Y                       Y
State-by-Year FE                                      Y                        Y                       Y
Research Design Variables                             Y                        Y                       Y
Geographic Variables                                  Y                        Y                       Y
1940 Mfg Emp x Year                                                            Y                       Y
All Other Controls                                                                                     Y
Notes: This table reports the ‘event-study’ estimates from equation (1). Each column in each panel
reports the point estimates from a different regression. The infant mortality rate is per 1,000 live births.
Near is an indicator equal to one if the county-centroid distance to the power plant is less than 30 miles,
and zero if the county-centroid is from 30 to 90 miles from the plant. ‘Research Design Variables’ include
a time trend based on county-centroid distance to the coal-fired power plant, and annual nameplate
capacity of the plant to ensure that identification relies solely on the timing of power plant openings.
‘Geographic Variables’ include time trends based on county longitude and latitude, annual precipitation,
average temperature, degree days below 10o C and degree days above 29o C. ‘All Other Controls’ include
annual hydropower capacity within 30 miles of a county-centroid, and time trends based on a variety
of baseline county characteristics – log population, log employment, and proportion of households with
electricity access in 1940, mileage of rail tracks in the beginning of the twentieth century (1911), and an
indicator for whether a county was recommended to receive a highway from the 1944 Interstate Highway
Plan. All regressions are weighted by live births. Standard errors are clustered at the county-level.
***,**,* denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.


                                                    40
                Table 2: Predictors of Coal Capacity Changes, 1938-1962

                                                 Dependent variable: ∆ Coal Capacity, 1938-1962
                                                        Explanatory variables measured in
                                                      Levels, 1940            Changes, 1930-1940
                                                  (1)              (2)         (3)          (4)
Above vs. below median capacity, 1940            Above           Below        Above        Below
Panel A: Economic variables

Log(total employment)                          2.7652***       0.3061***        3.0965        0.5720*
                                                (0.6994)        (0.0997)       (1.9710)       (0.2892)
    R-squared                                     0.153          0.0069         0.0090         0.0019
Manufacturing employment share                 0.0996**          0.0136         0.1054         0.0071
                                               (0.0469)         (0.0131)       (0.0729)       (0.0125)
    R-squared                                   0.0264           0.0020         0.0051         0.0002
Manufacturing payroll per worker               0.4318**          -0.0001        0.0664         -0.0004
                                               (0.1970)         (0.0011)       (0.2295)       (0.0010)
    R-squared                                   0.0306           0.0000         0.0005         0.0000
Retail payroll per worker                      2.5954***         0.0032         -0.1216        0.0028
                                                (0.7333)        (0.0024)       (0.3157)       (0.0025)
    R-squared                                    0.1490          0.0001         0.0002         0.0000
Railroad miles, 1911                             0.0151          0.0007
                                                (0.0098)        (0.0021)
    R-squared                                    0.0158         0.000190
Predicted interstate highway, 1944             3.0331***         0.1947
                                                (0.8033)        (0.2020)
    R-squared                                    0.0357          0.0012
Panel B: Demographic variables

Infant mortality rate                            -0.0461         -0.0003        -0.0223       -0.0052*
                                                (0.0304)        (0.0053)       (0.0232)       (0.0028)
    R-squared                                     0.0066          0.0000        0.0024         0.0017
Percent urban                                  0.0757***        0.0077**        0.0643        -0.0174**
                                                (0.0245)        (0.0031)       (0.0543)        (0.0083)
    R-squared                                    0.0671          0.0037         0.0025          0.0015
Percent white                                    -0.0687         -0.0019        0.0660         0.0016
                                                (0.0647)        (0.0030)       (0.0543)       (0.0030)
    R-squared                                     0.0046          0.0001        0.0008         0.0000
Log(median dwelling rent)                      8.1441***         0.4132         0.7269         0.5472
                                                (1.9627)        (0.3698)       (3.4226)       (0.4772)
    R-squared                                    0.1590          0.0028         0.0002         0.0015

 Notes: This table reports estimates from the analysis exploring the predictive power of levels and
pre-trends of baseline county characteristics in explaining changes in coal-fired electricity generating
capacity over the period 1938-1962. Each cell reports the estimates from a single regression of the
change in coal capacity from 1938 to 1962 on the indicated county characteristic, conditional on
state fixed effects and weighted by live births. Standard errors are clustered at the county-level;
***,**,* denote significance at 1%, 5%, and 10%, respectively.



                                                  41
    Table 3: The Effect of Coal Capacity on Infant Mortality, 1938-1962

                                            Dependent variable: Infant Mortality Rate
                                             (1)                 (2)                 (3)
Panel A: Overall effects
Coal capacity                             0.213***             0.222***            0.188***
                                           (0.030)              (0.025)             (0.027)
R-squared                                0.639             0.675                    0.679
Panel B: Effects by Generating Capacity in 1940: Below vs. Above median
Coal capacity × Below                     -0.146***            -0.094*              -0.040
                                           (0.051)             (0.049)             (0.058)
Coal capacity × Above                     0.215***             0.229***            0.203***
                                           (0.027)              (0.025)             (0.028)
P-value: Test βBelow = βAbove               0.000               0.000               0.000
R-squared                                0.640               0.676            0.680
Panel C: Effects by Household Electricity Access in 1940: Below vs. Above median
Coal capacity × Below                     -0.145***             -0.036              0.001
                                           (0.043)             (0.041)             (0.043)
Coal capacity × Above                     0.214***             0.233***            0.195***
                                           (0.026)              (0.025)             (0.030)
P-value: Test βBelow = βAbove               0.000               0.000               0.000
R-squared                                   0.640               0.676               0.680
Observations                               50,675               50,675              50,675
Counties                                    2,027               2,027               2,027
County and Year FE                            Y                   Y                   Y
State-by-Year FE                                                  Y                   Y
All controls                                                                          Y
 Notes: This table reports the difference-in-differences estimates from equation (2). Each
column in each panel reports the point estimates from a different regression. The infant
mortality rate is per 1,000 live births. The variable Coal capacity denotes total coal-fired
capacity within 30 miles of the county-centroid (measured in 100s of megawatts). ‘All
Controls’ include time trends based on county longitude and latitude, annual precipita-
tion, average temperature, degree days below 10o C and degree days above 29o C, annual
hydropower capacity within 30 miles of a county-centroid, and time trends based on a
variety of baseline county characteristics – log population, log employment, and log man-
ufacturing employment in 1940, mileage of rail tracks in the beginning of the twentieth
century (1911), and an indicator for whether a county was recommended to receive a high-
way from the 1944 Interstate Highway Plan. All regressions are weighted by live births.
Standard errors are clustered at the county-level. ***,**,* denote significance at the 1%,
5%, and 10% level, respectively.




                                            42
Table 4: Evolution in the Coal Capacity-Infant Mortality Relationship, 1938-1962

                                            Dependent variable: Infant Mortality Rate
                                             (1)                 (2)                 (3)
  Panel A: Pre-1950 vs. Post-1950
  Coal capacity × Pre-1950                  -0.016            -0.099**             -0.087*
                                           (0.063)             (0.046)             (0.045)
  Coal capacity × Post-1950               0.143***            0.134***            0.121***
                                           (0.032)             (0.024)             (0.026)
  Panel B: Dynamics by Generating Capacity in 1940: Below vs. Above median
  Pre-1950 ×
  Coal capacity × Below                  -0.477***            -0.611***           -0.745***
                                          (0.150)              (0.195)             (0.190)
  Coal capacity × Above                     0.015               -0.059              -0.054
                                           (0.061)             (0.043)             (0.044)
  Post-1950 ×
  Coal capacity × Below                  -0.162***            -0.115**              -0.061
                                          (0.050)              (0.050)             (0.059)
  Coal capacity × Above                   0.154***            0.149***            0.140***
                                           (0.029)             (0.024)             (0.027)
  Panel C: Dynamics by years since power plant first opened
  Coal capacity                          -0.160***            -0.101**            -0.122***
    × 1(< 10 years operating)             (0.050)              (0.046)             (0.046)
  Coal capacity                           0.217***            0.231***            0.209***
    × 1(≥ 10 years operating)              (0.028)             (0.024)             (0.027)
  Observations                             50,675              50,675               50,675
  Counties                                 2,027               2,027                2,027
  County and Year FE                         Y                   Y                    Y
  State-by-Year FE                                               Y                    Y
  All controls                                                                        Y
   Notes: This table reports the difference-in-differences estimates from equation (2). Each
  column in each panel reports the point estimates from a different regression. The infant
  mortality rate is per 1,000 live births. The variable Coal capacity denotes total coal-
  fired capacity within 30 miles of the county-centroid (measured in 100s of megawatts).
  The variables 1(< 10 years operating) and 1(≥ 10 years operating) are indicators for the
  length of time over which the power plant has been in operation. See Table 3 notes for
  a description of the control variables in column (3). All regressions are weighted by live
  births. Standard errors are clustered at the county-level. ***,**,* denote significance at
  the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.




                                             43
Table 5: Coal Capacity and Household Electricity Access: Heterogeneity by Baseline Sani-
tation, and Coal Stoves

                                                         Dependent variable: Infant Mortality Rate
                                                     (1)                     (2)                (3)
    Panel A: Heterogeneity by Baseline Sanitation-Related Mortality
    Above median electricity access
    × Coal Capacity                                   0.214***            0.233***            0.200***
                                                       (0.026)             (0.024)             (0.030)

    Below median electricity access
    × Coal Capacity                                     -0.048              0.073              0.138**
                                                       (0.056)             (0.055)             (0.054)
    × Coal Capacity × 1(High mortality)               -0.180**            -0.190**            -0.231***
                                                       (0.075)             (0.075)             (0.071)

    Panel B: Heterogeneity by Baseline Coal Stove Use
    Above median electricity access
    × Coal Capacity                                   0.214***            0.232***            0.195***
                                                       (0.026)             (0.024)             (0.030)

    Below median electricity access
    × Coal Capacity                                     -0.062              0.019               0.079
                                                       (0.049)             (0.056)             (0.059)
    × Coal Capacity × 1(High stoves)                  -0.171**              -0.104             -0.143*
                                                       (0.074)             (0.082)             (0.081)

    Observations                                       50,675              50,675              50,675
    Counties                                           2,027                2,027              2,027
    County and Year FE                                   Y                    Y                  Y
    State-by-Year FE                                                          Y                  Y
    All controls                                                                                 Y
     Notes: This table reports the difference-in-differences estimates from equation (2). Each column
    in each panel reports the point estimates from a different regression. The infant mortality rate is
    per 1,000 live births. The variable Coal capacity denotes total coal-fired capacity within 30 miles
    of the county-centroid (measured in 100s of megawatts). The variable 1(High mortality) indicates
    whether the county belonged to a state with above-median share of infant deaths due to diarrhea-
    enteritis in 1930. The variable 1(High stoves) indicates whether the county had above-median use
    of coal cookstoves in 1940. See Table 3 notes for a description of the control variables in column
    (3). All regressions are weighted by live births. Standard errors are clustered at the county-level.
    ***,**,* denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.




                                                    44
                              Table 6: The Effect of Coal Capacity on Economic and Demographic Outcomes

                                                                                   Dependent variables:
                                       Infant       Median           Employment                       Wages                Demographic composition
                                      mortality     dwelling       Total     Mfg               Mfg          Retail            %           % with
                                        rate          rent                                    payroll       payroll         white       high school
                                                                                            per worker    per worker                      diploma
                                         (1)           (2)           (3)          (4)           (5)           (6)            (7)             (8)

     Panel A: Effects by Generating Capacity in 1940: Below vs. Above median
     Coal capacity × Below             -0.188*        0.002        0.016*       0.021**        0.002          -0.001         0.065          0.088*
                                       (0.098)       (0.002)       (0.008)      (0.010)       (0.002)        (0.001)        (0.058)         (0.047)
     Coal capacity × Above            0.284***      -0.006***     0.012***      0.010**      -0.003***      -0.003***        -0.040          0.028
                                       (0.035)       (0.001)       (0.004)      (0.004)       (0.000)        (0.000)        (0.045)         (0.024)
     Panel B: Effects by Household Electricity Access in 1940: Below vs. Above median




45
     Coal capacity × Below             -0.170*      0.005***      0.016***     0.019***        -0.001         0.001        0.139***        0.099***
                                       (0.094)       (0.002)       (0.004)      (0.006)       (0.001)        (0.001)        (0.049)         (0.038)
     Coal capacity × Above            0.307***      -0.006***     0.012***      0.010**      -0.002***      -0.003***        -0.051          0.014
                                       (0.036)       (0.001)       (0.004)      (0.004)       (0.001)        (0.000)        (0.045)         (0.026)
     Panel C: Dynamic Effects by Years Since Power Plant First Opened
     Coal capacity                    -0.283***      0.004**        0.015       0.025**        0.002          -0.001         0.056           0.050
       × I(< 10 years operating)       (0.091)       (0.002)       (0.009)      (0.011)       (0.002)        (0.001)        (0.060)         (0.056)
     Coal capacity                    0.302***      -0.006***     0.012***      0.010**      -0.003***      -0.003***        -0.042          0.030
       × I(≥ 10 years operating)       (0.035)       (0.001)       (0.004)      (0.004)       (0.000)        (0.000)        (0.046)         (0.025)
     Full controls                        Y             Y            Y            Y              Y              Y             Y               Y

      Notes: This table reports the difference-in-differences estimates from equation (2). Each column in each panel reports the point estimates from
     a different regression. The variable Coal capacity denotes total coal-fired capacity within 30 miles of the county-centroid (measured in 100s of
     megawatts). Median dwelling rent, employment, and wage outcomes are all measured in logs. See Table 3 notes for a description of the control
     variables. All regressions are weighted by live births. Standard errors are clustered at the county-level. ***,**,* denote significance at the 1%,
     5%, and 10% level, respectively.
Figure 1: Trends in U.S. Electricity Generation and Coal Consumption




                      (a) Trends in Electricity Generation




                       (b) Coal Consumption, by Source
Notes: (a) Data from Gartner (2006), Historical Statistics of the United States,
Table Db218-227. Electric utilities-power generation and fossil fuel consumption
by energy source: 1920-2000. (b) Data from United States Bureau of Mines,
Minerals Yearbook (various years).



                                       46
Figure 2: Cumulative Dispersion of PM2.5 Around Large Coal-Fired Power Plants




      Notes: This figure shows the cumulative exposure to particulate matter by dis-
      tance to large coal-fired power plants (Levy et al., 2002).


     Figure 3: Tradeoffs Associated with Coal-fired Electricity Generation
               Net Effects of Coal-Fired Electricity	





                                                                             Turning Point	

                                                          Electricity Benefits                    Pollution Costs	

                                                                    >	
                                  >	

                                                            Pollution Costs	
                  Electricity Benefits 	





                                                                      Access to Coal-Fired Electricity	


      Notes: This figure illustrates the tradeoffs associated with the expansion of coal-
      fired electricity access. Appendix B.1 provides a microfoundation for this inverted-
      U shape.


                                                                                 47
 Figure 4: Trends in Infant Mortality by Baseline Coal Capacity, 1938-1962




    Notes: This figure plots the mean infant mortality rate from 1938 to 1962, sepa-
    rately for counties above and below the 1940 median coal-fired electricity gener-
    ating capacity. Sample means are weighted by live births.

Figure 5: Power Plant Openings, Generating Capacity, and Coal Consumption

                                            300                                                                     8
      Coal-Fired Generating Capacity (MW)




                                                                                                                    7   Coal Consumption (100,000 tons)
                                            250
                                                                                                                    6
                                            200
                                                                                                                    5

                                            150                                                                     4

                                                                                                                    3
                                            100
                                                                                                                    2
                                             50
                                                                                                                    1

                                              0                                                                     0
                                                  -6   -5   -4     -3   -2    -1    0    1     2   3    4   5   6
                                                                 Years Relative to Power Plant Openings

                                                                       Capacity             Consumption

    Notes: This figure reports coal-fired electricity generating capacity (in MWs)
    and coal consumption (in 100,000s of tons) for the 270 power plants that opened
    between 1938 and 1962.


                                                                                  48
                                                                 Figure 6: Event Study: The Effect of Coal-Fired Power Plant Openings on Infant Mortality


                                                             (a) Below Median Generating Capacity in 1940                                                                       (b) Above Median Generating Capacity in 1940
                                                   2                                                                                                                  2
     Infant Mortality Rate Per 1000 Live Births




                                                                                                                        Infant Mortality Rate Per 1000 Live Births
                                                  1.5                                                                                                                1.5

                                                   1                                                                                                                  1

                                                   .5                                                                                                                 .5

                                                   0                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                 Construction                                                                                                       Construction
                                                  -.5                                                                                                                -.5

                                                   -1                                                                                                                 -1
49




                                                        -10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3              4   5   6                                                      -10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3              4   5   6
                                                                    Years Relative to Power Plant Opening                                                                              Years Relative to Power Plant Opening



      Notes: These figures report the event study estimates based on equation (1), separately for counties with below and above median generating
      capacity in 1940. The coefficients plot the time path of infant mortality in ‘treatment’ counties (<30 miles from a power plant) relative
      to ‘control’ counties (30-90 miles from a power plant). The period t ∈ {−10, −5} identifies pre-construction, t ∈ {−4, 0} identifies likely
      construction, and t ∈ {1, 6} identifies post-opening. Following (Kline, 2012), we estimate the regression for the period t ∈ {−11, 7} and
      suppress the endpoint coefficients. Vertical dashed lines denote the 95% confidence intervals based on standard errors that are clustered at
      the county-level.
    Figure 7: Power Plant Openings and Installation at Existing Sites




  (a) Changes in generating capacity due to new openings and upgrades, 1938-1962




    (b) Frequency of power plant openings and upgrades at existing sites, by size
Notes: These figures depict the changes in coal-fired electricity generating capacity in
our sample over the period 1938-1962, as well as the size distribution of new plant
openings and upgrades at existing sites starting at 50MW.

                                           50
A   Appendix: Tables and Figures

                           Table A.1: TSP Concentration in Various Years
     Location                        Time                   TSP                       Source
     14 Large US Cities        1931-1933, Winter            510                  Ives et al. (1936)
     US Urban Stations             1953-1957                163                  USHEW (1958a)
     8 of 14 Large US Cities         1954                   214                  USHEW (1958a)
     US Urban Stations               1960                   118               Lave and Seskin (1972)
     14 Large US Cities              1960                   143                      EPA data

     US National Average            1990                     60             Chay and Greenstone (2003a)
     58 Chinese Cities            1980-1993                  538               Almond et al. (2009)
     Worldwide                      1999           18% of urban pop > 240       Cohen et al. (2004)

      Notes: The original measurements were in total suspended particulates (TSP) for all of the
     sources except for Cohen et al. (2004). Cohen et al., Figure 17.3 (World), indicates that 18%
     of the urban population lived in locations where particulate matter (PM10) was greater than
     100. We translated the PM10 values to TSP using the following formula: PM10/0.417, where
     0.417 is the empirical ratio of PM10 to TSP in their world data (Table 17.4). The estimate
     for 1990 is from Chay and Greenstone (2003a), Figure 1. EPA data are authors’ calculations
     based on EPA dataset for 1960.




                                                     51
               Table A.2: Characteristics of Power Plants and Surrounding Counties

                                                               Counties <30 miles               Counties
                                                                from power plant               30-90 miles
                                                   All                   Above vs. below          from
                                                                      median capacity, 1940    power plant
                                                                     Above            Below
                                                   (1)                 (2)              (3)        (4)
Panel A: Coal-fired power plant characteristics
Number                                             270                96               174           -
Initial year of operation                         1952               1952             1952           -
Capacity (MWs)                                    140.9              151.9            90.7           -
Annual coal consumption                            6.8                7.2              4.2           -
  (100,000 tons)
Panel B: County characteristics
Infant mortality rate                             29.1                28.6            31.4         31.1
Distance to power plant                           18.1                18.0            18.6         64.6
Hydroelectric capacity                             19                  22              8            22
  <30 miles (MWs)
Baseline characteristics, 1940
  Employment (1,000s)                              320                395              26            34
  % Manufacturing employment                       29.1               32.0            18.0          19.6
  Population (1,000s)                              842               1,037             76           102
  % Urban                                          70.3               78.2            39.2          38.4
  % Households with electricity                    88.4               94.1            66.3          66.9
  Railroad mileage, 1911                          198.7              219.4           117.7         112.4
  Predicted interstate highway, 1944              0.80               0.87            0.49          0.50
Counties                                       734                    251             483          1,235
N(plant-county pairs)                         1,056                   469             587          4,224
Observations                                  26,400                 11,725          14,675       105,600
 Notes: This table reports summary statistics for the event-study sample. Panel A describes the mean charac-
teristics of the 270 coal-fired power plants that opened between 1938 and 1962. Panel B describes the sample
means for the treatment and control counties. All means are weighted by the number of live births.




                                                          52
                 Table A.3: Summary Statistics, Coal Capacity Analysis

                                                                          Above vs. below
                                                                        median capacity, 1940
                                                      All              Above            Below
                                                    counties
                                                      (1)                (2)              (3)
Panel A: Outcome variables
Infant mortality rate
    Mean                                              30.4              29.1              32.0
    Change, 1962-1938                                -19.82            -20.86            -19.54
Median dwelling rent                                  240.6             272.3            200.3
per month, 1990$
Manufacturing payroll                                 17.7              19.8              14.9
per worker
Retail payroll                                        12.5              13.3              11.3
per worker
% White                                               89.1              89.9              88.2
% High School (age 25+)                               34.0              36.9              30.3

Panel A: Coal and hydro generation
Coal capacity <30 miles (100 MWs)
   Mean                                               5.94              10.00             0.70
   Change, 1962-1938                                  3.33              9.38              1.69
Coal consumption <30 miles (100K Tons)
   Mean                                               10.24             17.35             1.05
   Change, 1962-1938                                  2.27              6.84              1.04
Hydro capacity <30 miles (100 MWs)
   Mean                                               0.28              0.40              0.12
   Change, 1962-1938                                  0.15              0.21              0.14

Panel A: Baseline Characteristics, 1940
Population (1,000s)                                    456               835               69
% Urban                                               52.0              70.5              33.1
Employment (1,000s)                                    171               316               23
% Manufacturing Employment                            23.0              30.0              15.8
% Households with Electricity                         74.8              89.2              60.3
Mileage of Railroads, 1911                            155.7             201.0            109.5
Predicted Interstate Highway, 1944                    0.63              0.83              0.42

Number of Counties                                    2,027              431             1,596
 Notes: This table reports the characteristics for the sample of 2,027 counties used to estimate
equation (2). Sample means are reported separately according to whether counties had above or
below median generating capacity in 1940. All means are weighted by the number of live births.
All dollar amounts are reported in 1990 dollars.




                                              53
Table A.4: Total Suspended Particulates (TSP) Concentration and Coal Capacity, 1957-1962
                                                      Dependent variable:
                                                  Total Suspended Particulates
                                                    (1)              (2)

                  Coal capacity (≤ 30 miles)      2.3245**
                                                  (1.0228)
                  Coal capacity (≤ 50 miles)                         2.2378***
                                                                      (0.6451)
                  Observations                        433               433
                  Counties                             85                85
                  R-squared                          0.723             0.753
                  Mean dep var in 1957                         141
                  Mean dep var in 1962                         100
                  State-by-Year FE                    Y                 Y
                  Geographic Controls                 Y                 Y
                   Notes: This table reports the relationship between coal-fired
                  electricity generating capacity and total suspended particulates
                  (TSP), a measure of particulate matter collected by the EPA
                  for the period 1957-1962.




                                                54
                     Table A.5: The Effect of Coal-fired Power Plant Openings on Infant Mortality, Robustness Tests

                                                                    Dependent variable: Infant Mortality Rate
                                                                       Alternate treatment radii
                                     Baseline     Omit counties       < 20 miles      < 40 miles      Log infant     Effects by     Effects by
                                    estimates    30-60 miles from        from            from         mortality     power plant       wind
                                                   power plant        power plant     power plant        rate           size        direction
                                       (1)             (2)                (3)             (4)             (5)            (6)            (7)
     Panel A: Overall effects
     1(Plant Operating) × Near      0.609***         0.482***           0.334*          0.398**        0.016***
                                     (0.192)          (0.186)           (0.196)         (0.167)         (0.006)
         × Large (≥ 75MW)                                                                                             0.754***
                                                                                                                       (0.213)
         × Small (< 75MW)                                                                                               0.121
                                                                                                                       (0.253)
         × Downwind (90◦ arc                                                                                                          0.945***
         from plant centroid)                                                                                                          (0.327)
        × Upwind (270◦ arc                                                                                                            0.492**




55
        from plant centroid)                                                                                                          (0.204)
     Panel B: Effects by Generating Capacity in 1940: Below vs. Above median
     1(Plant Operating) × Near        -0.194           -0.284            -0.646          -0.305          -0.003
         × Below                     (0.319)          (0.366)           (0.4044)        (0.284)         (0.009)
     1(Plant Operating) × Near      0.870***         0.694***           0.557**        0.729***        0.022***
         × Above                     (0.236)          (0.205)           (0.237)         (0.197)         (0.007)

     Panel C: Effects by Household Electricity Access in 1940: Below vs. Above median
     1(Plant Operating) × Near        0.018            -0.037            -0.387          -0.209          0.003
         × Below                     (0.291)          (0.333)           (0.337)         (0.279)         (0.009)
     1(Plant Operating) × Near      0.936***         0.734***           0.607**        0.797***        0.023***
         × Above                     (0.265)          (0.231)           (0.261)         (0.220)         (0.008)

     Full controls                      Y                Y                 Y               Y              Y              Y               Y

      Notes: This table reports robustness tests from the ‘event-study’ estimates from equation (1). Each column in each panel reports the point
     estimates from a different regression. All models include the full set of controls from Table 1. The variables ‘Large’ and ‘Small’ indicate
     whether the initial capacity of power plants was above or below 75MW. All regressions are weighted by live births. Standard errors are
     clustered at the county-level. ***,**,* denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
                       Table A.6: The Effect of Coal Capacity on Infant Mortality, Robustness Tests

                                                             Dependent variable: Infant Mortality Rate
                                    Alternate samples             Alternate treatment radii            Log         Hydro Capacity
                                 Counties        Counties       Coal capacity    Coal capacity        infant       < 30     < 50
                                < 150 miles     < 30 miles         within           within           mortality     miles    miles
                                from plant      from plant        50 miles        100 miles            rate
     Panel A: Overall effects
     Coal capacity                0.188***        0.154***         0.105***          0.065***        0.005***
                                   (0.027)         (0.027)          (0.017)           (0.011)         (0.001)
     Hydro capacity                                                                                               -0.905*     -0.505**
                                                                                                                  (0.494)      (0.198)
     Panel B: Effects by Generating Capacity in 1940: Below vs. Above median
     Coal capacity × Below          -0.040          -0.053           0.000             0.015           -0.001




56
                                   (0.058)         (0.059)          (0.028)           (0.015)         (0.002)
     Coal capacity × Above        0.203***        0.165***         0.119***          0.071***        0.006***
                                   (0.027)         (0.028)          (0.018)           (0.011)         (0.001)
     Panel C: Effects by Household Electricity Access in 1940: Below vs. Above median
     Coal capacity × Below          0.002           0.017            -0.012            0.012           0.000
                                   (0.043)         (0.047)          (0.028)           (0.015)         (0.001)
     Coal capacity × Above        0.196***        0.154***         0.125***          0.080***        0.005***
                                   (0.029)         (0.028)          (0.021)           (0.012)         (0.001)
     Full controls                    Y              Y                Y                 Y               Y            Y           Y

      Notes: This table reports robustness tests for the difference-in-differences analysis from equation (2). Each column in each
     panel reports the point estimates from a different regression. All models include the full set of controls from Table 3. Alternate
     samples are constructed based on county proximity to the nearest power plant in 1962. All regressions are weighted by live births.
     Standard errors are clustered at the county-level. ***,**,* denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
Figure A.1: Trends in Power Plant Smoke Stack Height and Electrical Generating Capacity




                       (a) Stack Height of Newly Installed Power Plants




                         (b) Capacity of Newly Installed Power Plants
                         Notes: From Hales (1976).



                                             57
                          Figure A.2: Event Study Sample




Notes: This figure depicts the sample for the event-study analysis. White outlines identify
‘control’ counties located 30 to 90 miles from a power plant opening. Grey shades identify
‘treatment’ counties located within 30 miles of a power plant opening from 1938 to 1962.




                                            58
                          Figure A.3: Coal Capacity Sample




Notes: This figure depicts the sample for the difference-in-differences analysis. White outlines
identify counties located 30 to 90 miles from a capacity change. Shaded counties identify
counties within 30 miles of a capacity change from 1938 to 1962. Shaded counties are classified
according to quartile of change (<88MW, 88-263MW, 263-617MW, >617MW), where darker
shades indicate larger capacity increases.




                                              59
Figure A.4: Event Study: The Effect of Coal-Fired Power Plant Openings on Infant Mortality

                                                         1.5
            Infant Mortality Rate Per 1000 Live Births




                                                          1




                                                          .5




                                                          0


                                                                                              Construction

                                                         -.5
                                                               -10 -9   -8   -7   -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1               2   3   4   5   6
                                                                                  Years Relative to Power Plant Opening

         Notes: This figure reports the event study estimates based on equation (1). The coeffi-
         cients plot the time path of infant mortality in ‘treatment’ counties (<30 miles from a
         power plant) relative to ‘control’ counties (30-90 miles from a power plant). The period
         t ∈ {−10, −5} identifies pre-construction, t ∈ {−4, 0} identifies likely construction, and
         t ∈ {1, 6} identifies post-opening. Following (Kline, 2012), we estimate the regression
         for the period t ∈ {−11, 7} and suppress the endpoint coefficients. Vertical dashed lines
         denote the 95% confidence intervals based on standard errors that are clustered at the
         county-level.




                                                                                               60
                                                                   Figure A.5: Event Study: The Effect of Coal-Fired Power Plant Openings on Infant Mortality


                                                   (a) Below Median % Households w/ Electricity Access in 1940                                                              (b) Above Median % Households w/ Electricity Access in 1940

                                                   2                                                                                                                        2
     Infant Mortality Rate Per 1000 Live Births




                                                                                                                              Infant Mortality Rate Per 1000 Live Births
                                      1.5                                                                                                                      1.5


                                                   1                                                                                                                        1


                                                  .5                                                                                                                       .5


                                                   0                                                                                                                        0
                                                                                 Construction                                                                                                             Construction
                                                  -.5                                                                                                                      -.5


                                                  -1                                                                                                                       -1
61




                                                        -10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3                 4   5   6                                                         -10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3              4   5   6
                                                                    Years Relative to Power Plant Opening                                                                                    Years Relative to Power Plant Opening

                                                    Notes: These figures report the event study estimates based on equation (1), separately for counties with below and above median percentage
                                                    of households with electricity access in 1940. The coefficients plot the time path of infant mortality in ‘treatment’ counties (<30 miles from
                                                    a power plant) relative to ‘control’ counties (30-90 miles from a power plant). The period t ∈ {−10, −5} identifies pre-construction,
                                                    t ∈ {−4, 0} identifies likely construction, and t ∈ {1, 6} identifies post-opening. Following (Kline, 2012), we estimate the regression for the
                                                    period t ∈ {−11, 7} and suppress the endpoint coefficients. Vertical dashed lines denote the 95% confidence intervals based on standard
                                                    errors that are clustered at the county-level.
B      Appendix: Additional Information

B.1      Conceptual Framework
    We develop a simple partial equilibrium model to study the health impacts of expansions in
coal-fired generating capacity. We assume that a representative consumer of a U.S. county has a
concave utility function over electricity (E), health (H), and a composite good that we call shelter
(S). We also assume that health is a function of air quality (A) and access to electricity (E), and
that there is a market for electricity and shelter, but not for air quality. Finally, we assume that
air quality is directly affected by coal-fired power generation. The consumer’s problem is:


              MaxE,S∈R2+ U (E, H, S)        s.t.   dE + rS = Y,       H ≡ H(A, E),       A ≡ A(E),


where d and r represent prices of electricity and shelter, respectively, Y income, HA ≥ 0 the slope of
the pollution-mortality concentration-response function, HE ≥ 0 the marginal impact of electricity
access on health, AE ≤ 0 the effect of a marginal increase in coal-fired power generation on air
quality. To simplify, we define E as the share of hours of the day that the representative consumer
uses electricity. An expansion of coal-fired power generation allows the consumer to increase her
use of electricity during the day.
   The first order conditions to the consumer’s problem are given by:

                                                           dUS
                                      UE + UH · HA AE + HE =    .
                                                             r

Since UE , UH , and US are all positive, a tradeoff between electricity access and air pollution exists
only if AE and HA are both non-zero.53 That is, the tradeoff exists only if air pollution increases with
electricity generation (AE < 0), and health outcomes deteriorate with polluion (HA > 0). When
both conditions are met, the impact of welfare consequences of coal-fired generation will depend
on the level of electricity access. At low levels of access, the marginal benefit of an increase in
generation will tend to outweigh the pollution costs. As a result of concavity, the marginal benefit
will decrease as electricity production increases, and eventually be outweighed by the pollution
costs. This simple setup provides a microfoundation for the relationship depicted in Figure 3.




  53
     Notice that this setup is a variation of Greenstone and Jack (2015)’s framework used to evaluate why developing
countries have a low marginal willingness to pay for environmental quality. One of their leading explanation is that,
due to low income levels, citizens of those countries value increases in income more than marginal improvements in
environmental quality.

                                                         62
B.2    Power Plant Data Construction
   We have digitized power plant level data from the Federal Power Commission reports for the
years 1938-1962. These are the titles of the reports:
   1938-1947: Steam-Electric Plant Construction Cost and Annual Production Expenses, 1938-
1947
   1948-1962: Steam-Electric Plant Construction Cost and Annual Production Expenses (Annual
Supplements)
   As an example, we present a page from the 1957 report:




                                             63
