NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CAN CURRENCY COMPETITION WORK?
Jesús Fernández-Villaverde
Daniel Sanches
Working Paper 22157
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22157

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2016

We thank Todd Keister and Guillermo Ordoñez for useful comments. The views expressed in this
paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Reserve Bank of
Philadelphia, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research. Lastly,
we also thank the NSF for financial support.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Jesús Fernández-Villaverde and Daniel Sanches. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Can Currency Competition Work?
Jesús Fernández-Villaverde and Daniel Sanches
NBER Working Paper No. 22157
April 2016
JEL No. E40,E42,E52
ABSTRACT
Can competition among privately issued fiat currencies such as Bitcoin or Ethereum work? Only
sometimes. To show this, we build a model of competition among privately issued fiat currencies.
We modify the current workhorse of monetary economics, the Lagos-Wright environment, by
including entrepreneurs who can issue their own fiat currencies in order to maximize their utility.
Otherwise, the model is standard. We show that there exists an equilibrium in which price
stability is consistent with competing private monies, but also that there exists a continuum of
equilibrium trajectories with the property that the value of private currencies monotonically
converges to zero. These latter equilibria disappear, however, when we introduce productive
capital. We also investigate the properties of hybrid monetary arrangements with private and
government monies, of automata issuing money, and the role of network effects.

Jesús Fernández-Villaverde
University of Pennsylvania
160 McNeil Building
3718 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
jesusfv@econ.upenn.edu
Daniel Sanches
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia
Ten Independence Mall
Philadelphia, PA 19106-1574
Daniel.Sanches@phil.frb.org

1

Introduction
Can competition among privately issued fiat currencies work? The sudden appearance

of Bitcoin, Ethereum, and other cryptocurrencies has triggered a wave of public interest in
privately issued monies.1 A similar interest in the topic has not been seen, perhaps, since the
vivid polemics associated with the demise of free banking in the English-speaking world in
the middle of the 19th century (White, 1995). Somewhat surprisingly, this interest has not
translated, so far, into much research within monetary economics. Most papers analyzing the
cryptocurrency phenomenon have either been descriptive (Böhme, Christin, Edelman, and
Moore, 2015) or have dealt with governance and regulatory concerns from a legal perspective
(Chuen, 2015).2 In comparison, there has been much research related to the computer science
aspects of the phenomenon (Narayanan, Bonneau, Felten, Miller, and Goldfeder, 2016).
This situation is unfortunate. Without a theoretical understanding of how currency competition works, we cannot answer a long list of positive and normative questions. Among the
positive questions: Will a system of private money deliver price stability? Will one currency
drive all others from the market? Or will several of these currencies coexist along the equilibrium path? Will the market provide the socially optimum amount of money? Can private
monies and a government-issued money compete? Do private monies require a commodity
backing? Can a unit of account be separated from a medium of exchange? Among the
normative questions: Should governments prevent the circulation of private monies? Should
governments treat private monies as currencies or as any other regular property? Should the
private monies be taxed? Even more radically, now that cryptocurrencies are technically feasible, should we revisit Friedman and Schwartz’s (1986) celebrated arguments justifying the
role of governments as money issuers? There are even questions relevant for entrepreneurs:
What is the best strategy to jump start the circulation of a currency? How do you maximize
the seigniorage that comes from it?
To address some of these questions, we build a model of competition among privately
issued fiat currencies. We modify the workhorse of monetary economics, the Lagos and
Wright (2005) (LW) environment, by including entrepreneurs who can issue their own fiat
currencies in order to maximize their utility. Otherwise, the model is standard. Following LW
has two important advantages. First, since the model is particularly amenable to analysis, we
can derive many insights about currency competition. Second, the use of the LW framework
1

As of April 3, 2016, besides Bitcoin, three other cryptocurrencies (Etherum, Ripple, and Litecoin) have
market capitalizations over $100 million and another eleven between $10 and $100 million. Updated numbers
are reported by https://coinmarketcap.com/. Following convention, we will use Bitcoin, with a capital B,
to refer to the whole payment environment, and bitcoin, with a lower case b, to denote the currency units of
the payment system. See Antonopoulos (2015) for a technical introduction to Bitcoin.
2
Some exceptions are Chiu and Wong (2014) and Hendrickson, Hogan, and Luther (2016).

2

makes our many new results easy to compare with previous findings in the literature.
We highlight six of our results. First, we show the existence of a stationary equilibrium
with the property that the value of all privately issued currencies is constant over time. In
other words, there exists an equilibrium in which price stability is consistent with competing
private monies. This equilibrium captures Hayek’s (1999) vision of a system of private monies
competing among themselves to provide a stable means of exchange.
Second, there exists a continuum of equilibrium trajectories with the property that the
value of private currencies monotonically converges to zero. This result is intriguing because it
shows that the self-fulfilling inflationary episodes highlighted by Obstfeld and Rogoff (1983)
and Lagos and Wright (2003) in economies with government-issued money and a moneygrowth rule are not an inherent feature of public monies. Private monies are also subject to
self-fulfilling inflationary episodes, even when they are issued by profit-maximizing, long-lived
entrepreneurs who care about the future value of their monies.3
Third, we show that although the equilibrium with stable currencies Pareto dominates all
other equilibria in which the value of private currencies declines over time, a purely private
monetary system does not provide the socially optimum quantity of money. Private money
does not solve the trading frictions at the core of LW and, more generally, of essential models
of money (Wallace, 2001). In a well-defined sense, the market fails at providing the right
amount of money in ways that it does not fail at providing the right amount of other goods
and services.
Fourth, we characterize asymmetric equilibria in which one private currency drives the
other currencies out of the market. In these equilibria, a single entrepreneur becomes the
sole issuer of currency in the economy (a possibility conjectured by Hayek, 1999). Which
currency dominates is indeterminate. However, the threat of entry constrains the behavior
of this surviving entrepreneur. Market participants understand the discipline imposed by
free entry, even though everybody sees a single private agent supplying all currency in the
economy. As in the symmetric class, these equilibria may imply a stable or a declining value
of money.
Fifth, when we introduce a government competing with private money, we recover the set
of equilibrium allocations characterized by LW as a particular case in our analysis. Also, we
show that a hybrid monetary arrangement with constant prices requires the government to
follow a constant money supply policy. Because the problem of achieving a unique efficient
equilibrium remains unresolved under a money-growth rule, we investigate the extent to
3

Tullock (1975) suggested that competition among monies would prevent inflation (although he dismissed
this possibility due to the short planning horizon of most governments, which prevents them from valuing the
future income streams from maintaining a stable currency). Our analysis is a counterexample to Tullock’s
suggestion.

3

which the presence of government money can simultaneously promote stability and efficiency
under an alternative policy rule. In particular, we study the properties of a policy rule that
pegs the real value of government money. Under this alternative regime, the properties of
the dynamic system substantially change as we vary the policy parameter determining the
target for the real value of government money. We show that it is possible to implement an
efficient allocation as the unique global equilibrium, but this requires driving private money
out of the economy.
Sixth, we study the situation where the entrepreneurs use productive capital. We can
think about this case as an entrepreneur, for example, issuing money to be used for purchases
of goods on her internet platform. The presence of productive capital fundamentally changes
the properties of the dynamic system describing the evolution of the real value of private
currencies. Autarky is no longer a steady state and, as a result, there can be no equilibrium
with the property that the value of private currencies converges to zero. Furthermore, it is
possible to obtain an allocation that is arbitrarily close to the efficient one as the unique
equilibrium provided capital is sufficiently productive. This allocation vindicates Hayek’s
proposal. It also links our research to the literature on the provision of liquidity by productive
firms (Holmström and Tirole, 2011, and Dang, Gorton, Holmström, and Ordoñez, 2014).
We have further results involving automata issuing currency (inspired by the software
protocol behind Bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies) and the possible role of network effects
on currency circulation, but in the interest of space, we delay their discussion until later in
the paper.
The careful reader might have noticed that we have used the word “entrepreneur” and not
the more common “banker” to denote the issuers of private money. We believe this linguistic
turn is important. Our model highlights how the issuing of a private currency is logically
separated from banking. Both tasks were historically linked for logistical reasons: banks
had a central location in the network of payments that made it easy for them to introduce
currency in circulation. We will argue that the internet has broken the logistical barrier. The
issuing of bitcoins, for instance, is done through a proof-of-work system that is independent
of any banking activity (or at least of banking understood as the issuing and handling of
deposits and credit).4
This previous explanation may also address a second concern of this enlightened reader:
What are the differences between private monies issued in the past by banks (such as during
the Scottish free banking experience between 1716 and 1845) and modern cryptocurrencies?
As we mentioned, a first difference is the distribution process, which is now much wider and
4

Similarly, some of the community currencies that have achieved a degree of success do not depend on
banks backing or issuing them (see Greco, 2001).

4

more dispersed than before. A second difference is the possibility, through the protocols
embodied in the software, of having quasi-commitment devices regarding how much money
will be issued. The most famous of these devices is the 21 million bitcoins that will eventually
be released.5 We will discuss how to incorporate an automaton issuer of private money into
our model to analyze this property of cryptocurrencies. Third, cryptographic techniques,
such as those described in von zur Gathen (2015), make it harder to counterfeit digital
currencies than traditional physical monies, minimizing a historical obstacle that private
monies faced (Gorton, 1989). Fourth, most (but not all) historical cases of private money
were of commodity-backed currencies, while most cryptocurrencies are fully fiduciary.
Note that we ignore all issues related to the payment structure of cryptocurrencies, such
as the blockchain, the emergence of consensus on a network, or the possibilities of Goldfinger
attacks (see Narayanan, Bonneau, Felten, Miller, and Goldfeder 2016 for more details). While
these topics are of foremost importance, they require a specific modeling strategy that falls
far from the one we follow in this paper and that we feel is more suited to the macroeconomic
questions we focus on.
We are not the first to study private money. The literature is large and has approached
the topic from many angles. At the risk of being highly selective, we build on the tradition of
Cavalcanti, Erosa, and Temzelides (1999, 2005), Cavalcanti and Wallace (1999), Williamson
(1999), Berentsen (2006), and Monnet (2006).6 As we mentioned above, our emphasis is different from that in these previous papers, as we depart from modeling banks and their reserve
management problem. Our entrepreneurs issue fiat money that cannot be redeemed for any
other asset. Our characterization captures the technical features of most cryptocurrencies,
which are purely fiat (in fact, since the cryptocurrencies cannot be used to pay taxes in most
sovereigns, they are more “fiat” than public monies). Our partial vindication of Hayek shares
many commonalities with Martin and Schreft (2006), who were the first to prove the existence
of equilibria for environments in which outside money is issued competitively. Lastly, we cannot forget Klein (1974) and his application of industrial organization insights to competition
among monies.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents our model. Sections 3 and
4 analyze the existence and properties of the equilibria of the model. Section 5 introduces a
government issuing public money. Section 6 considers digital currencies issued by automata.
Section 7 extends the model with productive capital. Section 8 incorporates network effects.
Section 9 offers some concluding remarks.
5

We use the term “quasi-commitment” because the software code can be changed by sufficient consensus in
the network. This possibility is not appreciated enough in the discussion about open-source cryptocurrencies.
For the importance of commitment, see Araujo and Camargo (2008).
6
See, as well, from a very different methodological perspective, Selgin and White (1994).

5

2

Model
The economy consists of a large number of buyers and sellers, with a [0, 1]-continuum

of each type, and a countable infinity of entrepreneurs. Each period is divided into two
subperiods. In the first subperiod, all types interact in a centralized market (CM) where a
perishable good, referred to as the CM good, is produced and consumed. Buyers and sellers
can produce the CM good by using a linear technology that requires effort as input. All
agents want to consume the CM good.
In the second subperiod, buyers and sellers interact in a decentralized market (DM)
characterized by pairwise meetings, with entrepreneurs remaining idle. In particular, a buyer
is randomly matched with a seller with probability σ ∈ (0, 1) and vice versa. In the DM,
buyers want to consume, but cannot produce, whereas sellers are able to produce, but do
not want to consume. A seller is able to produce a perishable good, referred to as the DM
good, using a divisible technology that delivers one unit of the good for each unit of effort he
exerts. An entrepreneur is neither a producer nor a consumer of the DM good.
Entrepreneurs are endowed with a technology to create tokens, which can take either a
physical or an electronic form. The essential feature of the tokens is that their authenticity
can be publicly verified at zero cost (for example, thanks to the application of cryptography
techniques), so that counterfeiting will not be an issue. As we will see, this technology will
permit entrepreneurs to issue tokens that can circulate as a medium of exchange.
Let us now explicitly describe preferences. Start with a typical buyer. Let xbt ∈ R denote
net consumption of the CM good, and let qt ∈ R+ denote consumption of the DM good. A
buyer’s preferences are represented by

U b xbt , qt = xbt + u (qt ) .
The utility function u : R+ → R is continuously differentiable, increasing, and strictly concave, with u0 (0) = ∞ and u (0) = 0. Consider now a typical seller. Let xst ∈ R denote net
consumption of the CM good, and let nt ∈ R+ denote the seller’s effort level to produce the
DM good. A seller’s preferences are represented by
U s (xst , nt ) = xst − w (nt ) .
Assume that w : R+ → R+ is continuously differentiable, increasing, and weakly convex, with
w (0) = 0. Finally, let xit ∈ R+ denote entrepreneur i’s consumption of the CM good, with

6

i ∈ {1, 2, 3, ...}. Entrepreneur i has preferences represented by
∞
X

β t xit .

t=0

The discount factor β ∈ (0, 1) is common across all types.
Throughout the analysis, we assume that buyers and sellers are anonymous (i.e., their
identities are unknown and their trading histories are privately observable), which precludes
credit in the decentralized market. In contrast, an entrepreneur’s trading history can be
publicly observable (i.e., an entrepreneur is endowed with a record-keeping technology that
permits him to reveal costlessly his trading history). As we will argue below, public knowledge
of an entrepreneur’s trading history will permit the circulation of private currencies.

3

Perfect Competition
Because the meetings in the DM are anonymous, there is no scope for trading future

promises in this market. As a result, a medium of exchange is essential to achieve allocations
that we could not achieve without it. In a typical monetary model, a medium of exchange is
supplied in the form of a government issued fiat currency, with the government following a
monetary policy rule (e.g., money-growth rule). Also, all agents in the economy can observe
the money supply at each date. These features allow agents to form beliefs about the exchange
value of money in the current and future periods.
We start our analysis by considering the possibility of a purely private monetary arrangement. In particular, we focus on a system in which entrepreneurs issue intrinsically worthless
tokens that circulate as a medium of exchange, attaining a strictly positive value. These
privately issued currencies are not associated with any promise to exchange them for goods
at some future date. Because the currency issued by an entrepreneur is nonfalsifiable and an
entrepreneur’s trading history is publicly observable, all agents can verify the total amount
put into circulation by any individual issuer.
Profit maximization will determine the money supply in the economy. Since all agents
know that an entrepreneur enters the currency-issuing business to maximize profits, one
can describe individual behavior by solving the entrepreneur’s optimization problem in the
market for private currencies. These predictions about individual behavior allow agents to
form beliefs regarding the exchange value of private currencies, given the observability of
individual issuances. In other words, profit maximization in a private money arrangement
serves the same purpose as the monetary policy rule in the case of a government monopoly

7

on currency issue. As a result, it is possible to conceive a system in which privately issued
currencies can attain a positive exchange value.
In our analysis, a monetary unit comes in several brands issued by competing entrepreneurs.
Let φit ∈ R+ denote the value of a “dollar” issued by entrepreneur i ∈ {1, 2, 3, ...} in terms
of the CM good. Because there is free entry in the currency-issuing business and the operational cost for an entrepreneur is zero, the number of entrepreneurs in the market will
be indeterminate. Throughout the paper, we restrict attention to equilibria in which a
fixed number N ∈ {1, 2, 3, ...} of entrepreneurs enter the market for private currencies, with

∈ RN
φt = φ1t , ..., φN
t
+ denoting the vector of real prices. We refer to those who enter the
currency-issuing business as active entrepreneurs.7

3.1

Buyer

Let us start by describing the portfolio problem of a typical buyer. Let W b (m, t) denote

the value function for a buyer holding a portfolio m = m1 , ..., mN ∈ RN
+ of privately issued
currencies in the CM, and let V b (m, t) denote the value function in the DM. The Bellman
equation can be written as
W b (m, t) =

max

(x,m̂)∈R×RN
+




x + V b (m̂, t)

subject to the budget constraint
φt · m̂ + x = φt · m.
The vector m̂ ∈ RN
+ describes the buyer’s monetary portfolio after trading in the CM, and
x ∈ R denotes net consumption of the CM good. The value function W b (m, t) can be written
as
W b (m, t) = φt · m + W b (0, t) ,
with the intercept given by


W b (0, t) = max −φt · m̂ + V b (m̂, t) .
m̂∈RN
+

(1)

The value for a buyer holding a portfolio m in the DM is given by


V b (m, t) = σ u (q (m, t)) + βW b (m − d (m, t) , t + 1) + (1 − σ) βW b (m, t + 1) ,
7

(2)

It would be easy to extend the model to situations where the operational costs of running a currency
are positive, which will pin down the number of entrepreneurs in equilibrium.

8

with {q (m, t) , d (m, t)} representing the terms of trade. Specifically, q (m, t) ∈ R+ denotes

production of the DM good and d (m, t) = d1 (m, t) , ..., dN (m, t) ∈ RN
+ denotes the vector
of currencies the buyer transfers to the seller. Because W b (m, t) = φt · m + W b (0, t), we can
rewrite (2) as


V b (m, t) = σ u (q (m, t)) − β × φt+1 · d (m, t) + β × φt+1 · m + βW b (0, t + 1) .
The standard approach in the search-theoretic literature determines the terms of trade
by Nash bargaining. Lagos and Wright (2005) demonstrate that Nash bargaining can result
in a holdup problem, leading to inefficient trading activity in the DM. Aruoba, Rocheteau,
and Waller (2007) consider alternative axiomatic bargaining solutions and conclude that the
properties of these solutions matter for the efficiency of monetary equilibrium. To avoid
inefficiencies arising from the choice of the bargaining protocol, which may complicate the
interpretation of the main results in the paper, we assume the buyer makes a take-it-or-leave-it
offer to the seller.8
With take-it-or-leave-it offers, the buyer chooses the amount of the DM good, represented
by q ∈ R+ , the seller is supposed to produce and the vector of currencies, represented by

d = d1 , ..., dN ∈ RN
+ , to be transferred to the seller to maximize expected surplus in the
DM. Formally, the terms of trade (q, d) are determined by solving
max

+1
(q,d)∈RN
+



u (q) − β × φt+1 · d

subject to the seller’s participation constraint
−w (q) + β × φt+1 · d ≥ 0
and the buyer’s liquidity constraint
d ≤ m.

(3)

Let q ∗ ∈ R+ denote the quantity satisfying u0 (q ∗ ) = w0 (q ∗ ) (i.e., q ∗ is the surplus-maximizing
quantity). The solution to the buyer’s problem is given by
(
q (m, t) =


w−1 β × φt+1 · m if φt+1 · m < β −1 w (q ∗ ) ,
q ∗ if φt+1 · m ≥ β −1 w (q ∗ ) ,

8

Lagos and Wright (2005) show that, with take-it-or-leave-it offers by the buyer, it is possible to achieve
the socially efficient allocation provided the government implements the Friedman rule.

9

(
φt+1 · d (m,t) =

φt+1 · m if φt+1 · m < β −1 w (q ∗ ) ,
β −1 w (q ∗ ) if φt+1 · m ≥ β −1 w (q ∗ ) .

Note that the solution to the bargaining problem allows us to characterize real expenditures
in the DM, given by φt+1 ·d (m,t), as a function of the buyer’s portfolio, with the composition
of the basket of currencies transferred to the seller remaining indeterminate.
The indeterminacy of the portfolio of currencies transferred to the seller in the DM is
reminiscent of Kareken and Wallace (1981). These authors have established that, in the absence of portfolio restrictions and barriers to trade, the exchange rate between two currencies
is indeterminate in a flexible-price economy. In our framework, a similar result holds with
respect to privately issued currencies, given the absence of transaction costs when dealing
with different currencies in the CM.
Given the previously derived solution to the bargaining problem, the value function
V (m, t) takes the form



V b (m, t) = σ u w−1 β × φt+1 · m − β × φt+1 · m + β × φt+1 · m + βW b (0, t + 1)
if φt+1 · m < β −1 w (q ∗ ) and the form
V b (m, t) = σ [u (q ∗ ) − w (q ∗ )] + β × φt+1 · m + βW b (0, t + 1)
if φt+1 · m ≥ β −1 w (q ∗ ). Then, the first-order conditions for the optimal portfolio choice are
−φit + Vib (m̂, t) ≤ 0,
with equality if m̂i > 0. If φit+1 /φit < β −1 for all i, then the optimal portfolio choice satisfies
φit
u0 (q (m, t))
σ 0
+1−σ =
w (q (m, t))
βφit+1

(4)


for each brand i, with q (m, t) = w−1 β × φt+1 · m . These conditions imply that, in an
equilibrium with multiple currencies, the expected return on money must be equalized across
all valued currencies (i.e., all currencies for which m̂i > 0). In the absence of portfolio
restrictions, an agent is willing to hold in portfolio two alternative currencies only if they yield
the same rate of return, given that these assets are equally useful in facilitating exchange in
the DM.

10

3.2

Seller

Let W s (m, t) denote the value function for a seller holding a portfolio m ∈ RN
+ of privately
issued currencies in the CM, and let V s (m, t) denote the value function in the DM. The
Bellman equation can be written as
W s (m, t) =

max

(x,m̂)∈R×RN
+

[x + V s (m̂, t)]

subject to the budget constraint
φt · m̂ + x = φt · m.
The value V s (m, t) satisfies
V s (m, t) = σ [−w (q (m̃, t)) + βW s (m + d (m̃, t) , t + 1)] + (1 − σ) βW s (m, t + 1) .
Here the vector m̃ ∈ RN
+ denotes the buyer’s monetary portfolio (i.e., the seller’s trading
partner in the DM). In the LW framework, the terms of trade in the decentralized market
only depend on the buyer’s monetary portfolio, which implies that monetary assets do not
bring any additional benefit to the seller in the decentralized market. As a result, the seller
optimally chooses not to hold monetary assets across periods when φit+1 /φit < β −1 for all i.

3.3

Entrepreneur

Now we describe the entrepreneur’s portfolio problem. The entrepreneur’s budget constraint is given by
i
xit + φit Mt−1
+

X
j6=i

φjt Mtj = φit Mti +

X
j6=i

j
φjt Mt−1

at each date t ≥ 0. Here Mti ∈ R+ denotes entrepreneur i’s circulation in the current period
and Mtj ∈ R+ denotes entrepreneur i’s holdings of currency issued by entrepreneur j 6= i.
i
Note that Mti − Mt−1
gives entrepreneur i’s net circulation. The privately issued currencies

are not associated with an explicit promise by the issuers to exchange them for goods at a
future date. But an entrepreneur can make purchases and sales in the CM to adjust the
circulation of his own brand if this is consistent with profit maximization.
If φjt+1 /φjt < β −1 for all j 6= i, the entrepreneur i chooses not to hold other currencies

11

across periods so that Mtj = 0 for all j 6= i. Thus, we can rewrite the budget constraint as
i
= φit Mti
xit + φit Mt−1

at each date t ≥ 0. In this case, the entrepreneur’s lifetime utility is given by
∞
X


β τ −t φiτ Mτi − Mτi −1 .

τ =t

The entrepreneur’s lifetime utility derives from the currency-issuing business, given that
seigniorage is the only source of income (a privilege derived from access to the record-keeping
 ∞
technologies). Consider a sequence of real prices φit t=0 with φit > 0 for all t ≥ 0. Then, we
must have
i
Mti ≥ Mt−1

in every period t because consumption must be nonnegative. When φit > 0 for all t ≥ 0, it
follows that entrepreneur i’s money supply must be weakly increasing.
As previously mentioned, we assume free entry in the market for private currencies. In
the absence of operational costs, the free-entry condition implies
∞
X


β τ −t φiτ Mτi − Mτi −1 = 0

τ =t

at all dates t ≥ 0. This condition, together with nonnegative consumption xit ≥ 0 at all dates,
implies

i
φit Mti − Mt−1
=0
at all dates t ≥ 0. If φit > 0 holds at all dates t ≥ 0, then the only feasible choice for
i
entrepreneur i is Mti = Mt−1
in every period. In other words, entrepreneur i must choose
i
Mti = M i at all dates t ≥ 0, given some initial state M−1
= M i > 0. Along an equilibrium

trajectory, the nominal supply of each brand remains constant over time to make it consistent
with free entry. The market discipline imposed by free entry takes the form of a constant
nominal supply in the absence of operational costs. However, as we will see, the real value of
a unit of money issued by entrepreneur i can vary over time.

3.4

Equilibrium

We say that currency i is valued in equilibrium if φit > 0 for all t ≥ 0. If currency i is
valued, then we denote its real return by γ it+1 ≡ φit+1 /φit . In an equilibrium with the property
12

that currencies i and j coexist as a medium of exchange, condition (4) implies γ it+1 = γ jt+1
at all dates. Let γ t+1 denote the common rate of return in an equilibrium with multiple
currencies (i.e., the common return across all currencies that are valued in equilibrium). If
γ t+1 < β −1 , then the liquidity constraint (3) is binding. Let qt ∈ R+ denote the quantity
traded in the DM in period t. We can rewrite the first-order conditions (4) as a single
condition
σ

1
u0 (qt )
+1−σ =
.
0
w (qt )
βγ t+1

(5)

This condition determines production in a bilateral meeting as a function of the expected

return on money. Thus, we can use (5) to implicitly define qt = q γ t+1 , with q 0 (γ) > 0 for
all γ > 0. Thus, a higher return on money results in a larger amount produced in the DM.
The demand for real balances is given by
z γ t+1



w q γ t+1
≡
βγ t+1


.

(6)

As we will see, the demand for real balances can be either increasing or decreasing in the rate
of return γ t+1 , depending on the specification of preferences and technologies.
In equilibrium, the market-clearing condition
N
X

φit Mti = z γ t+1



(7)

i=1

must hold in all periods t ≥ 0. The only asset market in the economy is the market for
privately issued currencies. A buyer rebalances his portfolio in the centralized market and a
seller exits the centralized market holding no assets. Because quasi-linear preferences imply
that all buyers have the same demand function, condition (6) provides the aggregate demand
for real balances. The real value of the money supply is obtained by summing up the real
value of each private currency.
Let bit ≡ φit Mti denote the real value of the total supply of currency i in period t and let
bt ∈ RN
+ denote the vector of real values in period t. Free entry in the market for private
currencies requires
bit − γ t bit−1 = 0

(8)

for each i at all dates t ≥ 0. Finally, the market-clearing condition can be written as
N
X

bit = z γ t+1

i=1

13



(9)

at all dates t ≥ 0. Given these conditions, we can formally define an equilibrium in terms of
the sequence {bt , γ t }∞
t=0 .
Definition 1 A perfect-foresight equilibrium is a sequence {bt , γ t }∞
t=0 satisfying (8), (9),
bit ≥ 0, and 0 ≤ γ t ≤ β −1 for all t ≥ 0 and i ∈ {1, ..., N }.
It is a property of any equilibrium allocation that the exchange rate among private currencies remains indeterminate: the solution to the bargaining problem allows us to derive total
real expenditures in the DM, but not the composition of the monetary portfolio transferred
to the seller. As previously mentioned, this result is a direct consequence of the absence of
portfolio restrictions and transaction costs.

4

Existence
We start our analysis by characterizing symmetric equilibria with the property bit = bjt for

all i and j. In these equilibria, all active entrepreneurs issue currencies that circulate as a
medium of exchange, with the market for privately issued currencies equally divided among
them. The following proposition formally establishes the existence of symmetric equilibria.
Proposition 1 There exists a continuum of equilibrium trajectories with the property bit = bjt
for all i and j at all dates t ≥ 0. These equilibria can be characterized by a sequence {γ t }∞
t=0
satisfying

z γ t+1 = γ t z (γ t )

(10)

and 0 ≤ γ t ≤ β −1 at all dates t ≥ 0.
Proof. Because bit = bjt for all i and j, the market-clearing condition reduces to
N bt = z γ t+1



for some common value bt ≥ 0. Free entry implies bt = γ t bt−1 at each date t ≥ 0. Thus,
a symmetric equilibrium can be defined as a sequence {γ t }∞
t=0 satisfying (10). This equation implicitly defines a mapping γ t+1 = f (γ t ) with at least two fixed points: the origin


γ t , γ t+1 = (0, 0) and the interior steady state γ t , γ t+1 = (1, 1). As a result, there exists
a continuum of equilibrium trajectories that can be constructed starting from any arbitrary
point γ 0 ∈ (0, 1).
An immediate consequence of the previous proposition is the existence of a stationary
equilibrium with the property that the value of all privately issued currencies is constant over
14

time. Or more plainly: there exists an equilibrium in which price stability is consistent with
competing private monies.
Corollary 2 There exists an interior stationary equilibrium with γ t = 1 for all t ≥ 0.
Proof. As we have seen, equation (10) implicitly defines a mapping γ t+1 = f (γ t ) for

which γ t , γ t+1 = (1, 1) is a fixed point. Thus, setting γ t = 1 for all t ≥ 0 is a solution
satisfying the boundary condition 0 ≤ γ t ≤ β −1 .
In this equilibrium, the exchange value of private currencies remains stable over time.
Agents do not expect monetary conditions to vary over time so that the real value of private
currencies, as well as their expected return, remains constant. Thus, it is possible to have
an equilibrium with stable currencies, even though these privately issued tokens are not
associated with any explicit promise to exchange them for goods at some future date. Our
analysis finds that the type of purely private arrangement initially envisaged by Hayek (1999)
is feasible. Hayek argued that private agents through markets can achieve desirable outcomes,
even in the field of money and banking. According to his view, government intervention is
not necessary for the establishment of a stable monetary system.
However, we will show momentarily that other allocations with undesirable properties can
also be consistent with the same equilibrium conditions. These equilibria are characterized by
the persistently declining purchasing power of private currencies and falling trading activity.
There is no reason to forecast that the equilibrium with stable value will prevail over these
different equilibria.
Furthermore, even the equilibrium with a stable value of currencies is socially inefficient.
In this equilibrium, the quantity traded in the DM q̂ satisfies
σ

1
u0 (q̂)
+1−σ = ,
0
w (q̂)
β

which is below the socially efficient quantity (i.e., q̂ < q ∗ ). Although the equilibrium with
stable currencies Pareto dominates all other equilibria in which the value of private currencies
declines over time, a purely private monetary system does not provide the socially optimum
quantity of money, as defined in Friedman (1969).
Our next step is to characterize nonstationary equilibria with the property that the value of
privately issued currencies collapses along the equilibrium path. At this point, it makes sense
to restrict attention to preferences and technologies that imply an empirically plausible money
demand function satisfying the property that the demand for real balances is decreasing in
the inflation rate (i.e., increasing in the real return on money). In particular, it is helpful to
15

assume that u (q) = (1 − η)−1 q 1−η and w (q) = (1 + α)−1 q 1+α , with 0 < η < 1 and α ≥ 0. In
this case, the demand for real balances satisfies

z γ t+1



 1+α −1 
1+α
 η+α
βγ t+1 η+α
σ
.
=
1+α
1 − (1 − σ) βγ t+1

Note that z 0 (γ) > 0 for all γ > 0 so that the demand for real balances is increasing in the real
return on money. The dynamic system describing the equilibrium evolution of γ t is given by
1+α
η+α
γ t+1

1+α

−1

γ tη+α

1+α .
1+α =

 η+α
η+α
[1
−
(1
−
σ)
βγ
]
1 − (1 − σ) βγ t+1
t

(11)

Because the initial choice γ 0 is arbitrary, there exist multiple equilibrium trajectories that
converge monotonically to autarky.9
Proposition 2 Suppose u (q) = (1 − η)−1 q 1−η and w (q) = (1 + α)−1 q 1+α , with 0 < η < 1
and α ≥ 0. Then, there exists a continuum of equilibrium trajectories starting from any
γ 0 ∈ (0, 1) with the property that the value of private money monotonically converges to zero.
Proof. Note that γ t = 0 when γ t+1 = 0 because the demand function z (γ) goes to zero
as γ converges to zero from above. When γ t+1 = β −1 , it follows that γ t < β −1 . Using the
Implicit Function Theorem, we have

z 0 γ t+1
dγ t
=
>0
dγ t+1
γ t z 0 (γ t ) + z (γ t )


for any γ t+1 ∈ 0, β −1 . The Inverse Function Theorem implies
dγ t+1
γ z 0 (γ ) + z (γ t )

= t 0t
>0
dγ t
z γ t+1


for any γ t ∈ 0, f −1 β −1 , so the implicitly defined mapping γ t+1 = f (γ t ) is strictly increasing. In particular, we have
dγ t+1
dγ t

=
γ t =γ t+1 =1

z 0 (1) + z (1)
> 1,
z 0 (1)

which means that the mapping γ t+1 = f (γ t ) crosses the 45-degree line from below at the

point γ t , γ t+1 = (1, 1). Thus, the unique interior stationary solution is given by γ t = 1 for
9

Sanches (2016) has derived a similar result in an economy with the property that entrepreneurs issue
debt claims that circulate as a medium of exchange.

16

all t ≥ 0. In this case, a seller is willing to produce the quantity q̂ satisfying
σ

u0 (q̂)
+ 1 − σ = β −1 .
w0 (q̂)

For any initial choice γ 0 ∈ (0, 1), the mapping γ t+1 = f (γ t ) yields a strictly decreasing
sequence {γ t }∞
t=0 with the property limt→∞ γ t = 0.
Figure 1 plots the dynamic system (11) with α = .5, β = .9, η = .5, and σ = .9. For
any initial condition γ 0 ∈ (0, 1), there exists an associated equilibrium trajectory that is
monotonically decreasing. Along this equilibrium path, real money balances decrease monotonically over time and converge to zero, so the equilibrium allocation approaches autarky
as t → ∞. The decline in the desired amount of real balances follows from the agent’s optimization problem when the value of privately issued currencies persistently depreciates over
time (i.e., the anticipated decline in the purchasing power of private money leads agents to
reduce their real money balances over time). As a result, trading activity in the decentralized
market monotonically declines along the equilibrium trajectory. This property of equilibrium
allocations with privately issued currencies implies that private money is inherently unstable
in that changes in beliefs can lead to undesirable self-fulfilling inflationary episodes.

Figure 1: Dynamic system (11)

17

The existence of these inflationary equilibrium trajectories in a purely private monetary arrangement implies that hyperinflationary episodes are not an exclusive property of
government-issued money. Obstfeld and Rogoff (1983) build economies that can display selffulfilling inflationary episodes when the government is the sole issuer of currency and follows
a money-growth rule. Lagos and Wright (2003) show that search-theoretic monetary models
with government-supplied currency can also have self-fulfilling inflationary episodes under a
money-growth rule. Our analysis of privately issued currencies shows that self-fulfilling inflationary equilibria can occur in the absence of government currency when private agents enter
the currency-issuing business to maximize profits. Thus, replacing government monopoly
under a money-growth rule with free entry and profit maximization does not overcome the
fundamental fragility associated with fiduciary regimes, public or private.
In the following section, we introduce government currency and study the possibility of
stabilization policies. As we will see, the set of equilibrium allocations characterized by LW
arises as a special case in our analysis. In addition, we will study the equilibrium interaction
between private and government monies and derive some interesting properties.
As previously mentioned, the stationary equilibrium with a stable value of private currencies Pareto dominates any nonstationary equilibria, even though that equilibrium does
not achieve the first best. To verify this claim, note that the quantity traded in the DM
starts from a value below q̂ and decreases monotonically in a nonstationary equilibrium. As
a result, the allocation in the equilibrium with a stable value of money Pareto dominates the
allocation associated with any inflationary equilibrium.
Now we turn to asymmetric equilibria. Given that utility is linear and transferable in
the CM, the allocation in the DM is what matters for the welfare analysis. However, we
are still interested in studying the CM allocation in our positive analysis of currency competition. Given that the production of tokens costs nothing, there is no condition to pin
down the market share of each active entrepreneur, represented by the real values bit , in the
market for private currencies. Although the indeterminacy of the market share has no welfare
consequences, we want to study some asymmetric equilibria in our positive analysis.
An asymmetric equilibrium of interest involves a unique private currency circulating in the
economy, despite free entry. The following proposition shows that any equilibrium allocation
can be characterized by the dynamic system (10) and that it is possible to construct an
equilibrium in which a unique private currency dominates other currencies as a medium of
exchange, even though there is free entry in the currency-issuing business. Again, this occurs
because the market shares across different types of money are indeterminate.
Proposition 3 An equilibrium allocation can be characterized by a sequence {γ t }∞
t=0 satisfying (10) and the boundary condition 0 ≤ γ t ≤ β −1 at all dates. In particular, there exists
18

an equilibrium with valued money satisfying b1t = bt > 0 and bit = 0 for all i ≥ 2 at all dates
t ≥ 0.
Proof. Because (8) must hold for all i, we have
N
X

bit = γ t

N
X

bit−1 .

i=1

i=1

Condition (9) implies
N
X


bit = z γ t+1 .

i=1

Thus, the dynamic system (10), together with the boundary condition 0 ≤ γ t ≤ β −1 , describes
the evolution of the real return on money γ t in any equilibrium. As we have seen, condition
(5) implies that the sequence {γ t }∞
t=0 determines the equilibrium allocation in the DM.
Note that bjt = 0 implies either φjt = 0 or Mtj = 0, or both. Because bit = 0 for all i ≥ 2,

the market-clearing condition implies b1t = z γ t+1 . Free entry requires that the sequence
1
of returns {γ t }∞
t=0 satisfy (10). Hence, there exists an equilibrium with bt = z (1) > 0 and

bit = 0 for all i ≥ 2 at all dates t ≥ 0. In addition, there exists a continuum of equilibria with

b1t = z γ t+1 > 0 and bit = 0 for all i ≥ 2 at all dates t ≥ 0, with {γ t }∞
t=0 representing any
sequence that solves (10) starting from an arbitrary point γ 0 ∈ (0, 1).
In these equilibria, a single entrepreneur becomes the sole issuer of currency in the economy. The threat of entry constrains his behavior and market participants understand the
discipline imposed by free entry, even though all agents see a single private agent supplying
all currency in the economy. As in the symmetric class, an equilibrium with a stable value
of money is as likely to occur as an equilibrium with a declining value of money.

5

Government
In this section, we study the interaction between private and government monies and the

possibility of monetary stabilization through public policy. Suppose the government enters
the currency-issuing business by creating its own brand. The government budget constraint
is given by
φt M̄t + τ t = φt M̄t−1 ,
where τ t ∈ R is the real value of lump-sum taxes, φt ∈ R+ is the real value of governmentissued currency, and M̄t ∈ R+ is the amount supplied at date t. What makes government
19

money fundamentally different from private money is that behind the government brand there
is a fiscal authority with the power to tax agents in the economy.

5.1

Money-growth rule

We start by assuming that the government follows a money-growth rule of the form
M̄t = (1 + ω) M̄t−1 ,
with ω ≥ β − 1. In any equilibrium with valued government money, we must have
φt+1
= γ t+1
φt

(12)

at all dates t ≥ 0. Here γ t+1 continues to represent the common rate of return across all
currencies that are valued in equilibrium. In the absence of portfolio restrictions, government
money must yield the same rate of return as other monetary assets for it to be valued in
equilibrium.
Let mt ≡ φt M̄t denote the real value of government-issued currency. Then, condition (12)
implies
mt = (1 + ω) mt−1 γ t

(13)

at all dates. The market-clearing condition in the asset market becomes
mt +

N
X

bit = z γ t+1



(14)

i=1

for all t ≥ 0. Given these changes in the equilibrium conditions, it is now possible to provide
a formal definition of equilibrium in the presence of government intervention.
Definition 3 Given the policy parameter ω, a perfect-foresight equilibrium is a sequence
−1
i
{bt , mt , γ t }∞
for all t ≥ 0 and
t=0 satisfying (8), (13), (14), bt ≥ 0, mt ≥ 0, and 0 ≤ γ t ≤ β

i ∈ {1, ..., N }.
We start our analysis of a hybrid monetary arrangement by characterizing equilibria
with the property bit = bjt = mt for all i and j. In these symmetric equilibria, private
and government monies attain the same exchange value. Our next result shows that an
equilibrium with this property exists if and only if the government follows the policy ω = 0
(i.e., constant government supply).

20

Proposition 4 A symmetric equilibrium with the property that private and government monies
attain the same value exists if and only if ω = 0. In this case, there exist multiple equilibrium
−1
trajectories characterized by a sequence {γ t }∞
at all dates
t=0 satisfying (10) and 0 ≤ γ t ≤ β

t ≥ 0.
Proof. Symmetry requires bit = mt for all i at all dates. Let bt denote the common value.
Thus, the market-clearing condition implies

z γ t+1
bt =
.
N +1
Since the free-entry condition, bt −γ t bt−1 = 0, must hold at all dates, the equilibrium evolution
of the real return on money γ t must satisfy (10).
As previously mentioned, condition (12) implies mt = (1 + ω) mt−1 γ t . Because mt = bt
must hold in a symmetric equilibrium, we have

z γ t+1 = (1 + ω) z (γ t ) γ t .
This means that an equilibrium with the property that private and government monies attain
the same value exists if and only if ω = 0. As a result, an equilibrium sequence {γ t }∞
t=0 must
satisfy (10) and the boundary condition 0 ≤ γ t ≤ β −1 at all dates.
The previous result implies that price stability with both private and government monies
circulating as competing media of exchange can be attained under a money-growth rule only
if the government maintains a constant supply of its own brand. As in the purely private
monetary economy, there exist multiple equilibrium trajectories with the property that the
value of money monotonically declines over time, converging to zero. Thus, the introduction of
the government brand under a money-growth rule does not resolve the instability of fiduciarycurrency regimes.
A natural question to ask is whether it is possible to have an equilibrium with both private
and government monies circulating in the economy when government policy deviates from
ω = 0. If ω 6= 0, then we have to consider the possibility of asymmetric equilibria with the
property that government money and private money have different values, even though both
monies yield the same rate of return. These equilibria can be characterized by a sequence
{bt , mt }∞
t=0 satisfying

N bt + mt = z γ t+1 ,

(15)

bt = γ t bt−1 ,

(16)

mt = (1 + ω) mt−1 γ t ,

(17)

21

together with the boundary conditions bt ≥ 0, mt ≥ 0, and 0 ≤ γ t ≤ β −1 . The following
proposition establishes that a hybrid monetary arrangement with a constant return on money
does not exist when the government pursues either an expansionary or a contractionary policy.
Proposition 5 There is no equilibrium with the properties that the return on monetary assets
remains constant over time and private and government monies coexist as media of exchange
when ω 6= 0.
Proof. Suppose that γ t = γ̄ for all t ≥ 0. Then, (16) implies, at all dates,
bt
bt−1

= γ̄.

Condition (17) implies, at all dates,
mt
= (1 + ω) γ̄.
mt−1
Finally, condition (15) requires, at all dates,
N bt + mt = N bt−1 + mt−1 .
These conditions can be simultaneously satisfied if and only if ω = 0 and γ̄ = 1.
The previous result implies that expansionary and contractionary policies are not consistent with the coexistence of stable private and government monies (i.e., monetary assets
with the property that their returns remain constant over time). Thus, these assets cannot
jointly serve as stable media of exchange when the government deviates from the constant
money supply rule. Under a money-growth regime, the existence of a stable hybrid monetary
arrangement requires the government to follow a constant money supply rule.
As should be expected, it is possible to have equilibria with valued government money
only. In particular, we can construct asymmetric equilibria with the property bit = 0 for all i
and mt ≥ 0 at all dates t ≥ 0 (i.e., only government-issued currency circulates as a medium
of exchange). In these equilibria, the sequence of returns satisfies, for all dates

z γ t+1 = (1 + ω) z (γ t ) γ t .

(18)

The dynamic properties of the system (18) are exactly the same as those derived in Lagos and
Wright (2003) when preferences and technologies imply a demand function for real balances
that is strictly decreasing in the inflation rate. For instance, selecting the functional forms
22

u (q) = (1 − η)−1 q 1−η and w (q) = (1 + α)−1 q 1+α results in a dynamic system of the form
1+α
η+α
γ t+1

1+α

−1

γ tη+α

1+α

 1+α = (1 + ω)
[1 − (1 − σ) βγ t ] η+α
1 − (1 − σ) βγ t+1 η+α

(19)

with 0 < η < 1 and α ≥ 0.
A policy choice ω in the range (β − 1, 0) is associated with a steady state characterized
by deflation and a strictly positive real return on money. In particular, γ t = (1 + ω)−1 for all
t ≥ 0. In this stationary equilibrium, the quantity traded in the DM, represented by q (ω),
satisfies
σ

1+ω
u0 (q (ω))
+1−σ =
.
0
w (q (ω))
β

Figure 2 plots the dynamic system (19) for several values of the money growth rate ω with
α = .5, β = .9, η = .5, and σ = .9.

Figure 2: Dynamic system (19)
If we let ω → β − 1, the associated steady state delivers an efficient allocation (i.e.,
q (ω) → q ∗ as ω → β − 1). This policy prescription is the celebrated Friedman rule, which
eliminates the opportunity cost of holding money balances in private portfolios for transaction
purposes. The problem with this arrangement is that the Friedman rule is not uniquely
associated with an efficient allocation. There exists a continuum of suboptimal equilibrium
23

trajectories that are also associated with the Friedman rule. These trajectories involve a
persistently declining value of money.

5.2

Pegging the real value of government liabilities

In this section, we develop an alternative monetary policy rule that can implement a
unique efficient equilibrium allocation. This outcome will be feasible only if the government
can tax private agents to finance policy implementation. Also, it will require government
money to drive private money out of the economy.
Suppose the government decides to peg the real value of its monetary liabilities. Specifically, assume the government issues currency to satisfy
φt M̄t = m

(20)

at all dates for some target value m > 0. This means that the government adjusts the money

∞
supply sequence M̄t t=0 to satisfy (20) in each period. In this case, the market-clearing
condition in the asset market becomes
m+

N
X

bit = z γ t+1



(21)

i=1

at all dates t ≥ 0.
Furthermore, we need to impose the boundary conditions bit ≥ 0 at all dates t ≥ 0 for
each i. These conditions imply
z (γ t ) ≥ m

(22)

at all dates t ≥ 0. In other words, the policy of pegging the real value of government
money results in a lower bound for the real return on money in equilibrium. Given these
changes in the equilibrium conditions, we can now provide a definition of equilibrium when
the government pegs the real value of its monetary liabilities.
Definition 4 Given the policy parameter m > 0, a perfect-foresight equilibrium is a sequence
−1
i
{bt , γ t }∞
for all t ≥ 0 and i ∈ {1, ..., N }.
t=0 satisfying (8), (21), (22), bt ≥ 0, and 0 ≤ γ t ≤ β

Although the government supply is an endogenous variable, we do not need to include it
in our definition of equilibrium as it adjusts to satisfy (20) at each date. In particular, the

∞
money supply sequence M̄t t=0 must satisfy
M̄t+1 =

1
γ t+1

24

M̄t

at all dates t ≥ 0. Because the monetary authority pegs the real value of its monetary liabilities, the government money supply M̄t varies over time to follow the equilibrium evolution
of the return on monetary assets, given the target value m.
The following proposition provides a useful characterization of equilibrium when the government pegs the real value of its liabilities. It also shows that the equilibrium with constant
prices is a steady state regardless of the choice of the policy parameter m.
Proposition 6 An equilibrium allocation can be characterized by a sequence {γ t }∞
t=0 satisfying

z γ t+1 = γ t z (γ t ) − γ t m + m

(23)

and the boundary conditions 0 ≤ γ t ≤ β −1 and z (γ t ) ≥ m at all dates. In particular, the
stationary solution γ t = 1 for all t ≥ 0 is an equilibrium trajectory for any value of the policy
parameter m.
Proof. Because (8) must hold for all i, we have
N
X

bit

N
X

= γt

i=1

bit−1 .

i=1

Condition (21) implies
N
X


bit = z γ t+1 − m.

i=1

Thus, the dynamic system (23), together with the boundary conditions 0 ≤ γ t ≤ β −1 and
z (γ t ) ≥ m, describes the evolution of the return on money γ t along the equilibrium path.

Finally, it is straightforward to show that γ t , γ t+1 = (1, 1) is a fixed point of the implicitly
defined mapping γ t+1 = f (γ t ).
Note that autarky is no longer a steady state when m > 0, so the policy of pegging the real
value of government liabilities fundamentally changes the properties of the dynamic system.
To demonstrate the main result of this section, it is helpful to assume the functional forms
u (q) = (1 − η)−1 q 1−η and w (q) = (1 + α)−1 q 1+α , with 0 < η < 1 and α ≥ 0. In this case,
the dynamic system (23) reduces to
1+α

σ η+α βγ t+1

1+α
 η+α
−1

1+α

1+α

β η+α −1 (σγ t ) η+α

1+α − mγ t + m

 1+α =
[1 − (1 − σ) βγ t ] η+α
1 − (1 − σ) βγ t+1 η+α

with

1+α
1+α

 η+α
(βγ t ) η+α −1
σ
≥m
1+α
1 − (1 − σ) βγ t

25

(24)

(25)

at all dates t ≥ 0. Condition (25) imposes a lower bound on the equilibrium return on money,
which can result in the existence of a steady state at the lower bound.
The properties of equations (24)-(25) depend on the value of the policy parameter m.
In particular the dynamic system (24)-(25) is a transcritical bifurcation.10 To illustrate this
property, it is helpful to simplify the dynamic system by assuming that α = 0 (linear disutility
of production) and σ → 1 (no matching friction in the decentralized market). In this case,
the equilibrium evolution of the return on money γ t satisfies the law of motion
γ t+1 = γ 2t −

m
m
γt +
β
β

(26)

and the boundary condition
m
1
≤ γt ≤ .
β
β

(27)

The policy parameter can take on any value in the interval 0 ≤ m ≤ 1. Also, the value of
money remains above the lower bound m at all dates. Given that the government provides a
credible lower bound for the value of money due to its taxation power, the return on money
is bounded below by a strictly positive constant β −1 m along the equilibrium path.
We can obtain a steady state by solving the polynomial equation
2

γ −




m
m
+1 γ+
= 0.
β
β

If m 6= β, the roots are 1 and β −1 m. If m = β, the unique solution is 1. As we will see, the
properties of the dynamic system differ considerably depending on the value of the policy
parameter m.
If 0 < m < β, then there exist two steady states: γ t = β −1 m and γ t = 1 for all t ≥ 0.
The steady state γ t = 1 for all t ≥ 0 corresponds to the previously described stationary
equilibrium with constant prices. The steady state γ t = β −1 m for all t ≥ 0 is an equilibrium
with the property that only government money is valued. To see why this occurs, note that

z (γ t ) = z β −1 m = m holds in every period t so that we must have bit = 0 for each i
at all dates t ≥ 0. Figure 3 shows the dynamic system when 0 < m < β (panel (a) for
0 < γ t < (1/β) and panel (b) for (m/β) < γ t < (1/β)). In this case, the steady state with
a low value of money (β −1 m) is globally stable. As we can see, there exists a continuum of

equilibrium trajectories starting from any point γ 0 ∈ β −1 m, 1 with the property that the
10

In bifurcation theory, a transcritical bifurcation is one in which a fixed point exists for all values of a
parameter and is never destroyed. Both before and after the bifurcation, there is one unstable and one stable
fixed point. However, their stability is exchanged when they collide, so the unstable fixed point becomes
stable and vice versa.

26

return on money converges to β −1 m. Along these trajectories, the value of money declines
monotonically to the lower bound m and government money drives private money out of the
economy.

(a) 0 < γ t < (1/β)

(b) (m/β) < γ t < (1/β)

Figure 3: Dynamic system for government money, 0 < m < β
If m = β, the unique steady state is γ t = 1 for all t ≥ 0. This case is represented in Figure
4 (again with panel (a) for 0 < γ t < (1/β) and panel (b) for (m/β) < γ t < (1/β)). Note that
the 45-degree line is the tangent line to the graph of (26) at the point (1, 1), so the dynamic
system remains above the 45-degree line. When we introduce the boundary restriction (27),
we find that γ t = 1 for all t ≥ 0 is the unique equilibrium trajectory. Thus, the policy choice
m = β results in global determinacy, with the unique equilibrium outcome characterized by
price stability.
If β < m < 1 (Figure 5), the unique steady state is γ t = β −1 m for all t ≥ 0. When we
introduce the boundary restriction (27), γ t = β −1 m for all t ≥ 0 is the unique equilibrium
trajectory. Setting the target for the value of government money in the interval β < m < 1
results in a sustained deflation to ensure that the return on money remains above one. To
implement a sustained deflation, the government must contract its money supply, a policy
financed through taxation. Since a sustained contraction of the money supply by a private
entrepreneur is infeasible, in this situation there is only government money circulating in the
economy.
27

(a) 0 < γ t < (1/β)

(b) (m/β) < γ t < (1/β)

Figure 4: Dynamic system for government money, m = β
To implement a target value in the range β < m < 1, the government must tax private
agents in the CM. To verify this claim, note that the government budget constraint can be
written as
τ t = m (γ t − 1)
in every period t. Because the unique steady state implies γ t = β −1 m for all t ≥ 0, we must
have

τ t = m β −1 m − 1 > 0
at all dates t ≥ 0. To implement its target value m, the government needs to persistently
shrink the money supply by making purchases that exceed its sales in the CM, with the
shortfall financed by taxes.
Finally, it is possible to implement an efficient allocation as the unique equilibrium outcome when we take the limit m → 1. Thus, the joint goal of monetary stability and efficiency
can be achieved by government policy. The only caveat is that the implementation of an
efficient allocation requires government money to drive private money out of the economy.
In a few pages we will see how government money will no longer be essential when private
entrepreneurs have access to sufficiently productive capital.

28

(a) 0 < γ t < (1/β)

(b) (m/β) < γ t < (1/β)

Figure 5: Dynamic system for government money, β < m < 1

6

Automata
In this section, we introduce private currencies issued by automata. This extension of

the baseline model is motivated by the observation that digital currencies such as Bitcoin
are associated with software protocols that fix, in an automatic fashion, the total amount of
units of money that can be put into circulation.
Consider the benchmark economy described in Section 3 and add J automata, each programmed to issue a constant amount H j ∈ R+ of tokens. Let hjt ≡ φjt H j denote the real

value of the tokens issued by automaton j ∈ {1, ..., J} and let ht ≡ h1t , ..., hJt ∈ RJ+ denote
the vector of real values. If the units issued by automaton j are valued in equilibrium, then
we must have

φjt+1
φjt

= γ t+1

(28)

at all dates t ≥ 0. Here γ t+1 continues to represent the common real return across all
currencies that are valued in equilibrium. Thus, condition (28) implies
hjt = hjt−1 γ t

29

(29)

for each j at all dates. The market-clearing condition in the asset market becomes
J
X

hjt

+

i=1

N
X

bit = z γ t+1



(30)

i=1

for all t ≥ 0. Given these conditions, we can now provide a definition of equilibrium in the
presence of automata.
Definition 5 A perfect-foresight equilibrium is a sequence {bt , ht , γ t }∞
t=0 satisfying (8), (29),
(30), bit ≥ 0, hjt ≥ 0, and 0 ≤ γ t ≤ β −1 for all t ≥ 0, i ∈ {1, ..., N }, and j ∈ {1, ..., J}.
Our main result in this section is to show that the set of equilibrium allocations in the
presence of automata is the same as in the economy with profit-maximizing entrepreneurs
only.
Proposition 7 The set of equilibrium allocations is the same as in the economy without
automata. In particular, an equilibrium trajectory is characterized by a sequence {γ t }∞
t=0
satisfying (10) and 0 ≤ γ t ≤ β −1 at all dates t ≥ 0.
Proof. The free-entry condition implies bit = γ t bit−1 for each i ∈ {1, ..., N } at all dates.
Then, we can derive the relation
N
X

N
X

bit = γ t

i=1

bit−1 .

i=1

From (29), we find
J
X

hjt

= γt

i=1

J
X

hjt−1 .

i=1

Then, the market-clearing condition implies


z γ t+1 =

J
X
i=1

hjt

+

N
X

bit = γ t

N
X

i=1

bit−1 +

i=1

J
X

!
hjt−1

= γ t z (γ t )

i=1

as initially claimed. Because the sequence of returns {γ t }∞
t=0 determines the equilibrium
allocation, we obtain the equivalence result as claimed.
The result that the introduction of automata does not change the fundamental properties of the private monetary arrangement is not surprising given that a profit-maximizing
entrepreneur optimally chooses a constant nominal supply of his own brand in a perfectly
30

competitive environment. The commitment implied by a machine programmed to issue a
fixed amount of tokens does not alter the set of equilibrium allocations because market discipline limits the extent to which profit-maximizing issuers can resort to overissue as an
individually optimal strategy.11
Because the market share of each entrepreneur is indeterminate, it is possible to have an
equilibrium with the property that the tokens issued by automata drive out those issued by
entrepreneurs. Given that entrepreneurs have no access to productive projects, the existence
of equilibria with the property that some or all entrepreneurs remain idle has no welfare
consequences in our baseline economy.
This observation motivates our next section. An interesting debate in monetary economics
is whether productive firms should be able to issue their own money to fund capital expenditures and other operational expenses. To address this question, our next step is to consider
an economy in which the entrepreneurs have access to a form of productive capital. As we
will see, the introduction of productive capital will have deep consequences.

7

Productive Capital
So far, we have studied the properties of an economy where agents do not have access

to any form of productive capital. Suppose now that each entrepreneur is endowed with a
nontradable project that requires the CM good as input and that pays off at the beginning
of the following date. Let F (k) denote the payoff in terms of the CM good when k ∈ R+ is
the amount invested. Suppose that the payoff function takes the form
(
F (k) =

(1 + ρ) k if 0 ≤ k ≤ ῑ,
(1 + ρ)ῑ if ῑ < k ≤ 1,

with 1 + ρ ≥ β −1 and 0 < ῑ < 1.
Given the presence of productive capital, the entrepreneur’s budget constraint is given by
i
+
xit + φit Mt−1

X
j6=i

φjt Mtj + kt = φit Mti +

X
j6=i

j
φjt Mt−1
+ F (kt−1 )

in every period t. Because 1 + ρ ≥ β −1 , we obtain a corner solution kt = ῑ.
Continue to assume that φit+1 /φit < β −1 for all i. Then, the entrepreneur’s consumption

11

The Bitcoin protocol issues bitcoins over time as a reward for the verification of transactions in the
system. Since we are assuming that these costs are zero, the automaton does not issue new currency (as will
be the case, in the long run, with Bitcoin).

31

is given by

i
+ ρῑ
xit = φit Mti − Mt−1
and his lifetime discounted utility is given by
∞
X




β τ −t φiτ Mτi − Mτi −1 + ρῑ .

τ =t

That is, the currency-issuing business allows the entrepreneur to take advantage of the income
stream associated with productive capital by providing an external source of funding.
The free-entry condition requires
∞
X




β τ −t φiτ Mτi − Mτi −1 + ρῑ = 0

τ =t

in each period t ≥ 0. Given these changes in the environment, we can now define an equilibrium in the presence of productive capital.
i
Definition 6 A perfect-foresight equilibrium is a sequence {bt , kt , γ t }∞
t=0 satisfying (9), bt ≥

0, 0 ≤ γ t ≤ β −1 , kti = ῑ, and
bit − γ t bit−1 + ρῑ = 0

(31)

for all t ≥ 0 and i ∈ {1, ..., N }.
Given free entry, the dynamic system becomes

z γ t+1 + ρῑ = γ t z (γ t ) .

(32)

Thus, the presence of productive capital fundamentally changes the properties of the dynamic
system describing the evolution of the real return on money. In particular, autarky is no
longer a steady state and there is no equilibrium with the property that the value of private
currencies converges to zero.
Continue to assume the functional forms u (q) = (1 − η)−1 q 1−η and w (q) = (1 + α)−1 q 1+α ,
with 0 < η < 1 and α ≥ 0. Then, the dynamic system (32) reduces to
1+α

σ η+α βγ t+1

1+α
 η+α
−1

1+α

1+α

β η+α −1 (σγ t ) η+α

1+α .

 1+α + ρῑ =
[1 − (1 − σ) βγ t ] η+α
1 − (1 − σ) βγ t+1 η+α

(33)

The following proposition establishes the existence of a unique equilibrium allocation with
the property that the real return on money is strictly greater than one (i.e., γ t = γ for all
t ≥ 0 with 1 < γ ≤ β −1 ).
32

Proposition 8 Suppose u (q) = (1 − η)−1 q 1−η and w (q) = (1 + α)−1 q 1+α , with 0 < η < 1
and α ≥ 0. Then, there exists a unique equilibrium allocation with the property γ t = γ s for
all t ≥ 0 and 1 < γ s ≤ β −1 .
Proof. It can be shown that dγ t+1 /dγ t > 0 for all γ t > 0. When γ t+1 = 0, we have
η+α

γt =

(ρῑ) 1+α

.

η+α

1−η

σβ 1+α + (ρῑ) 1+α (1 − σ) β



Because γ t ∈ 0, β −1 for all t ≥ 0, a nonstationary solution would violate the boundary
condition. Thus, the unique solution is stationary, γ t = γ s for all t ≥ 0, and must satisfy
1+α

1+α

1+α

1+α

1+α

σ η+α (βγ s ) η+α −1 + ρῑ [1 − (1 − σ) βγ s ] η+α = β η+α −1 (σγ s ) η+α
and

η+α

(ρῑ) 1+α
σβ

1−η
1+α

+ (ρῑ)

η+α
1+α

≤ γs ≤
(1 − σ) β

1
.
β

The presence of productive capital results in the global determinacy of equilibrium under
free entry. Any belief implying a persistently declining value of private money is not consistent with the equilibrium conditions when entrepreneurs issue currency to fund productive
projects. The existence of productive projects in the economy provides a fundamental value
for the entrepreneur’s currency-issuing business, which falsifies any privately held belief with
the property that the exchange value of an entrepreneur’s currency monotonically converges
to zero. Figure 6 plots the dynamic system (33) with α = .5, β = .9, η = .5, σ = .9, ρ = .15,
and ῑ = .5.
Also, the presence of productive capital implies a strictly positive real return on money
under free entry, reducing the opportunity cost of holding money for transaction purposes.
In a perfectly competitive environment, free entry implies that the gains from intertemporal
investment opportunities translate into a higher yield on privately issued currencies in the
form of a sustained deflation. As a result, the ensuing equilibrium allocation Pareto dominates
the allocation associated with price stability derived in the absence of productive capital.
Moreover, the equilibrium real return on money approaches the efficient upper bound β −1
as the technological rate of return on capital increases. Therefore, the unique equilibrium
allocation approaches the efficient allocation as the return on capital rises. In other words, a
purely private monetary arrangement is consistent with Friedman’s (1969) optimum quantity
of money when capital is sufficiently productive.

33

Figure 6: dynamic system (33)
To verify that a sustained deflation is consistent with individual optimization, note that
the free-entry condition implies
∞
X




β τ −t φiτ Mτi − Mτi −1 + ρῑ = 0

τ =t

at all dates t ≥ 0. Because consumption is nonnegative, we must have

i
φit Mti − Mt−1
+ ρῑ = 0
in every period t ≥ 0. If the currency issued by entrepreneur i is valued in equilibrium,
i
we must have Mti < Mt−1
. Thus, the nominal supply of each brand must be monotonically

decreasing to be consistent with free entry. This means that, along the equilibrium trajectory,
an entrepreneur’s purchases exceed his sales in the CM, with the shortfall financed by the
proceeds from investment in the productive technology. Thus, the presence of productive
capital makes a sustained deflation feasible as an equilibrium outcome under free entry.
The implementation of the previously described allocation requires the enforcement of
the plan consistent with profit maximization. As we have seen, an entrepreneur makes purchases that exceed his sales in the CM when his nominal supply is strictly decreasing. If an
entrepreneur deviated from this plan by retaining the proceeds from capital investments, he
34

would clearly be better off. Thus, it is necessary to punish entrepreneurs who opportunistically deviate from the plan consistent with individual optimization when the nominal supply
is strictly decreasing. In the absence of productive capital, the nominal supply consistent
with free entry is constant over time so that an opportunistic deviation is not an issue in the
baseline model without capital. The consequences of the absence of an enforcement mechanism of the plan are an interesting avenue for future research, but go well beyond the scope
of this paper.
The following example illustrates these important properties of an economy with productive capital and competing private currencies.
√
Example 7 Suppose u (q) = 2 q and w (q) = q. In addition, assume σ → 1. In this case,
the dynamic system is given by
γ t+1 = γ 2t − β −1 ρῑ ≡ f (γ t ) .


The unique fixed point in the range 0, β −1 is
γs ≡
provided ρ ≤

1−β
.
ῑβ

1+

p
1 + 4β −1 ρῑ
2

Because f 0 (γ) > 0 for all γ > 0 and 0 = f

p


β −1 ρῑ , it follows that

γ t = γ s for all t ≥ 0 is the unique equilibrium trajectory. As we can see, the real return on
money is strictly greater than one. If we take the limit
ρ→

1−β
,
ῑβ

we find that the unique equilibrium allocation is socially efficient.
In our model, not only do the entrepreneurs have access to the technologies to produce
nonfalsifiable tokens and keep track of trading histories but they also have the opportunity
to invest in a productive project at each date. One can interpret an entrepreneur in our
framework as the owner of an internet platform (i.e., a productive project) that issues money
to be used for the purchase of goods through her platform. Thus, a monetary system with
the previously described properties is closer to reality than one might initially imagine. And
the desirable properties we have demonstrated serve as a useful guide to regulators, policy
makers, and others interested in the future of digital currencies.
Indeed, the result that when entrepreneurs can issue currency to fund socially productive
projects, a competitive monetary system is consistent with monetary stability and implements
35

an allocation that is arbitrarily close to the efficient allocation is a key finding of this paper.
This result vindicates Hayek’s proposal for the denationalization of money and it links our
research to the literature on the provision of liquidity by productive firms (Holmström and
Tirole, 2011, and Dang, Gorton, Holmström, and Ordoñez, 2014).
The possibility of having a private monetary arrangement consistent with Friedman’s
optimum quantity of money has recently been studied by Monnet and Sanches (2015) and
Andolfatto, Berentsen, and Waller (2016). Monnet and Sanches (2015) characterize a monetary arrangement in which privately issued debt claims circulate as a medium of exchange.
In their analysis, the debt claims are associated with an explicit promise by the issuer to
redeem them at some expected value. Andolfatto, Berentsen, and Waller (2016) study the
properties of a monetary arrangement in which an institution with the monopoly rights on the
economy’s physical capital issues claims that circulate as a medium of exchange. However,
these arrangements are fundamentally different from our analysis of currency competition.

8

Network Effects
Many discussions of currency competition highlight the importance of network effects.

See, for example, Halaburda and Sarvary (2015). To evaluate these network effects, let us
consider a version of the baseline model in which the economy consists of a countable infinity
of identical locations indexed by j ∈ {..., −2, −1, 0, 1, 2, ...}. Each location contains a [0, 1]continuum of buyers, a [0, 1]-continuum of sellers, and a countable infinity of entrepreneurs.
All agents have the same preferences and technologies as previously described. For simplicity,
we take the limit σ → 1 so that each buyer is randomly matched with a seller with probability
one and vice versa.
The main change from the baseline model is that sellers move randomly across locations.
Suppose that a fraction 1 − δ of sellers in each location j is randomly selected to move to
location j + 1 at each date t ≥ 0. Assume that the seller’s relocation status is publicly
revealed at the beginning of the decentralized market and that the actual relocation occurs
after the decentralized market closes.
We start by showing the existence of a symmetric and stationary equilibrium with the
property that the currency issued by an entrepreneur in location j circulates only in that
location. In this equilibrium, a seller who finds out he is going to be relocated from location
j to j + 1 does not produce the DM good for the buyer in exchange for local currency because
he believes that currency issued in location j will not be valued in location j + 1. This belief
can be self-fulfilling so that currency issued in location j circulates only in that location. In

36

this case, the optimal portfolio choice implies the first-order condition
δ

1
u0 (q (m, t))
+1−δ =
0
w (q (m, t))
βγ it+1

for each currency i. Note that we have suppressed any superscript or subscript indicating the
agent’s location, given that we restrict attention to symmetric equilibria. Let q̂ (γ) denote the
DM output as an implicit function of the real return γ. Then, the demand for real balances
in each location is given by
ẑ γ t+1



w q̂ γ t+1
≡
βγ t+1


,

where γ t+1 denotes the common rate of return across all valued currencies in a given location.
Because the market-clearing condition implies
N
X


φit Mti = ẑ γ t+1 ,

i=1

the equilibrium sequence {γ t }∞
t=0 satisfies the law of motion

ẑ γ t+1 = γ t ẑ (γ t )
and the boundary condition 0 ≤ γ t ≤ β −1 .
Suppose u (q) = (1 − η)−1 q 1−η and w (q) = (1 + α)−1 q 1+α , with 0 < η < 1 and α ≥ 0.
Then, the dynamic system describing the equilibrium evolution of γ t is given by
1+α
η+α
γ t+1



1+α

−1

1 − (1 − δ) βγ t+1

1+α =
 η+α

γ tη+α
1+α

(34)

[1 − (1 − δ) βγ t ] η+α

and the boundary condition 0 ≤ γ t ≤ β −1 . The following proposition establishes the existence
of a stationary equilibrium with the property that privately issued currencies circulate locally.
Proposition 9 Suppose u (q) = (1 − η)−1 q 1−η and w (q) = (1 + α)−1 q 1+α , with 0 < η < 1
and α ≥ 0. There exists a stationary equilibrium with the property that the quantity traded
in the DM is given by q̂ (δ) ∈ (0, q ∗ ) satisfying
δ

u0 (q̂ (δ))
+ 1 − δ = β −1 .
0
w (q̂ (δ))

(35)

In addition, q̂ (δ) is strictly increasing in δ.
Proof. It is easy to show that the sequence γ t = 1 for all t ≥ 0 satisfies (34). Then,
37

the solution to the optimal portfolio problem implies that the DM output must satisfy (35).
Because the term u0 (q) /w0 (q) is strictly decreasing in q, it follows that the solution q̂ (δ) to
(35) must be strictly increasing in δ.
The previously described stationary allocation is associated with price stability across
all locations, but production in the DM occurs only in a fraction δ ∈ (0, 1) of all bilateral
meetings. Only a seller who is not going to be relocated is willing to produce the DM good in
exchange for locally issued currency. A seller who finds out he is going to be relocated does
not produce in the DM because the buyer can only offer him currencies that are not valued
in other locations.
Now we construct an equilibrium in which the currency issued by an entrepreneur in
location j circulates in other locations. To do so, we establish a currency-exchange system
similar to that of Cavalcanti, Erosa, and Temzelides (1999). Suppose the entrepreneurs in all
locations establish a currency-exchange system by which entrepreneur i in location j agrees
to retire the currency issued by entrepreneur i in location j − 1. In this case, the budget
constraint for entrepreneur i in each location is given by
i
xit + φit Mt−1
= φit Mti .
i
refers to all currency of type i that is in circulation in a
In this equation, the term Mt−1

given location before the centralized market opens. In a symmetric equilibrium, the same
amount of type-i currency that flowed from location j to j + 1 in the previous period flowed
i
denotes the
into location j as relocated sellers moved across locations. As a result, Mt−1

beginning-of-period type-i circulation in a given location. Given the common knowledge of
a currency-exchange system, we build an equilibrium with the property that all sellers in a
given location accept locally issued currency because they believe that these currencies will
be valued in other locations. In this case, the optimal portfolio choice implies the first-order
condition

u0 (q (m, t))
1
=
w0 (q (m, t))
βγ it+1

for each currency i. Let q̄ (γ) denote the DM output as an implicit function of the real return
γ. Then, the demand for real balances in each location is given by
z̄ γ t+1



w q̄ γ t+1
≡
βγ t+1

38


.

Because the market-clearing condition implies
N
X


φit Mti = z̄ γ t+1 ,

i=1

the equilibrium sequence {γ t }∞
t=0 satisfies the law of motion

z̄ γ t+1 = γ t z̄ (γ t )
and the boundary condition 0 ≤ γ t ≤ β −1 .
Suppose u (q) = (1 − η)−1 q 1−η and w (q) = (1 + α)−1 q 1+α , with 0 < η < 1 and α ≥ 0.
Then, the dynamic system describing the equilibrium evolution of γ t is
1+α
η+α
γ t+1

−1

1+α

= γ tη+α

(36)

and the boundary condition 0 ≤ γ t ≤ β −1 . The following proposition establishes the existence
of a stationary equilibrium with the property that locally issued currencies circulate in several
locations.
Proposition 10 Suppose u (q) = (1 − η)−1 q 1−η and w (q) = (1 + α)−1 q 1+α , with 0 < η < 1
and α ≥ 0. There exists a stationary equilibrium with the property that the quantity traded
in the DM is given by q̄ ∈ (q̂ (δ) , q ∗ ) satisfying
u0 (q̄)
= β −1 .
w0 (q̄)

(37)

Proof. It is straightforward to show that the sequence γ t = 1 for all t ≥ 0 satisfies (36).
Then, the solution to the optimal portfolio problem implies that the DM output must satisfy
(37). The quantities q̄ and q̂ (δ) satisfy
u0 (q̄)
u0 (q̂ (δ))
=
δ
+ 1 − δ.
w0 (q̄)
w0 (q̂ (δ))
Because δ ∈ (0, 1), we must have q̄ > q̂ (δ) as claimed.
Because q̄ > q̂ (δ), the allocation associated with the currency-exchange system Pareto
dominates the allocation associated with the local circulation of private currencies. Thus, we
conclude that, in the presence of currency-exchange systems, the presence of network effects
may be less relevant than argued by the previous literature.

39

9

Conclusion
In this paper, we have shown how a system of competing private currencies can work. Our

evaluation of such a system is nuanced. While we offer glimpses of hope for it by showing
the existence of stationary equilibria that deliver price stability, there are plenty of other less
desirable equilibria. And even the best equilibrium does not deliver the socially optimum
amount of money. Furthermore, at this stage of the research, we do not have any argument
to forecast the empirical likelihood of each of these equilibria.
Although a system of competing currencies does not necessarily imply efficiency and
stability, we have identified the characteristics of an efficient and stable private monetary
arrangement under free entry, given that our framework is sufficiently flexible to consider
relevant extensions of the baseline model. As we have seen, the introduction of productive
capital fundamentally changes the properties of the model, implying the existence of a unique
equilibrium allocation that can be arbitrarily close to the efficient allocation depending on
the technological rate of return on capital. This result is illuminating as it identifies the
characteristics of a socially beneficial private monetary system.
We have, nevertheless, just scratched the surface of the study of private currency competition. Many topics, including the analysis of the different degrees of moneyness of private
currencies (including interest-bearing assets and redeemeable instruments), the role of positive transaction costs among different currencies, the entry and exit of entrepreneurs, the
possibility of market power by currency issuers, or the consequences of the lack of enforceability of contracts are some of the avenues for future research that we hope to tackle shortly.

40

References
Andolfatto, D., A. Berentsen, and C. Waller (2016): “Monetary policy with assetbacked money,” Journal of Economic Theory, forthcoming.
Antonopoulos, A. M. (2015): Mastering Bitcoin. O’Reilly.
Araujo, L., and B. Camargo (2008): “Endogenous supply of fiat money,” Journal of
Economic Theory, 142(1), 48–72.
Aruoba, S., G. Rocheteau, and C. Waller (2007): “Bargaining and the value of
money,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 54(8), 2636–2655.
Berentsen, A. (2006): “On the private provision of fiat currency,” European Economic
Review, 50(7), 1683–1698.
Böhme, R., N. Christin, B. Edelman, and T. Moore (2015): “Bitcoin: economics,
technology, and hovernance,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 29(2), 213–38.
Cavalcanti, R. d. O., A. Erosa, and T. Temzelides (1999): “Private money and
reserve management in a random-matching model,” Journal of Political Economy, 107(5),
929–945.
(2005): “Liquidity, money creation and destruction, and the returns to banking,”
International Economic Review, 46(2), 675–706.
Cavalcanti, R. d. O., and N. Wallace (1999): “Inside and outside money as alternative
media of exchange,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 31(3), 443–57.
Chiu, J., and T.-N. Wong (2014): “E-Money: efficiency, stability and optimal policy,”
Staff Working Papers 14-16, Bank of Canada.
Chuen, D. L. K. (2015): Handbook of Digital Currency: Bitcoin, Innovation, Financial
Instruments, and Big Data. Elsevier.
Dang, T. V., G. Gorton, B. Holmström, and G. Ordoñez (2014): “Banks as secret
keepers,” Working Paper 20255, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Friedman, M. (1969): “The optimum quantity of money,” in The Optimum Quantity of
Money and Other Essays. Aldine Publishing Company.
Friedman, M., and A. J. Schwartz (1986): “Has government any role in money?,”
Journal of Monetary Economics, 17(1), 37–62.
41

Gorton, G. (1989): “An Introduction to Van Court’s Bank Note Reporter and Counterfeit
Detector,” Working paper, University of Pennsylvania.
Greco, T. H. (2001): Money: Understanding and Creating Alternatives to Legal Tender.
Chelsea Green Publishing.
Halaburda, H., and M. Sarvary (2015): Beyond Bitcoin: The Economics of Digital
Currencies. Palgrave Macmillan.
Hayek, F. (1999): “The denationalization of money: An analysis of the theory and practice
of concurrent currencies,” in The Collected Works of F.A. Hayek, Good Money, Part 2, ed.
by S. Kresge. The University of Chicago Press.
Hendrickson, J. R., T. L. Hogan, and W. J. Luther (2016): “The political economy
of Bitcoin,” Economic Inquiry, forthcoming.
Holmström, B., and J. Tirole (2011): Inside and Outside Liquidity. The MIT Press.
Kareken, J., and N. Wallace (1981): “On the indeterminacy of equilibrium exchange
rates,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 96(2), 207–222.
Klein, B. (1974): “The competitive supply of money,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 6(4), 423–53.
Lagos, R., and R. Wright (2003): “Dynamics, cycles, and sunspot equilibria in ’genuinely
dynamic, fundamentally disaggregative’ models of money,” Journal of Economic Theory,
109(2), 156–171.
(2005): “A unified framework for monetary theory and policy analysis,” Journal of
Political Economy, 113(3), 463–484.
Martin, A., and S. L. Schreft (2006): “Currency competition: A partial vindication of
Hayek,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 53(8), 2085–2111.
Monnet, C. (2006): “Private Versus public money,” International Economic Review, 47(3),
951–960.
Monnet, C., and D. R. Sanches (2015): “Private money and banking regulation,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 47(6), 1031–1062.
Narayanan, A., J. Bonneau, E. Felten, A. Miller, and S. Goldfeder (2016):
Bitcoin and Cryptocurrency Technologies. Princeton University Press.
42

Obstfeld, M., and K. Rogoff (1983): “Speculative hyperinflations in maximizing models: Can we rule them out?,” Journal of Political Economy, 91(4), 675–87.
Sanches, D. (2016): “On the inherent instability of private money,” Review of Economic
Dynamics, 20, 198–214.
Selgin, G. A., and L. H. White (1994): “How would the invisible hand handle money?,”
Journal of Economic Literature, 32(4), 1718–1749.
Tullock, G. (1975): “Competing monies,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 7(4),
491–97.
von zur Gathen, J. (2015): CryptoSchool. Springer.
Wallace, N. (2001): “Whither monetary economics?,” International Economic Review,
42(4), 847–69.
White, L. H. (1995): Free Banking in Britain: Theory, Experience and Debate, 1800-1845.
Institute of Economic Affairs, second (revised and extended) edn.
Williamson, S. D. (1999): “Private money,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 31(3),
469–91.

43

