NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DECISION THEORETIC APPROACHES TO EXPERIMENT DESIGN AND EXTERNAL
VALIDITY
Abhijit Banerjee
Sylvain Chassang
Erik Snowberg
Working Paper 22167
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22167

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2016

We thank Esther Duflo for her leadership on the handbook, and for extensive comments on
earlier drafts. Chassang and Snowberg gratefully acknowledge the support of NSF grant
SES-1156154. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Abhijit Banerjee, Sylvain Chassang, and Erik Snowberg. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Decision Theoretic Approaches to Experiment Design and External Validity
Abhijit Banerjee, Sylvain Chassang, and Erik Snowberg
NBER Working Paper No. 22167
April 2016
JEL No. B23,C9,O1
ABSTRACT
A modern, decision-theoretic framework can help clarify important practical questions of
experimental design. Building on our recent work, this chapter begins by summarizing our
framework for understanding the goals of experimenters, and applying this to re-randomization.
We then use this framework to shed light on questions related to experimental registries, preanalysis plans, and most importantly, external validity. Our framework implies that even when
large samples can be collected, external decision-making remains inherently subjective. We
embrace this conclusion, and argue that in order to improve external validity, experimental
research needs to create a space for structured speculation.
Abhijit Banerjee
Department of Economics, E52-540
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
banerjee@mit.edu
Sylvain Chassang
Department of Economics
Bendheim Hall 316
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544-1021
chassang@princeton.edu

Erik Snowberg
Division of Humanities and Social Sciences
MC 228-77
California Institute of Technology
Pasadena, CA 91125
and NBER
snowberg@caltech.edu

1

Introduction

1.1

Motivation

In the last couple decades, two of the most successful areas of economic research have been
decision theory—and its close cousins, behavioral and experimental economics—and empirical microeconomics. Despite the fact that both emphasize experimentation as a method
of investigation, there is almost no connection between the two literatures.1 Indeed, there
are good reasons why such a dialogue is difficult: an experiment designed according to the
prescriptions of mainstream economic theory would get rejected by even the most benevolent
referees; conversely, experimentation as it is practiced fails the standard axioms of subjective
rationality.
Building on our work in Banerjee et al. (2014), this chapter seeks to establish such a
dialogue. We believe that modern decision theory can provide a much needed framework
for experiment design, at a time when experimenters seek to codify their practice. In turn,
we believe that the issues facing the experimental community present a rich and useful set
of challenges for decision theory. It is a rare opportunity for theorists to write models that
could impact the practice of their colleagues down the hall.

1.2

Overview

We believe the main difficulty in finding a good theoretical framework for understanding
experimental design stems from inconsistencies between the preferences of experimenters as
individuals and as a group. As individuals, experimenters behave more or less like Bayesians.
As a group however, experimenters behave like extremely ambiguity averse decision makers,
1

See Chassang et al. (2012); Kasy (2013); Banerjee et al. (2014) for recent exceptions. This lack of
connection despite the fact that economic theorists have extensively studied experimentation (Grossman
and Stiglitz, 1980; Milgrom, 1981; Banerjee, 1992; Persico, 2000; Bergemann and Välimäki, 2002). Bandit
problems have been a particular focus of this literature (Robbins, 1952; Bellman, 1956; Rothschild, 1974;
Gittins, 1979; Aghion et al., 1991; Bergemann and Välimäki, 1996, 2006).

1

believing it is unwise to settle on a specific prior by which to evaluate new information.
Our framework considers the problem of a decision maker choosing both an experimental
design and a decision rule—that is a mapping from experimental results into policy—who
seeks to maximize her own subjective utility, while also satisfying an adversarial audience who
may be able to veto her choices. We describe this framework, and then summarize the results
in Banerjee et al. (2014): First, it unifies the Bayesian and frequentist perspectives. For small
sample sizes, or if the decision maker places little weight on convincing her audience, optimal
experimentation is deterministic and maximizes subjective utility. If instead the sample
size is large, then randomized experiments allowing for prior-free inference become optimal.
Second, the framework sheds light on the tradeoffs involved in re-randomization: It always
improves the subjective value of experiments, but reduces the robustness of policy inferences.
However, provided the number of re-randomizations is not terribly large (compared to the
sample size), the robustness cost of re-randomization is negligible.
Having a model of experimenters also provides a useful perspective on pre-registration
and pre-analysis. Bayesian decision makers do not need or desire either. On the other hand,
a decision maker worried about an adversarial audience will value both. The important
observation is that there is no need for the two perspectives to be seen as in opposition.
Provided ex ante hypotheses are clearly labelled, there is no reason to constrain the dynamic
updating of experiments as they are being run. Some decision makers will value knowing the
ex ante hypotheses formulated by the experimenter, while Bayesian decision makers, who care
only about the data collected, will value getting the most informative experiment possible.
Reporting both, as “ex ante questions of interest,” and “interim questions of interest” can
satisfy both types.
The final sections are dedicated to the question of external validity. While there are ways
to satisfy both the Bayesian and adversarial perspective in (policy) decision problems internal
to the experimental environment, we argue that decision making in external environments
is necessarily subjective—things may just be different in different circumstances. However,
2

this does not mean that external inferences need to be vague or uninformative. We embrace
the idea that external inference is necessarily speculative and that it should be thought of
and reported as such as part of experimental research.
We formulate a framework for structured speculation that builds on two main observations. First, the manner of speculation, whether it is through a structural model or a
reduced-form set of empirical predictions, is unimportant. What is important is for speculation to be stated as crisp hypotheses that can be falsified by further data. The advantage
of structural modeling is that it automatically leads to a fully specified set of falsifiable predictions. However, model parameters are no less speculative than hypotheses formulated in
natural language by experienced field researchers. While models have value in systematizing
and clarifying thought, there is no formal reason to rule out any format of speculation experimenters are comfortable with, provided that predictions are made is a precise, falsifiable
way.
The second observation is that creating space for structured speculation may have an
important effect on how experiments are designed, run, and reported. Indeed, we believe it
may result in a more effective and informative process of experimentation. We argue that
the need for “better” speculation will lead experimenters to collect data that is ignored, unreported, or viewed as unconstructive to reported research: for instance, data on participant
preferences and beliefs, the participants’ place in a broader economic system, the role that
values and norms play in the outcomes we measure, and so on. We illustrate this point by
providing explicit examples of interesting topics for structured speculation.
The rest of this section very briefly discusses the history of experimental design, highlighting the interplay of theory and practice.

3

1.3

A Brief History

The first documented controlled experiment is found in the biblical book of Daniel, a story
set around 605 B.C.E., comparing the health effects of a vegetarian diet with the Babylon
court diet of meat and wine:
Then Daniel asked the guard whom the palace master had appointed over Daniel,
Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah: “Please test your servants for ten days. Let
us be given vegetables to eat and water to drink. You can then compare our
appearance with the appearance of the young men who eat the royal rations, and
deal with your servants according to what you observe.” So he agreed to this
proposal and tested them for ten days. At the end of ten days it was observed
that they appeared better and fatter than all the young men who had been eating
the royal rations. (Daniel 1:11–14, NRSV)
Despite the early emergence of controlled trials, it took millennia for randomization to be
inserted into the process—by statistical theorists well versed in field experiments. Simpson
and Pearson (1904) argues for a crude form of randomization in the testing of inoculants
(while at the same time performing the first meta-analysis, see Egger et al., 2001) in order
to establish a true control group. Over the years that followed, Pearson would formulate
stronger and stronger defenses of randomization, emphasizing the need to draw controls from
the same population as those that are treated (culminating in Maynard, 1909). Fisher (1926)
was the first to provide a detailed program for randomization, which he expanded into his
classic text on experimental design (Fisher, 1935).
Randomization became a mainstay of experimental design thanks to two factors. The
first was medical practitioners looking for a way to evaluate treatments in a way that would
prevent manipulation from the manufacturers of those treatments. Randomization alone
proved insufficient to this task, which lead to the development of many tools, such as preregistration and pre-analysis plans for trials, that we discuss in this chapter. These tools
4

have had success in medicine, but their costs and benefits are likely to vary by field. As such,
we have tried to identify, as abstractly as possible the factors that may make them more or
less appealing, depending on the circumstances.
The second factor was a desire in many other fields of social science to identify the causal
effects of interventions. Randomization was put at the center of frameworks for causal
analysis leading, after some delay, to an explosion of randomized controlled field trials in
several disciplines of the social sciences (Rubin, 1974; Pearl, 2000). Once again, however,
randomization alone has not been sufficient to the task. Practical difficulties, such as treated
participants being unwilling to receive treatment, have interfered. A number of statistical
tools have been created to address these issues. However, as decision theory has little to say
about the choice of statistical techniques, we do not discuss them here.
Finally, there is also work on experimental design that takes a Bayesian, rather than
classical, perspective. However, like in econometrics, its presence is somewhat marginal.
Even the proponents of Bayesian experimental design note that despite its strong normative
appeal, it remains rarely, if ever, used (Chaloner and Verdinelli, 1995).

2

The Framework

We take the point of view of a decision maker who can inform her policy choice by running an
experiment. She could be a scholar who is trying to come up with a policy recommendation,
or a political entrepreneur trying to shape policy for the better. The decision problem can be
internal, if the ultimate policy decision affects the population targeted by the experiment, or
external, if it applies to a population different from that involved in the experiment (hence
external validity).2
Our discussion and modeling follows Banerjee et al. (2014), but is more informal. The
2

Note that the decision problem may differ because the population has changed—for example, it consists of
different people, or the same people with different beliefs, or in a different context—or because the treatment
differs in some way—for example, it is delivered at a different time, through a different distribution channel.

5

interested reader may consult the original paper for more details.
Actions and preferences. A decision maker needs to decide whether to implement some
policy a ∈ {0, 1}, that provides a treatment τ ∈ {0, 1} to a unit mass population—which
may be composed of people, districts, cities, schools, and so on—indexed by i ∈ [0, 1] for individuals.3 To inform her judgement, the decision maker is able to run experiments assigning
a given number N of subjects to treatment or control.
Potential outcomes for subject i, given treatment τ , are denoted by Yiτ ∈ {0, 1}. Y = 1
is referred to as a success. Each individual i is associated with covariates xi ∈ X, where the
set X is finite. Covariates x ∈ X are observable and affect the distribution of outcomes Y .
The distribution q ∈ ∆(X) of covariates in the population is known and has full support.
Outcomes Yi are i.i.d. conditional on covariates. The success probabilities, conditional on
treatment τ and covariates x are denoted by pτx ≡ prob(Yiτ = 1|xi = x).
Environments and decision problems. To specify the decision problem, and the distinction between internal and external problems, we define environments z, which are described by the finite-dimensional vector p of success probabilities conditional on covariates
and treatment status
p = (p0x , p1x )x∈X ∈ ([0, 1]2 )X ≡ P.
For the first half of this chapter we consider internal decision problems in which the environment is the same in both the experimental and policy-relevant population. The second
half puts more attention on external decision problems and external validity, in which the
two environments may differ.
Given a known environment p and a policy decision a ∈ {0, 1}, the decision maker’s
3

For simplicity, we focus on policies that assign the same treatment status to all i ∈ [0, 1].

6

payoff u(a, p) can be written as
u(a, p) ≡ Ep Y a =

X

q(x)pax .

x∈X

This formulation does not explicitly recognize unobservables, although it allows pτx to vary
in arbitrary ways as x varies, which is effectively the consequence of unobservables.
Experiments and decision rules. An experiment is a realized assignment of treatment
to individuals represented by a tuple e = (xi , τi )i∈{1,...,N } ∈ (X × {0, 1})N ≡ E. Experiments generate outcome data y = (yi )i∈{1,...,N } ∈ {0, 1}N ≡ Y, with each yi an independent
realization of Yiτi given (xi , τi ).
The decision maker’s strategy consists of both a (possibly randomized) experimental
design E ∈ ∆(E) and a decision rule α : E × Y → ∆({0, 1}) which maps experimental
data—including the realized design e and outcomes y—to a policy decision a. We denote by
A the set of possible decision rules. Since E is the set of possible probability distributions over
the realized assignments of treatment, this framework allows for randomized experiments.
We assume that subjects are exchangeable conditional on covariates, so that experiments
identical up to a permutation of labels are equivalent from the perspective of the experimenter
(De Finetti, 1937).4

3

Perspectives on Experimental Design

3.1

Bayesian Experimentation

4

The framework here is not particularly general. The goal is to provide us with just enough flexibility
to illustrate specific issues. For example, we consider coarse policy decisions between treating the entire
population or no one. In practice, one may consider more sophisticated policy decisions indexed on observable
covariates. We also assume that the number of treatment and control observations are freely chosen under
an aggregate constraint. In practice, the cost of treatment and control data points may differ. These
simplifications do not affect our results.

7

Much of economic theory proceeds under the assumption that decision makers are subjective
expected utility maximizers. As this implies Bayesian updating, we refer to such decision
makers as Bayesians. While subjective expected utility maximization has been an incredibly
useful framework, it leads to theoretical prescriptions at odds with experimental practice.5
Formally, let the decision maker start from a prior h0 ∈ ∆(P) over treatment effects.
In the context of our experimentation problem, optimal experiments E and decision rules α
must solve,
max Eh0 [u(α(e, y), p)].
E,α

(1)

An immediate implication of the subjective expected utility framework is that randomization is never strictly optimal, and for generic priors it is strictly sub-optimal.
Proposition 1 (Banerjee et al. (2014), Bayesians do not Randomize). Assume that the
decision maker is Bayesian, that is, designs experiments according to (1). Then, there exist
deterministic solutions e ∈ E to (1). A mixed strategy (randomization) E ∈ ∆(E) solves (1)
if and only if for all e ∈ supp E, e solves (1).6
The intuition of the result is straightforward. Mixed strategies are never strictly optimal
for subjective expected utility maximizers when a pure strategy equilibrium exists, and an
RCT is a mixed strategy in the decision problem described above. Kasy (2013) uses a result
similar to Proposition 1 to argue that randomized controlled trials are suboptimal. Specifically, it emphasizes that if the goal is to achieve balance between the treatment and control
samples, this is more efficiently done by purposefully assigning participants to treatment
and control based on their observables, so as to eliminate any chance of ending up with an
unbalanced sample purely because of bad luck in the randomization process.
Proposition 1 is obviously at odds with experimental practice. Real-life experimenters go
through non-trivial expense in order to assign treatment and control randomly. We interpret
5

It is normatively appealing as well, and the “as if” axiomatization proposed by Savage (1954) seems so
natural that subjective expected utility maximization is sometimes considered an expression of rationality.
6
See Banerjee et al. (2014) for precise definitions and a proof.

8

this mismatch as an indication that the Bayesian paradigm provides a poor description of the
objectives of actual experimenters. However, we also believe there is insight into experimental
practice that can be gained by carefully considering Proposition 1. We do this in the following
example, before turning to the adversarial perspective discussed in the introduction.
3.1.1

Example: The Logic of Bayesian Experimentation

Consider an experiment evaluating educational vouchers. This experiment will influence a
school superintendent’s decision of whether or not to introduce vouchers in her district. The
superintendent has dismissed vouchers in the past, believing that by far the most important determinant of academic outcomes is whether a student is from a poor or privileged
background. She has used this belief to explain the superior performance of private schools
in her district, as they are a bastion for privileged students. However, in recent years, she
has become open to the radical opposite of her belief: Schooling is the sole determinant of
academic success. That is, even a poor student would do better at a private school. To test
this hypothesis, she has convinced a private school to let her assign, however she likes, a
single student to enroll there.
Faced with an experiment with a single observation, most academic experimenters would
give up. How could anyone ever learn from such an experiment? What is the comparison
group? Yet designing an informative experiment is easy: A Bayesian decision maker always
has a prior, and she can compare the outcome of the child to that. Suppose the superintendent believes that a poor child can never score higher than the 70th percentile on a
standardized test. She would then clearly find it informative if a poor child were given the
lone spot in the private school, and then scored in the 90th percentile.
Adding a second child to the experiment brings new questions, and new insights. In
particular, suppose that a slot in a public school is also allocated to this experiment. Should
the child in the public school have an identical or different background to the student assigned
to the private school? Should we allocate the private-school spot by lottery?
9

Once we recognize the role of the prior in setting the benchmark, these questions become
easy to answer. Our superintendent starts from the theory that only background matters.
Under that theory, the most surprising outcome, and therefore the one likely to move her prior
the most, is one in which a poor child who goes to a private school significantly outperforms
a privileged child who goes to a public school. If this occurs, she would strongly update
towards the alternative explanation that schooling is all that matters. Thus, the optimal
design involves giving the private school slot to a poor child and sending a privileged child
to a public school. In particular, she is more likely to be impressed by the outcome of this
experiment than one where both students are from the same background.
Strikingly, this example falsifies the idea that balanced treatment and control groups are
intrinsically appealing. Moreover, we are arguing for a deterministic, rather than random,
assignment of the students. Indeed, a lottery only moves us away from the ideal design: If
the privileged child is assigned to the private school, very little can be learned.
Proposition 1 shows that this result applies for all sample sizes. The limits of this line of
reasoning are only met if multiple decision makers with different priors (or a single decision
maker unable to commit to a single prior) are involved. Introduce another school official
with a slightly different prior beliefs about the effect of economic background: she believes
that while a poor student would not benefit from a move to a private school, a privileged
student would be harmed by moving to a public school. In this case the design suggested
above is much less attractive. If we observe that the poor child does better, it could be
either because the private school helps him to do better or because the public school hurts
the richer child (or both!).
When the experimenter wants to convince other decision makers, she will design an experiment that not only informs her, but also informs members of her audience with arbitrary
priors. This is the perspective that Banerjee et al. (2014) seeks to capture. In this setting,
randomized experiments emerge as the only ones that successfully defend against all priors,
that is, the only experiments whose interpretation cannot be challenged even by a devil’s
10

advocate.

3.2

Ambiguity, or an Audience

Although Bayesian decision-making is the default framework of economic theory, it is by no
means a consensus. First, a decision maker may not trust her prior, exhibiting ambiguity
aversion (Ellsberg, 1961; Schmeidler, 1989; Gilboa and Schmeidler, 1989; Klibanoff et al.,
2005). Second, she may simply not be able to think through all possible implications of
holding a particular prior, in effect violating Savage’s completeness axiom (Gilboa et al.,
2009; Bewley, 1998). Third she may recognize that she needs to convince others whose
priors may diverge from her own.7
The model we propose in Banerjee et al. (2014) takes seriously the idea that experimenters care about convincing such an audience. This “audience” may actually reflect the
experimenter’s own self-doubts and internal critics, or a real audience of stakeholders with
veto power (for example, referees).8 The decision maker chooses the experimental design E
and decision rule α that solve

max U (E, α) ≡ λ Eh0 ,E [u(α(e, y), p)] +(1 − λ) min Eh,E [u(α(e, y), p)]
E,α
h∈H
{z
}
|
{z
}
|
subjective effectiveness

(2)

robust effectiveness

where λ ∈ [0, 1]. Here, h0 is a fixed reference prior, while H is a convex set of alternative
priors h ∈ ∆(P ). A decision maker with these preferences can be interpreted as maximizing
its usefulness under reference prior h0 , while also satisfying an adversarial audience with
priors h ∈ H.9 The first term captures a desire for informativeness from the point of view
7

A related concern is that she may be accused of fraudulent manipulation of the evidence by those
who disagree with her a priori. However, if outright fraud is a concern, verifiable procedures, more than
randomization, become necessary.
8
The model belongs to the class of maxmin preferences axiomatized in Gilboa and Schmeidler (1989).
9
Note that if λ = 1, we recover (1), so that this model nests standard Bayesian expected utility maximization. If satisfying audience members was introduced as a hard constraint, then the weight ratio 1−λ
λ
would be interpreted as an appropriate Lagrange multiplier for that constraint.

11

of the experimenter, and the second captures a desire for robustness.
Ambiguity Averse Experimentation. Banerjee et al. (2014) study optimal experimentation by ambiguity-averse decision makers under one additional assumption.
Assumption 1. We assume that there exists ν > 0 such that, for all X0 ⊂ X with |X0 | ≤
N/2, there exists a prior h ∈ arg minh∈H Eh (maxa∈{0,1} pa ) such that for almost every pX0 ≡
(p0x , p1x )x∈X0 ,
 



a
0
a
1
min Eh max p − p pX0 , Eh max p − p pX0
> ν.
a∈{0,1}

a∈{0,1}

The condition says that even if an experiment were to reveal the probability of success
at every value of the covariate x in X0 , there is still at least one prior in the set H under
which the conditional likelihood of making a wrong policy decision is bounded away from
zero.10 We delay giving more intuition for this condition until after the following result:
Proposition 2. For λ ∈ (0, 1):
(i) Take sample size N as given. For generically every prior h0 , there exists
λ ∈ (0, 1) such that for all λ ≥ λ, the solution E ∗ to (2) is unique, deterministic,
and Bayesian-optimal for λ = 1.
(ii) Take weight λ as given. There exists N such that for all N ≥ N , the optimal
experiment E ∗ is randomized. As N goes to infinity, the optimal experiment
allows for correct policy decisions with probability going to one, uniformly over
priors h ∈ H.
Proposition 2 shows that the optimal experimental design depends on the number of
available data points (or participants), and the weight the decision maker puts on her own
10

The way this condition is specified implies that N < 2|X|.

12

prior versus those of the audience. Part (i) of the result shows that when sample points are
scarce, or when the decision maker does not put much weight on satisfying anyone else (λ
close to 1), optimal experimentation will be Bayesian. That is, the experimenter will focus
on assigning treatment and control observations to the subjects from whom she expects to
learn the most. Part (ii) shows that when sample points are plentiful and/or the decision
maker cares about satisfying an adversarial audience, she will use randomized trials that
allow for prior-free identification of correct policies.11
To build intuition for the result, and Assumption 1 it is useful to think of the decision
maker as playing a zero-sum game against nature (with probably 1 − λ). After the decision maker picks an experiment, nature picks the prior which maximizes the chance of
picking the wrong policy, given that experimental design. If there is any clear pattern in
the decision maker’s assignment of treatment, nature can exploit these due to Assumption
1. Randomization eliminates patterns for nature to exploit.
3.2.1

A Theory of Experimenters

Although randomization prevents nature from exploiting patterns in an experimental design,
it is not always the optimal solution. There are two possible reasons for this. First, the
decision maker may care so little about the audience (λ is close to 1), that preparing for
the worst is of little use. Second, with small samples, the loss of power from randomization
(relative to the optimal deterministic experiment) is so large that it offsets the benefit of
reducing nature’s ability to exploit a deterministic assignment. As the sample becomes large,
11

Kasy (2013) reports a result that seems to directly contradict ours: that randomized experiments can
never do better than a deterministic one, even with a maximin objective. The difference in the results
comes from the fact that in Kasy’s framework the audience sets its prior after randomization occurs, rather
than between the revelation of the design and the actual randomization, as in our framework. In Kasy’s
framework, the audience will obviously pick a prior that means, in effect, that they can learn nothing from
the actual treatment assignment.
Taking journal referees as an example of a skeptical audience, we believe our assumption is more realistic:
Referees do show a fair amount of forbearance, even when faced with imbalance in covariates generated by
a randomized control trial, though there are instances where they are sufficiently troubled by a particular
case of imbalance to recommend rejection.

13

Figure 1: Different modes of experimentation
the loss of power from randomizing shrinks to nothing, while the gains from robustness
against challenging priors remain positive and bounded away from zero.12
Figure 1 maps out implications of Proposition 2 for practical experiment design. In
scientific research, when an experimenter faces a skeptical audience, she randomizes. In
contrast, a firm implementing a costly new process in a handful of production sites will
not try it on random teams. The firm will focus on a few teams where it can learn the
most.13 Yet when the available sample is large, firms do randomize. This is the case for
firms dealing online with many end users: Although the firm only needs to convince itself of
the effectiveness of a particular ad or UI design, observations are plentiful and randomization
is cheap and used.
The logic of Proposition 2 applies at all stages of the decision-making tree that leads to
the evaluation of a particular technology. When scientists want to convince others, they run
12

As pointed out by Kasy (2013), the decision maker may also be able to limit the set of possible interpretations by deterministically choosing the right set of xs if there is enough continuity in px . Too much
continuity is ruled out by Assumption 1.
13
Similarly, a politician trying out platforms will do so at a few carefully chosen venues in front of carefully
chosen audiences.

14

detailed randomized experiments. At earlier stages however, when a scientist decides what
to experiment on, they do not just randomly pick a hypothesis. Instead, they develop a
subjective prior on the technologies most likely to be worth exploring in detail. This fits well
with our result: the number of experiments a scientist can run is limited, and each one of
them is very costly, so it makes sense to subjectively refine the set under consideration. In
online marketing, where experiments can be run at very little cost, there is much less need
to use a subjective prior to refine the set of possible ads with which to experiment.
Additional implications of Proposition 2 refine our understanding of experimental practice. Part (ii) implies that a decision maker who randomizes even without understanding
all its ramifications—why she is randomizing, what audience the experiment is meant to
satisfy—will nevertheless produce an almost-optimal experiment for large values of N . Even
if someone (or her own doubts) produces a particularly challenging prior, the decision rule
is still likely to be close to optimal. In this sense, our approach addresses the concern that
decision makers may violate Savage’s completeness axiom.14
Proposition 2 also highlights the importance of actually randomizing. An experiment
that adopts a protocol where assignment is only “nearly” random, such as assignment based
on time of day of an experimental session (see Green and Tusicisny, 2012, for a critique), or
the first letter of an experimental subject’s name (as was the case in the deworming study
of Miguel and Kremer, 2004; see Deaton, 2010 for a critique), will tend to find a skeptical
prior in its audience. Randomization provides a defense against the most skeptical priors,
but near-randomization offers no such protection.

4

Re-randomization, Registration, and Pre-Analysis

Proposition 2 suggests that the adversarial experimentation framework described by (2)
may be useful for capturing the objectives of real-life experimenters. We now highlight ways
14

A similar results hold for more complex policies that vary treatment with covariate x, provided the
complexity of possible policies is limited. See Vapnik (1999) for operational definitions of “complexity”.

15

in which having such a model can shed light on questions of current importance to the
experimental community.

4.1

Re-randomization

Banerjee et al. (2014) brings the adversarial framework of (2) to bear on the question of
re-randomization. A well-known problem with randomization is that it sometimes results
in observable characteristics being poorly balanced across treatment and control groups
(see Morgan and Rubin, 2012, and references therein).15 Of course, stratification, blocking,
and matching methods can be used to improve balance while maintaining randomization.
However, as any researcher who has tried to simultaneously stratify on multiple continuous
variables knows, this can be quite difficult in practice. Moreover, these techniques have
issues of their own (Athey and Imbens, forthcoming).
Re-randomization is a simple and intuitively attractive alternative: If a sample “looks”
unbalanced, simply randomize again, and keep doing so until the sample looks balanced.
While many authors caution against the use of re-randomization because it may have large
statistical and internal validity costs (see Bruhn and McKenzie, 2009, and references therein),
our framework can be used to precisely those costs.
From a purely Bayesian perspective, re-randomization does not create any concerns,
and, indeed, may be beneficial, because it may select an experiment closer to the optimal
deterministic experiment from a particular subjective point of view. That is, why should a
Bayesian learn differently from the same balanced sample if it is reached by a single lucky
randomization, or by choosing among many?
In Banerjee et al. (2014), we show that the concerns brought up by Bruhn and McKenzie (2009) make sense in our adversarial framework. Re-randomization does have a cost
in terms of robustness. Indeed, sufficiently many re-randomizations lead to an essentially
15

Balance is important because it limits the possible set of alternative interpretations of the evidence, as
described above. It also seems to serve as a rule of thumb for the experiment being competently executed,
although this may not be warranted.

16

deterministic allocation, which, we show, results in losses bounded away from zero for the
adversarial audience. However, we also show that this cost is negligible, provided the number
of re-randomizations is not exponential in the sample size.
We can make these costs and benefits precise: If K randomizations occur (K = 1 being a
standard RCT), frequentist decision-making—that is, assigning the treatment that performs
q
p
. Importantly, log(N )
best empirically—is optimal up to a loss bounded by max{1,log(K)}
N
is a number between 1.5 and 3 for sample sizes between 10 and 10,000, which suggests that
setting K ≤ N results in minimal losses of robustness. In turn, K randomizations guarantee
that the final sample will be within the group of 5% most balanced samples with probability
1 − 0.95K . Observing that 1 − 0.95100 > 0.99, this suggests the following rule of thumb for
re-randomization.
Rule of Thumb:
Use the most balanced sample out of K randomizations, where K = min{N, 100}.
Note that the balance criteria need not be defined ex ante. That is, the researcher can
re-randomize K times, and select the assignment of treatment and control however they like
even after seeing the set of possible assignments.16
We believe our proposal for re-randomization has several benefits. First, it provides
simple, effective guidelines under which re-randomization is not problematic. Second, by
doing so, it may help bring re-randomization out in the open. As discussed in Bruhn and
McKenzie (2009), many authors who employ re-randomization fail to disclose it, possibly
because of the stigma attached to the practice. However, as long as re-randomization is done
in a way that explicitly takes into account its costs and benefits, there is no reason for such
a stigma.
16

Two important notes are in order here. First, when clustered randomization is done, for example, at the
village level, then the number of re-randomizations should equal the number of clusters, not observations.
Second, one can both stratify and re-randomize. That is, an experimenter can choose simple variables
on which to stratify, and then re-randomize to achieve better balance on the more complex or continuous
variables.

17

Finally, re-randomization may help experimenters find compromises with governments or
research partners uncomfortable with randomization. In some cases, experimenters negotiate
a near-random treatment assignment scheme, as in the deworming example above. Our
proposal is a middle ground: experimenters could produce a list of K randomizations to give
to their implementation partner, and the partner could choose from that list. The criteria
the implementing partner uses to choose a particular randomization could be anything they
like it to be: from the one that “looks” the fairest to them, to more cynical ones that values
having a particular village or person in the treatment group. Hybrids are possible as well:
an experimenter could generate 100 randomization schemes, and allow the implementing
partner to choose, however they want, from among the five most balanced.

4.2

Registration

Registration, enabled by platforms such as The American Economic Association’s Randomized Controlled Trials Registry, is being embraced by a growing proportion of the experimental community. It has two effects. First, it creates a centralized and thorough database
of experimental designs and outcomes that does not suffer from publication bias, file drawer
bias, and so on. Second, it often leads researchers to commit to a particular experiment, and
not change the experimental design during the course of the experiment. It should be noted
that the latter is not a primary intention of registries, or their designers.
Within the framework described by (2), the first aspect of registration is unambiguously
good. More information is always beneficial, simply because it can be ignored.17
The commitment value of registration is much less obvious. In a dynamic setting, where
experimental designs can be updated after the arrival of new information, Bayesians have no
value for commitment, as they are time consistent. Indeed, if the decision maker is limited
in her ability to specify complex contingency plans, then commitment has negative value.
17

Note that decision makers exhibiting self-control problems (Gul and Pesendorfer, 2001), or decision
makers with preferences over the revelation of uncertainty (Kreps and Porteus, 1978), may prefer to restrict
the information available. Players involved in a strategic game may also have this preference.

18

The value is even more negative when one considers the fact that updating a design may
produce more useful information.
4.2.1

Good Commitment

Although registries are imperfect commitment devices, they are often used that way by experimenters. Commitment is valuable for the ambiguity-averse decision maker described by
(2). Indeed, as Machina (1989) highlights, non-expected utility maximizers are not dynamically consistent. In other words, an ambiguity-averse decision maker who likes a particular
design ex ante may be unsatisfied with the resulting experiment ex post, and try to alter its
design.
The kind of temptation against which a decision maker may want to commit amounts to
either: 1) tampering with realized random assignments, or 2) reneging from implementing
a policy proven to be effective according to a burden of proof specified ex ante. Indeed,
once a random assignment is drawn, there always exists priors under which the realized
sample assignment and/or the policy conclusions are unsatisfactory. Commitment allows
the experimenter follow through with the original plan. A plan, it should be remembered,
that was ex ante satisfactory to both the experimenter and her adversarial audience.
The idea that registries allow various parties to commit to both an experiment and an
action plan is plausible. Research partners may sometimes want to redraw assignments, shut
down all or part of the experiment, or suppress parts of the data because they find the results
misleading. Such hiding of information is likely to be undesirable in itself, in addition to its
potentially harmful effects on the incentives of the experimenter (Aghion and Tirole, 1994).
Registration can reduce this risk.
4.2.2

Bad Commitment

There is, however, scope for excessive commitment. Indeed, while it is important for experimenters to commit to a randomized assignment, they need not commit to a specific treatment
19

to guarantee robust inferences. For instance, after gaining experience with a treatment A,
the experimenter may subjectively decide that a variant A0 is likely to be much more useful.
Experimenting with A0 does not preclude robust inference about the value of A0 versus the
default alternative. In fact, data from experimenting with A and A0 can be aggregated,
corresponding to a mixture treatment A/A0 .
In principle, if there are finite possible treatments, an ambiguity-averse decision maker
may wish to randomize the treatments with which she experiments. In practice however, experimenters do not randomize the treatments they evaluate. The space of possible treatments
is simply too large for such random exploration to be useful. Instead, the experimenter’s
subjective prior ends up driving the choice of technology to evaluate. Randomized assignment after the treatment is chosen allows the experimenter to convince her audience to take
the data seriously, although this may create a loss of valuable information.
If experimenters are bounded in terms of the number of possibilities they can imagine (as
we definitely were), committing to a very detailed design once and for all makes little sense.
It is costly to do, and it limits flexibility in ways that do not improve robustness. There
is little reason not to update experiments, provided that these updates are registered, as is
allowed (and tracked) by most registration platforms.18
4.2.3

Examples

An insider’s perspective into Alatas et al. (2012) illustrates the cost of excessive commitment.
Alatas et al. (2012) describes a field experiment in Indonesia where communities were asked
to rank their members from poor to rich. The order in which households were considered
for ranking was chosen randomly, driven by some concern for fairness. Households that were
ranked earlier were ranked much more accurately, presumably because the rankers got tired
or bored as the ranking meeting progressed. This was not something the authors had set
18

Of course, experimenters should not be allowed to first collect data, and then register a design that
speaks only to a selected portion of this data.

20

out to learn. However, it might have made sense to change the protocol to guard against
the inefficiency of late rankings—perhaps the ranking could have been done in batches, with
breaks in between. But, the fact that the experiment was registered gave us a false sense that
we were could not alter the design, even though such an update could have been reflected in
the registry, and may have allowed for more learning.
Another example can be found in Andreoni et al. (2016), which used incentived choices
to estimate time-discounting parameters of polio vaccinators in Pakistan. These parameters
were then used to construct optimal contracts, which were tested against a standard piecerate. Unfortunately, the authors had pre-registered, and thus felt committed to, a model
of time preferences that the data showed to be mis-specified. This was a potentially fatal
decision as the paper is a “proof of concept” of using preference estimation to design personalized contracts, and had the mis-specification been severe enough, it would have resulted
in a failure to generate a significant improvement. Luckily, this was not the case, but it
illustrates the dangers of “too much” commitment.

4.3

Pre-analysis plans

A pre-analysis plan lists all outcomes of interest, and the ways in which data will be analyzed
when the experiment is complete. Formally, it may be thought of as a subset of statistics S
of the data.
4.3.1

Pre-analysis and Bounded Rationality

Interestingly, neither Bayesian nor ambiguity-averse decision makers find it beneficial to register a pre-analysis plan, nor would her audience care if she did. This follows from two implicit
assumptions: 1) all data is disclosed, and 2) the decision maker and audience members have
unbounded cognitive capacity. If an audience member is suspicious that the experimenter
cherry-picked results, she can just run her own analyses. This seems appropriate when the

21

experimenter faces a sophisticated professional audience (that is, referees, editors, seminar
participants). However, in practice, there is demand for pre-analysis and thus, a careful,
decision-theoretic foundation for pre-analysis plans is likely worthwhile.
While such a foundation is beyond the scope of this chapter, we can hint at a setup
in which pre-analyis, that is, pre-selecting a subset S of statistics to be reported, becomes
relevant. We believe this reflects the bounded rationality constraints of the decision maker or
audience members. Indeed, if the decision maker can only process a subset of information S,
she may be rightfully concerned about the way this set is selected. Formulating a pre-analysis
plan can reassure the stakeholders, and facilitate actionable inference. Of course, if cognitive
capacity is the issue, then pre-analysis plans cannot be excessively complicated: The goal
is not for authors to anticipate all possible interesting inquiries into the data. This would
defeat the purpose of pre-analysis plans by making them inaccessible to time-constrained
decision makers.
In practice, experimenters are likely to speak to various audiences, each warranting different attitudes towards pre-analysis plans. A scholarly audience might reason that by
demanding robustness checks, it is, in effect, forcing the reporting of all relevant dimensions
of the data. Such an audience may prefer to ignore pre-analysis plans. However, an audience
of time-constrained policymakers may behave differently, and only update from experiments
with simple, clearly stated pre-analysis plans.
We see no need to view these perspectives as oppositional. Given the variety of audiences,
the best response to us seems to allow for both ex ante and ex post analyses of the data
within clearly defined “ex ante analysis” and “ex post analysis” sections. Ex ante-specified
hypotheses will be useful to time-constrained audiences lacking the desire to really delve into
the data. Ex post analysis of the data will allow experimenters to report insights that were
hard to anticipate without the help of data.

22

4.3.2

Caveats

The discussion above does not touch on moral hazard concerns.19 In this respect, two questions seem relevant: Is misbehavior by experimenters is prevalent in Economics? Are the
mechanisms of registration and pre-analysis a long-term solution to this potential issue? The
data at this point suggests that the answers are respectively “not very” and “maybe not”.
In particular, Brodeur et al. (forthcoming), find very little evidence of nefarious conduct in
articles in top economics journals, and detect none in the reporting of results from randomized experiments. Moreover, in medicine, where norms of pre-registration and pre-analysis
are often enforced by journals, a recent study by the Center for Evidence Based Medicine at
Oxford University found that 58/67 of the articles examined contain misreporting—that is,
failure to report pre-specified outcomes.20 Response to these results has been quite varied,
with at least one prestigious journal issuing corrections to all implicated articles, and another
releasing an editorial defending aspects of misreporting.
A valuable aspect of pre-analysis plans that we do not account for is that they serve as
contractual devices with research partners heavily invested in the outcome of an experiment
(Casey et al., 2012; Olken, 2015). In these environments, a pre-analysis plan may prevent a
research partner from shifting definitions after the data is collected. Additionally, specifying
table formats, and the analyses therein, ahead of time, is useful in identifying and eliminating disagreement between co-authors, and translating intentions into clear instructions for
research assistants.

5

External Validity

19

Humphreys et al. (2013) also emphasizes a communication role for pre-analysis plans. However, this
should not detract from the very real commitment dimensions of registration and pre-analysis plans, and
the fact that in order to make them successful, one needs to pay attention to how this commitment gives
authors incentives to comply, or not.
20
See http://compare-trials.org/blog/post-hoc-pre-specification-and-undeclared-separation-of-results-abroken-record-in-the-making/.

23

So far we have focused on internal decision problems, where treatment effects in the population enrolled in the experiment are the same as in the population a policy will be implemented upon. We now bring our framework to bear on external decision problems, in which
treatment effects may differ between these two populations.
Formally, we allow the effectiveness of the treatment, described by vector p, to vary with
the environment, denoted z ∈ {ze , zp } (for experimental and policy-relevant):
pz = (p0x,z , p1x,z )x∈X ∈ ([0, 1]2 )X ≡ P.
While randomization is robustly optimal in internal decision problems (ze = zp )—
provided the sample size is large enough—we now show that policy advice for external
environments remains Bayesian even for arbitrarily large sample sizes. Under plausible assumptions, the best guess about which policy to choose in an environment or population
that has not been studied is the experimenter’s posterior after seeing experimental results
in a related setting.
Let H|pz denote the set of marginal distributions h|pz over treatment effects pz for priors
h ∈ H entertained by the audience. While information about environment ze will likely
affect the posterior over pzp for any given prior, it need not restrict the set of possible priors
over pzp . This is captured by the following formal assumption.
Assumption 2. H|pzp × H|pze ⊂ H.21
External validity can be thought of as the following problem: after running an experiment
in environment ze , the experimenter is asked to make a recommendation for the external
environment zp . She thus chooses E and α to solve

max

E∼pze ,α


λEhe [u(α, pzp )] + (1 − λ) min Eh [u(α, pzp )] .
h∈H

(3)

21

While this assumption is clearly stylized, our results generalize, provided there remains sufficient ambiguity about environment zp , even conditional on knowing environment ze very well.

24

Proposition 3 (external policy advice is Bayesian). The optimal recommendation rule α∗ in
(3) depends only on the experimenter’s posterior belief he (pzp |e) given experimental realization
e. The optimal experiment E ∗ is Bayesian optimal under prior he .
That is, external recommendations only reflect the beliefs held by the experimenter,
not by the audience. This occurs because, under Assumption 2, evidence accumulated in
environment ze does not change the set of priors entertained by the audience in environment
zp —that is, it does not reduce the ambiguity in environment zp . This further implies that
the most information one can hope to obtain is the experimenter’s subjective posterior belief
over state pzp .

6

Structured Speculation

Proposition 3 formalizes the natural intuition that external policy advice is unavoidably
subjective. This does not mean that it needs to be uninformed by experimental evidence,
rather, judgement will unavoidably color it.
This also does not imply that subjective recommendations by experimenters cannot be
used to inform policymakers. In many (most?) cases the policymaker will have to make a
call without a randomized controlled trial tailored to the particular environment. As such,
the decision maker’s most useful repository of information is likely to be the experimenter,
because she is likely to deeply understand the experimental environment, previous results
and evaluations, and how a policy environment may differ from experimental environments.
Proposition 3 also does not mean that external policy advice is cheap talk. Indeed, further
evidence may be collected, and, provided that advice is precise, it may be proven to be right
or wrong. What we should aim to do is extract the experimenter’s honest beliefs about the
efficacy of treatment in different environments. While this is not an entirely obvious exercise,
we know from the literature on incentivizing experts that it is possible (see, for example,
Olszewski and Peski, 2011; Chassang, 2013).
25

Practically, we do not think formal incentives are necessary to ensure truthful revelation.
Instead, we believe a clear set of systematic guidelines for structured speculation may go a
long way.
Guidelines for structured speculation:
1. Experimenters should systematically speculate about the external validity of their
findings.
2. Such speculation should be clearly and cleanly separated from the rest of the paper;
maybe in a section called “Speculation”.
3. Speculation should be precise, and falsifiable.

The core requirements here are for speculative statements to be labeled as such, and
be falsifiable. Practically, this means predictions need to be sufficiently precise that the
experiment to validate or falsify them is unambiguous. This will allow testing by subsequent
experimenters. By a reputational argument, this implies that speculative statements will
not be cheap talk.

6.1

The Value of Structured Speculation

We believe that creating space for structured speculation is important and useful for several
reasons.
First, providing a dedicated space for speculation will produce information that would
not otherwise be transmitted. When assessing external questions, experimenters will bring to
bear the full range of their practical knowledge built in the field. This includes an intuitive
understanding of the mechanisms at work, of the underlying heterogeneity in treatment
effects, how these correlates with observable characteristics, and so on.
Second, enforcing the format of speculative statements—that is, ensuring statements are
26

precise and falsifiable—will facilitate and encourage follow-up tests, as well as interaction
with closely related work.
Finally, to us, the most important side effect of asking experimenters to speculate about
external validity is the creation of incentives to produce experimental designs that maximize
the ability to address external questions. To address scalability, experimenters may structure
local pilot studies for easy comparison with their main experiments. To identify the right
sub-populations for generalizing to other environments, experimenters can identify ahead
of time the characteristics of groups that can be generalized, and stratify on those. To
extend the results to populations with a different distribution of unobserved characteristics,
experimenters may elicit the former using the selective trial techniques discussed in Chassang
et al. (2012), and run the experiment separately for each of the groups so identified.
While these benefits are speculative (and difficult to falsify!), it is our belief that creating
a rigorous framework for external validity is an important step in completing an ecosystem for
social science field experiments, and a complement to many other aspects of experimentation.
In the next subsections, we describe an operational framework for structured speculation
that can be used today. We begin by providing concrete examples of what structured speculation may look like, and how it may be useful. We then propose a baseline set of external
validity issues that should be systematically addressed. We conclude by discussing possible
formats for structured speculation: qualitative, reduced-form, and structural.

6.2

Examples

To flesh out what we mean by structured speculation, we describe the form it may take in
the context of a few papers.
Dupas (2014). Dupas (2014) studies the effect of short-term subsidies on long-run adoption, and reports that short-term subsidies had a significant impact on the adoption of a
more effective and comfortable class of bed nets. In its Section 5, the paper provides an
27

extraordinary discussion of external validity.
It first spells out a simple and transparent argument relating the effectiveness of short-run
subsidies to: 1) the speed at which various forms of uncertainty are resolved; 2) the timing
of user’s costs and benefits. If the uncertainty over benefits is resolved quickly, short-run
subsidies can have a long-term effect. If uncertainty over benefits is resolved slowly, and
adoption costs are incurred early on, short-run subsidies are unlikely to have a long-term
effect.
It then answers the question, “For what types of health products and contexts would we
expect the same results to obtain?” It does so by classifying potential technologies into three
categories based on how short-run (or one-time) subsidies would change adoption patterns:
Increased: cookstoves, water filters;
Unaffected: water disinfectant;
Decreased: deworming drugs.
While very simple, these statements are perfect examples of what structured speculation
might look like. They attack a relevant policy question—the extension of one-time subsidies to other technologies—and make clear predictions that could be falsified through new
experiments.
Banerjee et al. (2015a). This paper does not engage in speculation, but can illustrate
the potential value of structured speculation for experimenters and their audiences. In
particular, it reports on seven separate field trials, in seven different countries, of a program
designed to help the ultra-poor. The basic intervention was the same in all countries, was
funded out of the same pool, and the evaluations were all coordinated by Dean Karlan of
Yale University.
Within the study, there were two options for external speculation. First, different countries were evaluated at different times. Second, there were multiple rounds of results for
28

each location. Results from countries evaluated early in the experiment could have been
used to speculate about the results from those evaluated later. Within a country, earlier
rounds could have been used to speculate about later rounds. But what would have been
the benefit of doing so? And how would we go about it, in hindsight?
There were many common questions that came up about this research: How long did
we expect the effects to last? Was there any point in carrying out this program in rich
or middle-income countries? Formally speculating about these questions in earlier rounds
and countries would have provided a structure for answering those multiple queries, and
justified elements of our experimental design that readers and reviewers had some reason
to criticize. Additionally, making public predictions would have provided an opportunity
for the authors—and other scholars—to learn about what kinds of predictions tend to be
trustworthy.
Even directional predictions—a speculation that this effect will be larger than that one,
or that it will be bigger or smaller than some number, possibly zero—would have been of
some use. The point estimates of the program impact are smaller in richer countries. Does
this mean the program needs to be re-thought for richer countries? We could have informed
this decision by aggregating all we knew about the program, including the quantile results
and results for certain sub-populations, to declare whether we believe the effects shrink with
a country’s GDP. We could have done this at different points in time, as the results came
in from different countries and rounds, to see how good we are at making these sorts of
predictions, and thus, how strongly we should advocate for our predictions at the end of the
study. A similar exercise could have also been carried to predict the change in impact over
time, which is key to understanding whether the intervention actually frees people from a
poverty trap.
Banerjee et al. (2015b). Directional predictions would have also been very useful in
maximizing the information from a series of so-called Teaching at the Right Level (TaRL)

29

interventions described in Banerjee et al. (2015b). These interventions seek to teach children
basic skills they lack, even when they are in a grade that presumes they have mastered
those skills. This does not happen as a matter of course in most schools in the developing
world (Banerjee and Duflo, 2011). As this intervention had already been shown to work
on the margins of the school system, each experiment (RCT) focused on a different way of
integrating this practice into government schools. The interventions varied from training
teachers, to giving them the materials to use for TaRL, to implementing TaRL during the
summer break (when teachers are not required to follow the set curriculum), to integrating
TaRL directly into the curriculum, and so on. Each intervention built on the successes and
failures of the previous interventions, culminating in two different, but successful, models.
Yet without recording the predictions made along the way, this would look like an ex post
rationalization of shooting in the dark. Even minimal public predictions—this approach is
likely to work better than that—would have helped at lot.
Duflo et al. (2008). Another innovation that would have been useful is our call to record
structured speculation at the end of each paper (in addition to in a repository, as we describe
below). This would allow for a clear demarcation of results that are speculative—which will
tend to arise in papers with pre-registration and pre-analysis plans—and those that are not.
Such a demarcation would have clearly helped in dealing with Deaton’s (2010, pp. 441–442)
critique of the first TaRL paper (Banerjee et al., 2007).
[W]hen two independent but identical [randomized controlled trials] in two cities
in India find that children’s scores improved less in Mumbai than in Vadodora,
the authors state “this is likely related to the fact that over 80 percent of the
children in Mumbai had already mastered the basic language skills the program
was covering” (Duflo et al., 2008). It is not clear how “likely” is established here,
and there is certainly no evidence that conforms to the “gold standard” that is
seen as one of the central justifications for [randomized controlled trials]. For
the same reason, repeated successful replications of a “what works” experiment,
that is, one that is unrelated to some underlying or guiding mechanism, is both
unlikely and unlikely to be persuasive.

30

Our proposal would have helped with such criticism by establishing a place within the paper
where it was clear that this assertion was based on our own knowledge and intuitions, rather
than a part of the experimental design.

6.2.1

A Post-hoc Evaluation

In summary, our proposal would have helped with criticisms of prior research in three ways.
First, it would establish a place within research where such speculation is both expected and
encouraged. Second, by attaching reputational incentives to such speculation, the reader
can be assured that it is not just idle chatter intended to explain away an uncomfortable
discrepancy. Third, because experimenters will be encouraged to speculate about the outcomes of replications before they happen, replications that are close to their predictions
should increase, at least slightly, the credibility of the experimenter’s preferred underlying
mechanism.
An alternative approach, being pioneered by Stefano Della Vigna, of the University of
California, and Devin Pope, of the University of Chicago, is to elicit priors on a specific
research question from a wide range of experts (Della Vigna and Pope, 2016a,b). This has
the benefit of forcing the audience to think about their priors before research is carried out,
and identifying the places in which research can make the largest contribution by shifting
the average prior, or collapsing the distribution of priors. However, it is unlikely to protect
against the most skeptical members of an audience, who may not be in any given surveyed
panel of experts. Moreover, it lacks many of the side benefits of our proposal.
On the other hand, the Della Vigna and Pope approach is being implemented today,
while, with the exception of Dupas (2014), none of the papers above contained structured
speculation. Why not? This was, of course, in part because it was not on the agenda.
But there are deeper reasons: we, like many other researchers, focused on the reduced form
LATE estimates, which tell us very little directly about how they would translate to other
31

environments. A more natural basis for speculation would be to estimate a structural model,
and use the estimated parameters—which can be made to directly depend on features of the
environment—to predict out of sample. But, we must recognize that the choice of a model
is itself subjective, so providing a model that rationalizes some prediction is not, in itself,
completely reassuring.
However, the alternative may be worse. With different (Bayesian) readers having different
priors and models of the world, even well-structured speculation without a model could be
interpreted in multiple ways. The model serves as a currency for reducing, to a single number,
the many disparate pieces of information that the author has. Without the prop of a model
that exercise seems too hard to carry out with any accuracy.
To reduce the space of possible models, it would be helpful to demarcate the set of
environments where structured speculation would be particularly useful, and the challenges
likely to be encountered there. This is what the next subsection attempts to do.

7

Issues of Particular Interest

While our proposal could apply to any element of external validity, it is perhaps useful to
outline a number of external validity issues that are focal for economists.
Focal External Validity Issues:
1. How scalable is the intervention?
2. What are treatment effects on a different population?
3. What are treatment effects on the same population in different circumstances?

Another important question that we do not discuss further is the one addressed by Dupas
(2014): What is the effect of a different, but related, technology?
32

7.1

Scalability

A central concern in many development environments is how an intervention might scale—
that is, how might the treatment effects measured in an experiment change if the intervention
were rolled out across a province, country, or region? This concern is often composed of two
inter-related issues: how spillover effects might enhance or reduce the benefits of a particular
treatment, and how the incentives of an organization capable of implementing large-scale
interventions might affect outcomes.

Spillovers. Spillovers encompass both general equilibrium effects and externalities. Consider an intervention that gives scholarships for top-performing students in local schools to
attend provincial schools. As an experimental intervention, this policy may have large positive effects on a locality, because several students from the local school would be able to get
an improved education. However, if rolled out nationally, the returns on human capital may
diminish, possibly diminishing the treatment effect on outcomes such as wealth, savings, and
consumption. There may, however, be positive general equilibrium effects. For instance, a
more educated available workforce may increase FDI and lead to the creation of new types
of jobs. General equilibrium effects are difficult to apprehend through purely experimental
methods, but it is possible to draw on different sources of information to inform speculation.
For instance, one may use regional heterogeneity in average human capital to map out what
the effect may be should the program get rolled out.
Direct externalities (for example: physical interaction, information, contagion, and so on)
may be more easily captured, as they tend to be more localized. Experimental designs that at
least partially capture local externalities are now quite standard (Baird et al., 2014; Crépon
et al., 2013; Muralidharan and Sundararaman, 2015). The difficult external validity question
relates to the effect of scaling on adoption rates. In some cases, such as those of deworming
drugs or vaccines, private returns are a diminishing function of aggregate adoption. This
33

may be addressed by variation in the intensity of the program across locations. While this
variation is likely to not result in sufficient power to become a main finding of a paper, it
would be useful for guiding speculation about external validity.

Implementation by others. Informed speculation about implementing agencies is inherently difficult. Three environments seem relevant: implementations by other researchers,
implementations by NGOs or international agencies, and implementations by provincial or
country governments (Bold et al., 2013). The difficulty is that in order to make her speculation meaningful, the experimenter would need to specify the precise governments or NGOs
that her projections apply to. This might expose the experimenter to political risk, and
hamper her ability to conduct future experiments.22 At the very least, it should be possible
for the experimenter to highlight the specific aspects of the intervention that may make it
difficult to be implemented by others.
One aspect of implementation that can possibly be controlled by experimenters is the
reputational capital they have when they interact with the target population. They may
be able to control for this by running initial perception surveys regarding their potential
implementation partners, as well as by varying the way they present themselves. Having
an official present at a meeting may significantly affect the way people engage with an
experiment.
Again, an experiment may not be sufficiently well powered for variation in implementation
to lead to significant findings. However, that data would clearly help informed speculation.
In some cases, the experimenter may just have an intuitive understanding of how things
would play out in different settings. Such intuitive understandings would be of great value
to the next experimenter(s) who tried similar experiments. As such, it would be a useful
contribution to speculate about the role of implementing agencies on outcomes.
22
This concern may be mitigated in practice by the fact that the employees of many organizations are
more aware of their limited implementation abilities than researchers themselves.

34

7.2

Effect on Other Populations

If a program is effective in one region, or one country, is it effective in another? If a program
is effective for a specific social group, would it be effective for different groups in the same
country? For comparable groups in a different country? Answering such questions is inherently a speculative exercise, and yet it is useful for experimenters to do so. Experimenters
have detailed intuitive knowledge of local mechanisms that can help clarify what matters for
results to extend or not.
For example, suppose a program was found to be effective in India, and the experimenter
tried to speculate about its effectiveness in Kenya. The experimenter may first assess the
underlying heterogeneity in treatment effects and decide the program is principally effective
in helping members of Scheduled Castes. If this is the case, one may reason that the program
could be effective for historically discriminated populations of Kenya, say Muslims. However,
by spelling this hypothesis out clearly, another experimenter may question its relevance if
she believed affirmative action for Scheduled Castes appears essential for the treatment to
be effective.

Subgroups and selective trials. We believe that subgroup analysis, which is often instructive but poorly identified, has an important role to play in formulating successful speculative hypotheses. Reweighting treatment effects by subgroups provides a natural way to
project findings to different environments. This obviously includes groups formed on observable characteristics, say income, education, religion, and so on. Interestingly, this also
includes unobservable characteristics elicited through mechanisms.
A recent strand of the experimental literature, illustrated by Ashraf et al. (2010); Berry
et al. (2012); Cohen and Dupas (2010); Jack et al. (2013); Karlan and Zinman (2009), and
formalized in Chassang et al. (2012), combines randomization with self-selection in order
to “observe unobservables”. The idea is as follows: randomized trials are lotteries over
35

treatment. Many trials consist of a single lottery. By having multiple lotteries with different
winning rates, and assigning costs to these lotteries, it becomes possible to elicit participants’
values for the treatment, and estimate treatment effects conditional on values. This provides
additional information helpful to project treatment effects on different populations.
For instance, as selective trials recover marginal treatment effects (MTEs, Heckman and
Vytlacil, 2005), they allow the experimenter to figure out the effect of the program on
populations selected through prices, by reduced availability, and so on. An experimenter will
also make very different predictions about external treatment effects depending on whether
it is effective for everybody, or only for highly-motivated participants.
It is important to note that the “cost” of a lottery does not need to be monetary. Indeed,
effort, more than money, seems to be a metric more easily comparable across locations.
Alatas et al. (forthcoming) varies whether a participant has to travel for an interview, or can
stay at home, to see if they qualify for a cash-transfer program for the poor. They find that
those who travel are significantly more likely to actually be qualified for the program, and
that interviewer coding of them is significantly more reliable. Randomizing the treatment
(the cash-transfer program) conditional on whether or not the participant is judged to be
qualified would have allowed this work to estimate returns for the motivated and for the
less motivated. More generally, the variety of information that can be elicited through
mechanisms is very large, and it frequently comes with a natural structural interpretation.
We believe that collecting such information will prove helpful in formulating speculative
hypotheses.

7.3

Same Population, Different Circumstances

The same population may react differently to treatment in different circumstances. For
instance, if an intervention helps people save more, one may ask whether it will continue to
be effective as people accumulate savings. Similarly, one may ask about the effectiveness of
36

subsidies for technology adoption as information about the new technology spreads, and so
on.
As before, subgroup analysis is likely to be helpful in forming opinions about the way
effects will pan out as the population evolves. Richer participants or more informed communities may be used to proxy for future populations. As such, innovations in experimental
design may also be helpful in this respect. Chassang et al. (2012) emphasizes that by either
varying incentives, or by varying the participants’ beliefs that they are being treated, it is
possible to identify purely behavioral dimensions of treatment effects—that is, treatment
effects that are due to participant’s behavioral changes accompanying (the expectation of)
treatment. For instance, a small business owner participating in an experiment in which
she receives accounting training may decide to work longer hours because she believes the
training is making her more productive. This could result in finding positive effects to training even when accounting itself is not useful. These effects, however, may not persist—the
treatment effect for an informed participant, aware that accounting is of limited use, may
be much smaller.
This observation is useful in medicine, where isolating treatment effects due to the interaction of a new drug with patient behavior is essential for understanding the true value add
of that drug. In the context of medical trials, Chassang et al. (2015) proposes 2x2 blind trials
(Figure 2) able to isolate both the pure effect of treatment, and the interaction of treatment
and behavior. In a 2x2 trial, participants are randomly split into two arms. In one arm,
the participants are told they will have a high probability of treatment, and in the other,
they are told they will have a low probability of treatment. The trial within each arm is
then run accordingly. Under the assumption that participant behavior will change with the
probability of treatment, the trial independently randomizes both behavior and treatment.
This is sufficient to isolate the pure effect of treatment, the pure effect of behavior, and the
interaction of treatment and behavior.
37

Figure 2: A Two-by-Two Blind Trial.

Notes: The figure shows the two stages of randomization, with participants first allocated to either a highor low-probability treatment group, then informed of this probability (thus generating the corresponding
placebo effect), and then receiving either treatment or non-treatment in a standard, blinded manner. Source:
Chassang et al. (2015).

Bulte et al. (2014) implements a version of a 2x2 trial in a development context using
seed varieties as its technology. Its findings suggest that purely behavioral responses—that
is, mediated by expectations of change—to treatment are significant. This, in turn, suggests
that participants may change their response over time, as they learn the true effectiveness
of a treatment. Practically, running the complex mechanisms described in Chassang et
al. (2012), or using blind treatments as in Bulte et al. (2014) may not always be feasible.
However, it should always be possible to survey participants about their expectations for the
technology, and about how they are changing their practice in response to treatment. These
survey measures, which in many cases would not naturally be reported as hard evidence,
may prove quite useful in shaping speculative hypotheses.

7.4

Formats for Structured Speculation

We conclude our discussion of structured speculation with a brief discussion of the formats
in which structured speculation may be expressed. We argue that, at this stage, there is
no wrong way to formulate hypotheses about external validity, provided the hypotheses are
formulated in a clear and falsifiable way.
38

Qualitative predictions. Simple qualitative statements are not necessarily less rigorous
than analytical ones. For instance, Dupas (2014), describes environments in which treatment
effects are likely to larger or smaller. These descriptions are simple, yet precise and falsifiable
Experimenters ofter produce reduced form estimates for multiple sub-populations and/or
quantile treatment effects—though they may not report all of them—and these, along with
some intuitive understanding of which environments are similar, make it possible for them
to predict the direction of change in the treatment effect, though perhaps not the magnitude
of the change. Such speculation is naturally expressed qualitatively, as in, “This treatment
effect is likely to be larger than that.”

Predictive models. If sufficient data about subgroups is available, experimenters may feel
comfortable producing statistical models predicting treatment effects in other environments
conditional on observables. Multi-period, multi-country trials such as Alatas et al. (2012),
or multi-trial meta-analyses offer natural starting points. The main advantage of producing
a fully-specified, predictive model is that it is unambigous, and by construction, clear and
falsifiable. It is therefore a better starting point for further analysis than purely qualitative
predictions. Note that the model need not necessarily predict point estimates. A model
predicting ranges of estimates would be equally well specified.

Theory and structural models. Theory has an important role to play in formulating
useful speculative hypotheses. If an experimenter lays out a theoretical model she thinks
best summarizes the facts she sees, and the theory is rich enough to cover environments
beyond what is in her experiment, she is effectively making a directional prediction for other
environments.23
This is already happening to some degree. For example, Karlan et al. (2012) evaluates
two interventions to improve business for tailors in Ghana. In one intervention, the tailors
23

Some predictions may be ambiguous, which is both a benefit and a drawback of formal models.

39

were provided with a cash grant; in the other, they were given training. Both changed the
way the tailors practiced business (at least briefly), but neither increased profits over the
long term. The authors develop a model in which this occurs because tailors treat these
interventions as opportunities to explore new opportunities. While most of these fail, the
option value of experimentation is likely still positive. This implies that there should be
some tailors who experience very large gains from these interventions, but that, on average,
the effect will be small and difficult to detect. To test this prediction, the authors look at
other studies of similar interventions that are powered to detect differential changes in the
right tail of the distribution. They find some support for their theory.
Identified structural models, just as predictive statistical models, are attractive because
they make fully-specified predictions in external environments. An advantage they have
over purely statistical models is that they can make the process of external extrapolation
more transparent. We emphasize, however, the cautionary implications of Proposition 3.
In all external decision making problems, inference is unavoidably subjective. In structural
modeling, the source of subjectivity is the model itself.

8

Conclusion

This chapter has ranged from models of experimentation, to prescriptions for experimental
design, all the way to external validity. Hopefully the wide range of (potential) applications
of decision theory to experimental practice is enough to convince theorists and practitioners
alike that this is a fruitful area for further discovery.

40

References
Aghion, Philippe and Jean Tirole, “The Management of Innovation,” The Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 1994, 109 (4), 1185–1209.
, Patrick Bolton, Christopher Harris, and Bruno Jullien, “Optimal Learning by
Experimentation,” The Review of Economic Studies, 1991, 58 (4), 621–654.
Alatas, Vivi, Abhijit Banerjee, Rema Hanna, Benjamin A. Olken, and Julia
Tobias, “Targeting the Poor: Evidence from a Field Experiment in Indonesia,” American
Economic Review, 2012, 102 (4), 1206–1240.
,
,
, Benjamin Olken, Ririn Purnamasari, and Matthew Wai-Poi, “SelfTargeting: Evidence from a Field Experiment in Indonesia,” Journal of Political Economy,
forthcoming.
Andreoni, James, Michael Callen, Yasir Khan, Karrar Jaffar, and Charles
Sprenger, “Using Preference Estimates to Customize Incentives: An Application to Polio
Vaccination Drives in Pakistan,” 2016. NBER Working Paper Series # 22019.
Ashraf, Nava, James Berry, and Jesse M. Shapiro, “Can Higher Prices Stimulate
Product Use? Evidence from a Field Experiment in Zambia,” American Economic Review,
December 2010, 100 (6), 2383–2413.
Athey, Susan and Guido W. Imbens, “The Econometrics of Randomized Experiments,”
in Esther Duflo and Abhijit Banerjee, eds., Handbook of Field Experiments, Elsevier,
forthcoming.
Baird, Sarah, J. Aislinn Bohren, Craig McIntosh, and Berk Özler, “Designing
Experiments to Measure Spillover Effects,” 2014. PIER Working Paper #14-032.
Banerjee, Abhijit, “A Simple Model of Herd Behavior,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, August 1992, 107 (3), 797–817.
and Esther Duflo, Poor Economics: A Radical Rethinking of the way to Fight Global
Poverty, PublicAffairs, 2011.
,
, Nathanael Goldberg, Dean Karlan, Robert Osei, William Parienté,
Jeremy Shapiro, Bram Thuysbaert, and Christopher Udry, “A Multifaceted Program Causes Lasting Progress for the Very Poor: Evidence from Six Countries,” Science,
2015, 348 (6236), 1260799.
, Rukmini Banerji, James Berry, Esther Duflo, H Kannan, S Mukherji, and
Michael Walton, “Teaching at the Right Level: Evidence from Randomized Evaluations
in India,” MIT Working paper, 2015.

41

, Shawn Cole, Esther Duflo, and Leigh Linden, “Remedying Education: Evidence
from Two Randomized Experiments in India,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, August
2007, 122 (3), 1236–1264.
, Sylvain Chassang, Sergio Montero, and Erik Snowberg, “A Theory of Experimenters,” 2014. Princeton University, mimeo.
Bellman, Richard, “A Problem in the Sequential Design of Experiments,” Sankhyā: The
Indian Journal of Statistics, April 1956, 16 (3/4), 221–229.
Bergemann, Dirk and Juuso Välimäki, “Learning and Strategic Pricing,” Econometrica,
September 1996, 64 (5), 1125–1149.
and , “Information Acquisition and Efficient Mechanism Design,” Econometrica, 2002,
70 (3), 1007–1033.
and

, “Bandit Problems,” 2006. Cowles Foundation discussion paper.

Berry, James, Greg Fischer, and Raymond Guiteras, “Eliciting and Utilizing Willingness to Pay: Evidence from Field Trials in Northern Ghana,” 2012. Cornell University,
mimeo.
Bewley, Truman F, “Knightian Uncertainty,” in Donald P. Jacobs, Ehud Kalai, and Morton I. Kamien, eds., Frontiers of Research in Economic Theory: The Nancy L. Schwartz
Memorial Lectures 1983–1997, Cambridge University Press: Econometric Society Monographs, 1998, pp. 71–81.
Bold, Tessa, Mwangi Kimenyi, Germano Mwabu, Alice Ng’ang’a, and Justin
Sandefur, “Scaling up What Works: Experimental Evidence on External Validity in
Kenyan Education,” 2013. Center for Global Development Working Paper #321.
Brodeur, Abel, Mathias Lé, Marc Sangnier, and Yanos Zylberberg, “Star Wars:
The Empirics Strike Back,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, forthcoming.
Bruhn, Miriam and David McKenzie, “In Pursuit of Balance: Randomization in
Practice in Development Field Experiments,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2009, 1 (4), 200–232.
Bulte, Erwin, Gonne Beekman, Salvatore Di Falco, Joseph Hella, and Pan Lei,
“Behavioral Responses and the Impact of New Agricultural Technologies: Evidence from
a Double-Blind Field Experiment in Tanzania,” American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 2014, 96 (3), 813–830.
Casey, Katherine, Rachel Glennerster, and Edward Miguel, “Reashaping Institutions: Evidence on Aid Impacts using a Preanalysis Plan,” The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 2012, 127 (4), 1755–1812.
42

Chaloner, Kathryn and Isabella Verdinelli, “Bayesian Experimental design: A Review,” Statistical Science, August 1995, 10 (3), 273–304.
Chassang, Sylvain, “Calibrated Incentive Contracts,” Econometrica, 2013, 81 (5), 1935–
1971.
, Erik Snowberg, Ben Seymour, and Cayley Bowles, “Accounting for Behavior
in Treatment Effects: New Applications for Blind Trials,” PLOS ONE, 2015, 10 (6),
e0127227.
, Gerard Padró i Miquel, and Erik Snowberg, “Selective Trials: A Principal-Agent
Approach to Randomized Controlled Experiments,” American Economic Review, June
2012, 102 (4), 1279—1309.
Cohen, Jessica and Pascaline Dupas, “Free Distribution or Cost-Sharing? Evidence
from a Randomized Malaria Prevention Experiment,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
2010, 125 (1), 1–45.
Crépon, Bruno, Esther Duflo, Marc Gurgand, Roland Rathelot, and Philippe
Zamora, “Do Labor Market Policies have Displacement Effects? Evidence from a Clustered Randomized Experiment,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2013, 128 (2), 531–580.
De Finetti, Bruno, “La Prévision: Ses lois Logiques, ses Sources Subjectives,” Annales de
l’institut Henri Poincaré, 1937, 7 (1), 1–68.
Deaton, Angus, “Instruments, Randomization, and Learning about Development,” Journal of Economic Literature, June 2010, 48 (2), 424–455.
Della Vigna, Stefano and Devin Pope, “Run This Treament, Not That: What Experts
Know,” 2016. University of California, mimeo.
and , “What Motivates Effort? Evidence and Expert Forecasts,” 2016. University of
California, mimeo.
Duflo, Esther, Rachel Glennerster, and Michael Kremer, “Using Randomization in
Development Economics Research: A Tool Kit,” in T. Paul Schultz and John Strauss, eds.,
Handbook of Development Economics, Vol. 4, Amsterdam: Elsevier, 2008, pp. 3895–3962.
Dupas, Pascaline, “Short-Run Subsidies and Long-Run Adoption of New Health Products:
Evidence From a Field Experiment,” Econometrica, 2014, 82 (1), 197–228.
Egger, Matthias, George Davey Smith, and Jonathan AC Sterne, “Uses and Abuses
of Meta-analysis,” Clinical Medicine, 2001, 1 (6), 478–484.
Ellsberg, Daniel, “Risk, Ambiguity, and the Savage Axioms,” The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 1961, 75 (4), 643–669.

43

Fisher, Ronald Aylmer, “The Arrangement of Field Experiments,” Journal of the Ministry of Agriculture of Great Britain, 1926, 33, 503–513.
, The Design of Experiments., Edinburgh and London: Oliver & Boyd, 1935.
Gilboa, Itzhak and David Schmeidler, “Maxmin Expected Utility with a Non-Unique
Prior,” Journal of Mathematical Economics, 1989, 18 (2), 141–153.
, Andrew Postlewaite, and David Schmeidler, “Is it Always Rational to Satisfy
Savage’s Axioms?,” Economics and Philosophy, 2009, 25 (3), 285–296.
Gittins, John C., “Bandit Processes and Dynamic Allocation Indices,” Journal of the
Royal Statistical Society. Series B (Methodological), 1979, 41 (2), 148–177.
Green, Donald P and Andrej Tusicisny, “Statistical Analysis of Results from Laboratory Studies in Experimental Economics: A Critique of Current Practice,” 2012. Columbia
University, mimeo.
Grossman, Sanford J and Joseph E Stiglitz, “On the Impossibility of Informationally
Efficient Markets,” The American Economic Review, June 1980, 70 (3), 393–408.
Gul, Faruk and Wolfgang Pesendorfer, “Temptation and Self-Control,” Econometrica,
2001, 69 (6), 1403–1435.
Heckman, James J. and Edward Vytlacil, “Structural Equations, Treatment Effects,
and Econometric Policy Evaluation,” Econometrica, May 2005, 73 (3), 669–738.
Humphreys, Macartan, Raul Sanchez de la Sierra, and Peter Van der Windt,
“Fishing, Commitment, and Communication: A Proposal for Comprehensive Nonbinding
Research Registration,” Political Analysis, 2013, 21 (1), 1–20.
Jack, B Kelsey et al., “Private Information and the Allocation of Land Use Subsidies in
Malawi,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2013, 5 (3), 113–35.
Karlan, Dean, Ryan Knight, and Christopher Udry, “Hoping to Win, Expected to
Lose: Theory and Lessons on Micro Enterprise Development,” 2012. NBER Working
Paper Series # 18325.
Karlan, Dean S. and Jonathan Zinman, “Observing Unobservables: Identifying Information Asymmetries with a Consumer Credit Field Experiment,” Econometrica, 2009, 77
(6), 1993–2008.
Kasy, Maximilian, “Why Experimenters Should not Randomize, and What they Should
do Instead,” 2013. Harvard University, mimeo.
Klibanoff, Peter, Massimo Marinacci, and Sujoy Mukerji, “A Smooth Model of
Decision Making Under Ambiguity,” Econometrica, 2005, 73 (6), 1849–1892.
44

Kreps, David M. and Evan L. Porteus, “Temporal Resolution of Uncertainty and
Dynamic Choice Theory,” Econometrica, 1978, 46 (1), 185–200.
Machina, Mark J, “Dynamic Consistency and Non-Expected Utility Models of Choice
under Uncertainty,” Journal of Economic Literature, 1989, 27 (4), 1622–1668.
Maynard, G.D., “Statistical Study of Anti-Typhoid Inoculation,” Biometrika, March 1909,
6 (4), 366–375.
Miguel, Edward and Michael Kremer, “Worms: Identifying Impacts on Education and
Health in the Presence of Treatment Externalities,” Econometrica, January 2004, 72 (1),
159–217.
Milgrom, Paul R., “Rational Expectations, Information Acquisition, and Competitive
Bidding,” Econometrica, July 1981, 89 (4), 921–943.
Morgan, Kari Lock and Donald B Rubin, “Rerandomization to Improve Covariate
Balance in Experiments,” The Annals of Statistics, 2012, 40 (2), 1263–1282.
Muralidharan, Karthik and Vankatesh Sundararaman, “The Aggregate Effects of
School Choice: Evidence from a Two-Stage Experiment,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
2015, 130 (3), 1011–1066.
Olken, Benjamin A, “Promises and Perils of Pre-Analysis Plans,” The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2015, 29 (3), 61–80.
Olszewski, Wojciech and Marcin Peski, “The Principal-agent Approach to Testing
Experts,” American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 2011, 3 (2), 89–113.
Pearl, Judea, Causality: Models, Reasoning, and Inference, New York: Cambridge University Press, 2000.
Persico, Nicola, “Information Acquisition in Auctions,” Econometrica, 2000, 68 (1), 135–
148.
Robbins, Herbert, “Some Aspects of the Sequential Design of Experiments,” Bulletin of
the American Mathematical Society, September 1952, 58 (5), 527–535.
Rothschild, Michael, “A Two-Armed Bandit Theory of Market Pricing,” Journal of Economic Theory, 1974, 9 (2), 185–202.
Rubin, Donald B, “Estimating Causal Effects of Treatments in Randomized and Nonrandomized Studies,” Journal of Educational Psychology, 1974, 66 (5), 688–701.
Savage, Leonard J, The Foundations of Statistics, Courier Corporation, 1954.
Schmeidler, David, “Subjective Probability and Expected Utility without Additivity,”
Econometrica, July 1989, 57 (3), 571–587.
45

Simpson, R.J.S. and Karl Pearson, “Report on Certain Enteric Fever Inoculation Statistics,” The British Medical Journal, 1904, 2 (2288), 1243–1246.
Vapnik, Vladimir, The Nature of Statistical Learning Theory, 2nd edition ed., Springer,
1999.

46

