                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               INNOVATION IN THE GLOBAL FIRM

                                              L. Kamran Bilir
                                              Eduardo Morales

                                           Working Paper 22160
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w22160


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                        April 2016




We thank Costas Arkolakis, Paula Bustos, Jan De Loecker, Amit Gandhi, Elhanan Helpman, Sam
Kortum, Nina Pavcnik, Veronica Rappaport, Joel Rodrigue, Andres Rodriguez-Clare, Felix Tintelnot,
Jim Tybout, David Weinstein, Steve Yeaple, Bill Zeile, and seminar participants at AEA, CEPR, Colorado-Boulder,
Columbia, Dartmouth, Duke, George Washington University, Harvard, HBS, Hebrew University,
LMU, LSE, Michigan, Minnesota, MIT, NBER, Northwestern-Kellogg, Penn State, Princeton, Santa
Cruz, SED, UCLA, UPenn, Vanderbilt, and Wisconsin for very helpful comments. The statistical analysis
of firm-level data on U.S. multinational companies was conducted at the Bureau of Economic Analysis,
U.S. Department of Commerce, under arrangements that maintain legal confidentiality requirements.
The Bureau of Economic Analysis has reviewed this paper prior to its release to ensure that data confidentiality
is not unintentionally compromised. Bilir thanks the International Economics Section at Princeton
and the Wisconsin Alumni Research Foundation for support. Morales thanks the University of Wisconsin-Madison
and the Cowles Foundation at Yale University for their hospitality and support. An earlier draft of
this paper circulated under the title "The Impact of Innovation in the Multinational Firm." The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect official positions of the U.S.
Department of Commerce and the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2016 by L. Kamran Bilir and Eduardo Morales. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Innovation in the Global Firm
L. Kamran Bilir and Eduardo Morales
NBER Working Paper No. 22160
April 2016, Revised August 2018
JEL No. F00,F23,O30

                                              ABSTRACT

How global are the gains from innovation? When firms operate production plants in multiple countries,
technological improvements developed in one location may be shared with foreign sites for efficiency
gain. We develop a model that accounts for such transfer, and apply it to measure private returns to
R&D investment for a panel of U.S. multinationals during 1989-2008. Our estimates indicate that
innovation increases performance at firm locations beyond the innovating site: the median U.S. multinational
firm realizes abroad 20 percent of the return to its U.S. R&D investment, suggesting estimates based
only on domestic operations understate multinationals' gain from innovation, and revealing a spatial
disconnect between the costs and potential gains of policies that encourage multinationals' U.S. innovation.


L. Kamran Bilir
Department of Economics
University of Wisconsin - Madison
1180 Observatory Drive
Madison, WI 53706
and NBER
kbilir@ssc.wisc.edu

Eduardo Morales
Department of Economics
Princeton University
310 Fisher Hall
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
ecmorales@princeton.edu
1        Introduction
Multinational corporations are among the most innovation intensive firms and account for the
majority of innovation investment worldwide.1 Although defined by their fragmentation of produc-
tion across countries, innovation within these firms is spatially concentrated by comparison, with
a large share of firms pursuing innovation investment in only one (headquarters) country. If this
concentrated investment results in technological improvements that are shared with foreign sites
for efficiency gain, these facts raise the strong possibility that location-specific policies encouraging
innovation create within-firm gains that are realized abroad. While this is a stated concern of the
U.S. Congress, which awards over $30 billion in innovation subsidies to U.S. firms annually (Na-
tional Science Board 2014), its importance hinges on the actual extent to which innovation within
the multinational firm affects the productivity of affiliates abroad.2 Moreover, given the global
prevalence of innovation subsidies, these effects could also operate in reverse, impling significant
gains for U.S. affiliates of foreign multinational firms receiving such subsidies abroad.3
        This paper quantifies the intrafirm impact of U.S. innovation investment by multinational
firms on the performance dynamics of affiliates abroad. Guided by a model of global innovation
and production, we estimate this impact of innovation for a panel of U.S.-based firms with affili-
ates operating in 48 countries during 1989–2008. Our results provide evidence that headquarters
innovation significantly increases affiliate performance within the same multinational firm. Affiliate
innovation, by contrast, does not affect performance at other firm sites. Quantitatively, we find
that the median firm realizes abroad approximately 20 percent of the return to its U.S. R&D in-
vestment, suggesting estimates based only on domestic operations understate firms’ gain from U.S.
innovation, and revealing a spatial disconnect between the costs and potential gains of policies that
encourage firms’ U.S. innovation.
        We use detailed affiliate-level panel data on the global operations of U.S.-based multinational
firms from the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) for our estimation. These data allow us to
observe separate measures of parent- and affiliate-specific R&D spending, as well as inputs and
output, within each multinational firm and year. The availability of data on the allocation of
innovation investment across sites within the same firm is particularly unique and important; such
information is rarely available to researchers, but is essential in our analysis.
        To inform our model, we first use these data to describe innovation and production within
multinational firms. Innovation investment is more concentrated at the U.S. headquarters than
production. Affiliate innovation is nevertheless relevant, accounting for 13 to 19 percent of firm-
wide R&D spending, and is performed disproportionately by manufacturing affiliates. Given this,
and the predominance of manufacturing affiliates within the firm, we base our main estimates on
the complete set of manufacturing affiliates in which the parent owns a majority stake. For this
group, we estimate a highly significant reduced-form relationship between affiliate value added and
parent innovation that holds after controlling for affiliate inputs, innovation and lagged value added,
    1
      UNCTAD (2005), Criscuolo, Haskel, and Slaughter (2010). In addition, multinational firms account for 91 percent
of the innovation investment performed by firms in the United States (National Science Board 2014).
    2
      See Government Accountability Office (2009) and U.S. Senate (2013).
    3
      In 2016, 80 percent of OECD countries provided firms with tax relief for R&D expenditures (OECD 2017).


                                                              1
suggesting that the productivity growth of an affiliate is associated with the R&D investment of
its parent. In line with evidence on U.S. multiplant firms (Atalay, Hortaçsu, and Syverson 2014)
and U.S. multinational firms (Ramondo, Rappaport, and Ruhl 2016), we observe low volumes of
intrafirm trade among affiliates within multinational firms.
      Guided by these patterns in the data, our baseline model features ‘horizontal’ firms that do
not engage in intrafirm goods trade. Within this structure, affiliates produce output subject to
an idiosyncratic performance level that evolves according to a Markov process. This performance
process may respond to R&D investments of the affiliate itself, its U.S. headquarters (parent), or
other affiliates within the same firm. To evaluate the performance impact of each innovation source,
we build on the contributions of Aw, Roberts, and Xu (2011) and Doraszelski and Jaumandreu
(2013). Our approach is novel in its explicit consideration of the headquarters innovation impact on
foreign affiliate performance within the same firm—an impact that is important for what it reflects
regarding the importance of intangible input transfer across firm sites. In particular, our analysis
is informative for understanding whether ownership theories emphasizing the intrafirm transfer of
technological inputs are relevant for explaining the existence of multinational firms.4
      Using our empirical model, we recover estimates indicating that the performance of an affiliate
is persistent and increasing in the innovation of its U.S. parent. We also find that the performance
impact of an affiliate’s own innovation investment is significant, and that parent and affiliate R&D
are complementary. These latter results add nuance to the standard view of the multinational
firm (Helpman 1984, Markusen 1984), which considers all affiliates as pure recipients rather than
producers of technology. They are nevertheless consistent with Cohen and Levinthal (1989) and
Cassiman and Veugelers (2002, 2006), which propose that innovation enhances a firm’s ability
to assimilate and exploit information—including, in this case, information resulting from R&D
performed at the parent site.
      We assess the validity of our model using a series of specification tests. These tests indicate the
strong relevance of affiliate imports from the parent as a determinant of affiliates’ residual perfor-
mance change in our baseline model. We therefore extend our baseline framework to incorporate
intrafirm imports into the affiliate production function, and estimate this extended model for the
subset of ‘vertical’ affiliates importing from the parent in every period. These additional results re-
veal important differences between ‘vertical’ and ‘horizontal’ affiliates within the firm: while parent
innovation is important in both cases, the average impact of parent innovation is significantly higher
among vertical affiliates. On the other hand, the contribution of affiliates’ own R&D investment is
influential primarily among horizontal affiliates.
      Our estimates reveal that the firm-wide, value-added return to U.S. parent R&D is understated
considerably when only its local impact on the firm’s U.S. operations is accounted for. Specifically,
we find that the gross private return to headquarters R&D investment, defined as the impact of
an infinitesimal increase in parent R&D on the total value added earned by its multinational firm,
exceeds the parent-level return by approximately 20 percent for the median multinational firm.
Our estimates also imply that parent innovation is a critical determinant of long-run affiliate per-
  4
      For examples of such ownership theories, see Arrow (1975), Teece (1982), Atalay, Hortaçsu, and Syverson (2014).



                                                               2
formance: eliminating the effect of parent R&D would, all else equal, imply an average reduction
in affiliate performance of 36 percent. This impact of parent innovation on long-run affiliate per-
formance further implies an effect on aggregate affiliate productivity, so that countries hosting high
levels of U.S. affiliate activity would observe a decline in industry-level productivity if affiliates were
suddenly unable to benefit from U.S. parent innovation—an effect that may be further magnified
by technology spillovers from affiliates to domestic firms (Javorcik 2004) and links with domestic
input producers (Rodrı́guez-Clare 1996). Importantly, such technological knowledge spillovers are
known to be substantially local (Keller 2002); this, combined with our estimates and the dominance
of U.S. parent innovation in aggregate U.S. R&D, supports the idea that multinational production
is an important determinant of technology diffusion between countries (Keller 2004).
    To identify the performance impact of innovation, we consider specifications that project mea-
sures of current affiliate performance on different lags of parent and affiliate R&D investment.
Importantly, these specifications control for country-industry-year fixed effects and corresponding
lags of affiliate performance. Consistent with our assumption that affiliate performance follows a
Markov process, controlling for lagged performance ensures that our estimates are not affected by
reverse causality. Specifically, our estimates do not reflect the spurious correlation between lagged
R&D and current performance that would otherwise arise if performance is both persistent and cor-
related with contemporaneous R&D spending. In addition, the country-industry-year fixed effects
we include account for a range of time-varying, country- and industry-specific unobserved factors
that may simultaneously affect both affiliate performance growth and affiliate incentives to perform
R&D. For example, countries with an abundance of skilled labor may be attractive locations for
affiliate R&D investment, and affiliates in such countries may also have higher performance levels.
    A potential concern that remains is that other determinants of future affiliate performance may
be known to the firm at the time innovation decisions take place, but not controlled for by our mea-
sures of lagged affiliate performance and country-industry-year fixed effects. If these unobserved
determinants are idiosyncratic across affiliates within a firm, they are unlikely to be quantitatively
important when estimating the impact of parent R&D on affiliate performance within large multi-
national firms: parent R&D decisions likely depend on the set of such unobserved affiliate-specific
factors across all firm sites, and are therefore less sensitive to the idiosyncratic performance shocks
of an individual foreign affiliate. Consistent with this, we find that our parent innovation results are
robust to controlling for permanent unobserved affiliate-specific determinants of performance. To
consider whether such unobserved factors are present at the global firm level, potentially biasing our
parent innovation estimates, we evaluate specifications that replace our measure of R&D investment
with physical capital investment, which according to our model would also respond endogenously
to a persistent firm-level unobservable determinant of affiliate performance. Our estimates indicate
that this ‘placebo’ investment has no impact on affiliate performance, suggesting that it is unlikely
that persistent firm-level unobserved factors explain our parent innovation results.
    A second potential concern is that multinationals may misreport output or innovation invest-
ment for tax purposes: firms may, for example, intentionally overreport R&D spending by affiliates
located in high-tax countries with the aim of underreporting profits. To account for this possibil-
ity, we provide estimates that omit affiliates located in known tax havens as identified in Gravelle

                                                        3
(2015) and, in a second set of specifications, replace our continuous measure of affiliate R&D in-
vestment with discrete analogs less susceptible to misreporting concerns. In both cases, we find
results regarding parent innovation that are consistent with our main estimates.
    This paper contributes to a literature evaluating the impact of R&D investment on plant-level
and domestic firm-level outcomes, and methodologically follows Aw, Roberts, and Xu (2011) and
Doraszelski and Jaumandreu (2013); our focus on global firms further relates our analysis to Bøler,
Moxnes, and Ulltveit-Moe (2015). We contribute to this research by estimating the impact of parent
R&D investment on the performance of foreign affiliates within the multinational firm, a magnitude
that gains relevance in light of multinationals’ dominance in worldwide innovation spending. Given
that the multinational firm context we consider thus involves not only multiple countries, but also
dynamics and interdependence across firm locations, we pursue an estimation approach closely
resembling Doraszelski and Jaumandreu (2013); that is, we leave unspecified the innovation cost
function of the firm and estimate the impact of innovation on performance without requiring a full
solution to the firm’s complex dynamic problem.
    The estimates we recover support theories of the firm featuring sites linked by intangible trans-
fers, and thus complement existing evidence including Atalay, Hortaçsu, and Syverson (2014). They
find evidence consistent with the importance of intrafirm intangible transfers by showing that, after
a change in U.S. plant ownership, acquired establishments evolve to resemble the acquiring firm
despite a lack of physical shipments linking sites within the multiplant firm.5 While this approach
takes a general view of the form of the intangibles involved, our analysis provides related evidence
for a specific form of intangible input that we find is transferred across sites within the firm: the
proprietary knowledge resulting from R&D investment. A key motivation for our focus on R&D
is the prevalence, in many countries, of policies that subsidize local firms’ innovation, and the
corresponding potential for these subsidies to impact multinational firms’ performance abroad.
    Our results are closely related to work aiming to establish the existence of international tech-
nology transfer across plants within the multinational firm (Branstetter, Fisman, and Foley 2006;
Keller and Yeaple 2013; Gumpert 2017).6 A distinction in our paper is that we infer the flow of
technology by estimating the impact of U.S. parent R&D on foreign affiliate performance, without
relying on observed proxies for technology transfer. We are therefore able to compare the con-
clusions that arise from these two approaches for measuring technology transfer within the multi-
national firm. Consistent with Branstetter, Fisman, and Foley (2006), we find that the payment
of royalties and technology license fees is indeed positively correlated with affiliate performance
growth; however, we also find that parent R&D has an independent effect on affiliate performance.
In addition, consistent with Keller and Yeaple (2013), we extend our baseline framework to a ‘ver-
tical’ specification that permits parent-affiliate trade, and find that intrafirm goods trade channels
   5
     Ramondo, Rappaport, and Ruhl (2016) document a similar lack of shipments across sites within U.S. multina-
tional firms, and Arnold and Javorcik (2009), Guadalupe, Kuzmina, and Thomas (2012), and Javorcik and Poelhekke
(2016) show that affiliates acquired by foreign multinationals are faster growing than unaffiliated firms.
   6
     Branstetter, Fisman, and Foley (2006) use royalties paid to parents by affiliates as a proxy for technology transfer.
Keller and Yeaple (2013) use the joint distribution of U.S. multinationals’ intrafirm trade and affiliate sales to show
that firm activity is consistent with parents and affiliates sharing technology in both tangible and intangible forms.
Gumpert (2017) presents empirical evidence for knowledge transfers using data on corporate transferees. Giraud
(2013) provides indirect evidence of intrafirm trade in intangibles within U.S. multiplant firms.


                                                                4
proprietary technology across firm sites.
      Finally, the quantitative implications of intrafirm technology transfer that we compute are
related to studies assessing implications of input trade and technology transfer within multina-
tional firms, including McGrattan and Prescott (2010), McGrattan (2012), Irrazabal, Moxnes, and
Opromolla (2013), and Bilir (2014). Our estimates complement research investigating the welfare
gains from multinational production and the importance of the cross-plant, within-firm productiv-
ity distribution for the magnitude of these gains (Ramondo and Rodrı́guez-Clare 2013, Arkolakis
et al 2017, Head and Mayer 2016, Tintelnot 2017)—a distribution that in our model depends on
endogenous decisions of the firm, including the extent of parent and affiliate R&D investments.
      The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the data and provides de-
scriptive evidence on the relationship between parent innovation and affiliate performance. Section
3 presents an empirical model of innovation in the multinational firm. Section 4 outlines the
baseline estimation strategy and discusses our identification assumptions. Section 5 presents our
estimates, and section 6 discusses quantitative implications of these estimates. Section 7 concludes.
Derivations and additional results may be found in the online Appendix.


2      Data and Descriptive Statistics
Evaluating the intrafirm impact of innovation investment on affiliate performance requires measures
of innovation for each multinational firm parent, and measures of inputs, output, and innovation
for each affiliate. We describe these below and present descriptive statistics on the relationship
between affiliate output and R&D investment.

2.1     Affiliate-Level Data, U.S. Multinational Firms
We use affiliate-level panel data on the global operations of U.S.-based multinational firms from the
Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) Survey of U.S. Direct Investment Abroad. These confidential
data provide information on U.S. parent companies and each foreign affiliate on an annual basis.7
For our analysis, we assemble separate datasets corresponding to different manufacturing industries
for the period 1989–2008. Details regarding data construction appear in Appendix A.
      The data include direct measures of affiliate-level innovation, output, and input use. These
include sales revenues, value added, the value of physical capital (plant, property, and equipment,
net of depreciation), the number of employees, and total employee compensation.8,9 Affiliate-level
    7
      The survey is comprehensive in its coverage. Any U.S. person having direct or indirect ownership or control of
10 percent or more of the voting securities of an incorporated foreign business enterprise or an equivalent interest in
an unincorporated foreign business enterprise at any time during the survey fiscal year in question is considered to
have a foreign affiliate. The country of an affiliate corresponds to the location of its physical assets.
    8
      The BEA constructs affiliate-level value added as the sum of profits and costs incurred in production, which
include: employee compensation, net interest paid, taxes, and capital costs (U.S. BEA 2008). Affiliate value added
is positively correlated with a) affiliate sales revenues (0.814), and b) U.S. parent value added (0.386), and has an
autocorrelation coefficient (0.931) similar to that of affiliate sales revenues (0.957).
    9
      The value of physical capital is not reported annually; Appendix A describes the procedure we implement
to construct an annual measure of capital combining observed net plant, property, and equipment with observed
investment in physical capital. We test our procedure by constructing our measure of capital for years in which
net plant, property, and equipment is directly available; the correlations between the observed and our constructed


                                                               5
imports from the corresponding U.S. parent are also available, however, an affiliate-level measure
of total materials use is not directly observed. Thus, when needed, we will measure materials
spending as the difference between affiliate-level observed sales and value added. Importantly, the
data include separate parent- and affiliate-level measures of R&D investment for distinct sites within
the same firm. The availability of panel data that include measures of production inputs, output,
and R&D by site within the same firm is both essential for estimating the within-firm impacts of
parent and affiliate innovation on affiliate performance and also unusual. To our knowledge, the
data provided by the BEA is the only affiliate-level resource that provides a homogeneous measure
of site-level innovation spending within a comprehensive panel of multinational or multiplant firms.
      The measure of innovation investment in the data captures primarily variable costs of perform-
ing R&D. Specifically, it includes spending on wages and salaries, materials, and supplies used
in both basic and applied R&D, and also spans the range between product and process R&D.10
This measure does not account for spending on capital inputs, routine testing and quality control,
market research, advertising, or legal expenses related to patents.
      To measure labor inputs, it is important to consider that an innovating plant may dedicate a
subset of its labor to R&D activities. The data do not always include separate measures of produc-
tion and innovation employees, and our baseline measurement approach thus captures labor inputs
as the (always available) total number of employees. Benchmark-year surveys do, however, record
separate measures of both total employment and R&D employment. Using these, we construct an
alternative measure of labor usage that, similar to Schankerman (1981), corrects for affiliate-specific
differences in the share of employment devoted to innovation.11
      Estimation below proceeds at the industry level. The main analysis evaluates firms operating
in Computers and Office Equipment (SIC 357), a manufacturing industry that accounts for the
production of electronic computers, computer terminals, computer peripheral equipment, calculat-
ing and accounting machines, and office machines. Appendix C.6 presents additional estimates for
firms in Motor Vehicles and Equipment (SIC 371) and Pharmaceutical Drugs (SIC 283).

2.2     Descriptive Statistics
Tables 1 and 2 describe the average multinational firm in the 2004 benchmark survey.12 Statistics
are provided for U.S.-based firms in manufacturing and, separately, for the subsets of these firms
operating in the three manufacturing sectors indicated above: Computers and Office Equipment,
Motor Vehicles and Equipment, and Pharmaceutical Drugs.
      Table 1 describes the structure of the global firm. The average manufacturing firm operates a
measures of capital are 0.994 for 1994, 0.923 for 1999, and 0.981 for 2004.
  10
     Benchmark-year surveys in 1989, 1994, 1999, and 2004 provide a decomposition of R&D spending according to
the entity paying for the R&D and the entity performing the R&D. This decomposition indicates that nearly all R&D
activity completed at an affiliate site is also paid for by the performing affiliate (U.S. BEA 2008).
  11
     The data do not provide information to permit an analogous approach for capital inputs. However, we find
in Appendix C.2 that correcting measured labor inputs has only a negligible impact on the estimates obtained,
suggesting this is unlikely to be an important empirical concern.
  12
     The statistics correspond to majority-owned affiliates required to report innovation expenditures. In Appendix
D, Table D.1 provides standard deviations for the variables described in Table 1; Table D.2 replicates Table 1 for the
1994 and 1999 surveys. Tables D.3 and D.4 are analogous to tables D.1 and D.2, but correspond to Table 2.



                                                              6
U.S. parent and 10.8 foreign affiliates; computer, motor vehicles, and pharmaceutical firms have on
average 13.1, 15.5, and 26.1 foreign affiliates, respectively. Combined, affiliates account for roughly
one-third of activity within the firm, whether measured by sales, value added, or employment.13
       Affiliates are primarily single-product establishments producing in the parent industry. Specif-
ically, the average manufacturing firm operates manufacturing (58.4 percent), retail (18.5 percent),
and services affiliates (12.1 percent); only 0.2 percent of affiliates are R&D laboratories. This
structure is comparable in motor vehicles and pharmaceuticals firms, while computer firms have
relatively more retail and services affiliates. The majority of manufacturing affiliates—74.3 to 84.8
percent—produce some fraction of their output in the same three-digit industry as the parent. Most
affiliates (80 percent) sell exclusively in a single three-digit industry, Moreover, across those that
do not, sales are concentrated, with the primary industry accounting for three-quarters of sales.
       Among manufacturing affiliates, Table 1 further indicates that approximately half import from
the parent in the average firm. The value of these imports relative to sales ranges between 8.4 and
10.6 percent. For comparison, the value of materials spending to sales ranges between 74.1 and 83.9
percent. Affiliates also export 43 to 50 percent of output. Around one-third of affiliate exports are
sales to the United States, with an only slightly smaller share sold to the U.S. parent. In line with
Atalay, Hortaçsu, and Syverson (2014) and Ramondo, Rappaport, and Ruhl (2016), the data thus
indicate that a large share of manufacturing affiliates are ‘horizontal,’ primarily buying and selling
in arms’-length transactions; however, it is important to remark that, although the composition of
shipments is not observed, the presence of intrafirm trade within a subset of parent-affiliate pairs
is consistent with these affiliates being ‘vertically’ integrated within the firm.
       Table 2 summarizes the distribution of innovation investment within the average multinational
firm. The top rows reveal three salient features of the data regarding the organization of innovation
across sites within the firm. First, nearly all U.S. parents invest in R&D within the computer,
motor vehicles, and pharmaceuticals industries. Second, only a smaller share of multinational
firms—approximately 65 percent among computer and motor vehicles firms—have at least one
foreign affiliate investing in R&D. Third, only approximately a third of affiliates per firm perform
any R&D; those that do are almost exclusively manufacturing affiliates. Innovation is thus very
concentrated spatially: although multinationals are defined by their fragmentation of production
across countries, a large share of these firms perform R&D investment in only one country.
       One way to understand the dispersion of production relative to innovation is to consider the
share of each activity accounted for by foreign affiliates within the firm. Table 2 shows that affiliates
tend to account for a small share—12.9 to 18.9 percent on average—of firm-level R&D spending.
By contrast, the affiliate share in total sales for the average firm is 30.3 to 41.1 percent (Table 1).
A similar pattern holds when considering innovation employment. Parent sites are thus responsible
for a substantially higher share of innovation investment than of production. Parents are more
innovation intensive than affiliates as a result, with ratios of R&D to sales three to ten times higher
than those of corresponding affiliates. That the spatial concentration of innovation investment is
higher than that of production is consistent with the idea that knowledge is shared across firm
  13
      The number of affiliates per firm and affiliate shares of firm value added and sales are growing over time; the
affiliate share of firm employment is relatively stable (see Table D.2 in Appendix D).


                                                              7
locations (Arrow 1975, Teece 1982). However, the observation that some firms fragment innovation
across countries may suggest the presence of frictions limiting the communication of technical
knowledge across sites (Arrow 1962, 1969). Importantly, these statistics suggest that a subset of
affiliates are producers rather than pure recipients of knowledge.
       The relevance of affiliate innovation within the global firm is growing over time (see Table 2 and
Table D.4 in Appendix D). An increasing share of firms perform at least some innovation abroad,
and an increasing share of total firm R&D investment is performed by offshore affiliates. The
rate of growth in offshore innovation also exceeds that in affiliate sales among computer and motor
vehicles firms, raising the innovation intensity of affiliates. Given the parallel increase in firms’ ratio
of parent R&D to sales, the data reveal a growing role for innovation within the multinational firm.
The statistics on the joint distribution of parent and affiliate ratios of R&D to sales, shown toward
the bottom of Table 2, indicate that innovation-intensive U.S. parents tend to own innovation-
intensive affiliates, suggesting parent and affiliate R&D investments may be complements.14
       Geographically, affiliates are predominantly in Europe—56.3 percent per firm, followed by Asia
with 17.9 percent and Canada with 14.7 percent of affiliates per firm (Table D.5). Europe and Asia
are both innovative, accounting for 60.3 and 22.9 percent of affiliate R&D investment per firm,
respectively. Over time, Europe accounts for a rising share of affiliates per firm.15

2.3      Reduced-Form Evidence
Consider the following specification,

 vaijt = θnt + dijt−1 (θr,nt + ϑa rijt−1 ) + di0t−1 (θp + ϑp ri0t−1 ) + di−jt−1 (θo + ϑo ri−jt−1 ) + uijt . (1)

This equation expresses the log of firm-i, affiliate-j value added in year t, vaijt , as a function of
the log R&D investments of the affiliate rijt−1 , its parent ri0t−1 , and other affiliates of the same
firm ri−jt−1 in year t − 1. To account for parents and affiliates that do not invest in R&D during
t − 1, (1) includes indicator variables for the parent di0t−1 , the affiliate dijt−1 , and other affiliates
di−jt−1 ; these are equal to one if and only if the firm-i parent, affiliate j, and at least one affiliate
other than j invests in R&D at t − 1, respectively. Equation (1) also includes country-industry-year
fixed effects that may differ depending on whether affiliate j invests in R&D, {(θnt , θr,nt ), ∀n, t}.
Least-squares estimates of the parameters in (1) and variants thereof appear in Table 3.
       The estimates in columns 1 and 4 indicate the output of an affiliate is strongly correlated with
its own innovation investment, and with that of its U.S. parent: ϑ̂a and ϑ̂p are both positive and
highly significant in every industry we consider. For computer firms, these elasticities are 0.220 for
affiliate R&D and 0.284 for parent R&D (column 4, top panel). We cannot rule out that affiliate
value added is unrelated to the innovation of other affiliates in the same firm, however.
       Affiliates with higher levels of value added also tend to have larger innovation expenditures, re-
  14
    The pharmaceutical industry, in which affiliate innovation intensity is declining, is the exception.
  15
    Countries identified as tax havens by Gravelle (2015), listed in Appendix A, account for between 9 and 30
percent of affiliates per firm on average. It is reassuring that these countries account for similar shares of firm R&D
investment; firms behaving opportunistically would tend to underreport R&D spending in low-tax jurisdictions.



                                                               8
sulting in a correlation between value added and innovation spending that affects the interpretation
of ϑ̂a . A similar consideration applies to parent R&D, affecting the interpretation of ϑ̂p . To account
for this, columns 2 and 5 include lagged value added as an additional regressor. The estimated
effects of parent and affiliate innovation uphold the same qualitative pattern found in columns 1
and 4: innovation by the affiliate and its parent are both strongly and positively correlated with
affiliate value added, while the correlation with R&D investment by other affiliates remains negligi-
ble. Finally, these estimates could be explained by an association between innovation and affiliate
inputs. To control for this possibility, columns 3 and 6 add current and lagged affiliate-j capital
and labor inputs to the specification in columns 2 and 5. Parent and affiliate innovation elasticities
both remain positive and statistically significant, but the latter falls in magnitude.
         The results in Table 3 suggest a strong association between affiliate productivity and parent
and affiliate innovation. However, whether a causal interpretation of these results can be supported
hinges on the properties of the error term uijt in (1). To guide our reasoning in terms of the content
of this residual and thereby clarify the interpretation of the estimates in Table 3, we specify below
an empirical model of innovation and performance evolution, and compare the estimates resulting
from this model with the reduced-form estimates described above.


3         Empirical Model
This section describes an empirical model of production and innovation investment in the multi-
national firm. Our baseline model considers a ‘horizontal’ firm that does not engage in intra-firm
trade across plants, in line with the evidence presented in section 2.2. Specifically, while approxi-
mately half of manufacturing affiliates import from the parent on average, these imports account
for only a minor share of affiliate material inputs expenditures. Appendix B.6 extends our model
to account for intrafirm trade by permitting an affiliate to source inputs from its U.S. parent.
         As our focus is on understanding the determinants of offshore affiliate performance, we restrict
attention here to the foreign-affiliate production function, postponing our treatment of parents
to section 6.2. Furthermore, the plurality of sites in the data are manufacturing affiliates, which
also account for the majority of affiliate R&D investment. We thus consider here manufacturing
affiliates, and assess retail and services affiliates in section 5.4 below.16
         We use our model to derive estimating equations that may be combined with the data described
in section 2 to recover the parameters determining the performance impact of headquarters and
affiliate R&D across different sites within the multinational firm.

3.1         Setup
Consider a set of multinational firms indexed by i operating within the same industry, defined as
the industry of the parent. The set of firm-i production sites active in period t is Jit . Sites in Jit
are indexed by j, where j = 0 denotes the parent and j > 0 corresponds to its foreign affiliates.
         Section 2.2 indicates that most affiliates produce within a single three-digit sector, yet are
    16
         As shown in section 2.2, a negligible share of affiliates are R&D laboratories; we thus omit them from our analysis.



                                                                    9
heterogeneous both in terms of industry and production location. Within each firm i, we thus
assume affiliate j is a single-product firm and allow the market nij in which it operates to differ
across affiliates. Specifically, we define nij as the country-sector pair in which affiliate j of firm i
produces. This market definition accommodates a range of firm structures, from those with affiliates
operating in the same sector in spatially segmented markets, to those with affiliates operating in
different sectors in the same geographic market. Importantly, the country corresponding to nij is
the firm-i, affiliate-j production location, but need not be the location of its customers.17

3.2      Demand and Production Functions
Affiliate j faces the following demand function for its output Qijt :

                                 Qijt = Qnij t (Pijt /Pnij t )−σ exp[ξijt (σ − 1)],                            (2)

where σ > 1 is the elasticity of substitution across output varieties, Pijt is the output price of
affiliate j, and ξijt is an unobserved demand shock (or product quality shock) that is known to the
firm when making its input, output, and pricing decisions at period t. The variables Pnij t and Qnij t
denote the period-t market-level price index and demand, respectively. When making its optimal
input and output decisions, affiliate j takes these market-level variables as given.18
       To produce output Qijt , affiliate j combines capital, labor, and materials using the following
production technology

                                                                αm
                               Qijt = (H(Kijt , Lijt ; α))1−αm Mijt exp(ωijt ),                                (3)

where

                    H(Kijt , Lijt ; α) = exp(h(kijt , lijt ; α)),                                              (4)
                                                                     2          2
                       h(kijt , lijt ; α) ≡ αl lijt + αk kijt + αll lijt + αkk kijt + αlk lijt kijt ,          (5)

and α = (αl , αk , αll , αkk , αlk ).19 In (3), Kijt is effective units of capital, Lijt is the number of
production workers, Mijt is a quantity index of materials use, and ωijt denotes the Hicks-neutral
physical productivity at t.20 Consistent with our baseline ‘horizontal’ model of the firm, we assume
here that Mijt includes only inputs purchased from arms’-length suppliers.
       The production function in (3) combines materials with a translog function of capital and
  17
     Our model does not take a stand on the geographic location of demand, and thus accommodates export-platform
sales provided these do not cause interdependencies across affiliates in their production decisions. See Tintelnot
(2017) for a model of multinational production with export platforms that accounts for these interdependencies.
  18
     These assumptions have previously been exploited in the production function literature (e.g. De Loecker 2011).
They imply that firms set output prices as a constant markup over their marginal cost. Other work emphasizes the
relevance of variable markups (De Loecker and Warzynski 2012, De Loecker et al 2016), including in contexts with
endogenous innovation (Doraszelski and Jaumandreu 2013). Allowing for variable markups given the demand in (2)
requires relaxing the assumed monopolistic competition structure; we do so in Appendix B.7.
  19
     Lower-case Latin letters denote the logarithm of the upper-case variable, e.g. lijt = ln(Lijt ).
  20
     Our baseline model does not include labor-augmenting productivity terms (see Bøler 2015, and Doraszelski and
Jaumandreu 2016) nor untransmited shocks (see Appendix B.1.2). While we leave the study of the role of labor-
augmenting productivity for future work, we account for untransmited shocks in Appendix B.7.2.


                                                               10
labor, defined in (4) and (5), according to a Cobb-Douglas technology. The elasticity of output
with respect to materials is captured in (3) by αm ; output elasticities with respect to capital and
labor may be heterogeneous across affiliates, reflecting differences in factor usage.21 We assume
                                  l , capital P k , and materials P m as given, and that the latter is
affiliates take prices of labor Pijt           ijt                 ijt
                                                 m = Pm .
common to all affiliates within a market-year: Pijt   nij t


3.3     Value Added Function
Given the production and demand functions described above, and assuming firm i determines Mijt
optimally by maximizing affiliate-j static profits at t, log value added va∗ijt may be expressed as

                                      va∗ijt = κnij t + h(kijt , lijt ; β) + ψijt ,                                (6)

where

                                        ψijt ≡ ι(ωijt + ξijt ),                                                    (7)
                                          β ≡ ι(1 − αm )α,                                                         (8)
                                           ι ≡ (σ − 1)/(σ − αm (σ − 1));                                           (9)

see Appendix B.1 for a derivation of this expression. In (6), κnij t is a function of the materials price
Pnmij t , aggregate price index Pnij t , and aggregate demand level Qnij t in market nij at t; h(·) is the
translog function of capital and labor inputs in (5). In (7), ψijt is the ι-scaled sum of the physical
productivity ωijt and demand shock ξijt . We refer to ψijt as the performance level of affiliate j.22
      Allowing value added to be measured with error, we express observed log value added as

                                  vaijt = κnij t + h(kijt , lijt ; β) + ψijt + εijt ,                             (10)

and assume that the measurement error εijt is mean independent of capital kijt , labor lijt , and all
variables known to firm i at period t − 1:

                                              Et−1 [εijt |kijt , lijt ] = 0.                                      (11)

3.4     Impact of Innovation on Firm Performance
The performance of firm i’s affiliate j evolves over time according to the stochastic process

                                             ψijt = Et−1 [ψijt ] + ηijt ,                                         (12)
   21
      Although the elasticity of substitution between materials and the joint output of capital and labor is restricted
to one, (3) yields a value added function analogous to that in the literature (e.g. De Loecker and Warzynski 2012).
In Appendix B.7, we present an alternative framework that assumes that materials are perfect complements with the
joint output of capital and labor (see Ackerberg, Caves, and Frazer 2015).
   22
      Performance combines supply and demand shifters as in Foster, Haltiwanger and Syverson (2008), De Loecker
(2011), and Bøler, Moxnes, and Ulltveit-Moe (2015). Note that, in the special case in which αm = 0, the scale
parameter ι equals the inverse of the firm’s markup; i.e. ι = 1 − 1/σ.




                                                                11
where the expectation of ψijt conditional on the information of firm i at t − 1 is

                      Et−1 [ψijt ] = µψ ψijt−1 + g(dijt−1 , rijt−1 , di0t−1 , ri0t−1 ; µ) + µnij t ,               (13)

with,

      g(dijt−1 , rijt−1 , di0t−1 , ri0t−1 ; µ) ≡ dijt−1 (1 − di0t−1 )(µa0 + µa1 rijt−1 )                           (14)
                                            + (1 − dijt−1 )di0t−1 (µp0 + µp1 ri0t−1 )
                                            + dijt−1 di0t−1 (µb0 + µb1 rijt−1 + µb2 ri0t−1 + µb3 rijt−1 ri0t−1 ),

and µ ≡ (µa0 , µa1 , µp0 , µp1 , µb0 , µb1 , µb2 , µb3 ). The variables dijt−1 and di0t−1 are indicators equal
to one if, respectively, affiliate j and its parent invest in R&D within firm i at t − 1; rijt−1 and
ri0t−1 are, respectively, the log R&D investments of affiliate-j and its parent at t − 1 if these
investments are positive, and are zero otherwise. The parameter µψ measures the persistence of
affiliate performance and is thus key for determining the long-run effects of R&D investment. The
parameters (µa0 , µa1 ) measure the impact of affiliate innovation on ψijt for affiliates whose parent
does not perform R&D; conversely, (µp0 , µp1 ) measure the impact of parent innovation on ψijt when
affiliate j does not perform R&D. Finally, (µb0 , µb1 , µb2 , µb3 ) capture the impact of both affiliate and
parent R&D investments on ψijt when both are innovating. The market-year term µnij t accounts
for any unobserved country-industry-year level determinants of affiliate productivity growth.23,24
      From (12), ηijt captures shocks to the performance of affiliate j at t that are not anticipated by
the firm at t − 1. The expected productivity of affiliate j in (13) depends on its past productivity
and R&D spending, in line with recent models of innovation including Aw, Roberts, and Xu (2011),
Doraszelski and Jaumandreu (2013), and Bøler, Moxnes, and Ulltveit-Moe (2015).25 A distinction
in (13) is the inclusion of R&D investment performed by the parent of affiliate j. This allows us to
assess the intrafirm influence of headquarters innovation on the performance of foreign affiliates.

3.5      Firm Optimization
In every period t, firm i determines optimal levels of labor Lit , materials Mit , capital investment Iit ,
R&D investment Rit , and output prices Pit for each of its affiliates active at t, and also determines
   23
      Equations (12) to (14) describe the evolution of ψijt . Identifying separate processes for ωijt and ξijt would
require observing either output prices (see Roberts et al 2017) or revenue in at least two separate markets per affiliate
(see Jaumandreu and Yin 2016); neither is available in our dataset. The parameters in µ may thus be interpreted
as reflecting the joint impact of R&D investment on ωijt (process innovation) and ξijt (product innovation). This
specification is consistent with our innovation measure, which combines product with process R&D investments; see
Cohen and Klepper (1996) and Dhingra (2013) for models that feature both types of innovation. If both ωijt and
ξijt follow first-order Markov processes, their sum will also follow a first-order Markov process only if the parameters
determining the persistence of ωijt and ξijt coincide. Otherwise, ψijt would follow a higher-order Markov process. In
section 5.4, we present results for a model in which we allow ψijt to follow a second-order Markov process.
   24
      As in (1), we also estimate µ including a second set of market-year effects interacted with the affiliate R&D
dummy µr,nij t × dijt−1 to capture unobserved factors that affect performance growth differentially for innovating and
non-innovating affiliates.
   25
      In our context, introducing nonlinear functions of ψijt−1 in (13) poses an empirical challenge. If we were to allow
                                   2
for higher-order terms such as ψijt−1   , the market-year unobserved effects in (10), κnij t , would enter nonlinearly in
(13) and the estimation of the parameter vector µ would become computationally costly (see Appendix B.3).



                                                                12
the set of affiliates that will be active at t + 1, Jit+1 .26 These decisions are a function of firm i’s
state vector Sit , which includes the vector

                                              l      k
                    Sijt = (ψijt , Kijt−1 , Pijt , Pijt , Pnmij t , Qnij t , Pnij t , µnij t , χkijt , χrijt , Fijt )          (15)

for every potential affiliate j of firm i. The variables χkijt and χrijt are exogenous affiliate-specific
shocks to the cost of investment in physical capital and R&D, respectively, and Fijt is a fixed oper-
ating cost. Decisions at t regarding inputs and investments depend thus on ψijt and, consequently,
on the shock ηijt . Specifically, we assume in our baseline model that labor is a static input while
capital is a dynamic input: capital at t, Kijt , is determined by physical capital investment in all
periods up until period t, according to the law of motion Kijt = δk Kijt−1 + Iijt .27
       The Bellman equation associated with firm i’s dynamic optimization problem is
                        n X                                                                                                o
       V (Sit ) = max             Π(Sijt , Iijt , Lijt , Mijt , Pijt , Rijt ) + δ E[V (Sit+1 )|Sit , Iit , Rit , Jit+1 ]       (16)
                 Cit
                          j∈Jit


where Cit = {Jit+1 , Iit , Lit , Mit , Pit , Rit } is the set of control variables, V (·) is the value function,
Π(·) is the profit function, and δ is the discount factor. If active at period t, the profit function of
firm i’s affiliate j is

                                                                       l      m          k
           Π(Sijt , Iijt , Lijt , Mijt , Pijt , Rijt ) = Pijt Qijt − Wijt − Wijt − Ck (Pijt , Iijt , Kijt , χkijt )
                                                       − Cr (Rijt , χrijt ) − Fijt ,                                           (17)

                                                                                            l and
where Ck (·) and Cr (·) are cost functions of investment in physical capital and R&D, and Wijt
  m are total spending on labor inputs and materials, respectively. Our estimation approach below
Wijt
does not require specifying Ck (·), Cr (·), or the distribution of cost shocks χkijt , χrijt , and Fijt .28

3.6      Interpreting Innovation Effects in the Model
The parameter vector µ in (13) and (14) captures the impact of innovation investments Rit−1
on performance ψijt for manufacturing affiliates present both at t − 1 and t. These parameters
reflect a range of potential channels through which innovation may impact affiliate performance.
  26
      Our baseline model assumes affiliate entry and exit decisions are taken with a one-period lag; section 4.2 considers
instead the case of instantaneous affiliate entry and exit. For any X, we henceforth denote Xit = {Xijt }j∈Jit .
   27
      Our baseline estimation approach is also compatible with capital being predetermined; i.e. Kijt = δk Kijt−1 +
Iijt−1 . In many countries, the hiring and firing of workers is subject to frictions and, thus, labor may not be fully
flexible. The estimation procedures described in Appendix B.7 are compatible with this alternative assumption.
   28
      Our model thus ensures that there exist Ck (·) and Cr (·) functions and χkijt and χrijt realizations that rationalize
any observed pattern of investment in R&D and physical capital, including zeros. Estimating Ck (·) and Cr (·) using
necessary conditions for optimality of observed R&D and capital investment requires accounting for interdependence
in these decisions across affiliates and over time, and therefore solving a dynamic discrete choice problem with a very
large choice set and state vector. This poses a well-known computational challenge (Holmes 2011, Morales, Sheu, and
Zahler 2017), and the resulting estimates and predictions may be very sensitive to the definition of firms’ information
sets (Dickstein and Morales 2018). Separately, Fillat and Garetto (2015), Garetto, Oldenski, and Ramondo (2018),
and Gumpert et al (2018) have shown that a sunk cost of affiliate entry is able to explain important features of
multinational firm dynamics. While the profit function in (17) does not include an entry cost for notational simplicity,
our estimation approach and results are robust to its inclusion.



                                                                        13
These include the impact of R&D investment as manifested through affiliates that upgrade product
quality, increase manufacturing efficiency, or switch to a new product. R&D investment could
potentially affect the profits of non-manufacturing affiliates through other channels; consequently,
we explore separately in section 5.4 the impact that Rit−1 has on retail and services affiliates.
      A firm in our model chooses whether to a) become a multinational by opening its first affiliate,
b) maintain an existing affiliate, or c) open a new affiliate, based, in part, on the performance of all
potential sites within the firm. Our model thus accounts for the possibility that innovation impacts
affiliate entry and exit through its effect on affiliate performance. Although the elements of µ do
not themselves quantify the affiliate entry effects of innovation, the estimation framework accounts
for—and is thus consistent with—responsiveness to innovation along these entry margins.
      The functional form in (14) is motivated by two considerations. First, the model nests a
benchmark specification (Aw, Roberts and Xu 2011, Doraszelski and Jaumandreu 2013), whereby
the productivity of a domestic firm responds exclusively to innovation performed within the same
domestic firm. This specification is captured by a version of (14) that restricts µp0 = µp1 = µb2 =
µb3 = 0, µa0 = µb0 , and µa1 = µb1 . Estimated values of these parameters that reject this restriction
would thus suggest the importance of a new, international dimension of R&D effects within the
multinational firm.29 Furthermore, equation (14) allows for a range of degrees of substitutability
between parent and affiliate R&D in determining affiliate performance: our model is consistent
with parent and affiliate R&D interacting positively or negatively as performance determinants.
      Finally, the model treats the elements of µ as technological parameters. An alternative would be
a model in which these parameters reflect the combination of a) knowledge communication frictions,
and b) the decision over how much proprietary technology a parent transmits to its foreign affiliate.
Given the data in hand, however, we are unable to distinguish between these two forces.30


4      Estimation
In this section, we show how the model in section 3 may be combined with the data in section 2 to
measure the affiliate-level performance impacts of parent and affiliate innovation.

4.1     Estimation Approach
The parameters of interest are those entering the value added function in (10), β, and those
governing the short- and long-run impact of innovation on performance in (13) and (14), µψ and
µ. To derive an estimating equation, we first combine (10), (12), (13), and (14) to arrive at

                          vaijt = h(kijt , lijt ; β) + µψ (vaijt−1 − h(kijt−1 , lijt−1 ; β))
                                + g(dijt−1 , rijt−1 , di0t−1 , ri0t−1 ; µ) + µnij t + uijt ,                       (18)
   29
      Because of the log-linear specification in (14), our model does not nest one in which each affiliate’s performance
depends only on the sum of the R&D expenditures across the parent and all of its affiliates. We test in section 5.3
whether log total firm R&D expenditure has an effect on affiliates’ performance once we control for the terms in (14).
   30
      For recent work that considers the firm decision over technology transfer to affiliates within the multinational
firm, see Bilir (2014) and Holmes, McGrattan, and Prescott (2015).



                                                               14
where uijt ≡ ηijt + εijt − µψ εijt−1 is a function of the performance shock and measurement error
in value added, and γnij t ≡ µnij t + κnij t − µψ κnij t−1 is a market-year effect that accounts for the
unobserved quantity and prices embedded in κnij t and the component of firm performance, µnij t .
       Estimating the parameters in (18) requires addressing two identification challenges. First, as
a static input, labor hired by firm i’s affiliate j at t is determined after the period-t shock to
performance ηijt is observed by firm i. This gives rise to a correlation between lijt and the residual
uijt (Griliches and Mairesse 1998). The same endogeneity may affect our measure of capital Kijt
if, as we allow for in our baseline model, it is partly affected by the investment decision taken at
t, Iijt . Second, uijt is a function of the measurement error in value added εijt−1 , resulting in a
correlation between vaijt−1 and uijt . To simultaneously address both challenges, we estimate the
parameters of interest in two steps.
       The first step uses the affiliate labor optimality condition to estimate parameters determining
the elasticity of value added with respect to labor, (βl , βll , βlk ), and the measurement error com-
ponent of value added εijt for each affiliate and period (see Gandhi, Navarro, and Rivers 2016).
Conditional on these first-stage estimates, the second step estimates the remaining value added
parameters, (βk , βkk ), and the performance evolution parameters, µψ and µ.

Step 1 Given the value-added function in (10), the profit function in (17), and the assumption
that labor is a static input, a necessary condition for labor to be optimally determined is

                                                                  l
                                ln(βl + 2βll lijt + βlk kijt ) = wijt − vaijt + εijt ,                             (19)

       l
where wijt is the (log) total affiliate-j spending on labor inputs during period t. Parameters
(βl , βll , βlk ) are thus identified from the mean independence restriction in (11), which implies

                     E[vaijt − wijt
                                l
                                    + log(βl + 2βll lijt + βlk kijt )|lijt , kijt , j ∈ Jit ] = 0,                 (20)

where conditioning on j ∈ Jit reflects that identification relies only on affiliates active at period t.
We derive unconditional moments from (20) and estimate (βl , βll , βlk ) using a method of moments
estimator.31 With the estimates (β̂l , β̂ll , β̂lk ) in hand, we recover an estimate of the measurement
                                                                        l + log(β̂ + 2β̂ l
error εijt for each firm i, affiliate j, and period t: ε̂ijt = vaijt − wijt       l     ll ijt + β̂lk kijt ).
       The first-order condition in (19) takes a strong stand on the determinants of affiliate-j labor
usage at t. It assumes: a) labor is fully flexible, implying affiliate-j labor usage is unaffected by
j’s own prior labor decisions, and b) affiliate-j labor usage is unaffected by the labor decisions of
other affiliates in the same firm.32 We test both assumptions in section 5.3. Although we cannot
reject the null that these are correct, we present results that relax each assumption in section 5.5.
  31
      Equation (19) is compatible with differences in value added per worker across affiliates. These may be due
to either differences in wages or capital usage. As we do not restrict the correlation between affiliate performance
                     l
ψijt and wages Pijt    , these may differ across affiliates with different performance levels (e.g. due to differences in
screening or hiring mechanisms). Differences in Kijt may reflect variation in any affiliate-specific state variable in
                                                                       k
Sijt , including, for example, performance ψijt , the capital price Pijt , or capital adjustment costs χkijt .
  32
      See Muendler and Becker (2010) for an alternative model of how affiliates determine their labor hiring decisions.




                                                               15
                                                                                                          2 −
                                                                          aijt ≡ vaijt − β̂l lijt − β̂ll lijt
Step 2 Using the estimates (β̂l , β̂ll , β̂lk ) and ε̂ijt , we construct vc
β̂lk lijt kijt − ε̂ijt and rewrite (18) as

                                              2                                     2
                       vc
                        aijt = βk kijt + βkk kijt       v aijt−1 − βk kijt−1 − βkk kijt−1
                                                  + µψ (c                                 )
                             + g(dijt−1 , rijt−1 , di0t−1 , ri0t−1 ; µ) + µnij t + ηijt .                     (21)

The residual in (21) is now the performance shock ηijt . The parameters (βk , βkk ), µψ , and µ are
identified by the definition of ηijt in (12) and the timing assumptions in section 3.5, which imply

                                   E[ηijt |z ijt , {dnij t }, j ∈ (Jit−1 ∩ Jit )] = 0,                        (22)

where {dnij t } denotes a full set of market-year dummies and the vector z ijt is defined as

                         z ijt ≡ (c
                                  v aijt−1 , kijt−1 , kijt−2 , dijt−1 , rijt−1 , di0t−1 , ri0t−1 ).           (23)

By conditioning on j ∈ (Jit−1 ∩ Jit ), (22) accounts for the restriction that an affiliate must be
active in both periods t − 1 and t to be included in the estimation sample. We derive unconditional
moments from (22) and estimate (βk , βkk ), µψ , and µ using an optimal two-step GMM estimator,
controlling for the market-year fixed effects {dnij t } using the Frisch-Waugh-Lovell theorem.33
    This second step identifies the impact of affiliate and parent R&D investments on affiliate
performance by exploiting variation in our measures of R&D expenditures conditional on lagged
affiliate performance ψijt−1 and a full set of market-year fixed effects {dnij t }. Controlling for ψijt−1
ensures that our estimates are not affected by reverse causality: our estimates do not reflect the
correlation between lagged R&D expenditure and current performance ψijt that would arise if
performance is persistent and lagged R&D is determined by ψijt−1 . In addition, the market-year
fixed effects account for country characteristics that may affect both affiliate performance growth
and affiliate incentives to perform R&D. For example, countries with an abundance of skilled labor
may be attractive locations for affiliate R&D investment, and affiliates in such countries may also
have higher levels of performance growth. Furthermore, the fixed effects we include account for the
possibility that such country characteristics may have differential effects on affiliates depending on
their industry. All remaining variation that is unobserved by the econometrician is assumed to be
mean independent of the R&D investments at period t − 1.
    The assumption that all unobserved determinants of vc
                                                        aijt in (21) are mean independent of both
parent and affiliate innovation investments is admittedly strong. In section 5.3, we test whether
these unobserved determinants are mean independent of certain affiliate characteristics that may
correlate with R&D investments. Guided by these tests, we extend our model in several directions.
Specifically, we include affiliate imports from the parent, affiliate ‘lifetime’ within the multinational
firm, and the second lag of affiliate performance as additional determinants of vc
                                                                                 aijt in (21).
    Even after controlling for all observed affiliate performance determinants, the possibility re-
  33
     See Appendix B.4 for additional details on our estimation procedure; Hansen (1982) for information on the
properties of our estimator; and Frisch and Waugh (1933), Lovell (1963), and Giles (1984) for different expositions
of the Frisch-Waugh-Lovell theorem.


                                                                 16
mains that our estimates of the parent R&D investment impact are biased due to the presence of
unobserved parent characteristics that are correlated with both parent R&D investment and affili-
ate performance growth. Here, it is useful to observe that if parent R&D investment is operating
only as a proxy for the affiliate performance impact of such unobserved firm characteristics in (21),
the affiliate performance elasticity with respect to other parent investments should be similar to
our estimated elasticity with respect to parent innovation. Thus, in section 5.6, we estimate models
that substitute parent R&D investment in (21) and (23) with parent physical capital investment,
which plays the role of a placebo in our approach.
       An alternative to the placebo strategy described above would be to control for affiliate fixed
effects in (21). As discussed in Blundell and Bond (1998, 2000), allowing for affiliate fixed effects in
our context by first-differencing the moment function in (21) can produce large finite-sample biases
in our estimator. We adopt instead the solution proposed in these papers and substitute the mean
independence condition in (22) by the following moment condition:

                                E[ηijt |∆z ijt , {dnij t }, j ∈ (Jit−1 ∩ Jit )] = 0,                         (24)

where each element of the vector ∆z ijt corresponds to the first difference of the corresponding ele-
ment in the vector z ijt defined in (23). Equation (24) allows for the levels of the covariates in z ijt to
be correlated with unobserved determinants of affiliate performance, but assumes that these unob-
served determinants are mean independent of the appropriately lagged changes in those covariates.
As Ackerberg (2016) indicates, (24) implies that affiliates that are systematically more productive
for unobserved reasons are not growing faster (or slower) than those that are less productive.
       Finally, it is important to remark that our estimation approach does not require fully specifying
how multinational firms determine their R&D and physical capital investments, as we rely on
observed values of these variables for identification. Hence, our estimator is robust to alternative
models of investment in R&D and physical capital, as long as they are consistent with the mean
independence restriction in (22).34 For example, the model in section 3.5 assumes that a central
planner in a multinational firm i determines innovation and capital investments optimally for
each of its sites Jit , but our estimation approach remains valid if instead each affiliate determines
independently its own investments.

4.2      Instantaneous Entry and Exit
The model presented in section 3.5 assumes affiliate entry and exit decisions taken at t are im-
plemented after period-t production occurs. We consider here the possibility that entry and exit
decisions taken at t are instead instantaneous, taking place prior to period-t production.
       Equation (22) requires that the expectation of the performance shock ηijt is zero across affiliates
active at both t − 1 and t. For affiliate j to be active at both t − 1 and t, it must be the case that
a) entry by j occurs at or before t − 1, and b) exit by j occurs after t. Instantaneous entry is thus
not a concern as (12) implies entry events that occur at or before t − 1 are independent of ηijt .
  34
   Specifically, the model in section 3.5 and our estimation approach allow the decisions on optimal investment in
physical capital and R&D to be interdependent across different production locations, including the parent.


                                                             17
         However, instantaneous exit decisions may introduce a form of sample selection bias that affects
the estimator described in section 4.1. The restriction j ∈ Jit in (22) is satisfied when firm i
optimally chooses to maintain control over affiliate j at t. In a model with instantaneous exit,
this period-t decision depends on current performance ψijt , itself a function of lagged parent and
affiliate innovation, lagged affiliate performance ψijt−1 , and the performance shock ηijt . Even if
firm i determines its t − 1 R&D investments before observing ηijt , the fact that the exit decision
for affiliate j occurs after all determinants of ψijt are observed by the firm implies that ηijt will
be correlated with the lagged parent and affiliate R&D investments conditional on survival.35
Specifically, the correlation between ηijt and the corresponding parent and affiliate lagged R&D
investments is likely to be negative, placing a downward bias on our estimates of the elasticity of
the affiliate’s performance with respect to these investments (see Appendix B.2 for details).36


5         Main Results
This section presents our baseline estimates. We assess the validity of our model through a series
of specification tests; guided by these tests, we evaluate the robustness of the main results by
extending our model in several directions. We present additional results in Appendix C.

5.1        Baseline Estimates
Estimates of the baseline model described in section 3 appear in Table 4. We first evaluate the
influence of innovation on affiliate performance in a specification that considers an affiliate as re-
sponsive only to its own R&D investment (column 1). We find evidence that the performance
of an affiliate increases systematically in its own R&D investment and is also persistent, results
that qualitatively match recent estimates (Aw, Roberts and Xu 2011, Doraszelski and Jaumandreu
2013). In column 2, we add R&D performed by the U.S. parent of the affiliate, and find strong
support for its importance as a determinant of affiliate performance. In column 3, which includes
the interaction between parent and affiliate R&D, we find evidence that innovating affiliates receive
significantly higher gains from parent innovation. In column 4, by contrast, we find that the innova-
tion investment of other foreign affiliates within the same firm has no significant impact on affiliate
performance, suggesting the strong centrality of parent innovation within the firm network.37
    35
      By contrast, while exit decisions taken at t are also a function of ψijt in the baseline model with delayed exit,
this does not restrict the set of period-t observations used for estimation, as choices take effect in the subsequent
period. Thus, endogenous exit does not generate sample selection bias for the model in section 3.
  36
      Theoretically, one may correct this bias following the procedure in Olley and Pakes (1996). In our context,
implementing this would require nonparametrically projecting the exit indicator for each firm-i affiliate j at t on the
full firm-i state matrix Sit . This projection is infeasible as multiple elements of Sit are unobserved. A distinct form
of sample selection bias would arise if the multinational firm were to exit. As exit of multinational firms is minimal
in our data, this consideration is unlikely to be an important source of selection bias in our estimates.
  37
      The standard error estimates in Table 4 do not account for: a) the sampling error in our first-step estimates of
(βl , βll , βlk ) and {εijt , ∀i, j, t} when computing the second-step estimates of (βk , βkk ), µψ and µ; nor b) the potential
correlation in the productivity shock ηijt across affiliates of the same multinational firm in a given year t. To address
the first limitation, we bootstrap the estimator described in steps 1 and 2 in section 4.1 and report the resulting
standard errors in columns 1 to 3 of Table D.6. To address the second limitation, we adjust the variance-covariance
matrix of our GMM estimates to allow for clustering at the firm-year level; we report the resulting estimates in
columns 4 to 6 of Table D.6. While these adjustments generate slightly larger standard errors than those implied


                                                                  18
    Our estimates reveal that the intrafirm impact of U.S. parent R&D investment on affiliate
performance is economically significant. All else equal, the estimates in column 3 indicate that
the mean elasticity of affiliate performance with respect to parent R&D investment (0.013) is
approximately twice as large as the mean elasticity with respect to affiliate R&D spending (0.006);
for the subset of affiliates performing R&D, the difference widens to a factor larger than four (0.026).
The large estimated parent innovation elasticity is of interest from an innovation policy perspective,
as it suggests that the welfare effects of innovation stimulus incentives such as R&D tax credits
may extend to firm sites located abroad. Our estimates suggest that such policies, where effective
at increasing R&D investment by multinational parents (Rao 2016), increase affiliate performance
abroad and may thereby contribute to a spatial disconnect between the costs and gains of such
policies. From the perspective of an affiliate host country, these estimates also quantify potential
gains due to local innovation activity by affiliates of foreign multinational firms. In subsequent
sections, we therefore emphasize specifications like those in columns 2 and 3, which include both
own-affiliate and parent R&D spending.
    The estimated differences between parent and affiliate innovation elasticities in column 3 are
compatible with an optimizing firm that equalizes the marginal net return to its parent and affiliate
R&D investments. In particular, our model does not impose equal innovation costs across sites;
the R&D cost shifters χrijt included in (15) thus contribute to the distribution of optimal R&D
spending across firm sites through differences in sites’ fixed and variable R&D costs.
    The complementarity between parent and affiliate innovation that we find in column 3 implies
innovating affiliates benefit more from parent R&D than non-innovating affiliates: the impact of
parent R&D on an innovating affiliate is twice as large as its impact on the average affiliate. This
result supports the view put forth in Cohen and Levinthal (1989), which proposes that, beyond its
potential for generating new production techniques, R&D enhances a firm’s ability to assimilate and
exploit existing information–information developed by the parent firm, in this case. Our estimates
shed light on this theoretical possibility, and indicate that an affiliate’s gain from parent technology
is amplified by its own investment in R&D. Comparing the estimates in column 3 with those in
columns 1 and 2 also suggests an important consequence of failing to account for this parent-
affiliate innovation complementarity. This omission leads to an overstatement—of approximately
70 percent—in the elasticity of affiliates’ performance with respect to their own R&D.
    The results reported in Table 4 contribute to our understanding of affiliate and parent roles
within a multinational firm. Through the positive estimates of the mean affiliate R&D elasticity in
columns 1 through 2, and the positive impact that affiliate innovation has on the mean parent R&D
elasticity in column 3, we find that affiliates’ contribution to proprietary technology development
has meaningful consequences for performance outcomes; this adds nuance to the standard view of
the multinational firm (Helpman 1984, Markusen 1984), which considers affiliates as pure recipients,
rather than producers, of knowledge. Our results also provide a rationale for heterogeneous, yet
correlated, affiliate productivities within the multinational firm, as specified in Arkolakis et al
(2017). The distribution of productivities across affiliates within the multinational firm arises in
by our baseline estimation procedure, none of the main conclusions of our analysis change; we thus present these
alternative inference procedures only for Table 4.


                                                           19
our model as an outcome of the endogenous decisions of the firm, including the extent of parent
and affiliate R&D investments.38
      The lower rows of Table 4 present the mean and standard deviation of the distributions across
affiliates of value added elasticities with respect to labor and capital. The mean value-added labor
elasticity is 0.47 and the mean capital elasticity is approximately 0.35. In Appendix B.5, we
combine these value added elasticities with estimates of the demand elasticity σ and the coefficient
on materials in the production function in (3), αm , to compute output elasticities. As Table 4
reports, our estimates imply that the average affiliate has approximately constant returns to scale.
The p-value from a test of overidentifying restrictions appears below the estimates in each column.

5.2     Comparison to Reduced-Form Estimates
Relative to our baseline estimates in Table 4, the reduced-form estimates in Table 3 for firms
within the computers industry overstate value-added elasticities with respect to both parent and
own-affiliate innovation by a factor of approximately three in the case of the parent innovation
and four in the case of the affiliate innovation. These reduced-form estimates also understate the
persistence of affiliate performance and overstate the ratio of labor to capital elasticities.39
      The key distinctions between the reduced-form approach in section 2.3 and our baseline esti-
mation approach in section 4.1 are that the latter a) specifies a translog instead of a Cobb-Douglas
production function, b) accounts for the endogeneity of current labor by estimating the parameters
determining the labor value-added elasticity using the first-order condition of the profit function
with respect to labor, c) accounts for measurement error in value added, and d) imposes parametric
restrictions linking the coefficients on capital and lagged capital with the persistence parameter.
These distinctions can explain the differences in the estimates resulting from both approaches.
      In particular, failing to account for the likely positive correlation between labor usage and
unobserved productivity shocks results in ‘transmission bias‘ (Griliches and Mairesse 1998), which
can explain the upward bias in the ratio of labor to capital elasticities implied by the reduced-form
estimates. Similarly, the failure of the approach in section 2.3 to account for measurement error
in value added can explain the downward bias in the estimated persistence parameter (‘classical
measurement error bias’). Given the positive correlations across affiliates between R&D investments
(of both the affiliate and its parent) and both the affiliate’s first-lag of value added and its capital
usage, downward bias in the persistence parameter and capital elasticity translates into an upward
bias in the innovation elasticities.40 For these reasons, our estimates in Table 4 are preferred.
   38
      A similar intuition appears in Lind and Ramondo (2018), which microfound the joint distribution of productivities
across countries as the outcome of a process in which each country adopts technologies, which are a product of global
innovations, based on a country’s ability to apply each innovation.
   39
      Comparing the remaining estimates in Table 3 with those in Table D.12 (Appendix D) indicates these discrep-
ancies between our reduced-form and structural estimates are pervasive across the different industries we study.
   40
      In terms of the parametric restrictions mentioned in d) above, if the reduced-form equation in (1) was derived
from a Cobb-Douglas production function, the coefficient on lagged capital would be restricted to equal the opposite
of the product of the coefficients on lagged value added and current capital. For the firms in the computer industry,
the estimates in Table 3 yield −0.1450 and −0.7137 × 0.1939 = −0.1384 for these two magnitudes. While a test of the
equality of these two parameters is rejected at usual significance levels, the similarity in the point estimates suggests
that the parametric restrictions imposed by our model are unlikely to play a large role in explaining the differences
between the estimates in tables 3 and 4.


                                                               20
5.3     Specification Testing
To assess the validity of the estimates described above, we subject our baseline specifications to
a series of overidentifying restrictions tests in Table 5. We perform two sets of tests: the first
relates to properties of the unobserved term entering the first order condition in (19), and the
second relates to properties of the unobserved term in (21). Each test evaluates whether the
corresponding unobserved term satisfies mean independence restrictions that, although predicted
by our model, would not hold in more general settings that relax certain assumptions we impose.
      First, according to our model, the unobserved term in (19) is simply the measurement error in
value added εijt . This implies that, at the true values of (βl , βll , βlk ), the expression

                                            l
                                   vaijt − wijt + log(βl + 2βll lijt + βlk kijt )

is mean independent not only of lijt , kijt and Jijt , as imposed in (20), but also of other covariates
such as the labor hired by the parent and other affiliates within the same firm i at t. This would
not hold if the labor input decisions across different establishments within the same multinational
firm were instead interdependent. We show in the third line of Table 5, Panel A that the p-value
of the test of overidentifying restrictions for the moment conditions
                                                                                                    
                                                                    1
                                                              lijt
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                     
      E  (vaijt − wijt + log(βl + 2βll lijt + βlk kijt )) ×             × 1{j ∈ (Jit ∩ Jit−1 )}
                   l
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                        = 0,
                                                              kijt
        
                                                                                                      
                                                              li0t
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                     
                                                               li−jt

is 0.863, however. Consistent with our model, we thus cannot reject that the unobserved deter-
minants entering the first order condition for affiliate-j labor are uncorrelated with j’s labor and
capital usage, labor usage by its parent li0t , and the mean labor usage of other firm-i affiliates li−jt .
      Second, the unobserved term in (21) is the performance shock ηijt defined in (12). This implies
that, according to our model, the moment condition in (22) holds even if we extend the instrument
vector z ijt in (23) by adding total firm R&D investment at t − 1, parent and affiliate R&D invest-
ments at t − 2 and t − 3, affiliate materials usage and imports from the parent at t, affiliate lifetime
within the firm, lagged affiliate labor, and second lags of the affiliate value added, labor, and capi-
tal.41 We add each of these additional covariates to the vector z ijt separately, and perform a test
of overdentifying restrictions using a set of unconditional moments analogous to those described in
(B.13) and (B.14) in Appendix B.4.
      As the first line in Table 5, Panel B indicates, we cannot reject that total firm-i R&D spending
is orthogonal to the unobserved determinants of affiliate performance, once we control for the
covariates in (13) and (14). Conversely, we perform a related test that first modifies the specification
of affiliate performance evolution in (14), replacing parent and affiliate R&D investments with
   41
      We construct affiliate lifetime within the firm as the difference between date t and the first year in which an
affiliate is either established by or incorporated within a U.S. multinational firm.



                                                             21
total firm R&D. While this modified model is valid (p-value 0.617), the test including our separate
measures of parent and affiliate R&D as additional instruments in an appropriately modified vector
of instruments z ijt strongly indicates their correlation with the residual productivity (p-value <
0.01). We thus reject that total firm R&D spending is a sufficient statistic for the affiliate-level
impact of site-specific R&D investments within a multinational firm.
      The results in Table 5 also indicate that, controlling for parent and affiliate R&D investments
at t − 1 as in (14), further innovation lags have no significant impact on affiliate performance at t.
This does not necessarily imply that R&D investments translate into affiliate performance within
one year. As both parent and affiliate R&D investments are persistent, an alternative interpretation
of this result is that the covariates rijt−1 and ri0t−1 already control for the effects of all previous
R&D investments; as Hall, Mairesse and Mohen (2010) indicate, it is difficult to determine the
lag structure of the relationship between R&D and performance. If this were to be the case, our
estimates would not exclusively capture the one-year ahead impact of innovation, but also the
impact of all relevant prior R&D investments.
      Consistent with our assumption in (3) that the elasticity of substitution between materials
and the joint output of capital and labor is 1, we obtain large p-values (between 0.30 and 0.49)
when adding affiliate materials usage to z ijt . The even larger p-values (between 0.58 and 0.72)
for tests that add affiliate labor usage at t − 1 to z ijt are consistent with affiliate labor being
determined according to the first-order condition in (19). Were this first-order condition incorrect
as a representation of the determinants of affiliates’ labor usage, the adjusted value added measure
                                 2 − β̂ l k − ε̂
 aijt ≡ vaijt − β̂l lijt − β̂ll lijt
vc                                     lk ijt ijt ijt would not correctly account for affiliate labor and, thus,
the residual term in (21) would be correlated with current and lagged affiliate labor. We perform
this test using lagged affiliate labor lijt−1 only because, as a static input, our model already accounts
for the correlation between lijt and ηijt . Relatedly, tests that add lagged parent and other firm-i
affiliate labor to z ijt deliver large p-values, in line with the findings in Panel A.
      Importantly, however, the tests reported in the last three rows of Panel B indicate that our
baseline model fails to account for the relevance of affiliate lifetime within the firm, second lags of
affiliate value added, labor and capital, and current affiliate imports from the parent as affiliate
value-added determinants. Each of these covariates is significantly correlated with the affiliate’s
value added after controlling for all determinants accounted for by the model in section 3. We extend
this model accordingly. First, we generalize the expression in (13) by allowing the component of
the performance index ψijt known by the firm at t − 1 to depend both on affiliate ‘lifetime’ and on
the second lag of affiliate performance ψijt−2 . Second, we generalize the production function in (3)
to account for the possible contribution to affiliate output of imports the affiliate receives from its
parent. This ‘vertical’ model is described in Appendix B.6.

5.4     Alternative Specifications
Guided by the specification tests discussed above, we begin by adjusting our baseline specification
to include affiliate ‘lifetime’ as an additional performance shifter in (13). The estimates in Table 6
indicate that this variable is a significant component of the productivity process, with an affiliate


                                                           22
owned by a multinational firm for a longer duration of time having higher performance growth on
average. The results regarding the performance impacts of affiliate and parent R&D are, however,
very similar to those in Table 4, reflecting that parent and affiliate R&D investments are not
systematically related to the number of years an affiliate is owned by a U.S. firm.42 Similarly,
including second lags of value added, capital, and labor to accommodate a second lag of performance
ψijt−2 in (13) has no significant impact on our estimates of the R&D effects.
       Discriminating between affiliates based on whether they receive imports from the parent does
affect the innovation estimates, by contrast. In Table 7, we categorize affiliates receiving imports
from the parent in every year as ‘vertical’, and consider all other affiliates to be ‘horizontal’.43 Our
estimates indicate that among vertical affiliates that do not perform R&D, parent innovation is
considerably more important as a productivity determinant than is reflected in Table 4; by con-
trast, neither the own-affiliate innovation elasticity nor the amplifying effect of affiliate innovation
participation on the parent innovation elasticity is statistically different from zero in this sample.
Notice that the small estimated output elasticity with respect to parent imports (around 0.025)
suggests these are on average not a major affiliate production input, in line with Ramondo, Rappa-
port, and Ruhl (2016). Estimates of the ‘horizontal’ baseline model for affiliates that either never
or only infrequently import from the parent reveal a significant own-affiliate innovation effect, as
well as a large own-innovation impact on the parent innovation elasticity, reflecting substantial
complementarity between parent and affiliate innovation. Furthermore, conditional on the affiliate
performing R&D, the performance elasticity with respect to parent R&D is similar for ‘vertical’
and ‘horizontal’ affiliates. The results thus reveal that the impact of parent innovation is largest
among innovating and importing affiliates.
       These results resonate with Teece (1977) and Keller and Yeaple (2013), which distinguish be-
tween transfers of technology that are tangible (e.g. equipment) versus intangible (e.g. blueprints).
Our estimates are consistent with affiliates receiving technology from the U.S. parent in both forms.
In indicating that parent and affiliate R&D are complements only among ‘horizontal’ affiliates, our
estimates further suggest the theory that R&D facilitates external technology acquisition (Cohen
and Levinthal 1989) is particularly—and perhaps exclusively—relevant in the case of intangible
transfers. One possible explanation for this finding is that ‘vertical’ and ‘horizontal’ affiliates
specialize in distinct production activities within the firm, and that this distinction has strong
consequences for the relevant mode of technology acquisition. Under this interpretation, whether
an affiliate acquires new technology in tangible or intangible form would not be an independent
choice, but instead one intrinsically linked to its production activities within the firm.
  42
      Table D.7 in Appendix D provides estimates for two alternative specifications involving affiliate ‘lifetime’ within
the firm. The first extends the specification in Table 6 by including both linear and squared ‘lifetime’ terms. The
second controls for a full set of ‘lifetime’ fixed effects. Both alternatives yield results very similar to those in Table 6.
Prior work (Evans 1987, Huergo and Jaumandreu 2004, Haltiwanger, Jarmin, and Miranda 2013) has documented
a negative relationship between firm age and firm growth. We do not observe affiliate age in the data. However, an
affiliate’s age is likely to be positively correlated with the number of years since this affiliate was incorporated into
a multinational firm. If so, our estimates will partly capture the age effect documented in the prior literature and,
thus, will underestimate the impact of experience within a multinational firm on performance growth.
   43
      Across all manufacturing affiliates included in our main estimation sample, approximately 40 percent import
from the parent in every period, 30 percent never import, and 30 percent import in some but not all periods.



                                                                 23
      Columns 5 to 8 of Table 7 include estimates for two sets of affiliates not included in the
main estimation sample: retail affiliates and services affiliates. Both gain significantly from parent
innovation, while own-affiliate innovation has an independent effect only among services affiliates,
which primarily operate in Technical Testing and Analysis (SIC 743). The positive impact of
parent innovation on retail affiliates is consistent with the relevance specifically of parent product
innovation for affiliate performance. That the impact of affiliate innovation is larger for services
affiliates is consistent with the evidence shown in Table 2: services affiliates perform a significantly
larger share of total affiliate R&D than retail affiliates.

5.5      Alternative Estimation Approaches
The estimation approach described in section 4.1 relies on a set of important assumptions. First,
the production function in 3 rules out the presence of untransmitted shocks. Second, the first-order
condition for labor in (19) assumes that: a) labor is a static input; b) affiliates are monopolistically
competitive; and c) once we control for affiliate performance and capital usage, the labor hiring
decision of an affiliate is unaffected by that of the parent or other affiliates.
      To understand how these assumptions affect our results, we pursue two alternative estimation
strategies: a) a dynamic panel approach; and b) an approach à la Ackerberg, Caves, and Frazer
(2015). We explain these two estimation approaches in detail in Appendix B.7, and present cor-
responding estimates in Table 8. Both assume a production function that is Leontief in materials
and use sales revenue (instead of value added) as the relevant measure of affiliate output. Further-
more, neither approach relies on a first-order condition to identify the parameters determining the
elasticity of revenue with respect to labor, both being thus able to relax the assumptions needed to
derive such first-order condition in (19). In addition, the approach building on Ackerberg, Caves,
and Frazer (2015) relaxes further our baseline framework in that it is compatible with the pres-
ence of untransmitted shocks. Conversely, this approach requires assuming away a) the demand
shocks ξijt in (2); and, given our approach to measure expenditure on materials expenditure, b)
any measurement error in sales revenue or value added.
      The results in Table 8 show that the estimates are quite similar across the two estimation
approaches. However, not using the labor first-order condition for identification yields mean labor
elasticities that are much less precisely estimated than in our baseline estimation approach. The
difficulties in the estimation of the labor elasticity parameters get translated into imprecise estimates
of the capital elasticity and, more importantly, of the R&D elasticities.44 The coefficient on parent
R&D investment nevertheless remains statistically significant and, thus, the results corroborate the
strong importance of parent innovation for affiliate performance.

5.6      Persistent Unobserved Productivity Determinants
As discussed in section 4.1, a potential concern with our baseline estimates is the potential presence
of determinants of future affiliate performance known to the firm at the time innovation decisions
take place, and not controlled for by our measure of lagged affiliate performance and the introduc-
 44
      This is consistent with the correlation between R&D investment and capital usage discussed in section 5.2.


                                                              24
tion of country-industry-year fixed effects. For example, affiliate performance could be affected by
persistent factors that are known to the firm, but that affect affiliates differentially even within the
same market (e.g. the firm’s managerial quality or brand name). If these factors are correlated
with affiliate or parent R&D investment, our estimates would be affected by omitted variable bias.
         In Table 9, we consider two alternative approaches to address this possibility. The first relies
on the observation that an unobserved performance factor at the multinational firm level would
affect not only optimal parent R&D investment, but also optimal parent investment in physical
capital. Accordingly, the first two columns of Table 9 provide estimates of a placebo specification
that replaces parent R&D investment with parent investment in physical capital. The estimated
parent investment elasticity is statistically indistinguishable from zero. These results suggest a
firm-level unobservable is unlikely to be driving the parent innovation effects in tables 4 through 8.
         In Table 9, we estimate a specification, otherwise analogous to our baseline model, that imposes
the mean independence condition in (24) instead of that in (22): unobserved determinants of affiliate
performance are thus allowed to be correlated with R&D investment levels but are assumed to be
mean independent of their changes over time. These results indicate a statistically important and
economically large role for parent innovation investment; however, the effects of affiliate innovation
appear negligible in this specification.45


6         Quantitative Implications
In this section, we investigate implications of the estimates described in section 5. We quantify
the contribution of headquarters innovation to long-run affiliate performance and the overall value
added earned by a multinational firm, including the share of this return that is earned abroad. We
also quantify the extent to which the performance impacts of innovation investment across parents
and affiliates can explain the well-documented parent-affiliate performance gap within multinational
firms. Throughout this section, we rely on our baseline estimates reported in columns 2 and 3 of
Table 4. When assessing the firm-level return to parent innovation investment, and the share of this
return earned abroad, we also account for the differential effects of innovation investment across
‘vertical’ and ‘horizontal’ affiliates using the estimates in columns 2 and 4 of Table 7.

6.1        Innovation and Affiliate Performance
The welfare gains from trade with multinational production hinge on multinationals’ productivity
distribution across the set of production locations (Arkolakis et al 2017). Our estimates imply that
this productivity distribution is influenced by parent and affiliate innovation.
     To quantify the long-run impact of parent innovation on affiliate performance, we first consider
its effect on ψij ≡ E lims→∞ ψijs ri0t , rijt ], the expected long-run performance of affiliate j within
                      

    45
    We describe additional results in Appendix C. These aim to: a) account for transfer pricing within the multi-
national firm; b) analyze the stability of the technology over the sample period; c) explore potential heterogeneity
in the affiliate-level performance impact of parent R&D, depending on the GDP per capita of the host country and
the industrial proximity between parent and affiliate; d) accounting for affiliate R&D labor when measuring labor
usage in production; e) studying the properties of technology license fees paid to the parent as proxies for technology
transfers; and, f) evaluating our main results for other industries.


                                                              25
firm i; for simplicity, we consider the benchmark case in which firm-i parent and affiliate-j inno-
vation levels ri0t and rijt are fixed at their respective period-t values for a given base year t. The
long-run affiliate performance impact of eliminating the contribution of parent innovation can then
be evaluated by considering how this expectation responds to setting ri0t = 0. Holding affiliate-
j innovation fixed, this expectation becomes ψij,r0 ≡ E lims→∞ ψijs 0, rijt , and the impact of
                                                                          

removing the contribution of parent R&D is therefore ∆ij,r0 ≡ ψij,r0 − ψij .46
       Figure 1 plots the distributions of ∆ij,r0 across affiliates using the estimates in columns 2
and 3 of Table 4.47 At each percentile, it is apparent that ∆ij,r0 < 1, indicating that long-run
affiliate performance is lower in the absence of parent innovation. These distributions reveal the
economic significance of parent innovation for foreign affiliates: for the median affiliate, eliminating
the impact of parent R&D would, all else equal, imply a substantial reduction in its long-run
performance, whether we include parent-affiliate innovation interactions (36.1 percent) or not (37.6
percent). Comparing the two distributions, we observe that accounting for the complementarity
between parent and affiliate R&D implies a more dispersed affiliate-level impact of parent R&D
investment, reflecting the underlying distribution of affiliate R&D investment and the effect it has
on the elasticity of the affiliate’s performance with respect to the parent’s R&D investment.
       These impacts of parent innovation for the long-run affiliate performance within the multina-
tional firm shed light on the quantitative importance of technology transfers across firm sites. In
particular, our results suggest that ownership theories emphasizing the intrafirm transfer of tech-
nological inputs are relevant for explaining the existence of multinational firms, and also provide
a rationale for evidence indicating affiliates acquired by foreign multinationals are faster growing
than unaffiliated firms.48

6.2      Headquarters Performance Advantage
Recent work including Tintelnot (2017) and Head and Mayer (2018) finds that parents are on aver-
age more productive than foreign affiliates within the multinational firm. While this performance
advantage likely reflects a range of determinants, the framework in section 3 may be combined
with our estimates to quantify the specific contribution of innovation investment to the measured
parent-affiliate performance gap observed within firms in the data.
       We measure this intrafirm performance gap by comparing the expected long-run performance
of each parent firm in the sample with that of its foreign affiliates. This requires first estimating
the determinants of parent performance evolution; we proceed by assuming parents face demand
and production functions similar to (2) through (5), but governed by distinct parameters σ, αm ,
  46
     Accounting for the impact of a change in parent innovation on optimal affiliate R&D requires specifying the
dynamic problem described in section 3.5 and solving the optimization problem described in (16). As discussed in
footnote 28, this approach would pose a severe computational challenge, and would also require imposing a set of
assumptions on firm behavior that our analysis does not otherwise need.
  47
     See Appendix B.8 for details. Unless otherwise noted, the implications in this section use all affiliate-year
observations in the estimation sample corresponding to Table 4. We replicate Figure 1 using only the observations
corresponding to the years 1994, 1999, and 2004 and find very similar results; see Figure E.1 in Appendix E.
  48
     For example, Arrow (1975), Teece (1982), Atalay, Hortaçsu, and Syverson (2014); Arnold and Javorcik (2009),
Guadalupe, Kuzmina, and Thomas (2012), and Javorcik and Poelhekke (2016).




                                                            26
and α. We also assume parent performance evolves according to a version of (12) with

         Et−1 [ψi0t ] = µ̃ψ ψi0t−1 + di0t−1 (µ̃p0 + µ̃p1 ri0t−1 ) + di−0t−1 (µ̃a0 + µ̃a1 ri−0t−1 ) + µn0 t ,   (25)

where µ̃ψ is the persistence of parent performance, (µ̃p0 , µ̃p1 ) determine the impact of parent R&D
investment, and (µ̃a0 , µ̃a1 ) determine the impact of ri−0t−1 , the log sum of R&D investments across
firm-i foreign affiliate sites; as in (14), di0t−1 and di−0t−1 are dummy variables indicating positive
parent and affiliate R&D investment, respectively. Parent-level estimates appear in Table D.14 in
Appendix D. These suggest parent innovation is an important determinant of its own performance,
while innovation by its foreign affiliates is not.49
       The relative long-run performance difference ψij − ψi0 between the parent of firm i and its
affiliate j depends, in the model, on the respective sequences of market-year specific performance
shocks affecting these two sites, {(µni0 s , µnij s ) ∀s ∈ [t, ∞)}. Given the data described in section
2, these unobserved effects cannot be separately identified from the market-year unobserved terms
in the parent and affiliate value-added functions {(κni0 s , κnij s ) ∀s ∈ [t, ∞)}. We therefore focus
here on the parent-affiliate performance gap due exclusively to the differential impact of parent and
affiliate innovation. Appendix B.9 shows how this may be evaluated using affiliate-level estimates
discussed in section 5, parent-level estimates presented in Table D.14 in Appendix D, and data on
parent and affiliate R&D investments. Using separately the estimates in columns 2 and 3 of Table
4, we report in Figure 2 the resulting distributions of the difference ψij − ψi0 for all the observations
in the estimation sample. According to the specification in column 2, the median affiliate reaches
a long-run performance level that is only 58 percent as high as its U.S. parent, and within the
sample, 95 percent of affiliates have lower long-run performance levels than their parent due to
the differential effects of innovation. By contrast, accounting for the innovation interactions in the
specification in column 3 implies the median affiliate reaches 89 percent of its parent performance,
with wider dispersion in this gap; long-run productivity is lower for non-innovating affiliates in
the specification in column 3 and higher for those innovating. The data and estimates suggest
performance exceeds that of the parent for 45 percent of affiliates. As Figure E.2 in Appendix E
illustrates, these conclusions are stable over the sample period.

6.3      Gross Return to Parent R&D
The U.S. Congress distributes over $30 billion in innovation subsidies to U.S. firms annually, to offset
costs of R&D investment performed in the United States (National Science Board 2014). Because
large corporations including U.S.-based multinationals claim the majority of these subsidies, their
impact on aggregate R&D hinges on the responsiveness of U.S. parent innovation spending to
changes in innovation costs. The U.S. parent innovation response to a subsidy depends on the
multinational firm-wide return to parent R&D investment. We quantify the share of this firm-wide
R&D return that accrues to foreign affiliates and find that it is substantial; this suggests that failing
to account for the impact of parent innovation on foreign affiliates understates the firm-wide return
  49
    This conclusion is consistent with parent-level reduced-form evidence in Table D.13. The estimates in Table D.14
are computed following an estimation procedure analogous to that described in section 4.1.


                                                                27
to parent innovation and distorts the predicted efficacy of U.S. innovation policy.
       Provided that parents of multinational firms determine innovation investment optimally, and
that firm-i parent R&D Ri0t is positive, it must satisfy
                                                   hP                     i
                                          s>t Et
                                                             s−t V A∗
                                      P
                    ∂V (Sit )     ∂                  j∈Jis δ        ijs           ∂Cr (Ri0t , χri0t )
                              =                                               −                       = 0,   (26)
                     ∂Ri0t                          ∂Ri0t                              ∂Ri0t
                                  |                  {z                   }       |     {z          }
                                                   ≡ GRi0t                            ≡ M Ci0t


where GRi0t is the gross firm-i return to parent R&D and M Ci0t is its marginal cost; as defined
in section 3, V (·) is the firm-i value function, Sit is the firm-i state vector, V A∗ijt is the true value
added of firm i’s affiliate j, Cr (Ri0t , χri0t ) is the parent R&D cost function, itself a function of Ri0t
and the firm-i parent R&D cost shock χri0t , and δ is the discount factor.50 Optimal firm-i parent
R&D spending thus depends on the shape of the gross return function GRi0t ; moreover, firms for
which the function GRi0t is larger at any given level of parent R&D will optimally choose higher
levels of parent innovation investment, all else equal. The model in section 3 and the estimates
in section 5 together imply that, at any given level of parent R&D, GRi0t is increasing in: a)
the number of affiliates, b) the total value added of firm-i parent and affiliates at t, c) the R&D
expenditure of firm-i foreign affiliates at t, d) expected growth at t in the variables mentioned
in a) to c). We quantify the contributions these variables to the gross, firm-i return to parent
R&D, assuming for simplicity that all firms expect the number of affiliates and both the parent
and average affiliate value added to grow at a constant rate. Specifically, we denote the constant
growth rate in the number of affiliates as χn , and the constant growth rate in parent and affiliate
value added as χp and χa , respectively. Using this notation, Appendix B.10 shows that we can
rewrite the gross return to firm-i parent R&D investment Ri0t > 0 as

                              δχp     ∂ψi0t+1 V A∗i0t   X    δχa χn    ∂ψijt+1 V A∗ijt
                 GRi0t =                              +                                ,                     (27)
                           1 − µ̃ψ δχp ∂ri0t Ri0t         1 − µψ δχa χn ∂ri0t Ri0t
                                                               j∈Jit
                                                                j6=0


where the first term captures the return to firm-i parent innovation that is realized by the parent,
the second term captures the return realized by its foreign affiliates, and where according to (14)
and (25), ∂ Et [ψijt+1 ]/∂ri0t = (1 − dijt )µp1 + dijt (µb2 + µb3 rijt ) and ∂ψi0t+1 /∂ri0t = µ̃p1 .
       In Figure 3, we report the value of the gross return expression in (27) under the assumption that
the number of affiliates and the value added earned by parents and affiliates remain constant at their
period-t levels; i.e. (χn , χp , χa ) = (1, 1, 1). As this figure illustrates, the gross, firm-wide return
to parent R&D is not sensitive to parent-affiliate innovation complementarity, nor to whether we
distinguish vertical from horizontal affiliates within the firm. Specifically, median-firm gross returns
are 1.12, 1.27, and 1.06 dollars for the three specifications considered in Figure 3. Figure E.4 in
Appendix E shows that the distribution of returns is growing over time, with a median-firm return
in the baseline model of 0.92 dollars in 1994 rising to 1.41 dollars by 2004.
  50
    As in Doraszelski and Jaumandreu (2013), the function Cr (·) accounts for the possibility that Ri0t may not
capture all costs associated with R&D activity. This is consistent with the data, as our measure of R&D spending
excludes capital innovation costs.



                                                                28
    Figure 4 explores how responsive the implied gross return distribution is to our assumed values
(χn , χp , χa ). Specifically, using estimates in column 3 of Table 4, we compute the gross, firm-wide
returns to parent innovation implied by setting (χn , χp , χa ) to the 25th, 50th, and 75th-percentile
values of their respective observed growth distributions across firms in the data. For the 50th
percentile, the implied return to parent innovation is 1.22 dollars for the median firm. The upper
and lower bounds implied by assuming either faster (75th-percentile) or slower (25th-percentile)
growth are 3.30 dollars and 1.02 dollars, respectively. Figures E.7 and E.8 in Appendix E show
that the analogous gross returns assuming growth only in value-added (i.e. χn = 1) are 1.01 (25th-
percentile growth), 1.17 (median growth), and 1.66 dollars (75th-percentile growth) for the median
firm. Thus, excepting firms with the highest levels of affiliate entry, the gross, firm-wide return to
parent innovation implied by our model is slightly above one dollar, but quite close to it.51
    The share of the gross return to firm-i parent innovation that is realized among its foreign
affiliates is
                                                  δχp     ∂ψi0t+1 V A∗i0t .     
                                Λit ≡ 1 −                                   GRi0t .
                                                1 − µ̃ψ δχp ∂ri0t Ri0t

The distribution of Λit across all firm-years in the estimation sample appears in Figure 5, and is
replicated for the years 1994, 1999, and 2004 in Figure E.9 in Appendix E. As shown in this latter
figure, differences over time in the distribution of Λit are minimal. Conversely, Figure 5 shows that,
in order to correctly measure Λit , it is important to account both for the parent-affiliate innovation
complementarity, and for differences across vertical and horizontal affiliates. Specifically, when
these sources of affiliate heterogeneity in the performance impact of parent innovation are taken into
account, we conclude that the share of overall firm returns to parent R&D that accrue to affiliates
is 19.5 percent for the median firm. This implies that the gross, private return to parent R&D
investment exceeds the parent-level return by approximately 25 percent for the median firm, and
that estimates based only on firms’ domestic data understate the innovation return substantially.
From an innovation policy perspective, this result reinforces the spatial disconnect between the
location of headquarters innovation financed by U.S. subsidies (account for in our model through
χri0t ) and the location of innovation returns that enter GRi0t . While this disconnect is internalized
by the multinational firm in our model, U.S. Congress reports cited in footnote 2 suggest that it
is not internalized by U.S. policy makers determining the generosity of innovation subsidies, and
could thus result in the underprovision of innovation subsidies.


7     Conclusion
This paper examines the impact of parent innovation on affiliate performance in the multinational
firm. We document that the spatial concentration of innovation is higher than that of production
within multinational firms, consistent with the idea that knowledge is shared across locations
  51
     Notice that we have not imposed the equality in (26) when computing the estimates in section 5, yet these
estimates indicate that the gross long-run return is in the vicinity of one for most firms. Given (26), this implies that
the effective marginal cost of investing one additional dollar in R&D is also near one for most firms.



                                                               29
within firm boundaries (Arrow 1975, Teece 1982), and with recent results emphasizing the transfer
of intangible inputs as a key motive for plant integration within firm boundaries (Atalay, Hortaçsu,
and Syverson 2014). Using data on the global activity of U.S.-based multinationals, we estimate
the parameters of a dynamic innovation model and find evidence that U.S. parent R&D investment
indeed systematically increases the performance of foreign affiliates within the same firm.
    Our analysis considers the intrafirm impact of a specific form of intangible input–the propri-
etary knowledge resulting from parent R&D investment–about which we observe uniquely detailed
information in our data. From a policy perspective, the relevance of this input arises in part due
to the prevalence of location-specific policies that aim to stimulate private innovation investment.
Our findings strongly suggest that such policies, where effective at increasing innovation by parents
of multinational firms, create gains in within-firm productivity that are realized abroad.
    While further work is needed to determine the impact of aggregate U.S. R&D investment on
welfare outcomes abroad, our results suggest that U.S. innovation subsidies, when effective, will
have a positive effect on foreign countries. Given stated concerns of U.S. Congress regarding the
allocation of gains from U.S. innovation subsidies, this positive effect is likely not internalized by
policymakers. Adjusting the tax treatment of multinational firms offers one potential remedy, but
deeper international coordination of innovation policy may be an effective alternative. In particular,
building on the global patent protection treaties of the last century, our estimates suggest that,
for industries dominated by offshoring and multinational production, further efficiency gains could
result from the international coordination of innovation subsidies.




                                             REFERENCES

[1] Ackerberg, Daniel A. (2016). “Timing Assumptions and Efficiency: Empirical Evidence in a Produc-
   tion Function Context.” University of Michigan mimeo.
[2] Ackerberg, Daniel A., Kevin Caves, and Garth Frazer. (2015). “Identification Properties of
   Recent Production Function Estimators.” Econometrica, vol. 83, no. 6, pp. 2411–2451.
[3] Arkolakis, Costas, Natalia Ramondo, Andrés Rodrı́guez-Clare, and Stephen Yeaple. (2017).
   “Innovation and Production in the Global Economy.” American Economics Review, forthcoming.
[4] Arnold, Jens Matthias, and Beata Javorcik. (2009). “Gifted Kids Or Pushy Parents? Foreign
   Direct Investment and Plant Productivity in Indonesia.” Journal of International Economics, vol. 79, no.
   1, pp. 42–53.
[5] Arrow, Kenneth J. (1962). “Economic Welfare and the Allocation of Resources for Invention,” in The
   Rate and Direction of Inventive Activity: Economic and Social Factors, National Bureau of Economic
   Research.
[6] Arrow, Kenneth J. (1969). “Classificatory Notes on the Production and Transmission of Technological
   Knowledge.” American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, vol. 59, no. 2, pp. 29–35.
[7] Arrow, Kenneth J. (1975). “Vertical Integration and Communication.” Bell Journal of Economics,
   vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 173–183.
[8] Atalay, Enghin, Ali Hortaçsu, and Chad Syverson. (2014). “Vertical Integration and Input Flows.”
   American Economic Review, vol. 104, no. 4, pp. 1120–1148.


                                                        30
[9] Aw, Bee Yan, Mark J. Roberts, and Daniel Yi Xu. (2011). “R&D Investment, Exporting, and
   Productivity Dynamics.” American Economic Review, vol. 101, no. 4, pp. 1312–1344.
[10] Bilir, L. Kamran. (2014). “Patent Laws, Product Lifecycle Lengths, and Multinational Activity.”
   American Economic Review, vol. 104, no. 7, pp. 1979–2013.
[11] Blundell, Richard, and Stephen Bond. (1998). “Initial Conditions and Moment Restrictions in
   Dynamic Panel Data Models.” Journal of Econometrics, vol. 87, pp. 115–143.
[12] Blundell, Richard, and Stephen Bond. (2000). “GMM Estimation with Persistent Panel Data: An
   Application to Production Functions.” Econometric Reviews, vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 321–340.
[13] Bøler, Esther A. (2015). “Technology-skill Complementarity in a Globalized World.” University of
   Oslo mimeo.
[14] Bøler, Esther A., Andreas Moxnes, and Karen H. Ulltveit-Moe. (2015). “R&D, International
   Sourcing, and the Joint Impact on Firm Performance.” American Economic Review, vol. 105, no. 12, pp.
   3704–3739.
[15] Branstetter, Lee G., Raymond Fisman, and C. Fritz Foley. (2006). “Do Stronger Intellectual
   Property Rights Increase International Technology Transfer? Empirical Evidence from U.S. Firm-level
   Panel Data.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 121, no. 1, pp. 321–349.
[16] Cassiman, Bruno, and Reinhilde Veugelers. (2002). “R&D Cooperation and Spillovers: Some
   Empirical Evidence from Belgium.” American Economic Review, vol. 92, no. 4, pp. 1169–1184.
[17] Cassiman, Bruno, and Reinhilde Veugelers. (2006). “In Search of Complementarity in the Inno-
   vation Strategy: Internal R&D and External Knowledge Acquisition.” Management Science, vol. 52, no.
   1, pp. 68–82.
[18] Cohen, Wesley M., and Steven Klepper. (1996). “Firm Size and the Nature of Innovation within
   Industries: The Case of Process and Product R&D.” Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 78, no. 2,
   pp. 232–243.
[19] Cohen, Wesley M., and David A. Levinthal. (1989). “Innovation and Learning.” Economic Jour-
   nal, vol. 99, pp. 569–596.
[20] Criscuolo, Chiara, Jonathan E. Haskel, and Matthew Slaughter. (2010). “Global Engagement
   and the Innovation Activities of Firms.” International Journal of Industrial Organization, vol. 28, no. 2,
   pp. 191–202.
[21] De Loecker, Jan. (2011). “Product Differentiation, Multi-Product Firms and Estimating the Impact
   of Trade Liberalization on Productivity.” Econometrica, vol. 79, no. 5, pp. 1407–1451.
[22] De Loecker, Jan, and Frederic Warzynski. (2012). “Markups and Firm Level Export Status.”
   American Economic Review, vol. 102, no. 6, pp. 2437–2471.
[23] De Loecker, Jan, Pienelopi K. Goldberg, Amit K. Khandelwal and Nina Pavcnik. (2016).
   “Prices, Markups and Trade Reform.” Econometrica, vol. 84, no. 2, pp. 445–510.
[24] Dickstein, Michael, and Eduardo Morales. (2018). “What Do Exporters Know?” Princeton Uni-
   versity mimeo.
[25] Dhingra, Swati. (2013). “Trading Away Wide Brands for Cheap Brands.” American Economic Review,
   vol. 103, no. 6, pp. 2554–2584.
[26] Doraszelski, Ulrich, and Jordi Jaumandreu. (2013). “R&D and Productivity: Estimating En-
   dogenous Productivity.” Review of Economic Studies, vol. 80, pp. 1338–1383.
[27] Doraszelski, Ulrich, and Jordi Jaumandreu. (2018). “Measuring the Bias of Technological
   Change.” Journal of Political Economy, vol. 126, no. 3, pp. 1027-1084.
[28] Evans, David. (1987). “Tests of Alternative Theories of Firm Growth.” Journal of Political Economy,
   vol. 95, no. 4, pp. 657–674.
[29] Fillat, José L., and Stefania Garetto. (2015). “Risk, Returns, and Multinational Production.”
   Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 130, no. 4, pp. 2027–2073.

                                                         31
[30] Foster, Lucia, John Haltiwanger, and Chad Syverson. (2008). “Reallocation, Firm Turnover,
   and Efficiency: Selection on Productivity or Profitability?” American Economic Review, vol. 98, no. 1,
   pp. 394–495.
[31] Frisch, Ragnar, and Frederick V. Waugh. (1933). “Time Regressions as Compared with Individual
   Trends.” Econometrica, vol. 1, no. 4, pp. 387–401.
[32] Gandhi, Amit, Salvador Navarro, and David Rivers. (2016). “On the Identification of Production
   Functions: How Heterogeneous is Productivity?” University of Wisconsin-Madison mimeo.
[33] Garetto, Stefania, Lindsay Oldenski, and Natalia Ramondo. (2018). “Life-Cycle Dynamics and
   the Expansion Strategies of U.S. Multinational Firms.” Boston University mimeo.
[34] Giles, David E. A. (1984). “Instrumental Variables Regressions Involving Seasonal Data.” Economics
   Letters, vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 339–343.
[35] Giraud, Xavier. (2013). “Proximity and Investment: Evidence from Plant-level Data.” The Quarterly
   Journal of Economics, vol. 128, no. 2, pp. 861-915.
[36] Government Accountability Office. (2009). “Tax Policy: The Research Tax Credit’s Design and
   Administration Can Be Improved,” Report to the Committee on Finance, U.S. Senate, November.
[37] Gravelle, Jane G. (2015). “Tax Havens: International Tax Avoidance and Tax Evasion.” Congres-
   sional Research Service Report, no. 7-5700, pp. 605-627.
[38] Griliches, Zvi. (1979).“Issues in Assessing the Contribution of Research and Development to Produc-
   tivity Growth.” Bell Journal of Economics, vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 92–116.
[39] Griliches, Zvi, and Philippe Mairesse. (1998). “Production Functions: The Search for Identifica-
   tion,” In Econometrics and Economic Theory in the Twentieth Century: The Ragnar Frisch Centennial
   Symposium. New York: Cambridge University Press, 169–203.
[40] Guadalupe, Marı́a, Olga Kuzmina, and Catherine Thomas. (2012). “Innovation and Foreign
   Ownership.” American Economic Review, vol. 102, no. 7, pp. 3594–3627.
[41] Gumpert, Anna. (2017). “The Organization of Knowledge in Multinational Firms.” University of
   Munich mimeo.
[42] Gumpert, Anna, Andreas Moxnes, Natalia Ramondo, and Felix Tintelnot. (2018). “Ex-
   porters’ and Multinational Firms’ Life-cycle Dynamics.” University of Chicago mimeo.
[43] Hall, Bronwyn H., Jacques Mairesse, and Pierre Mohnen. (2010). “Measuring the Returns to
   R&D.” University of California–Berkeley mimeo.
[44] Haltiwanger, John, Ron S. Jarmin, and Javier Miranda. (2013). “Who Creates Jobs? Small
   Versus Large Versus Young.” The Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 95, no. 2, pp. 541–559.
[45] Hansen, Lars Peter. (1982). “Large Sample Properties of Generalized Method of Moments Estima-
   tors.” Econometrica, vol. 50, no. 4, pp. 1029–1054.
[46] Head, Keith, and Thierry Mayer. (2018). “Brands in Motion: How Frictions Shape Multinational
   Production.” University of British Columbia mimeo.
[47] Helpman, Elhanan. (1984). “A Simple Theory of International Trade with Multinational Corpora-
   tions.” Journal of Political Economy, vol. 92, no. 3, pp. 451–471.
[48] Holmes, Thomas J. (2011). “The Diffusion of Wal-Mart and Economies of Density.” Econometrica,
   vol. 79, no. 1, pp. 253–302.
[49] Holmes, Thomas J., Ellen R. McGrattan, and Edward C. Prescott. (2015). “Quid Pro Quo:
   Technology Capital Transfers for Market Access in China.” Review of Economic Studies, vol. 82, no. 3,
   pp. 1154–1193.
[50] Huergo, Elena, and Jordi Jaumandreu. (2004). “Firms Age, Process Innovation and Productivity
   Growth.” International Journal of Industrial Organization, vol. 22, pp. 541–559.



                                                       32
[51] Irarrazabal, Alfonso, Andreas Moxnes, and Luca David Opromolla. (2013). “The Margins of
   Multinational Production and the Role of Intrafirm Trade.” Journal of Political Economy, vol. 121, no.
   1, pp. 74–126.
[52] Jaumandreu, Jordi, and Heng Yin. (2016). “Cost and Product Advantages: A Firm-level Model
   for Chinese Exports and Industry Growth.” Boston University mimeo.
[53] Javorcik, Beata. (2004). “Does Foreign Direct Investment Increase the Productivity of Domestic
   Firms? In Search of Spillovers Through Backward Linkages.” American Economic Review, vol. 94, no. 3,
   pp. 605–627.
[54] Javorcik, Beata, and Steven Poelhekke. (2017). “Former Foreign Affiliates: Cast Out and Out-
   performed?” Journal of the European Economic Association, vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 501-539.
[55] Keller, Wolfgang. (2002). “Geographic Localization of International Technology Diffusion.” American
   Economic Review, vol. 92, no. 1, pp. 120–142.
[56] Keller, Wolfgang. (2004). “International Technology Diffusion.” Journal of Economic Literature, vol.
   42, no. 3, pp. 752–782.
[57] Keller, Wolfgang, and Stephen R. Yeaple. (2013). “The Gravity of Knowledge.” American Eco-
   nomic Review, vol. 103, no. 4, pp. 1414–1444.
[58] Lind, Nelson, and Natalia Ramondo. (2018). “Trade with Correlation.” University of California
   San Diego mimeo.
[59] Lovell, Michael C. (1963). “Seasonal Adjustment of Economic Time Series and Multiple Regression
   Analysis.” Journal of the American Statistical Association, vol. 58, no. 304, pp. 993–1010.
[60] Markusen, James R. (1984). “Multinationals, Multi-Plant Economies, and the Gains from Trade.”
   Journal of International Economics, vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 205–226.
[61] McGrattan, Ellen R. (2012). “Transition to FDI Openness: Reconciling Theory and Evidence.”
   Review of Economic Dynamics, vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 437–458.
[62] McGrattan, Ellen R., and Edward C. Prescott. (2010). “Technology Capital and the U.S. Current
   Account.” American Economic Review, vol. 100, no. 4, pp. 1493–1522.
[63] Morales, Eduardo, Gloria Sheu, and Andres Zahler. (2017). “Extended Gravity.” Princeton
   University mimeo.
[64] Muendler, Marc-Andreas, and Sascha O. Becker. (2010). “Margins of Multinational Labor Sub-
   stitution.” American Economic Review, vol. 100, no. 5, pp. 1999–2030.
[65] National Science Board. (2014). Science and Engineering Indicators 2014. Arlington, VA: National
   Science Foundation (NSB 14-01).
[66] Olley, Steven G., and Ariel Pakes. (1996). “The Dynamics of Productivity in the Telecommunica-
   tions Equipment Industry.” Econometrica, vol. 64, no. 6, pp. 1263–1295.
[67] Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. (2017). “Review of National R&D
   Tax Incentives and Estimates of R&D Tax Subsidy Rates, 2016.” Version 12 September 2017.
[68] Ramondo, Natalia, Veronica Rappaport, and Kim Ruhl. (2016). “Intra-firm Trade and Vertical
   Fragmentation in U.S. Multinational Corporations.” Journal of International Economics, vol. 98, pp.
   51–59.
[69] Ramondo, Natalia, and Andrés Rodrı́guez-Clare. (2013). “Trade, Multinational Production, and
   the Gains from Openness.” Journal of Political Economy, vol. 121, no. 2, pp. 273–322.
[70] Rao, Nirupama S. (2016). “Do Tax Credits Stimulate R&D Spending? The Effect of the R&D Tax
   Credit in its First Decade.” Journal of Public Economics, vol. 140, pp. 1–12.
[71] Roberts, Mark J., Daniel Yi Xu, Xiaoyan Fan and Shengxing Zhang. (2017). “A Structural
   Model of Demand, Cost, and Export Market Selection for Chinese Footwear Producers.” Review of Eco-
   nomic Studies, forthcoming


                                                       33
[72] Rodrı́guez-Clare, Andrés. (1996). “Multinationals, Linkages and Economic Development.” American
   Economic Review, vol. 86, no. 4, pp. 852–873.
[73] Schankerman, Mark. (1981). “The Effects of Double-Counting and Expensing on the Measured
   Returns to R&D.” Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 63, no. 3, pp. 454–459.
[74] Teece, David J. (1977). “Technology Transfer by Multinational Firms: The Resource Cost of Trans-
   ferring Technological Know-how.” Economic Journal, vol. 87, pp. 242–261.
[75] Teece, David J. (1982). “Towards an Economic Theory of the Multiproduct Firm.” Journal of Eco-
   nomic Behavior and Organization, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 39–63.
[76] Tintelnot, Felix. (2017). “Global Production with Export Platforms.” Quarterly Journal of Eco-
   nomics, vol. 132, no. 1, pp. 157–209.
[77] United Nations Conference on Trade and Development. (2005). World Investment Report 2005:
   Transnational Corporations and the Internationalization of R&D. New York: United Nations.
[78] U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis. (2008). “U.S. Direct Investment Abroad: 2004 Final Benchmark
   Data.” Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, November 2008.
[79] U.S. Senate Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations. (2013). “Offshore Profit Shifting and
   the U.S. Tax Code.” U.S. Senate Hearing, May 21.
[80] Wilson, Daniel J. (2009). “Beggar Thy Neighbor? The In-State, Out-of-State, and Aggregate Effects
   of R&D Tax Credits.” Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 91, no. 2, pp. 431–436.




                                                     34
                 Table 1: Descriptive Statistics, Production in the Multinational Firm

Variable                                         Manufacturing Computers Motor Vehicles                   Pharmaceuticals
                                                                 Importance of Affiliates in Production

Number of Affiliates                                    10.8              13.1             15.5                  26.1
Affiliate Share in Total Firm—
     Sales                                             32.7%            36.4%             30.3%                 41.4%
     Value Added                                       26.2%            27.9%             32.1%                 35.4%
     Employment                                        27.6%            29.9%             31.5%                 36.0%
                                                                   Classification of Affiliates by Type
Percentage of Affiliates per Firm in—
    Manufacturing                                      58.4%            39.0%             68.7%                 55.5%
    Wholesale and Retail                               18.5%            33.6%             12.6%                 24.7%
    Services                                           12.1%            21.2%             11.0%                 14.8%
    R&D Laboratories                                    0.2%             0.3%              0.1%                  0.2%
                                                         Industrial Composition of Manufacturing Affiliates
Percentage of Affiliates per Firm in—
    Parent Industry [three-digit]                      84.8%            80.8%             78.6%                 74.3%
    Parent Industry [two-digit]                        92.0%            90.9%             94.3%                 79.5%
    A Single Industry [three-digit]                    84.1%            79.6%             85.6%                 79.6%
Share of Sales in Primary Industry                     74.9%            72.0%             75.5%                 72.4%
                                                          Imports from the Parent, Manufacturing Affiliates
Percentage of Affiliates per Firm—
    Importing from the Parent                          45.3%            58.1%             48.5%                 45.0%
Ratio of Imports from Parent to Sales                   8.4%            10.6%              9.0%                  7.0%
Ratio of Materials Expenditure to Sales                75.9%            83.9%             75.4%                 74.1%
                                                            Destination of Sales, Manufacturing Affiliates
Share of Affiliate Sales per Firm—
    Exported                                           46.0%            49.6%             46.8%                 43.6%
    Exported to the United States                      15.4%            13.4%             21.0%                 11.8%
    Exported to the Parent                             11.0%            11.9%             11.6%                  8.8%
Notes: The statistics above describe the activity of U.S.-based multinational firms operating in manufacturing, Computers
and Office Equipment (SIC 357), Motor Vehicles (SIC 371), and Pharmaceutical Drugs (SIC 283). All variables are firm-level
average values from the 2004 Bureau of Economic Analysis Benchmark Survey of U.S. Direct Investment Abroad. Statistics
for 1999 and 1994 appear in Table D.2; standard deviations are reported in Table D.1. We measure expenditure in materials
as the difference between the sales and value added measures. The shares of affiliates in manufacturing, wholesale and retail,
services and R&D laboratories need not sum to 100 percent; excluded categories include communications, natural resources
drilling and extraction, air transportation, and construction.




                                                                  35
                 Table 2: Descriptive Statistics, Innovation in the Multinational Firm

                                                        Manufacturing Computers Motor Vehicles Pharmaceuticals
Percentage of Firms with Positive—
     Parent R&D Expenditure                                  76.1%           91.5%           87.0%              88.1%
     Affiliate R&D Expenditure                               57.3%           63.4%           66.7%              84.7%
Percentage of Affiliates per Firm with—
     Positive R&D Expenditure                                30.5%           30.0%           33.5%              42.4%
Share of Affiliate R&D Expenditure in—
     Manufacturing Affiliates                                85.0%           71.6%           91.3%              87.5%
     Wholesale and Retail Affiliates                          5.9%            7.5%            4.3%              8.7%
     Services Affiliates                                      2.9%           19.5%            2.0%              3.7%
     R&D Laboratories                                         0.9%            1.4%            0.2%              2.3%
Affiliate Share in Total Firm—
     R&D Expenditure                                         18.2%           12.9%           18.9%              18.4%
     R&D Employment                                          19.7%           14.4%           22.5%              19.8%
Ratio of R&D Expenditure to Sales—
     Parent                                                   4.4%            9.3%            2.8%              10.6%
     Affiliates                                               1.2%            0.9%            0.9%               1.4%
R&D Employment Share—
     Parent                                                   7.5%           16.9%            5.2%              17.2%
     Affiliates                                               2.7%           2.7%             2.1%               5.5%
Affiliate Ratio of R&D to Sales, in Firms with—
      Low Parent Ratio of R&D to Sales                        0.2%            0.4%            0.4%               1.1%
      Medium Parent Ratio of R&D to Sales                     0.8%            0.4%            1.4%               0.7%
      High Parent Ratio of R&D to Sales                       1.6%            1.3%            2.7%               2.2%
Total R&D Expenditure (in millions $US)—
      Parent                                                   157            509             275                 642
      Affiliates                                                26            51              94                  107
Notes: The statistics above describe the activity of U.S.-based multinational firms operating in manufacturing, Computers
and Office Equipment (SIC 357), Motor Vehicles (SIC 371), and Pharmaceutical Drugs (SIC 283). All variables are firm-level
average values from the 2004 Bureau of Economic Analysis Benchmark Survey of U.S. Direct Investment Abroad. Statistics for
1999 and 1994 appear in Table D.4; standard deviations are reported in Table D.3.




                                                               36
                                        Table 3: Reduced-Form Evidence

                    Dependent Variable:                                   Affiliate Value Added
                                                            Manufacturing                            Computers
                                                   (1)          (2)       (3)               (4)         (5)            (6)
Affiliate R&D                                    0.2842a       0.0405a     0.0181a       0.2201a       0.0348a      0.0163b
                                                 (0.0037)      (0.0021)    (0.0019)      (0.0155)      (0.0082)     (0.0076)
Parent R&D                                       0.1335a       0.0170a     0.0183a       0.2840a       0.0220b      0.0310a
                                                 (0.0036)      (0.0020)    (0.0018)      (0.0174)      (0.0095)     (0.0087)
Other Affiliates’ R&D                            0.0059        0.0021      0.0066a       -0.0086      -0.0062       -0.0064
                                                 (0.0034)      (0.0018)    (0.0016)      (0.0159)      (0.0082)     (0.0075)
Affiliate Labor                                                            0.4636a                                  0.4715a
                                                                           (0.0067)                                 (0.0326)
Affiliate Capital                                                          0.1061a                                  0.1939a
                                                                           (0.0046)                                 (0.0278)
1st Lag of                                                     0.8448a     0.6690a                     0.8908a      0.7137a
Affiliate Value Added                                          (0.0023)    (0.0032)                    (0.0105)     (0.0150)
1st Lag of                                                                 -0.2928a                                 -0.2866a
Affiliate Labor                                                            (0.0069)                                 (0.0332)
1st Lag of                                                                 -0.0260 a
                                                                                                                    -0.1450a
Affiliate Capital                                                          (0.0045)                                 (0.0281)

Observations                                     57,034        57,034       57,034         4,008        4,008         4,008
R2                                               0.4169        0.8362       0.8640        0.6388       0.9046        0.9208

                                                            Motor Vehicles                         Pharmaceuticals
                                                   (1)          (2)        (3)              (4)         (5)        (6)
Affiliate R&D                                    0.2993a       0.0357a     0.0161a       0.2866a       0.0432a      0.0181a
                                                 (0.0085)      (0.0049)    (0.0043)      (0.0080)      (0.0047)     (0.0044)
Parent R&D                                       0.1587a       0.0153a     0.0116b       0.2053a       0.0229a      0.0295a
                                                 (0.0105)      (0.0056)    (0.0049)      (0.0153)      (0.0083)     (0.0077)
Other Affiliates’ R&D                            -0.0012       -0.0018      0.0015       -0.0708a      -0.0005       0.0065
                                                 (0.0103)      (0.0054)    (0.0048)      (0.0112)      (0.0060)     (0.0055)
Affiliate Labor                                                            0.5359a                                  0.4221a
                                                                           (0.0175)                                 (0.0208)
Affiliate Capital                                                          0.1112a                                  0.1328a
                                                                           (0.0151)                                 (0.0173)
1st Lag of                                                     0.8656a     0.3130a                     0.8539a      0.6861a
Affiliate Value Added                                          (0.0062)    (0.0096)                    (0.0066)     (0.0092)
1st Lag of                                                                 -0.2923a                                 -0.2639a
Affiliate Labor                                                            (0.0191)                                 (0.0217)
1st Lag of                                                                 -0.0274 a
                                                                                                                    -0.0507a
Affiliate Capital                                                          (0.0153)                                 (0.0176)

Observations                                      9,181         9,181        9,181         8,433        8,433         8,433
R2                                               0.4859        0.8591       0.8905        0.5416       0.8695        0.8878
Notes: a denotes 1% significance, b denotes 5% significance, c denotes 10% significance. All columns report least-aquares
estimates of (1) and variants thereof for affiliates of U.S.-based multinational firms in the four industries indicated during
1989–2008. All specifications include innovation dummies for the parent di0t−1 and other affiliates di−jt−1 , as well as two
sets of country-industry-year fixed effects interacted with an affiliate innovation dummy dijt−1 . The dependent variable is
(log) affiliate value added. Affiliate R&D, Parent R&D, and Other Affiliates’ R&D capture elasticities of period-t output
with respect to the period-(t − 1) value of the corresponding covariate. Measures of labor, capital, value added, and R&D
expenditure are from the Bureau of Economic Analysis Survey of U.S. Direct Investment Abroad.




                                                                 37
                                  Table 4: Baseline Model

              R&D Specification:               Affiliate     Affiliate        Interact       Other-
                                                Only         & Parent          Parent        Affiliate
                                                 (1)           (2)               (3)           (4)
Persistence                                    0.7553a        0.7444a         0.7430a        0.7433a
                                               (0.0169)       (0.0180)        (0.0180)       (0.0180)
Affiliate R&D Elasticity—
  Unconditional—
     Mean                                      0.0106a        0.0106a         0.0063         0.0056
                                               (0.0037)       (0.0036)        (0.0041)       (0.0041)
      Standard Deviation                                                      0.0039         0.0036
   If Affiliate R&D > 0—
      Mean                                     0.0106a        0.0106a         0.0070         0.0062
                                               (0.0036)       (0.0036)        (0.0043)       (0.0043)
      Standard Deviation                                                      0.0036         0.0033
Parent R&D Elasticity—
  Unconditional—
    Mean                                                      0.0122a         0.0133a        0.0115b
                                                              (0.0040)        (0.0039)       (0.0047)
      Standard Deviation                                                      0.0137         0.0133
   If Affiliate R&D > 0—
      Mean                                                    0.0122a         0.0260a        0.0239a
                                                              (0.0040)        (0.0050)       (0.0057)
      Standard Deviation                                                      0.0041         0.0038
Other-Affiliate R&D Elasticity—
    Mean                                                                                     0.0049
                                                                                             (0.0133)
Labor Elasticity—
    Mean                                       0.4773a        0.4773a         0.4773a        0.4773a
                                               (0.0056)       (0.0056)        (0.0056)       (0.0056)
    Standard Deviation                          0.0878         0.0878         0.0878         0.0878
Capital Elasticity—
    Mean                                       0.3632a        0.3415a         0.3380a        0.3377a
                                               (0.0183)       (0.0186)        (0.0185)       (0.0184)
    Standard Deviation                          0.0654         0.0573         0.0567         0.0573
Returns to Scale, Mean                          1.0635         1.0547         1.0533         1.0532
Overidentification Test (p-value)               0.5820         0.6298         0.6105         0.5994
Observations                                     4008           4008           4008           4008
Notes: a denotes 1% significance, b denotes 5% significance, c denotes 10% significance.
This table reports GMM estimates corresponding to (21) and several variants thereof.
                                                                          E
These variants differ in the specification of the determinants of t−1 [ψijt ] in (13). The
                                                                         E
R&D specification in column 1, ‘Affiliate Only’, imposes that t−1 [ψijt ] = µψ ψijt−1 +
                                                                                         E
dijt−1 (µa0 + µa1 rijt−1 ) + µnij t ; ‘Affiliate & Parent’ in column 2 imposes that t−1 [ψijt ] =
µψ ψijt−1 + dijt−1 (µa0 + µa1 rijt−1 ) + di0t−1 (µp0 + µp1 ri0t−1 ) + µnij t ; ‘Interact Parent’ in
column 3 imposes (13); and ‘Other-Affiliate’ in column 4 includes di−jt−1 ri−jt−1 to (13) as
                                 E
an additional determinant of t−1 [ψijt ]. All columns include market-year fixed effects and
a second set of market-year fixed effects interacted with a dummy dijt−1 capturing affiliate
R&D spending. Standard errors are reported in parentheses. Persistence corresponds to µψ .
Affiliate R&D, Parent R&D, Other-Affiliate R&D Elasticities capture the elasticity of period-
t performance with respect to the period t − 1 value of the corresponding covariate. Mean
elasticities are reported in all columns; columns 3 and 4 also include conditional mean elas-
ticities and standard deviations. Labor Elasticity reports the mean and standard deviation
of βl + βll 2lijt + βlk kijt ; Capital Elasticity does the same for βk + βkk 2kijt + βlk lijt . Returns
to scale reports the mean of (αl + αll 2lijt + αlk kijt + αk + αkk 2kijt + αlk lijt )(1 − αm ) + αm
(see Appendix B.5 for details). The standard error for each input elasticity appears below its
mean. Each specification reports the p-value for the overidentifying restrictions test (Hansen
1982). Measures of labor, capital, value added, and R&D expenditure are from the Bureau
of Economic Analysis Survey of U.S. Direct Investment Abroad.


                                                       38
                                  Table 5: Specification Tests

                           Panel A: First-Stage Moment Conditions
Additional Instruments—
 Parent Labor (t)                                                                  0.1678
 Mean Other-Affiliate Labor (t)                                                    0.9798
 Parent and Mean Other-Affiliate Labor (t)                                         0.8633
                          Panel B: Second-Stage Moment Conditions
                                   R&D Specification:               Affiliate    Affiliate      Interact
                                                                     Only        & Parent        Parent
                                                                      (1)          (2)             (3)
Additional Instruments—
 Total Firm R&D (t − 1)                                              0.5511        0.5829        0.7224
 Parent R&D, Affiliate R&D (t − 2)                                   0.6508        0.1384        0.1835
 Parent R&D, Affiliate R&D (t − 2, t − 3)                            0.4712        0.4971        0.2514
 Affiliate Materials (t)                                             0.1489        0.2609        0.2644
 Affiliate Labor (t − 1)                                             0.6763        0.6274        0.5862
 Parent Labor (t − 1)                                                0.0883        0.8743        0.9250
 Other-Affiliate Labor (t − 1)                                       0.8805        0.8817        0.8188
 Affiliate, Parent, and Other-Affiliate Labor (t − 1)                0.0820        0.6187        0.5936
 Affiliate ‘Lifetime’ (t)                                            < 0.01        < 0.01        0.0130
 Affiliate Value Added, Capital, Labor (t − 2)                       < 0.01        < 0.01        < 0.01
 Affiliate Imports from Parent (t)                                   < 0.01        < 0.01        < 0.01
Notes: This table shows p-values for two types of specification tests. The first relates to the properties
of the unobserved term entering the first-order condition for labor in (19) [Panel A]; the second relates
to the properties of the unobserved term entering (21) [Panel B]. Second-stage R&D specifications
considered in Panel B, ‘Affiliate Only’, ‘Affiliate & Parent’, and ‘Interact Parent’, are as described in
Table 4 above. As described in section 5.3, each test evaluates whether the moment conditions in (20)
[Panel A] and (22) [Panel B] are satisfied when the indicated covariate is added to the conditioning set
of the corresponding moment. As indicated in section 2.1, we measure affiliate materials as affiliate
sales revenue minus affiliate value added, and affiliate ‘lifetime’ as the difference between t and the
first year in which the affiliate is either established by or incorporated within a U.S. multinational
firm.




                                                         39
                   Table 6: Alternative Specifications, Affiliate Productivity Process

                                                        Affiliate ‘Lifetime’                Second Productivity Lag
            R&D Specification:                   Affiliate Affiliate Interact            Affiliate Affiliate Interact
                                                  Only       & Parent Parent              Only     & Parent Parent
                                                   (1)           (2)         (3)           (4)        (5)        (6)
Persistence (t − 1)                              0.7431a       0.7431a      0.7343a      0.7038a       0.6970a      0.6949a
                                                 (0.0176)      (0.0185)     (0.0185)     (0.0235)      (0.0240)     (0.0239)
Persistence (t − 2)                                                                      0.1160a       0.1131a      0.1136a
                                                                                         (0.0200)      (0.0198)     (0.0198)
Affiliate ‘Lifetime’ Semi-Elasticity             0.4169a       0.3694a      0.3474a
                                                 (0.0011)      (0.0011)     (0.0011)
Affiliate R&D Elasticity—
  Unconditional—
     Mean                                        0.0107a       0.0107a       0.0066      0.0112a       0.0114a       0.0093b
                                                 (0.0037)      (0.0036)     (0.0041)     (0.0041)      (0.0041)     (0.0046)
     Standard Deviation                                                      0.0040                                  0.0021
  If Affiliate R&D > 0—
     Mean                                        0.0107a       0.0107a       0.0072c     0.0112a       0.0114a       0.0092c
                                                 (0.0037)      (0.0036)     (0.0043)     (0.0041)      (0.0041)     (0.0049)
     Standard Deviation                                                      0.0035                                  0.0013
Parent R&D Elasticity—
  Unconditional—
    Mean                                                       0.0104a      0.0115a                    0.0096a      0.0099a
                                                               (0.0039)     (0.0039)                   (0.0045)     (0.0045)
     Standard Deviation                                                      0.0131                                  0.0108
  If Affiliate R&D > 0—
     Mean                                                      0.0104a      0.0237a                    0.0096a      0.0203a
                                                               (0.0039)     (0.0050)                   (0.0045)     (0.0055)
     Standard Deviation                                                      0.0039                                  0.0002
Labor Elasticity—
    Mean                                         0.4773a       0.4773a      0.4773a      0.4773a       0.4773a      0.4773a
                                                 (0.0056)      (0.0056)     (0.0056)     (0.0056)      (0.0056)     (0.0056)
    Standard Deviation                            0.0878        0.0878       0.0878       0.0878        0.0878       0.0878
Capital Elasticity—
    Mean                                         0.3484a       0.3327a      0.3301a      0.3228a       0.3031a      0.3029a
                                                 (0.0176)      (0.0181)     (0.0179)     (0.0238)      (0.0235)     (0.0232)
    Standard Deviation                            0.0644        0.0580       0.0574       0.0656        0.0575       0.0572
Returns to Scale, Mean                            1.0575        1.0512       1.0501       1.0472        1.0392       1.0391
Overidentification Test (p-value)                 0.4868        0.5344       0.5192       0.1325        0.2073       0.2179
Observations                                       4008          4008         4008         3018          3018         3018
Notes: a denotes 1% significance, b denotes 5% significance, c denotes 10% significance. This table reports GMM
estimates corresponding to variants of (21) that incorporate affiliate ‘lifetime’, measured as the duration during which
the foreign affiliate is owned by a U.S. parent (columns 1–3), and the second lag of affiliate productivity (columns 4–6).
The indicated R&D specifications ‘Affiliate Only’, ‘Affiliate & Parent’, and ‘Interact Parent’ are as described in Table
4 above. All columns include market-year fixed effects and a second set of market-year fixed effects that are interacted
with a dummy capturing R&D spending by the affiliate. Standard errors are reported in parentheses. Persistence (t − 1)
corresponds to µψ in (21), and Persistence (t − 2) corresponds to the second lag of productivity. Affiliate R&D and
Parent R&D R&D Elasticities capture the elasticity of period-t performance with respect to the period t − 1 value of the
corresponding covariate; mean and conditional mean elasticities are reported in all columns, and standard deviations are
shown for columns 3 and 6. Labor Elasticity reports the mean and standard deviation of βl + βll 2lijt + βlk kijt ; Capital
Elasticity does the same for βk + βkk 2kijt + βlk lijt . The standard deviation for each input elasticity appears below its
mean. For each specification, the p-value for the overidentifying restrictions test (Hansen 1982) is included. Measures of
‘lifetime’, labor, capital, value added, and R&D expenditure are from the Bureau of Economic Analysis Survey of U.S.
Direct Investment Abroad.




                                                                  40
                                   Table 7: Alternative Specifications, Heterogeneity by Type of Affiliate

                    Type of Affiliate:                ‘Vertical’                ‘Horizontal’                   Retail                      Services
                   R&D Specification:           Affiliate Interact          Affiliate Interact          Affiliate Interact         Affiliate     Interact
                                                & Parent Parent             & Parent Parent             & Parent Parent            & Parent       Parent
                                                  (1)           (2)           (3)         (4)             (5)         (6)            (7)            (8)
     Persistence                                 0.7498a       0.7495a       0.7250a       0.7218a       0.8044a       0.8042a       0.5454a        0.5541a
                                                 (0.0245)      (0.0244)      (0.0242)      (0.0242)      (0.0151)      (0.0151)      (0.0535)       (0.0535)
     Affiliate R&D Elasticity—
       Unconditional—
           Mean                                   0.0052        0.0035       0.0175a       0.0129a       0.0044        0.0033        0.0203b        0.0207b
                                                 (0.0056)      (0.0064)      (0.0065)      (0.0064)      (0.0053)      (0.0066)      (0.0090)       (0.0090)
          Standard Deviation                                    0.0041                     0.0265                      0.0126                        0.0064
       If Affiliate R&D > 0—
          Mean                                    0.0052        0.0032       0.0175a       0.0119a       0.0044        0.0026        0.0203b        0.0215b
                                                 (0.0056)      (0.0066)      (0.0065)      (0.0067)      (0.0053)      (0.0072)      (0.0090)       (0.0092)
         Standard Deviation                                     0.0043                     0.0151                      0.0142                        0.0077
     Parent R&D Elasticity—
       Unconditional—
         Mean                                    0.0307a       0.0315a       0.0166a       0.0187b       0.0225a       0.0231a       0.0389a        0.0393a
                                                 (0.0078)      (0.0078)      (0.0060)      (0.0059)      (0.0044)      (0.0044)      (0.0102)       (0.0102)
          Standard Deviation                                    0.0084                     0.0220                      0.0034                        0.0051
       If Affiliate R&D > 0—
          Mean                                   0.0307a       0.0383a       0.0166a       0.0402a       0.0225a       0.0322a       0.0389a        0.0319a
                                                 (0.0078)      (0.0089)      (0.0060)      (0.0078)      (0.0044)      (0.0091)      (0.0102)       (0.0136)




41
         Standard Deviation                                     0.0017                     0.0114                      0.0015                        0.0050
     Labor Elasticity—
         Mean                                    0.6495a       0.6495a       0.4545a       0.4545a       0.5799a       0.5799a       0.5929a        0.5929a
                                                 (0.0723)      (0.0723)      (0.0080)      (0.0080)      (0.0061)      (0.0061)      (0.0132)       (0.0132)
         Standard Deviation                       0.0395        0.0395        0.0915       0.0915        0.0858        0.0858        0.2070          0.2070
     Capital Elasticity—
         Mean                                    0.2418a       0.2084a       0.3226a       0.3067a       0.0942a       0.0942a       0.0789a        0.0767a
                                                 (0.0642)      (0.0628)      (0.0276)      (0.0268)      (0.0239)      (0.0239)      (0.0282)       (0.0282)
          Standard Deviation                      0.1809        0.1785        0.0469       0.0455        0.0457        0.0456        0.0908          0.0908
     Parent Imports Elasticity
         Mean                                    0.0259a       0.0228b
                                                 (0.0089)      (0.0113)
     Returns to Scale, Mean                       1.0827        1.0693        1.0390       1.0327        0.9775        0.9775        0.9779          0.9967
     Overidentification Test (p-value)            0.8696        0.8430        0.6105       0.5994        0.3810        0.3719        0.1107          0.1089
     Observations                                  1446          1446          2107         2107          3639          3639           708             708
     Notes: a denotes 1% significance, b denotes 5% significance, c denotes 10% significance. This table reports GMM estimates of (B.26) in columns 1
     and 2, and (21) in columns 3 through 8; the indicated R&D specifications ‘Affiliate & Parent’ and ‘Interact Parent’ are otherwise as described in Table
     4 above. Estimates are shown for four groups of affiliates: ‘vertical’ manufacturing affiliates that persistently import from the parent, ‘horizontal’
     manufacturing affiliates that do not, retail affiliates, and services affiliates. The sum of ‘vertical’ plus ‘horizontal’ observations is below the overall
     sample size in Table 4 because observations for which affiliate imports from the parent are missing are not included in columns 1–4 above. All
     columns include market-year fixed effects and a second set of market-year fixed effects that are interacted with a dummy capturing R&D spending
     by the affiliate. Standard errors are reported in parentheses. All other details are as in Table 4 above.
        Table 8: Alternative Estimation Approaches, Baseline Model

                                            Dynamic Panel                  Estimation
                                               Approach                à la ACF (2015)
              R&D Specification:          Affiliate Interact         Affiliate    Interact
                                          & Parent Parent            & Parent      Parent
                                            (1)        (2)              (3)          (4)
Persistence                                0.7811a       0.7796a      0.7526a        0.7508a
                                           (0.0431)      (0.0431)     (0.0189)       (0.0190)
Affiliate R&D Elasticity—
  Unconditional—
     Mean                                  -0.0034       -0.0035       -0.0046        0.0008
                                           (0.0075)      (0.0077)     (0.0093)       (0.0100)
     Standard Deviation                                  0.0115                       0.0243
  If Affiliate R&D > 0—
     Mean                                  -0.0034       -0.0055       -0.0046       -0.0040
                                           (0.0075)      (0.0079)     (0.0093)       (0.0011)
     Standard Deviation                                  0.0085                       0.0195
Parent R&D Elasticity—
  Unconditional—
    Mean                                   0.0261a       0.0263a      0.0234a        0.0219a
                                           (0.0079)      (0.0120)     (0.0075)       (0.0164)
     Standard Deviation                                  0.0120                       0.0150
  If Affiliate R&D > 0—
     Mean                                  0.0261a       0.0365b      0.0234a        0.0280a
                                           (0.0079)      (0.0233)     (0.0075)       (0.0326)
     Standard Deviation                                  0.0062                       0.0182
Labor Elasticity—
    Mean                                   0.4239a       0.4306a      0.6711a        0.6810a
                                           (0.1242)      (0.1219)     (0.1368)       (0.1365)
    Standard Deviation                      0.0640       0.0736        0.2166         0.1892
Capital Elasticity—
    Mean                                   0.2677a       0.2658a       0.2240b       0.2227b
                                           (0.0769)      (0.0764)     (0.0845)       (0.0843)
    Standard Deviation                      0.1119       0.1108        0.1344         0.1355
Returns to Scale, Mean                      0.7800       0.7854        1.0095         1.0192
Overidentification Test (p-value)           0.3671       0.3538        0.2560         0.2396
Observations                                 4008         4008          4008           4008
Notes: a denotes 1% significance, b denotes 5% significance, c denotes 10% significance. This
table reports GMM estimates following the procedure in B.7.1 in columns 1 and 2, and that in
B.7.2 in columns 3 and 4; the indicated R&D specifications ‘Affiliate & Parent’ and ‘Interact
Parent’ are otherwise as described in Table 4 above. All columns include market-year fixed
effects and a second set of market-year fixed effects that are interacted with a dummy capturing
R&D spending by the affiliate. Standard errors are reported in parentheses. Persistence
corresponds to µψ . Affiliate R&D and Parent R&D Elasticities capture the elasticity of period-
t performance with respect to the period t − 1 value of the corresponding covariate; mean
and conditional mean elasticities are reported in all columns, and standard deviations are
shown for columns 2 and 4. Labor Elasticity reports the mean and standard deviation of
βl + βll 2lijt + βlk kijt ; Capital Elasticity does the same for βk + βkk 2kijt + βlk lijt . The
standard deviation for each input elasticity appears below its mean. For each specification,
the p-value for the overidentifying restrictions test (Hansen 1982) is included. Measures of
labor, capital, value added, and R&D expenditure are from the Bureau of Economic Analysis
Survey of U.S. Direct Investment Abroad.




                                                   42
 Table 9: Accounting for Persistent Unobserved Productivity Determinants

                                                  Placebo Exercise:            Affiliate-Specific
                                                 Parent Investment               Unobservable
              R&D Specification:                 Affiliate Interact          Affiliate    Interact
                                                 & Parent Parent             & Parent      Parent
                                                    (1)       (2)               (3)          (4)
Persistence                                       0.7421a       0.7419a       0.6475a       0.6411a
                                                  (0.0224)      (0.0224)      (0.0666)      (0.0710)
Affiliate R&D Elasticity—
  Unconditional—
     Mean                                         0.0110a        0.0086       -0.0037        -0.0121
                                                  (0.0047)      (0.0055)      (0.0466)      (0.0586)
     Standard Deviation                                          0.0006                      0.1298
  If Affiliate R&D > 0—
     Mean                                         0.0110a        0.0086       -0.0037        0.0010
                                                  (0.0047)      (0.0055)      (0.0466)      (0.0361)
     Standard Deviation                                          0.0005                      0.0848
Parent R&D Elasticity—
  Unconditional—
    Mean                                                                      0.1238a       0.1472a
                                                                              (0.0346)      (0.0445)
     Standard Deviation                                                                      0.0153
  If Affiliate R&D > 0—
     Mean                                                                     0.1238a       0.1583a
                                                                              (0.0346)      (0.0450)
     Standard Deviation                                                                      0.0137
Parent Capital-Investment Elasticity
  Unconditional:
    Mean                                          0.0043         0.0056
                                                  (0.0053)      (0.0053)
     Standard Deviation                                          0.0022
  If Affiliate R&D > 0—
     Mean                                                        0.0076
                                                                (0.0053)
     Standard Deviation                                          0.0005
Labor Elasticity—
    Mean                                          0.4775a       0.4775a       0.4722a       0.4722a
                                                  (0.0056)      (0.0056)      (0.0056)      (0.0056)
    Standard Deviation                            0.0879         0.0879        0.0667        0.0667
Capital Elasticity—
    Mean                                          0.3484a       0.3467a       0.1989a       0.1977a
                                                  (0.0251)      (0.0253)      (0.0244)      (0.0266)
    Standard Deviation                            0.0563         0.0565        0.0479        0.0455
Returns to Scale, Mean                            1.0576         1.0569        0.9951        0.9947
Overidentification Test (p-value)                 0.1170         0.1052        0.1017        0.4067
Observations                                       2681           2681          3815          3815
Notes: a denotes 1% significance, b denotes 5% significance, c denotes 10% significance. This table
reports GMM estimates corresponding to several variants of (21). Columns 1 and 2 replace parent
R&D investment with parent investment in physical capital; columns 3 and 4 allow a permanent
affiliate-specific unobserved productivity determinant. The indicated R&D specifications ‘Affiliate
& Parent’ and ‘Interact Parent’ are otherwise as described in Table 4 above. All columns include
market-year fixed effects and a second set of market-year fixed effects that are interacted with a
dummy capturing R&D spending by the affiliate. Standard errors are reported in parentheses.
Persistence corresponds to µψ . Affiliate R&D and Parent R&D Elasticities capture the elasticity
of period-t performance with respect to the period t − 1 value of the corresponding covariate; mean
and conditional mean elasticities are reported in all columns, and standard deviations are shown for
columns 2 and 4. Labor Elasticity reports the mean and standard deviation of βl +βll 2lijt +βlk kijt ;
Capital Elasticity does the same for βk +βkk 2kijt +βlk lijt . Measures of labor, capital, value added,
and R&D expenditure are from the Bureau of Economic Analysis Survey of U.S. Direct Investment
Abroad.


                                                       43
             Figure 1: Distribution of Performance Impact of Parent R&D




Notes: For each percentile indicated on the horizontal axis, the vertical axis indicates the long-run
affiliate performance without parent R&D relative to the long-run affiliate performance level in our
benchmark specification. The solid line corresponds to the evolution of performance in (13) and uses
the estimates in column 3 of Table 4. The dotted line uses the estimates in column 2 of Table 4,
which imposes the following parametric restrictions on equation (13): µp0 = µp1 = µb2 = µb3 = 0,
µa0 = µb0 , and µa1 = µb1 . These estimates are combined with data on R&D investment for all
affiliate-years in the sample used to compute the estimates in Table 4.




       Figure 2: Distribution of Affiliate Performance Relative to Firm Parent




Notes: For each percentile indicated on the horizontal axis, the vertical axis indicates the expected
long-run affiliate performance relative to the expected long-run parent performance. The solid line
computes the expected long-run affiliate performance using the evolution of performance in (13) and
the estimates in column 3 of Table 4. The dotted line uses the estimates in column 2 of Table 4,
which imposes the following parametric restrictions on equation (13): µp0 = µp1 = µb2 = µb3 = 0,
µa0 = µb0 , and µa1 = µb1 . Both the solid and the dotted lines compute the expected long-run
parent performance using the estimates in Table D.14. These estimates are combined with data on
R&D investment for all affiliate-years in the sample used to compute the estimates in Table 4.




                                                      44
    Figure 3: Distribution of Gross Return to Parent R&D (Without Extremes)




Notes: For each percentile indicated on the horizontal axis, the vertical axis indicates the long-run
gross return to the parent R&D investment (see (27)). The solid line computes the expected long-run
affiliate performance using the estimates in column 3 of Table 4. The dashed line uses the estimates
in column 2 of Table 4. The dotted line uses the estimates in columns 2 and 4 of Table 7. These
estimates are combined with calibrated values of (χn , χa , χp , δ) and data on R&D investment for
all affiliate-years in the sample used to compute the estimates in Table 4. We assume that δ = 0.9
and (χn , χa , χp ) = (1, 1, 1). The reported distributions exclude affiliates below the 5th and above
the 90th percentile. An analogous figure without censoring appears in Figure E.3 in Appendix E.




    Figure 4: Distribution of Gross Return to Parent R&D (Without Extremes):
                 Accounting for Affiliate Entry and Value-Added Growth




Notes: For each percentile indicated on the horizontal axis, the vertical axis indicates the long-
run gross return to the investment in R&D performed by U.S. parents (see (27)). All the three
lines use the estimates in column 3 of Table 4 and assume δ = 0.9. The three lines differ in the
calibrated values of (χn , χa , χp ). The solid line sets these three parameters to the 25th percentile
of their corresponding distribution. The dashed line sets them to the median of their corresponding
distribution. The dotted line sets them to the 75th percentile of their corresponding distribution. The
reported distributions exclude affiliates below the fifth percentile and above the ninetieth percentile.
An analogous figure without this censoring appears in Figure E.6 in Appendix E.




                                                        45
      Figure 5: Distribution of Affiliate Share of Gross Return to Parent R&D




Notes: For each percentile indicated on the horizontal axis, the vertical axis indicates the the share
of the long-run gross return to investment in R&D performed by U.S. parents that can be attributed
to affiliates. The solid line computes the expected long-run affiliate performance using the estimates
in column 3 of Table 4. The dashed line uses the estimates in column 2 of Table 4. The dotted
line uses the estimates reported in columns 2 and 4 of Table 7. These estimates are combined with
calibrated values of (χn , χa , χp , δ) and data on R&D investment for all affiliate-years in the sample
used to compute the estimates in Table 4. We assume that δ = 0.9 and (χn , χa , χp ) = (1, 1, 1).




                                                        46
Online Appendix for “Innovation in the Global Firm”


       L. Kamran Bilir                        Eduardo Morales
University of Wisconsin-Madison             Princeton University




                             May 25, 2018
Contents
A Data Sources                                                                                                                                                                        2

B Model and Estimation Strategy: Details and Alternatives                                                                                                                             4
  B.1 Value Added Function: Details and Limitations . . . . . . . .                                          .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .    4
  B.2 Sample Selection Bias . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                      .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .    6
  B.3 Nonlinear Evolution of Firm Performance . . . . . . . . . . .                                          .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .    7
  B.4 GMM Estimation: Details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                        .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .    7
  B.5 Returns to Scale: Estimates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                      .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .    8
  B.6 Intrafirm Trade: Model and Empirical Strategy . . . . . . . .                                          .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   10
  B.7 Alternative Estimation Approaches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                        .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   12
  B.8 Headquarters Innovation and Affiliate Performance . . . . . .                                          .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   17
  B.9 Innovation and the Headquarters Performance Advantage . .                                              .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   17
  B.10 Innovation Policy Effectiveness and the R&D Return . . . . .                                          .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   17

C Additional Estimates                                                                                                                                                               21
  C.1 Transfer Pricing . . . . . . . . . .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   21
  C.2 Labor Measurement . . . . . . .        .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   22
  C.3 Intrafirm Technology Licensing .       .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   22
  C.4 Technology Stability . . . . . . .     .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   22
  C.5 Heterogeneous Innovation Impact        .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   23
  C.6 Other Industries . . . . . . . . .     .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   23

D Extra Tables                                                                                                                                                                       24

E Extra Figures                                                                                                                                                                      41




                                                                             1
A     Data Sources
Multinational activity: Confidential data on U.S. multinational firms and their activity abroad is provided
by the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) through a sworn-status research arrangement. The data include
detailed financial and operating information for each foreign affiliate owned (at least a 10% share) by a U.S.
entity. In our estimation, we use information on the value added, labor (number of employees), capital (the
value of plant, property, and equipment, net of depreciation), research and development (R&D) spending,
R&D labor (number of R&D employees), and employee compensation corresponding, separately, to the U.S.
parent and each of its affiliates abroad. These variables were extracted from the BEA’s comprehensive data
files for each year, and then merged by parent and affiliate identification numbers to form a complete panel.
The dataset used in the estimation covers U.S. affiliates during 1989–2008.
     The measure of parent and affiliate-level value added used in our analysis is constructed by the BEA. This
measure follows the definition in Mataloni and Goldberg (1994) from the factor-cost side, in which value added
is employee compensation (wages and salaries plus employee benefits), plus profit-type returns (net income
plus income taxes plus depreciation, less capital gains and losses, less income from equity investments), plus
net interest paid (monetary interest paid plus imputed interest paid, less monetary interest received, less
imputed interest received), plus indirect business taxes (taxes other than income and payroll taxes plus
production royalty payments to governments, less subsidies received), plus capital consumption allowances
(depreciation).
     We measure affiliate-level capital as the value of plant, property, and equipment, net of depreciation
corresponding to the affiliate site. This value is reported directly to the BEA in benchmark years and in
each year immediately preceding a benchmark year. We therefore observe Kijt directly in 1989, 1993, 1994,
1998, 1999, 2003, and 2004. For all remaining years, we construct affiliate-level capital by combining Kijt
values with observed investment in physical capital (plant, property, and equipment) using the perpetual
inventory method and a depreciation rate of 5.9 percent, the physical capital depreciation rate found for
U.S. manufacturing firms in Nadiri and Prucha (1996). The BEA measure of plant, property, and equip-
ment includes land and natural resource rights owned; structures, machinery, equipment, special tools, and
other depreciable property; construction in progress; and capitalized tangible and intangible exploration and
development costs, but excludes other types of intangible assets, and land held for resale.
     Research and development expenditures are reported directly and include basic and applied research in
science and engineering, and the design and development of prototypes and processes, if the purpose of such
activity is to: 1) pursue a planned search for new knowledge, whether or not the search has reference to
a specific application; 2) apply existing knowledge to the creation of a new product or process, including
evaluation of use; or 3) apply existing knowledge to the employment of a present product or process. This
variable includes all costs incurred to support R&D, including R&D depreciation and overhead. The variable
excludes capital expenditures, routine product testing and quality control conducted during commercial
production, geological and geophysical exploration, market research and surveys, and legal patent work.
     All estimates in sections 5 and Appendix C arise from specifications that control for country-industry-
year fixed effects, but we nevertheless convert all variables originally expressed in U.S. dollar nominal values
to 2004 real terms using correction factors available from the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics.
     We estimate model parameters separately by industry. The baseline estimates presented in section 5 and
Appendix C correspond to multinational firms in the computer and office equipment industry (SIC 357). We
define the industry of each multinational corporation based on the 3-digit SIC sector of its U.S. parent; i.e.
for a parent that reports sales in a given 3-digit SIC sector, we extract all available observations for it and



                                                           2
each of its affiliates abroad during 1989–2008. We build separate datasets that incorporate manufacturing
affiliates, retail affiliates, and service affiliates, respectively. We exclude all remaining affiliates (e.g. finance,
insurance and agriculture) from our data. Appendix C.6 also reports results for two other three-digit SIC
industries: motor vehicles and motor vehicle equipment (SIC 371) and pharmaceutical drugs (SIC 283).52
      The data are cleaned prior to estimation. Observations are excluded if a) values are carried over or
imputed based on previous survey responses; b) the affiliate is exempt from reporting R&D expenditures.
Regarding b), the BEA requires only majority-owned and relatively large foreign affiliates of U.S. parent
firms to report R&D expenditures. The reporting threshold differs depending on the year, ranging between
$3 million in 1989 and 1994 to $50 million in 1999. Specifically, thresholds in nominal terms were $3 million
in 1989 and 1994, $15 million in the period 1990–1993, $20 million in 1995–1998, $25 million in 2004, $30
million in 2000–2003, $40 million in 2005–2008, and $50 million in 1999. We impose these year-specific
cutoffs to build the dataset used in our estimation.

Tax Havens: The identification of countries as tax havens is from Gravelle (2015). This list was prepared
by the U.S. Congressional Research Service and is similar to lists prepared by the Organization for Economic
Cooperation and Development (OECD) and the U.S. Government Accountability Office (GAO). The list of
countries classified as tax havens is: Andorra, Bahamas, Bahrain, Barbados, Bermuda, Costa Rica, Cyprus,
the Dominican Republic, Pacific Ocean French Islands, Indian Ocean French Islands, Gibraltar, Hong Kong,
Ireland, Jordan, Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Macau, Maldives, Malta, Mauritius, Monaco, the
Netherlands, the Netherlands Antilles, Panama, the Seychelles, Switzerland, Singapore, and British Overseas
Territories.


                                           APPENDIX REFERENCES

[1] Gravelle, Jane G. (2015). “Tax Havens: International Tax Avoidance and Tax Evasion.” Congressional
   Research Service Report, no. 7-5700, pp. 605-627.
[2] Mataloni, Raymond J. Jr., and Lee Goldberg. (1994). “Gross Product of U.S. Multinational
   Companies, 1977-2001.” Survey of Current Business, vol. 70, (February), pp. 42–63.
[3] Nadiri, M. Ishaq, and Ingmar Prucha. (1996). “Estimation of the Depreciation Rate of Physical
   and R&D Capital in the U.S. Total Manufacturing Sector.” Economic Inquiry, vol. 34, pp. 43–56.
[4] U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis. (2008). “U.S. Direct Investment Abroad: 2004 Final Benchmark
   Data.” Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, November 2008.




  52
      During the sample period, the BEA data switches from using SIC to using NAICS-based parent-firm and foreign-
affiliate industry classifications. We apply the U.S. Census Bureau concordance to match NAICS-based observations
to each of the SIC industries for which we estimate model parameters.


                                                               3
B       Model and Estimation Strategy: Details and Alternatives
B.1      Value Added Function: Details and Limitations
In Appendix B.1.1, we include a detailed derivation of the value-added function in (6). In Appendix B.1.2,
we show how the value-added function in (6) changes if one were to allow for untransmitted shocks in the
production function in (3).


B.1.1      Value Added Function: Derivation
Assume firm i determines the optimal quantity of material inputs used for production by affiliate j in period t
by maximizing the affiliate’s static profits with respect to Mijt . This maximization problem may be expressed
as follows

                 max{Yijt − Pnmij t Mijt } = max{Pijt Qijt − Pnmij t Mijt }
                 Mijt                             Mijt
                                                         1                               σ−1
                                            = max{Qnσij t Pnij t exp(ξijt (1 − 1/σ) Qijtσ − Pnmij t Mijt }.
                                                  Mijt

                                                                            ∗
Given the production function in (3), the optimal level of material inputs Mijt satisfies the following condition

                                 1                                                             (1−αm )(σ−1)     αm (σ−1)
                                                                                                                         −1
      Pnmij t = αm (1 − 1/σ)Qnσij t Pnij t exp((ξijt + ωijt )(1 − 1/σ))[H(Kijt , Lijt ; α)]         σ         Mijt  σ
                                                                                                                              .

Thus, assuming firms determine materials use optimally, the revenue function may be rewritten in logs as

                                            enij t + ι(1 − αm )h(kijt , lijt ; α) + ψijt ,
                                     yijt = κ

where
                                 (σ − 1)
                        ι=                  ,
                             σ − αm (σ − 1)
                                  h                                         σ            1        i
                        enij t = ι αm ln(αm (1 − 1/σ)) − αm pm
                        κ                                    nij t +           pnij t +     qnij t ,
                                                                           σ−1          σ−1
                        ψijt = ι(ωijt + ξijt ).

Because the translog function h(kijt , lijt ; α) is linear in α, we can also represent the revenue function as

                                           yijt = κ
                                                  enij t + h(kijt , lijt ; β) + ψijt ,

where β = αι(1 − αm ). Obtaining a similar expression for the value added function is straightforward. The
first order condition for materials is

                                                       ∗
                                              Pnmij t Mijt = αm (1 − 1/σ)Yijt ,                                               (B.1)

                                    ∗
which implies that, conditional on Mijt , value added is related to revenue as follows

                                            V A∗ijt = (1 − αm (1 − 1/σ)) Yijt .




                                                                    4
Value added (in logs) may thus be concisely represented as in (6),

                                        va∗ijt = κnij t + h(kijt , lijt ; β) + ψijt ,

where

                                        κnij t = ln(1 − αm (1 − 1/σ)) + κ
                                                                        enij t .


B.1.2      Value Added Function: Accounting for Untransmitted Shocks
Assume that the production function of affiliate j of firm i at period t is

                                                               αm
                              Qijt = (H(Kijt , Lijt ; α))1−αm Mijt exp(ωijt ) exp(νijt ),                          (B.2)

where H(·) is defined as in (4) and (5), Kijt , Lijt , Mijt and ωijt are defined as in section 3.2 and νijt is
a productivity shock that is unknown to the firm when determining its optimal input decisions at period t
(i.e. untransmited shock). Denoting the expectation conditional on the information that firm i has when
determining the input and output decisions of all its affiliates at period t as Et [·], the first order condition
for materials is

                                                  ∗
                                         Pnmij t Mijt = αm (1 − 1/σ)Et [Yijt ],                                    (B.3)

and the resulting expression for value added is

        V A∗ijt = Yijt − Pnmij t Mijt
               = Yijt − αm (1 − 1/σ)Et [Yijt ]
               = Pijt Qijt − αm (1 − 1/σ)Et [Pijt Qijt ]
                     1
                                                         1− 1                           1− 1
               = Qnσij t Pnij t exp[ξijt (1 − 1/σ)] × (Qijt σ − αm (1 − 1/σ)Et [Qijt σ ])
                     1
                                                                                                 ∗ αm (1−1/σ)
               = Qnσij t Pnij t exp[(ξijt + ωijt )(1 − 1/σ)][H(Kijt , Lijt ; α)](1−αm )(1−1/σ) (Mijt )        ×
               × exp[νijt (1 − 1/σ)] − αm (1 − 1/σ)Et exp[νijt (1 − 1/σ)] .
                                                                                  


Defining

                                             E ≡ Et exp[νijt (1 − 1/σ)] ,
                                                                      


we can simplify the expression for V A∗ijt as

                     1
        V A∗ijt = Qnσij t Pnij t exp[(ξijt + ωijt )(1 − 1/σ)][H(Kijt , Lijt ; α)](1−αm )(1−1/σ) (Mijt
                                                                                                  ∗ αm (1−1/σ)
                                                                                                      )        ×
               × (exp[νijt (1 − 1/σ)] − αm (1 − 1/σ)E).                                                            (B.4)

Note that this equation is not log-linear in the untransmitted shock νijt . Therefore, using this equation
to estimate the parameters of the value-added function would require imposing parametric assumptions
on the distribution of νijt . Given that any parametric assumption on the distribution of this unobserved
component is likely to be wrong and consequential for our estimates, and will make our estimation procedure
much more complex computationally (given the large set of market-year fixed effects to estimate), we opt
for not including untransmited shocks in our baseline model and account for them instead in the extension
discussed in Appendix B.7.2.


                                                                  5
B.2     Sample Selection Bias
Here, we discuss the impact of instantaneous entry and exit for the estimates resulting from the procedure
described in section 4.1. As described in this section, a necessary condition for consistency of our estimator
is the mean independence restriction in (22). To study the effect that instantaneous entry and exit would
have on the validity of this mean-independence condition, it is convenient to first rewrite the vector z ijt in
(23) in terms of a different set of covariates that contains the same information. From (10) and the definition
of vc
    aijt−1 as

                                                                2
                          aijt−1 ≡ vaijt−1 − β̂l lijt−1 − β̂ll lijt−1
                         vc                                           − β̂lk lijt−1 kijt−1 − ε̂ijt−1 ,

we can write

                                                                                2
                                                      aijt−1 − βk kijt−1 − βkk kijt−1
                                   ψijt−1 + κnij t = vc                               .

Plugging this equality into (21) we can thus rewrite the conditional expectation in (22) as

                E[ηijt |kijt−1 , ψijt−1 , rijt−1 , ri0t−1 , dijt−1 , di0t−1 , {dnij t }, j ∈ (Jit−1 ∩ Jit )] = 0.     (B.5)

Section 4.2 shows that, whether or not we assume that entry decisions are instantaneous, (B.5) implies

                     E[ηijt |kijt−1 , ψijt−1 , rijt−1 , ri0t−1 , dijt−1 , di0t−1 , {dnij t }, j ∈ Jit−1 ] = 0.        (B.6)

Conversely, if firm-i’s decision about affiliate j’s exit at period t is instantaneous, then the set Jit becomes
a function of Sit and, from (15), implicitly a function of kijt , κnij t , and ψijt . Furthermore, from (12) and
(13), we can rewrite ψijt as a function of ψijt−1 , rijt−1 , ri0t−1 , µnij t and ηijt . Therefore, in sum, the set
Jit becomes a function of all the elements in the conditioning set in (B.5) and ηijt . Therefore, the mean
independence condition in (B.5) does not hold in the case of instantaneous exit. Determining the direction
of the bias that instantaneous exit would cause in estimates computed according to the procedure described
in section 4.1 requires knowing when an affiliate leaves a firm.
     According to the firm optimization problem described in section 3, one may conjecture that the optimal
solution for the decision by firm i of having affiliate j incorporated at period t is characterized by a threshold
rule: there is a critical productivity level ψ ijt such that, if ψijt ≤ ψ ijt , affiliate j is not integrated in
multinational i at period t, and the opposite is true if ψijt ≥ ψ ijt . The threshold value ψ ijt will be a
function of all the elements of the state vector Sit other than ψijt . According to this conjecture, one may
rewrite (B.5) as

                    E[ηijt |kijt−1 , ψijt−1 , rijt−1 , ri0t−1 , dijt−1 , di0t−1 , {dnij t }, ψijt ≥ ψ̄ijt ] = 0.      (B.7)

By (12), ηijt is mean independent of all the elements in Sit−1 . Therefore, conditional on the selection rule
ψijt ≥ ψ̄ijt and on the full set of market-year fixed effects {dnij t }, ηijt is independent of kijt−1 , ψijt−1 , rijt−1 ,
ri0t−1 , dijt−1 , di0t−1 . Therefore, we can simplify (B.7) as

                                              E[ηijt |ψijt ≥ ψ̄ijt , {dnij t }] = 0.                                  (B.8)

From (12) and (13), we can further rewrite this expression as

             E[ηijt |µψ ψijt−1 + g(dijt−1 , rijt−1 , di0t−1 , ri0t−1 ; µ) + µnij t + ηijt ≥ ψ̄ijt , {dnij t }] = 0.   (B.9)



                                                                      6
Therefore, as long as the elements of µ are such that the elasticities of ψijt with respect to lagged performance
and parent and affiliate R&D are all positive, the higher these elasticities are, the lower ηijt must be so that
ψijt ≥ ψ̄ijt . This shows that, if the participation decision affecting the set of affiliates of firm i at period t
were instantaneous, the estimates of the elasticities of ψijt with respect to lagged performance and parent
and affiliate R&D obtained through the estimation procedure described in section 4.1 would be biased
towards zero. In this case, thus, our estimation procedure would underestimate both the persistence of firm
performance as well as the impact of parent and affiliate R&D.


B.3     Nonlinear Evolution of Firm Performance
Suppose that, instead of (13), we assume that

                 Et−1 [ψijt ] = µψ ψijt−1 + µψψ ψijt−1
                                                 2
                                                       + g(dijt−1 , rijt−1 , di0t−1 , ri0t−1 ; µ) + µnij t .             (B.10)

Combining (10), (12), and (B.10), we obtain

                                                                  2                                        2
                                      v aijt−1 − β̂k kijt − β̂kk kijt
     vaijt = h(kijt , lijt ; β) + µψ (c                                        v aijt−1 − β̂k kijt − β̂kk kijt
                                                                      ) + µψψ (c                               − κnij t−1 )2
          g(dijt−1 , rijt−1 , di0t−1 , ri0t−1 ; µ) + µnij t + uijt ,                                                     (B.11)

                                                                                                                    2
where uijt = ηijt + εijt , γnij t = µnij t + κnij t − µψ κnij t−1 , vc       aijt−1 ≡ vaijt−1 − β̂l lijt−1 − β̂ll lijt−1  −
β̂lk lijt−1 kijt−1 − ε̂ijt−1 and β̂l , β̂ll , β̂lk and ε̂ijt−1 denote estimates of βl , βll , βlk and εijt−1 . We explain in
section 4.1 the procedure we follow to compute β̂l , β̂ll , β̂lk and ε̂ijt−1 . Equation (B.11) is identical to (21)
when µψψ equals zero. As we discuss in section 4.1, we use (21) to derive moment conditions that identify
the parameter vector (βk , βkk , µψ , µ). Using (B.11) instead of (21) as the basis to derive moment conditions
that identify the parameter vector (βk , βkk , µψ , µ, µψψ ) requires however estimating also a large number of
market-year unobserved effects {κnij t−1 } that enter nonlinearly in the moment function and that, for our
purposes, are nuisance parameters. Performing this estimation is computationally very intensive.


B.4     GMM Estimation: Details
As described in section 4, we use a two-step estimator to compute the parameter vector of interest. In Step
1, we use a method of moments estimator to estimate (βl , βll , βlk ) and εijt for every i, j, and t. Given
these estimates, we use in Step 2 an optimal two-step Generalized Method of Moments (GMM) estimator
to estimate (βk , βkk ) and µ. We describe here in detail our estimator.

Step 1 Given the conditional moment in (20) we derive the following unconditional moments:
                                                                                                        
                                                                           1
      E           l
        (vaijt − wijt + log(βl + 2βll lijt + βlk kijt )) ×  lijt  × 1{j ∈ (Jit ∩ Jit−1 )}  = 0.
                                                                                           
                                                                                                                         (B.12)
                                                                       kijt

These three unconditional moments exactly identify the parameter vector (βl , βll , βlk ).

Step 2 Given the conditional moment in (22) and the definition of the vector z ijt in (23), we estimate
(βk , βkk ), µψ , and µ using the following unconditional moments:
                                                                   >
                                                      E[η̈ijt ⊗ Z̈ ijt ] = 0,                                            (B.13)




                                                                       7
where

                                          2                 2
            Z ijt ≡ (c
                     v aijt−1 , kijt−1 , kijt−1 , kijt−2 , kijt−2 , dijt−1 (1 − di0t−1 ), dijt−1 (1 − di0t−1 )rijt−1 ,
                    (1 − dijt−1 )di0t−1 , (1 − dijt−1 )di0t−1 ri0t−1 , dijt−1 di0t−1 , dijt−1 di0t−1 rijt−1 ,
                    dijt−1 di0t−1 r0t−1 , dijt−1 di0t−1 rijt−1 ri0t−1 ),                                                 (B.14)

and 0 is a vector of zeros with as many rows as elements are in the vector Z ijt . For any given random vector
xijt , we denote as ẍijt the vector of residuals from projecting all observations for which j ∈ (Jit−1 ∩ Jit ) on
a set of market-year fixed effects. All elements of the vector Z ijt are functions of the elements of the vector
z ijt in (23) and, thus, the conditional moment in (22) implies the unconditional moment in (B.29). We use
thirteen moment conditions to identify ten parameters and, thus, our moment conditions over-identify the
parameter vector of interest. We compute the optimal weighting matrix following Hansen (1982).

We account for the impact that estimation error in (β̂l , β̂ll , β̂lk ) and ε̂ijt has on our estimates (β̂k , β̂kk ), µ̂ψ ,
and µ̂ and, ultimately, on the average capital and R&D elasticities whose estimates we report in Table 4
by reporting bootstrap standard errors. Specifically, for each of the 500 bootstrap samples we generate, we
perform steps 1 and 2 described above and report the standard deviation across the bootstrap samples of
our estimates of the elasticities presented in Table 4. Computing these bootstrap standard errors is very
costly and, consequently, we compute them only for the estimates reported in Table 4.


B.5     Returns to Scale: Estimates
For each affiliate j of a firm i and period t, we define a measure of the returns to scale of j at t as

          ∂qijt   ∂qijt   ∂qijt
                +       +       = (αl + 2αll lijt + αlk kijt + αk + 2αkk kijt + αlk lijt )(1 − αm ) + αm .
          ∂lijt   ∂kijt   ∂mijt

In words, this expression indicates the growth in log output qijt arising from a small increase in log labor
lijt , log capital kijt , and log materials mijt .
       Computing a consistent estimate of our measure of returns to scale thus requires consistent estimates of
the elements of the parameter vector α entering the affiliate’s production function; see section 3.2 for details.
However, the estimation procedure described in section 4.1 does not provide estimates of the production
function parameters; it provides instead consistent estimates of the vector of value-added parameters β ≡
(β l , β ll , β k , β kk , β lk ). As indicated in (8) and (9), recovering consistent estimates of the parameter vector
α using consistent estimates of the parameter vector β requires additionally obtaining consistent estimates
of αm and σ. Specifically, given consistent estimates of β, αm and σ, we can compute a consistent estimate
of the parameter vector α as

                                                          σ̂ − α̂m (σ̂ − 1)
                                                  α̂ =                      β̂.
                                                         (1 − α̂m )(σ̂ − 1)

We describe here the procedure we follow to recover consistent estimates of αm and σ.

Estimation of αm . In order to compute a consistent estimate of αm , we use the derivative of the profit
function with respect to materials. Specifically, assuming that materials are a flexible and static input, we
can write the first order condition for materials as
                                                                   m
                                                                 Wijt
                                                         αm =      ∗ ,
                                                                 Yijt


                                                                     8
        ∗
where Yijt denotes the sales revenue of affiliate j of firm i at period t.
                                                                                                 m
    As discussed in section 2.1, we do not observe a direct measure of expenditure in materials Wijt . Instead,
we construct such a measure as the difference between observed measures of sales revenue and value added.
Using these measures and accounting for multiplicative measurement error in value added (as in section 3.3)
and in sales revenue, we can rewrite αm as a function of observed measures of sales and value added:

                                          Yijt exp(−εyijt ) − V Aijt exp(−εijt )
                                   αm =                                          ,
                                                    Yijt exp(−εyijt )

                ∗
where Yijt ≡ Yijt exp(εyijt ) and V Aijt ≡ V A∗ijt exp(εyijt ) denote observed revenue and value added, respec-
tively. Doing simple algebra, we can rewrite this expression as

                                                        V Aijt exp(−εijt )
                                          1 − αm =
                                                         Yijt exp(−εyijt )

and, taking logs on both sides of this equation, we obtain

                                    ln(1 − αm ) = vaijt − yijt + εyijt − εijt .

The mean independence condition in (11) implies that the unconditional expectation of the measurement
error in value added is equal to zero. Imposing an analogous assumption on the unconditional expectation
of the measurement error in sales revenue,

                                              E[εyijt ] = E[εijt ] = 0,                                 (B.15)

we compute a consistent estimate of αm using the sample analogue of the following moment condition

                                       E[ln(1 − αm ) − vaijt + yijt ] = 0.                              (B.16)

The following table contains estimated values α̂m for different sets of affiliates:

                                 Table B.1: Materials’ Share in Production

                      Industry             Affiliates                                    α̂m
                      Computers            Manufacturing Affiliates       - All          0.725
                                           Manufacturing Affiliates       - Vertical     0.725
                                           Manufacturing Affiliates       - Horizontal   0.732
                                           Retail Affiliates                             0.773
                                           Services Affiliates                           0.591
                                           Parent                                        0.661
                      Motor Vehicles       Manufacturing Affiliates       - All          0.706
                      Pharmaceuticals      Manufacturing Affiliates       - All          0.703


Estimation of σ. In order to estimate the elasticity of substitution σ, we follow the approach implemented,
among others, in Das, Roberts and Tybout (2007) and Antràs, Fort and Tintelnot (2017). Given the
assumption that all firms are monopolistically competitive in their output markets (see section 3.2), it will
be true that

                                                ∗     v        1 ∗
                                              Yijt − Cijt =     Y ,
                                                               σ ijt


                                                               9
        v
where Cijt  denotes the total variable costs that affiliate j of firm i incurred at period t to obtain the sales
          ∗
revenue Yijt . Assuming that the only variable inputs are materials Mijt and labor Lijt , we can rewrite the
equation above as

                                                                1 ∗
                                             V A∗ijt − Wijt
                                                        l
                                                            =    Y ,
                                                                σ ijt
and, further allowing for measurement error in both sales revenue and value added, we can rewrite it as

                                                                1
                                                        l
                                  V Aijt exp(−εijt ) − Wijt =     Yijt exp(−εyijt ).                        (B.17)
                                                                σ
Imposing the mean zero assumptions in (B.15) is not enough to derive a moment condition that identifies
σ. To do so, we impose the additional assumption that sales revenue is measured without error (εyijt = 0 for
all i, j, and t). Given this restriction and doing simple algebra, we can express (B.17) as

                                                                     l
                                      vaijt − εijt = ln((1/σ)Yijt + Wijt ).

Imposing the assumption that E[εijt ] = 0, we compute a consistent estimate of σ using the sample analogue
of the following moment condition

                                      E[ln((1/σ)Yijt + Wijt
                                                        l
                                                            ) − vaijt ] = 0.                                (B.18)

The following table contains estimated values σ̂ for different sets of affiliates:

                              Table B.2: Demand Elasticity of Substitution

                      Industry            Affiliates                                     σ̂
                      Computers           Manufacturing Affiliates      - All           8.826
                                          Manufacturing Affiliates      - Vertical      8.916
                                          Manufacturing Affiliates      - Horizontal    8.866
                                          Retail Affiliates                            14.080
                                          Services Affiliates                           6.984
                                          Parent                                       14.630
                      Motor Vehicles      Manufacturing Affiliates      - All           9.402
                      Pharmaceuticals     Manufacturing Affiliates      - All           6.563



B.6     Intrafirm Trade: Model and Empirical Strategy
The baseline model presented in section 3 assumes away affiliate imports from the parent that are documented
in section 2.2. We extend here our baseline ‘horizontal’ model to account for these imports. As our data are
silent about the nature of these imports (e.g. they may be material inputs or capital inputs), we impose as
few assumptions as possible on how these enter in the affiliate’s production function and how their observed
quantities are determined. The estimation results are reported in section 5.4.
     To account for affiliates’ imports from their parents, we generalize the production function in (3) and
assume that, to produce output Qijt , affiliate j combines capital Kijt , labor Lijt , material inputs sourced from
third-party suppliers Mijt , and other inputs sourced from their parent Oijt using the following production
technology

                                                                      αm
                              Qijt = (H(Kijt , Lijt , Oijt ; α))1−αm Mijt exp(ωijt )                        (B.19)


                                                            10
where, abusing notation, we now define H(·) and α as

             H(Kijt , Lijt , Oijt ; α) = exp(h(kijt , lijt , oijt ; α)),                                                                 (B.20)
                                                                      2          2
                 h(kijt , lijt , oijt ; α) ≡ αl lijt + αk kijt + αll lijt + αkk kijt + αlk lijt kijt + αo oijt + αoo o2ijt
                                          + αlo lijt oijt + αko kijt oijt ,                                                              (B.21)
                                       α = (αl , αk , αs , αll , αkk , αoo , αlk , αlo , αko ).                                          (B.22)

All other assumptions in section 3.2 apply here. Therefore, following analogous steps as in Appendix B.1,
we can derive a value-added function analogous to that in (6) as

                                             va∗ijt = κnij t + h(kijt , lijt , oijt ; β) + ψijt ,                                        (B.23)

where the expressions for β and ι are the same as in (8) and (9), with the function h(·) and the vector α now
defined as in (B.21) and (B.22), respectively. All assumptions on the evolution of affiliates’ performance and
the firm’s optimizing behavior described in sections 3.4 and 3.5 apply here. Additionally, we allow firm i’s
decision on the optimal value of Oijt for every affiliate j and period t to partly depend on the performance
level of each affiliate ψijt .
     The estimation of the parameter vectors β and µ follows steps analogous to those described in section
4. In the first step, we use the first order condition with respect to labor to estimate (βl , βll , βlk , βlo ):

                    E[vaijt − wijt
                               l
                                   + log(βl + 2βll lijt + βlk kijt + βlo oijt )|lijt , kijt , oijt , j ∈ Jit ] = 0.                      (B.24)

This conditional moment does not take a stand on whether the imports that an affiliate receives from its
parent are static or dynamic. Specifically, we estimate (βl , βll , βlk , βlo ) using the unconditional moments
                                                                                                                            
                                                                                      1
                                                                                 l                                          
 E           l
   (vaijt − wijt + log(βl + 2βll lijt + βlk kijt + βlo oijt )) × 
                                                                                    ijt
                                                                                            × 1{j ∈ (Jit ∩ Jit−1 )}
                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                = 0. (B.25)
                                                                                                                               
                                                                                 kijt                                       
                                                                                   oijt

With the estimates (β̂l , β̂ll , β̂lk , β̂lo ) in hand, we recover an estimate of the measurement error εijt for each
                                                            l
firm i, affiliate j, and period t: ε̂ijt = vaijt −wijt         +log(β̂l +2β̂ll lijt + β̂lk kijt + β̂lo oijt ). In the second step, using
                                                                                                     2
                                                                    aijt ≡ vaijt − β̂l lijt − β̂ll lijt
the estimates (β̂l , β̂ll , β̂lk , β̂lo ) and ε̂ijt , we construct vc                                    − β̂lk lijt kijt − β̂lo lijt oijt − ε̂ijt
and derive the following moment condition:

                                             E[ηijt |z ijt , {dnij t }, j ∈ (Jit−1 ∩ Jit )] = 0,                                         (B.26)

where ηijt is now defined as

                                               2
                         aijt − βk kijt − βkk kijt
                 ηijt = vc                         − βo oijt − βoo o2ijt − βko kijt oijt
                                                         2
                       − µψ (c
                             v aijt−1 − βk kijt−1 − βkk kijt−1 − βo oijt−1 − βoo o2ijt−1 − βko kijt−1 oijt−1 )
                       − g(dijt−1 , rijt−1 , di0t−1 , ri0t−1 ; µ) − γnij t ,                                                             (B.27)

and the vector of instruments zijt is now defined as

                         z ijt ≡ (c
                                  v aijt−1 , kijt−1 , kijt−2 , oijt−1 , oijt−2 , dijt−1 , rijt−1 , di0t−1 , ri0t−1 ).                    (B.28)




                                                                            11
Using (B.26), (B.27), and (B.28), we estimate (βk , βkk , βo , βoo ), µψ , and µ using a GMM estimator, control-
ling for the market-year fixed effects {dnij t } using the Frisch-Waugh-Lovell theorem. Specifically, for any
given random vector xijt , denoting as ẍijt the vector of residuals from projecting all values of xijt for which
j ∈ (Jit−1 ∩ Jit ) on a set of market-year fixed effects, we estimate the parameter vectors (βk , βkk , βo , βoo ),
µψ , and µ using an optimal two-step GMM estimator (Hansen 1982) on the following moment conditions
                                                                      >
                                                         E[η̈ijt
                                                             0
                                                                 ⊗ Z̈ ijt ] = 0,                                                 (B.29)

where

                               2                 2
 Z ijt ≡ (c
          v aijt−1 , kijt−1 , kijt−1 , kijt−2 , kijt−2 , oijt−1 , o2ijt−1 , oijt−2 , o2ijt−2 , kijt−1 oijt−1 , kijt−2 oijt−2 ,
         dijt−1 (1 − di0t−1 ), dijt−1 (1 − di0t−1 )rijt−1 , (1 − dijt−1 )di0t−1 , (1 − dijt−1 )di0t−1 ri0t−1 , dijt−1 di0t−1 ,
         dijt−1 di0t−1 rijt−1 , dijt−1 di0t−1 r0t−1 , dijt−1 di0t−1 rijt−1 ri0t−1 ),

and 0 is a vector of zeros with as many rows as elements are in Z ijt .


B.7     Alternative Estimation Approaches
We describe in Appendix sections B.7.1 and B.7.2 two alternative estimation approaches that relax some of
the assumptions imposed in sections 3 and 4. The approach in Appendix B.7.1 implements a dynamic linear
panel data estimator. The approach in Appendix B.7.2 implements an estimation approach à la Ackerberg,
Caves, and Frazer (2015). The results corresponding to the two estimation approaches described here are
discussed in section 5.5.
      From a theoretical standpoint, the main advantage of the two estimation procedures discussed in this
appendix section is twofold. First, they do not require assuming that affiliates are monopolistically com-
petitive and, thus, allow markups to be heterogeneous across affiliates and to endogenously react to the
firm’s R&D investments. Second, they do not require specifying the first order condition that determines
the optimal labor usage of each affiliate in each time period and, thus, are compatible with models in which
this optimal labor usage by an affiliate depends on labor hiring decisions that the affiliate took in the past
(labor as a dynamic input) or that other production sites within the multinational firm are taking (allowing
for interdependencies across firm sites in their labor input decisions).
      Additionally, the estimation procedure in Appendix B.7.2 allows for untransmitted shocks to the af-
filiates’ production functions. Conversely, relative to the estimation procedure described in section 4, it
imposes two additional assumptions: (a) the output measure (sales revenue) of each affiliate, firm and year
is measured without error; (b) there is no heterogeneity across affiliates in their demand or quality shock
(i.e. ξijt = 0 for all i, j, and t).
      To deal with the fact that materials’ expenditure is unobserved without assuming that firms are mo-
nopolistically competitive in output markets, we substitute the production function in (3) by an alternative
production function that is Leontief in materials:

                                 Qijt = min{H(Kijt , Lijt ; α) exp(ωijt ), Mijt )} exp(νijt ).                                   (B.30)

This production function has been suggested by Ackerberg, Caves, and Frazer (2015) and Gandhi, Navarro
and Rivers (2016). The function H(·), the variables Kijt , Lijt , Mijt and ωijt , and the parameter vector α
are defined as in section 3.2. The variable νijt captures an “untransmitted” productivity shock that is not
observable (or predictable) by firms before making their input and output decisions at period t. While the
approach described in Appendix B.7.1 requires assuming that νijt = 0 for every i, j and t, the approach in


                                                                          12
Appendix B.7.2 only requires assuming that

                                  E[νijt |{kijt−b , lijt−b , mijt−b , Jit−b }∞
                                                                             b=0 ] = 0,                  (B.31)

where, as in the main text, lower-case Latin letters denote the logarithm of the upper-case variable. Therefore,
the untransmitted shock νijt is assumed to be mean independent of all observed production inputs of affiliate
j of firm i in both period t and in any period prior to t, as well as of all dummy variables capturing which
affiliates belong to firm i in the same time periods. This is consistent with the interpretation of νijt as
a productivity shock that is unpredictable to the firm at period t and in any period prior to t, but that
becomes observed ex post. Consequently, we do not rule out that νijt is correlated with decisions of the firm
in periods subsequent to t.
      From (B.30), we can rewrite output as

                                   Qijt = H(Kijt , Lijt ; α) exp(ωijt ) exp(νijt ).                      (B.32)

Given (2), we derive the inverse demand function
                                                  1                 1
                               Pijt = (Qnij t ) σ Pnij t (Qijt )− σ exp[ξijt (σ − 1)/σ],

and an expression for sales revenue as a function of Qijt :
                                                           1             σ−1
                         Yijt = Pijt Qijt = (Qnij t ) σ Pnij t (Qijt )    σ    exp[ξijt (σ − 1)/σ].      (B.33)

Combining this expression with that in (B.32), we obtain an expression for sales revenue as a function of the
observed production inputs:

                               yijt = κ0nij t + h(kijt , lijt ; β 0 ) + ψijt
                                                                         0
                                                                             + ι0 νijt + εyijt ,         (B.34)

where, as in section 3.3, κ0nij t denotes a function of the price index Pnij t and demand level Qnij t in market
nij at t; h(·) is the translog function of capital and labor inputs in (5); εyijt denotes measurement error in
the sales revenue measure yijt ; and,

                                                  0
                                                 ψijt ≡ ι0 (ωijt + ξijt ),                               (B.35)
                                                       0       0
                                                      β ≡ ι α,                                           (B.36)
                                                      ι0 ≡ (σ − 1)/σ.                                    (B.37)

We use primes to differentiate the variables entering (B.34) from the analogous variables entering (10). The
revenue equation in (B.34) is a generalization of the “value added” production function in Ackerberg, Caves,
and Frazer (2015): it is a translog function of capital and labor (instead of Cobb-Douglas) and the constant
term is market-year specific (instead of common across all observations in the sample).
    While the approach in Appendix B.7.2 requires assuming that εyijt = 0 for every i, j and t, the approach
in Appendix B.7.1 only requires assuming that

                                 E[εyijt |{kijt−b , lijt−b , mijt−b , Jit−b }∞
                                                                             b=−∞ ] = 0.                 (B.38)

According to this expression, the measurement error in sales revenue εyijt at period t is assumed to be mean
independent of all observed production inputs of affiliate j of firm i in any period (both prior and subsequent
to t), as well as of all dummy variables capturing which affiliates belong to firm i in the same time periods.


                                                                   13
                                                 0
    The sales revenue performance index ψijt        defined in (B.35) differs from the value-added performance
index ψijt defined in (7) to the extent that the constant ι0 defined in (B.37) differs from the constant ι defined
in (9). Specifically, both would be the same if and only if αm = 0 in (3). We assume that the sales revenue
                       0
performance index ψijt   of firm i’s affiliate j evolves over time according to a stochastic process analogous to
that in (12) and (13). Specifically:

                                                       0
                                                      ψijt = Et−1 [ψijt
                                                                    0        0
                                                                        ] + ηijt ,                                             (B.39)

where

      Et−1 [ψijt
             0
                 ] = µ0ψ ψijt−1
                          0
                                + dijt−1 (1 − di0t−1 )(µ0a0 + µ0a1 rijt−1 ) + (1 − dijt−1 )di0t−1 (µ0p0 + µ0p1 ri0t−1 )
                    + dijt−1 di0t−1 (µ0b0 + µ0b1 rijt−1 + µ0b2 ri0t−1 + µ0b3 rijt−1 ri0t−1 ) + µ0nij t .                       (B.40)

The variables dijt−1 , rijt−1 , di0t−1 and ri0t−1 are defined as in section 3.4. We analogously define the
parameter vector µ0 = (µ0ψ , µ0a0 , µ0a1 , µ0p0 , µ0p1 , µ0b0 , µ0b1 , µ0b2 , µ0b3 ).


B.7.1       Dynamic Panel Approach
Assuming that νijt = 0 for all firms, affiliates and years, and combining the expression for sales revenue in
(B.34) and the expression for the evolution of sales revenue performance in (B.39) and (B.40), we can define
a random variable

                  u0ijt ≡ yijt − βl0 lijt − βll0 lijt
                                                  2
                                                      − βk0 kijt − βkk
                                                                    0   2
                                                                       kijt    0
                                                                            − βlm lijt kijt
                       − µ0ψ (yijt−1 − βl0 lijt−1 − βll0 lijt−1
                                                          2
                                                                − βk0 kijt−1 − βkk
                                                                                0   2
                                                                                   kijt−1    0
                                                                                          − βlm lijt−1 kijt−1 )
                       − g(dijt−1 , rijt−1 , di0t−1 , ri0t−1 ; µ0 ) − γn0 ij t ,                                               (B.41)

such that

                                                  u0ijt = ηijt
                                                           0
                                                               + (εyijt − µ0ψ εyijt−1 ).                                       (B.42)

The assumption on the distribution of εyijt in (B.38) and the definition of ηijt
                                                                             0
                                                                                 in (B.39) imply that

                                          E[u0ijt |z ijt , {dnij t }, j ∈ (Jit−1 ∩ Jit )] = 0,                                 (B.43)

where the vector of instruments z ijt is now defined as

                        z ijt ≡ (yijt−2 , kijt−1 , kijt−2 , lijt−1 , lijt−2 , dijt−1 , rijt−1 , di0t−1 , ri0t−1 ).             (B.44)

For any given random vector xijt , denoting as ẍijt the vector of residuals from projecting all values for which
j ∈ (Jit−1 ∩ Jit ) on a set of market-year fixed effects, we estimate the parameter vectors β 0 and µ0 using an
optimal two-step GMM estimator (Hansen 1982) and the following moment conditions
                                                                       >
                                                         E[ü0ijt ⊗ Z̈ ijt ] = 0,                                              (B.45)

where

                               2                 2                 2                 2
 Z ijt ≡ (c
          v aijt−1 , kijt−1 , kijt−1 , kijt−2 , kijt−2 , lijt−1 , lijt−1 , lijt−2 , lijt−2 , lijt−1 kijt−1 , lijt−2 kijt−2 ,
         dijt−1 (1 − di0t−1 ), dijt−1 (1 − di0t−1 )rijt−1 , (1 − dijt−1 )di0t−1 , (1 − dijt−1 )di0t−1 ri0t−1 , dijt−1 di0t−1 ,


                                                                           14
         dijt−1 di0t−1 rijt−1 , dijt−1 di0t−1 r0t−1 , dijt−1 di0t−1 rijt−1 ri0t−1 ),

and 0 is a vector of zeros with as many rows as elements are in Z ijt .


B.7.2      Conditional Input Demand Approach
We apply here the approach in Ackerberg, Caves, and Frazer (2015) to our specific setting. As indicated
above, this procedure requires assuming that ξijt = εyijt = 0 for all i, j, and t.
    Ackerberg, Caves, and Frazer (2015) build a proxy for the productivity term ωijt by relying on a demand
function for material inputs that conditions on the observed values of all other factors of production (including
labor). Given the production function in (B.32), the optimal consumption of materials is such that:

                                              Mijt = H(Kijt , Lijt ; α) exp(ωijt ).                                         (B.46)

As discussed in Ackerberg, Caves, and Frazer (2015) and Gandhi, Navarro and Rivers (2016), this equality
will hold even if neither labor nor capital are flexible inputs. We do not observe materials usage, Mijt ,
                                     m
but rather materials expenditure, Wijt ≡ Pnmij t Mijt . However, using the assumption that all firms within a
market-year pair face the same materials price (see section 3.2), we can use (B.46) to write

                                            m
                                           Wijt = Pnmij t H(Kijt , Lijt ; α) exp(ωijt ).                                    (B.47)

From this equation, we can define a proxy for productivity ωijt as a function of total expenditure in materials,
a market-year effect that accounts for the materials price, and labor and capital usage as

                                                     m
                                             ωijt = wijt − pm
                                                            nij t − h(kijt , lijt ; α).                                     (B.48)

Furthermore, under the assumption that ξijt = 0 for all i, j, and t, we can multiply both sides of this
equation by the constant ι0 defined in (B.37) to obtain a proxy for performance ψijt
                                                                                 0
                                                                                     ,

                                            0                                            0
                                           ψijt = ι0 wijt
                                                      m
                                                          − ι0 pm
                                                                nij t − h(kijt , lijt ; β ),                                (B.49)

where β 0 is defined in (B.36).
    Relying again on the assumption that ξijt = 0 for all i, j, and t and combining the expressions for sales
revenue in (B.34), the expression for the evolution of performance in (B.39) and (B.40), and the proxy for
performance in (B.49), we can write

         0
        ηijt + ι0 νijt + εyijt = yijt − βl0 lijt − βll0 lijt
                                                         2
                                                             − βk0 kijt − βkk
                                                                           0   2
                                                                              kijt    0
                                                                                   − βlm lijt kijt
                              − µ0ψ (ι0 wijt−1
                                         m
                                               − βl0 lijt−1 − βll0 lijt−1
                                                                    2
                                                                          − βk0 kijt−1 − βkk
                                                                                          0   2
                                                                                             kijt−1    0
                                                                                                    − βlm lijt−1 kijt−1 )
                              − g(dijt−1 , rijt−1 , di0t−1 , ri0t−1 ; µ0 ) − γn00ij t ,                                     (B.50)

where each γn00ij t just denotes a generic market-year specific term.
    As indicated in section 2, we do not observe directly a measure of materials expenditures, but rather
            m                                                                m
compute wijt−1      as the (log) difference between sales and value added: wijt−1  = log(Yijt−1 − V Aijt−1 ).
Multiplicative measurement error in sales and value added would thus be problematic, as it would imply
      m
that wijt−1 is measured with error and that this measurement error is not log additive. Therefore, we assume
here that both sales and value added are measured without error: εijt = εyijt = 0 for all affiliates j of every




                                                                        15
multinational firm i in any period t. Therefore, we can define a random variable

                u00ijt ≡ yijt − βl0 lijt − βll0 lijt
                                                 2
                                                     − βk0 kijt − βkk
                                                                   0   2
                                                                      kijt    0
                                                                           − βlm lijt kijt
                      − µ0ψ (ι0 wijt−1
                                 m
                                       − βl0 lijt−1 − βll0 lijt−1
                                                            2
                                                                  − βk0 kijt−1 − βkk
                                                                                  0   2
                                                                                     kijt−1    0
                                                                                            − βlm lijt−1 kijt−1 )
                      − g(dijt−1 , rijt−1 , di0t−1 , ri0t−1 ; µ0 ) − γn00ij t ,                                              (B.51)

such that

                                                         u00ijt = ηijt
                                                                   0
                                                                       + ι0 νijt .                                           (B.52)

The assumption on νijt in (B.31) and the definition of ηijt in (B.39) imply that

                                          E[u00ijt |z ijt , {dnij t }, j ∈ (Jit−1 ∩ Jit )] = 0,                              (B.53)

where the vector of instruments z ijt is now defined as

                                  m
                        z ijt ≡ (wijt−1 , kijt−1 , kijt−2 , lijt−1 , lijt−2 , dijt−1 , rijt−1 , di0t−1 , ri0t−1 ).           (B.54)

For any given random vector xijt , denoting as ẍijt the vector of residuals from projecting all values for which
j ∈ (Jit−1 ∩ Jit ) on a set of market-year fixed effects, we estimate the parameter vectors β 0 and µ0 using an
optimal two-step GMM estimator (Hansen 1982) and the following moment conditions
                                                                       >
                                                         E[ü00ijt ⊗ Z̈ ijt ] = 0,                                           (B.55)

where

           m                 2                 2                 2                 2
 Z ijt ≡ (wijt−1 , kijt−1 , kijt−1 , kijt−2 , kijt−2 , lijt−1 , lijt−1 , lijt−2 , lijt−2 , lijt−1 kijt−1 , lijt−2 kijt−2 ,
         dijt−1 (1 − di0t−1 ), dijt−1 (1 − di0t−1 )rijt−1 , (1 − dijt−1 )di0t−1 , (1 − dijt−1 )di0t−1 ri0t−1 , dijt−1 di0t−1 ,
         dijt−1 di0t−1 rijt−1 , dijt−1 di0t−1 r0t−1 , dijt−1 di0t−1 rijt−1 ri0t−1 ),

and 0 is a vector of zeros with as many rows as elements are in Z ijt .
    In summary, the only difference between the estimation procedures described in Appendix sections B.7.1
and B.7.2 is that the former one uses lagged sales revenue, yijt−1 , in the moment function and the latter one
                                       m
uses total expenditure in materials, wijt−1  , instead.
    The advantage of the approach in Appendix B.7.2 is that the error term in the moment function, u00ijt ,
does not depend on the untransmitted shock at t − 1, νijt−1 , and, consequently, even if this untransmitted
shock is non-zero, the estimator defined in (B.55) is not affected by sample selection bias although data only
on affiliates j such that j ∈ (Jit−1 ∩ Jit ) is used. More precisely, while the mean independence condition
in (B.31) guarantees that νijt−1 and Jit−1 are mean independent, it does not rule out that firm i takes
into account νijt−1 when determining Jit . Therefore, while the moment condition in (B.53) is valid in the
presence of untransmitted shocks, this would not the case for the moment condition in (B.43) if we had not
previously assumed that these untransmitted shocks are always equal to zero.
    The advantage of the approach in Appendix B.7.1 is that it does not use data on materials’ expenditure
by affiliate and, thus, does not require imposing assumptions on how accurate our measure of affiliates’
expenditure in this input are. Furthermore, it is compatible with the presence of non-zero demand or
product quality shocks ξijt .




                                                                           16
B.8     Headquarters Innovation and Affiliate Performance
To evaluate the contribution of firm-i parent innovation to the long-run performance of its affiliate j, we
use information on the levels of innovation, ri0t and rijt , that prevail in the firm during a base period t.
Supposing these base-year levels are held constant, the expected long-run performance of j is

                          ψij ≡ E lim ψijs ri0t , rijt
                                                      
                                    s→∞
                                X                   1
                              =      µs−t
                                      ψ µnij s +         g(dijt−1 , rijt−1 , di0t−1 , ri0t−1 ; µ),                   (B.56)
                                s>t
                                                 1 − µψ

where ri0t and rijt are observable, and with Et−1 [ψijt ] defined as in (13) and g(dijt−1 , rijt−1 , di0t−1 , ri0t−1 ; µ)
as in (14). In order to derive (B.56) we have applied E[ηijs |rijt , ri0t ] = 0 for all s > t, as implied by (12).
     The long-run performance of affiliate j of firm i in the case in which parent R&D is zero and affiliate
R&D remains at its period-t level yields
                                                 X                      1
                                      ψij,r0 =         µs−t
                                                        ψ µnij s +          g(rijt , 0),
                                                 s>t
                                                                     1 − µψ

and we assess the contribution of parent innovation by comparing the distributions of ψij and ψij,r0 across
multinational firm affiliates. Note that the difference between ψij and ψij,r0 does not depend on the set of
fixed effects {µnij t }.


B.9     Innovation and the Headquarters Performance Advantage
To compute the long-run performance ψij of affiliate j of a multinational i, we use the expression in (B.56)
above. From (25), the expected long-run productivity of the parent firm of multinational i is

                                                                   1
               ψi0 = E lim ψi0s ri0t =
                                    X s−t
                                       µ̃ψ µni0 t +                     ga (di0t−1 , ri0t , di−0t−1 , ri−0t ; µ̃),   (B.57)
                         s→∞
                                             s>t
                                                                1 − µ̃ψ

where ri0t and ri−0t are observable, and ga (di0t−1 , ri0t , di−0t−1 , ri−0t ; µ̃) ≡ Et−1 [ψi0t ] − µ̃ψ ψi0t−1 − µni0 t with
Et−1 [ψi0t ] defined as in (25). Comparing (B.56) and (B.57), one can see that the difference in performance
between parents and affiliates will depend on the market-year unobserved exogenous factors that affect either
the evolution of the performance of the parent, µni0 t , or the evolution of performance for each affiliate j,
µnij t . Being able to identify these parameters would require data on the price index, Pnij t , the quantity
index, Qnij t , and the price of materials, Pnmij t , in every market and year in which either the parent or an
affiliate operates. Such data is not available to us; therefore, Figure 2 and Figure E.2 in Appendix E report
the distribution of the performance of every affiliate relative to its parent that is exclusively due to the
distribution of R&D spending within the multinational firm.


B.10      Innovation Policy Effectiveness and the R&D Return
Here we derive the expression for the gross returns to parent R&D investment under the assumption that
the number of affiliates of each multinational firm, the value added of the parent and, for each affiliate, its
value added all grow at a constant rate (which may be zero). Conversely, we assume that R&D spending
remains constant at period-t levels.
    First, taking into account that the R&D investment performed by the parent at period t only affects the
future value added of affiliate j through its impact on period t + 1 performance, Ψijt+1 = exp(ψijt+1 ), we




                                                                 17
can rewrite the gross return term GRi0t in (26) as

                                                    ∂V A∗ijs
                           X X                                
             GRi0t = Et                     δ s−t
                            s>t j∈Jis
                                                     ∂Ri0t
                                                    ∂Ψijt+1 ∂V A∗ijs
                           X X                                           
                    = Et                    δ s−t
                            s>t j∈Jis
                                                     ∂Ri0t ∂Ψijt+1
                                                                ∂Ψijs ∂V A∗ijs
                           X X                                                     
                                                s−t ∂Ψijt+1
                    = Et                    δ
                            s>t j∈Jis
                                                     ∂Ri0t     ∂Ψijt+1 ∂Ψijs
                           X               h ∂Ψ            ∂Ψi0s ∂V A∗i0s   X ∂Ψijt+1 ∂Ψijs ∂V A∗ijs i
                    = Et              s−t          i0t+1
                                  δ                                        +
                            s>t
                                                ∂Ri0t      ∂Ψi0t+1 ∂Ψi0s        ∂Ri0t ∂Ψijt+1 ∂Ψijs
                                                                                   j∈Jis
                                                                                    j6=0

                                                                     V A∗i0s                    V A∗ijs i
                           X               h ∂ψ                               X ∂ψijt+1                 
                    = Et
                                                  i0t+1
                                  δ s−t                    µ̃s−t−1
                                                             ψ               +           µs−t−1           ,         (B.58)
                            s>t
                                                ∂ri0t                 Ri0t        ∂ri0t ψ        Ri0t
                                                                                j∈Jis
                                                                                 j6=0


where δ denotes the discount factor, the second equality applies the chain rule, the third equality differentiates
between the impact of parent R&D on the parent itself and all its affiliates, and the fourth equality uses the
fact that, for any s ≤ t + 1,

                      ∂Ψijt+1       ∂ψijt+1 Ψijt+1
                                  =                   ,                                     j = 0, . . . , Jis ,
                       ∂Ri0t          ∂ri0t Ri0t
                       ∂Ψi0s                  Ψi0s
                                  = µ̃s−t−1
                                      ψ             ,
                      ∂Ψi0t+1                Ψi0t+1
                       ∂Ψijs                  Ψijs
                                  = µs−t−1
                                      ψ             ,                                       j = 1, . . . , Jis ,
                      ∂Ψijt+1                Ψijt+1
                      ∂V A∗ijs      V A∗ijs
                                  =         ,                                               j = 0, . . . , Jis .
                       ∂Ψijs          Ψijs

Furthermore, assuming the specifications of the stochastic process of productivity given by (13), (14) and
(25) and assuming that di0t = 1 (i.e. the parent of firm i performs a positive amount of R&D at period t),
it will be true that
                              ∂ψi0t+1
                                      = µ̃p1 ,                                                                     (B.59a)
                               ∂ri0t
                              ∂ψijt+1
                                      = (1 − dijt−1 )µp1 + dijt−1 (µb2 + µb3 rijt−1 ).                             (B.59b)
                               ∂ri0t

Plugging these expressions into (B.58), we obtain

                                                                                     V A∗i0s
                                                            X         h
                                        GRi0t = Et                δ s−t µ̃p1 µ̃s−t−1
                                                                               ψ             +
                                                              s>t
                                                                                      Ri0t
                        Jis
                                                                                  V A∗ijs i
                        X                                                                   
                                                                            s−t−1
                            ((1 − dijt−1 )µp1 + dijt−1 (µb2 + µb3 rijt−1 ))µψ                .                      (B.60)
                        j=1
                                                                                   Ri0t

Assume that the value added of the parent and each of its affiliates grow at a (possibly different) constant
rate,

                       V A∗i0s = (χp )s−t V A∗i0t ,
                       V A∗ijs = (χa )s−t V A∗ijt ,                                        j = 0, . . . , Jis ,


                                                                           18
we can rewrite (B.60) as
                                                                                      ∗
                                                                              χs−t
                                                                               p V Ai0t
                                                     X         h
                                        GRi0t = Et         δ s−t µ̃p1 µ̃s−t−1
                                                                        ψ               +
                                                       s>t
                                                                                 Ri0t
                       Jis                                                                      ∗
                       X                                                                χs−t
                                                                                         a V Ai0jt
                                                                                                   i
                              ((1 − dijt−1 )µp1 + dijt−1 (µb2 + µb3 rijt−1 ))µs−t−1
                                                                              ψ                      ,
                        j=1
                                                                                           Ri0t

or, equivalently,

                                                                                      V A∗i0t
                                                  X          h
                                    GRi0t = Et           δ s−t µ̃p1 χp (µ̃ψ χp )s−t−1         +                 (B.61)
                                                     s>t
                                                                                       Ri0t
                     Jis
                                                                                         V A∗i0jt i
                     X                                                                              
                                                                                   s−t−1
                         ((1 − dijt−1 )µp1 + dijt−1 (µb2 + µb3 rijt−1 ))χa (µψ χa )                  .
                     j=1
                                                                                          Ri0t

Computing the second term in this expression would require knowing the value added V A∗i0jt and R&D
variables (dijt−1 , rijt−1 ) for every affiliate j belonging to firm i at period s. For those affiliates that joined
the multinational firm i at some point in time between periods t and s, this information is not available. We
will thus assume that the average value of

                                                                                      V A∗i0jt
                                   ((1 − dijt−1 )µp1 + dijt−1 (µb2 + µb3 rijt−1 ))             ,
                                                                                       Ri0t

across the set of affiliates belonging to firm i at period s, Jis , remains constant across time periods s (and,
thus, equal to their value at period t). Under this assumption, we can rewrite (B.61) as

                                                                                      V A∗i0t
                                                  X          h
                                    GRi0t = Et           δ s−t µ̃p1 χp (µ̃ψ χp )s−t−1         +
                                                     s>t
                                                                                       Ri0t
                        Jit
                                                                                            V A∗i0jt i
                                                                                                      
                    Jis X
                            ((1 − dijt−1 )µp1 + dijt−1 (µb2 + µb3 rijt−1 ))χa (µψ χa )s−t−1            .        (B.62)
                    Jit j=1                                                                  Ri0t

Finally, assuming that the number of affiliates of a multinational firm i grows at a constant rate χn ,

                                                        Jis = (χn )s−t Jit ,

we can rewrite the expression in (B.62) as

                                                                     V A∗i0t h                      V A∗i0t
                           X           X   h
            GRi0t = Et             Et   δ s−t µ̃p1 χp (µ̃ψ χp )s−t−1        + µ0 χp (µ̃ψ χp )s−t−1          +
                           s>t      s>t
                                                                      Ri0t                            Ri0t
                 Jit
                                                                                             V A∗i0jt i
                 X                                                                                     
                     ((1 − dijt−1 )µp1 + dijt−1 (µb2 + µb3 rijt−1 ))χa χn (µψ χa χn )s−t−1              .       (B.63)
                 j=1
                                                                                              Ri0t

Finally, as long as δ µ̃ψ χp | < 1 and |δµψ χa χn | < 1, we can rewrite this expression as

                 δ µ̃p1 χp V A∗i0t   X δ((1 − dijt−1 )µp1 + dijt−1 (µb2 + µb3 rijt−1 ))χa χn V A∗ijt
     GRi0t =                       +                                                                 .          (B.64)
               1 − µ̃ψ δχp Ri0t                           1 − µψ δχa χn                       Ri0t
                                          j∈Jit
                                           j6=0




                                                                     19
Using again the expressions in (B.59), we can simply (B.65) as

                               δχp     ∂ψi0t+1 V A∗i0t   X    δχa χn    ∂ψijt+1 V A∗ijt
                  GRi0t =                              +                                ,      (B.65)
                            1 − µ̃ψ δχp ∂ri0t Ri0t         1 − µψ δχa χn ∂ri0t Ri0t
                                                       j∈Jit
                                                        j6=0


with corresponds to (27) in the main text.


                                       APPENDIX REFERENCES

[1] Ackerberg, Daniel A., Kevin Caves, and Garth Frazer. (2015). “Identification Properties of
   Recent Production Function Estimators.” Econometrica, vol. 83, no. 6, pp. 2411–2451.
[2] Antràs, Pol, Teresa C. Fort and Felix Tintelnot. (2017). “The Margins of Global Sourcing: Theory
   and Evidence From U.S. Firms.” American Economic Review, vol. 107, no. 9, pp. 2514–2564.
[3] Das, Sanghamitra, Mark J. Roberts and James R. Tybout. (2007). “Market Entry Costs, Pro-
   ducer Heterogeneity and Export Dynamics.” Econometrica, vol. 75, no. 3, pp. 837–873.
[4] Gandhi, Amit, Salvador Navarro, and David Rivers. (2016). “On the Identification of Production
   Functions: How Heterogeneous is Productivity?” University of Wisconsin-Madison mimeo.
[5] Hansen, Lars Peter. (1982). “Large Sample Properties of Generalized Method of Moments Estimators.”
   Econometrica, vol. 50, no. 4, pp. 1029–1054.




                                                        20
C     Additional Estimates
We consider a number of alternative specifications to better establish the stability of our main results, and
to thereby shed light on the importance of the assumptions in our baseline model.


C.1     Transfer Pricing
A multinational firm may attempt misreporting affiliate profits to minimize its worldwide tax burden. To
achieve this aim, a firm could misreport affiliate value added or affiliate R&D spending in response to
prevailing corporate tax rates faced by its affiliates (Hines and Rice 1994, Hines 1997, and Bernard, Jensen,
and Schott 2006).
      Differences between actual and reported value added are accommodated by the model described in section
3 through the term εijt in (10). Provided that these differences are uncorrelated with affiliate labor and
capital input use, equation (20) is satisfied and the estimation procedure in section 4.1 will yield consistent
estimates even in the presence of misreporting.
      Regarding R&D spending, the model in section 3 presumes actual and reported R&D expenditures
coincide. Suppose instead that these differ. In particular, suppose that rijt−1 is reported R&D spending,
                                                   ∗
and that true R&D investment by affiliate j is rijt−1    ≡ rijt−1 − xijt−1 , where xijt−1 captures the difference
                                                                                                ∗
between actual and reported R&D spending. We define an analogous pair of variables ri0t−1             and xi0t−1
corresponding to the parent. In this case, the error term in (21) becomes a function of both xijt−1 and
xi0t−1 . The mean independence condition in (22) will not hold if either deviation (xi0t−1 or xijt−1 ) is
correlated with reported parent or affiliate R&D spending.
      To assess the robustness of our main results to patterns of value added misreporting that do not verify
the mean independence condition in (20) or to misreporting of R&D spending that contradicts the mean
independence condition in (22), we re-estimate our baseline model excluding affiliates located in tax havens
(Gravelle 2015). We include the full list of tax havens in Appendix A. The resulting estimates appear
in columns 1 to 3 of Table D.8 (reported in Appendix D) and are similar to those in Table 4, which
were computed using all affiliates, independently of the country in which they are located. One significant
difference is that, in the model that accounts for interactions between affiliate and parent R&D, the elasticity
with respect to affiliate R&D becomes statistically significant once we drop tax havens (Table D.8, column
3), but not in the full sample (Table 4, column 3). One hypothesis that could explain this is the greater
prevalence of misreporting of affiliate R&D among affiliates located in tax havens causing the estimate of
the coefficient on that variable to be downward biased in Table 4.
      To obtain consistent estimates in the presence of misreporting of R&D spending, we re-estimate the
model parameters replacing the continuous measure of affiliate R&D with two indicator variables for positive
affiliate R&D spending, and for above-median R&D spending, respectively. The logic behind this discrete
approach is that misreporting is costly, so that affiliates are unlikely to report very large R&D investments
when actual R&D investment levels are low, and are unlikely to report R&D spending when in fact none
is performed. We report the resulting estimates in columns 4 to 6 of Table D.8. Comparing these results
against Table 4, the estimated labor, capital, and persistence parameters are almost identical. The results
in columns 4 and 5 of Table D.8 also feature very similar parent innovation elasticities relative to those in
column 2 of Table 4. The estimates in these columns reveal that affiliates with low volumes of R&D spending
benefit little from the investment, while above-median innovation spending raises performance substantially.
Furthermore, as reflected in column 6 of Table D.8, and in line with Table 4, the gains to own-affiliate
innovation come primarily through an amplifying effect on the parent innovation elasticity, consistent with


                                                           21
a substantial complementarity between the R&D activities of parents and affiliates.


C.2        Labor Measurement
As discussed in section 2, concerns may arise regarding the measure of labor inputs in production. In
particular, the results in Table 4 measure labor inputs Lijt as the total number of workers employed by
affiliate j. However, because an innovating affiliate may devote some workers to innovation, a more precise
measure of Lijt would be the total number of production workers. Information on the division of labor
between innovation and production is available in benchmark years 1989, 1994, 1999, and 2004. We use this
information to compute an affiliate-specific share of workers employed in innovation and apply it across all
sample years to construct a new measure of production workers. Estimates using this new measure appear
in columns 1 and 2 of Table D.9, and reveal larger parent and affiliate innovation elasticities relative to those
in Table 4. Capital and labor elasticities are essentially unchanged, however.53


C.3        Intrafirm Technology Licensing
One interpretation of observed technology royalties and license fees flowing within the multinational firm is
that they are an exact proxy for otherwise unobserved technology transfers (Hines 1995, Branstetter, Fisman,
and Foley 2006). Under this view, we are able to use these observed payments to evaluate the extent to which
the impact of parent R&D on affiliate performance that we estimate actually captures technology transfer
within the multinational firm. For this, columns 3 and 4 of Table D.9 in Appendix D present estimates
that allow the affiliate-level impact of parent R&D to reflect the volume of royalties paid by the affiliate
to its U.S. parent. The estimates in Table D.9 indicate that controlling for royalties paid by affiliates to
parents affects the estimated parent R&D elasticity only minimally (e.g. relative to that reported in Table
4), suggesting that license fees may not fully capture the affiliate performance impact of parent innovation.
Nevertheless, consistent with the view that such payments capture meaningful intrafirm technology links,
the affiliate performance elasticity with respect to royalty payments is positive and highly significant.


C.4        Technology Stability
Our estimation relies on data spanning two decades. This long time-series raises the question of whether
technology–including production parameters and the performance impact of R&D investment–has remained
stable during the sample period. To explore potential technological changes during the sample period, we
divide our sample into two subsamples of approximately similar size (pre-1997 and post-1997) and provide
separate estimates for each half of the data in Table D.10 in Appendix D. We first consider whether
the production function parameters change, holding fixed the parameters of the productivity process, in
columns 1 and 2. Conversely, columns 3 and 4 hold fixed the production function parameters but allow the
productivity process to evolve over time. The point estimates suggest reductions in the labor intensity of the
affiliates, and increases in the affiliate performance elasticities with respect to R&D investments, particularly
that of the parent. However, tests for parameter equality across each pair of columns indicate these changes
are not statistically significant, suggesting that there is not enough evidence to conclude that either the
production function parameters nor those determining the evolution of performance have changed over the
sample period.
  53
       Appendix A contains additional details regarding the construction of our measure of production workers.




                                                              22
C.5     Heterogeneous Innovation Impact
While the results in section 5 evaluate a model with identical parameters governing affiliate production,
demand, and performance evolution across all foreign affiliates of U.S. parent firms operating in the computer
industry, the impact of parent R&D on affiliate performance may differ systematically depending on the level
of economic development in the affiliate host country and on the industrial proximity between an affiliate
and its parent. Columns 1 and 2 in Table D.11 thus divide the sample into affiliates located in countries
with above- and below-median GDP per capita. Similarly, columns 3 and 4 divide the sample into affiliates
with an industrial composition similar to the parent and those industrially far, where industrial proximity is
assessed using a Euclidean distance measure based on the allocation of parent and affiliate sales across their
respective top-five sectors. The resulting estimates suggest that restricting the composition of affiliates in
this way significantly impacts the importance of parent and affiliate R&D investment. Parent innovation is
substantially more important for affiliates in less developed countries; innovation by affiliates in developed
countries is significantly more effective than innovation in low-GDP per capita countries, but in both cases
amplifies the positive affiliate-level impact of parent innovation. Parent innovation is particularly important
for innovating affiliates positioned industrially near the parent. That affiliates producing in industries closely
related to the parent benefit more from parent innovation is in line with the interpretation that parent R&D
investments are more relevant to affiliates manufacturing within the same sector. The higher efficacy of
affiliate innovation in developed countries further aligns with the idea that such countries have a greater
capacity for technology development.


C.6     Other Industries
Table D.12 assesses the relevance of the results above for multinationals in other industries. Columns
1 through 6 show that the essential patterns observed in Table 4 are also present within multinational
firms in the motor vehicles industry (SCI 371) and in pharmaceutical drugs (SIC 283). Specifically, parent
innovation investment has a statistically and economically important impact on affiliate performance in both
industries. One key difference is that the coefficient on the interaction between parent and affiliate R&D is
not statistically distinguishable from zero in either sector. In addition, the performance effects of parent and
affiliate innovation are both larger in the pharmaceutical industry than among motor vehicles firms.


                                         APPENDIX REFERENCES

[1] Bernard, Andrew J., Bradford Jensen, and Peter Schott. (2006). “Transfer Pricing by U.S.-Based
   Multinational Firms.” Yale University mimeo.
[2] Branstetter, Lee G., Raymond Fisman, and C. Fritz Foley. (2006). “Do Stronger Intellectual
   Property Rights Increase International Technology Transfer? Empirical Evidence from U.S. Firm-level
   Panel Data.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 121, no. 1, pp. 321–349.
[3] Gravelle, Jane G. (2015). “Tax Havens: International Tax Avoidance and Tax Evasion.” Congressional
   Research Service Report, no. 7-5700, pp. 605-627.
[4] Hines, James R., Jr. (1995). “Taxes, Technology Transfer, and R&D by Multinational Firms,” in
   Hines, James R., James R. Hines, Jr., and R. Glenn Hubbard (editors), Taxing Multinational Corporations,
   University of Chicago Press.
[5] Hines, James R., Jr. (1997). “Tax Policy and the Activities of Multinational Corporations,” in:
   Auerbach, A.J. (Ed.) Fiscal Policy: Lessons from Economic Research. MIT Press, Cambridge: 401–445.
[6] Hines, James R., Jr., and Eric M. Rice. (1994). “Fiscal Paradise: Foreign Tax Havens and American
   Business.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol 109, pp. 149–181.


                                                            23
D     Extra Tables

       Table D.1: Descriptive Statistics, Production in the Multinational Firm–Dispersion

                                                Manufacturing Computers Motor Vehicles Pharmaceuticals
                                                              Importance of Affiliates in Production
Number of Affiliates                                  29.4             23.9             29.8                 37.5
Affiliate Share in Total Firm—
      Sales                                          22.0%           23.0%            20.2%                 22.2%
      Value Added                                    51.5%           23.4%            64.5%                 30.0%
      Employment                                     23.3%           24.2%            21.6%                 19.4%
                                                                Classification of Affiliates by Type
Percentage of Affiliates per Firm in—
    Manufacturing                                    39.8%          38.8%         34.3%            32.6%
    Wholesale and Retail                             21.3%          31.4%         18.3%            19.4%
    Services                                         31.7%          36.7%         25.8%            30.1%
    R&D Laboratories                                  2.6%           3.8%          0.5%             0.8%
                                                       Industrial Composition of Manufacturing Affiliates
Percentage of Affiliates per Firm in—
    Parent Industry [three-digit]                    31.6%         32.3%         34.5%             37.3%
    Parent Industry [two-digit]                      24.1%         23.4%         20.5%             32.9%
    A Single Industry [three-digit]                  29.3%         31.2%         25.7%             29.7%
Share of Sales in Primary Industry                   15.5%         14.1%         14.6%             18.0%
                                                       Imports from the Parent, Manufacturing Affiliates
Percentage of Affiliates per Firm—
    Importing from the Parent                        41.8%         42.1%          39.7%              39.2%
Ratio of Imports from Parent to Sales                17.2%         17.6%          15.4%              11.2%
Ratio of Materials Expenditure to Sales              29.2%         49.0%          17.2%              16.3%
                                                         Destination of Sales, Manufacturing Affiliates
Share of Affiliate Sales per Firm—
    Exported                                         33.1%            34.0%            27.2%                29.6%
    Exported to the United States                    23.3%            20.1%            27.8%                23.3%
    Exported to the Parent                           20.6%            19.5%            20.3%                19.9%
The statistics above describe dispersion in the activity of U.S.-based multinational firms operating in manufacturing,
Computers and Office Equipment (SIC 357), Motor Vehicles (SIC 371), and Pharmaceutical Drugs (SIC 283). Each
reported value is the standard deviation across firms for the variable indicated; corresponding mean values appear in
Table 1. Standard deviations are computed using data from the 2004 Bureau of Economic Analysis Benchmark Survey
of U.S. Direct Investment Abroad.




                                                               24
                                                Table D.2: Descriptive Statistics, Production in the Multinational Firm

                                                                                   1999                                                                 1994

                                                     Manufacturing Computers            Motor Pharmaceutical              Manufacturing Computers           Motor Pharmaceutical
     Variable                                                                          Vehicles                                                            Vehicles
                                                                                               Importance of Affiliates in Production
     Number of Affiliates                                   8.5             10.3          12.8       18.2                  8.0                   10.8          10.9          16.4
     Affiliate Share in Total Firm—
          Sales                                            25.8%           31.0%          20.9%        33.6%                 21.5%              28.1%          18.0%        28.4%
          Value Added                                      20.3%           25.9%          17.5%        25.7%                 14.8%              19.2%          13.2%        21.0%
          Employment                                       27.6%           31.0%          25.7%        33.3%                 23.8%              28.7%          22.8%        29.7%
                                                                                                   Classification of Affiliates by Type
     Percentage of Affiliates per Firm in—
         Manufacturing                                     62.5%           42.7%          71.9%        61.0%             60.1%          41.7%                  67.3%        54.8%
         Wholesale and Retail                              13.0%           21.9%          11.2%        12.9%             11.7%          14.9%                  14.1%         9.5%
         Services                                          20.6%           34.6%          12.4%        25.8%             21.9%          43.0%                  14.5%        32.0%
         R&D Laboratories                                   0.1%            0.1%           0.0%         0.7%                -              -                     -             -
                                                                                           Industrial Composition of Manufacturing Affiliates
     Percentage of Affiliates per Firm in—
         Parent Industry [three-digit]                     66.6%           69.5%          57.7%        63.9%            65.2%          69.2%                   52.7%        56.9%




25
         Parent Industry [two-digit]                       74.6%           72.0%          65.2%        71.9%            74.0%          76.6%                   61.8%        73.1%
         A Single Industry [three-digit]                   69.5%           58.8%          84.0%        58.3%            69.9%          58.2%                   64.3%        59.5%
     Share of Sales in Primary Industry                    85.5%           83.4%          85.9%        81.0%            84.8%          84.4%                   84.0%        76.8%
                                                                                           Imports from the Parent, Manufacturing Affiliates
     Percentage of Affiliates per Firm—
         Importing from the Parent                         50.6%           66.0%          45.8%         63.7%             60.5%           67.4%                61.6%        68.3%
     Ratio of Imports from Parent to Sales                  9.3%           12.9%           9.3%         11.6%              9.5%           17.2%                10.1%        12.0%
     Ratio of Materials Expenditure to Sales               75.0%           85.6%          73.0%         73.4%                -            81.6%                75.3%        72.5%
                                                                                              Destination of Sales, Manufacturing Affiliates
     Share of Affiliate Sales per Firm—
         Exported                                          42.5%           50.9%          40.9%         45.5%                  42.8%            52.6%          43.7%        45.6%
         Exported to the United States                     15.7%           21.7%          19.4%         14.6%                  15.3%            20.9%          22.1%         9.5%
         Exported to the Parent                            11.3%           19.5%          11.4%         10.4%                  11.2%            19.3%          12.4%         6.7%
     Notes: The statistics above describe the activity of U.S.-based multinational firms operating in manufacturing, Computers and Office Equipment (SIC 357), Motor Vehicles
     (SIC 371), and Pharmaceutical Drugs (SIC 283). All variables are firm-level average values from the Bureau of Economic Analysis Benchmark Survey of U.S. Direct Investment
     Abroad for 1999 (columns 1–3) and 1994 (columns 4–6). Benchmark surveys are unusually comprehensive in coverage of U.S. multinational firms’ activity abroad. The shares
     of affiliates in manufacturing, wholesale and retail, services and R&D laboratories need not sum to 100 percent; excluded categories include communications, natural resources
     drilling and extraction, air transportation, and construction.
         Table D.3: Descriptive Statistics, Innovation in the Multinational Firm–Dispersion

                                                     Manufacturing Computers Motor Vehicles Pharmaceuticals
Percentage of Affiliates per Firm with—
     Positive R&D Expenditure                             36.3%           35.6%            34.7%               34.0%
Share of Affiliate R&D Expenditure in—
     Manufacturing Affiliates                             33.0%           40.9%            24.6%               28.4%
     Wholesale and Retail Affiliates                      21.3%           21.3%            18.1%               25.1%
     Services Affiliates                                  14.8%           36.3%             9.6%               15.6%
     R&D Laboratories                                      7.6%            6.6%             1.0%               12.8%
Affiliate Share in Total Firm—
     R&D Expenditure                                      27.2%           24.3%            26.2%               25.9%
     R&D Employment                                       28.3%           26.0%            28.3%               25.9%
Ratio of R&D Expenditure to Sales—
     Parent                                                4.4%            9.6%             4.3%               12.2%
     Affiliates                                            4.0%            1.7%             1.6%               11.7%
R&D Employment Share—
     Parent                                               13.6%           19.0%             9.4%               20.5%
     Affiliates                                           7.5%            5.6%              4.3%               10.8%
Total R&D Expenditure (in millions $US)—
     Parent                                                 588            1231             750                1040
     Affiliates                                             163            227              407                 266
Notes: The statistics above describe dispersion in the activity of U.S.-based multinational firms operating in manu-
facturing, Computers and Office Equipment (SIC 357), Motor Vehicles (SIC 371), and Pharmaceutical Drugs (SIC
283). Each reported value is the standard deviation across firms for the variable indicated; corresponding mean val-
ues appear in Table 2. Standard deviations are computed using data from the 2004 Bureau of Economic Analysis
Benchmark Survey of U.S. Direct Investment Abroad.




                                                                  26
                                              Table D.4: Descriptive Statistics, Innovation in the Multinational Firm

                                                                                         1999                                                          1994

                                                             Manufacturing Computers Motor Pharmaceutical                 Manufacturing Computers Motor Pharmaceutical
     Variable                                                                       Vehicles                                                     Vehicles
     Percentage of Firms with Positive—
           Parent R&D Expenditure                                 77.0%          86.2%          84.2%      91.9%               81.1%           96.6%          87.6%     100.0%
           Affiliate R&D Expenditure                              53.6%          62.1%          64.2%      77.4%               50.4%           54.1%          61.9%     76.7%
     Percentage of Affiliates per Firm with—
           Positive R&D Expenditure                               29.9%          32.3%          32.1%      41.4%               27.1%           25.7%          32.5%      42.0%
     Share of Affiliate R&D Expenditure in:
           Manufacturing Affiliates                               88.3%          69.2%          94.1%      82.2%               88.2%           71.7%          92.1%      75.5%
          Wholesale and Retail Affiliates                         7.5%           17.9%           2.7%      12.7%               7.0%            22.1%          4.2%       21.8%
          Services Affiliates                                     2.9%           13.0%          1.5%        3.0%               2.7%            6.2%           1.8%        2.3%
          R&D Laboratories                                         0.3%           0.0%           0.0%       0.1%                  -              -              -           -
     Affiliate Share in Total Firm—
           R&D Expenditure                                        14.4%          11.1%          16.2%      14.1%               9.1%            6.3%           10.7%      10.7%
           R&D Employment                                         18.9%          12.7%          22.9%      21.0%               13.0%           10.9%          23.8%      19.1%




27
     Ratio of R&D Expenditure to Sales—
           Parent                                                 3.6%            6.8%          2.7%        9.7%                3.3%            6.7%          2.5%       10.4%
           Affiliates                                             1.0%            1.2%          0.9%        2.6%                0.9%            0.6%          0.7%       4.2%
     R&D Employment Share—
           Parent                                                 6.3%           13.7%          4.6%       13.7%                6.1%           12.0%          4.2%       15.4%
           Affiliates                                             2.7%           2.8%           2.1%       5.7%                 2.2%           2.0%           1.6%       7.6%
     Affiliate Ratio of R&D to Sales, in Firms with—
           Low Parent Ratio of R&D to Sales                       0.2%            0.3%          0.7%        1.4%                0.1%            0.2%          0.9%        0.8%
           Medium Parent Ratio of R&D to Sales                    0.8%            0.5%          1.4%        1.0%                0.6%            1.1%          0.9%        2.5%
           High Parent Ratio of R&D to Sales                      1.7%            1.2%          2.3%        3.4%                1.7%            1.1%          1.3%        3.3%
     Total R&D Expenditure (in millions $US)—
           Parent                                                  158             425           388         548                 151            415            399        475
           Affiliates                                              22              43            97          91                  15             34             43         69
     Notes: The statistics above describe the activity of U.S.-based multinational firms operating in manufacturing, Computers and Office Equipment (SIC 357), Motor Vehicles (SIC
     371), and Pharmaceutical Drugs (SIC 283). All variables are firm-level average values from the Bureau of Economic Analysis Benchmark Survey of U.S. Direct Investment Abroad
     for 1999 (columns 1–3) and 1994 (columns 4–6). Benchmark surveys are unusually comprehensive in coverage of U.S. multinational firms’ activity abroad.
                                        Table D.5: Geography of Affiliates and Innovation in the Multinational Firm

                                                Manufacturing                       Computers                    Motor Vehicles                  Pharmaceuticals
                                            1994   1999      2004           1994      1999    2004           1994    1999      2004          1994    1999      2004
     Share of–
       Affiliates per Firm in—
         Europe                           45.06%     51.51%     53.20%     50.09%     53.39%    56.30%     37.30%     49.28%     48.00%     52.45%    59.42%      62.50%
         Asia                             20.30%     14.98%     14.20%     27.88%     24.64%    17.90%     16.28%     9.20%      9.50%      18.32%    15.01%      17.00%
         Canada                           17.22%     18.25%     18.20%     12.70%     12.15%    14.70%     21.49%     23.88%     26.40%     10.99%    12.60%      9.70%
         Mexico                            5.34%      4.34%      4.30%      2.16%      2.96%     2.70%      6.02%      8.37%      8.70%      4.69%     4.18%       4.20%
         Other                            12.08%     10.92%     10.02%      7.17%     6.86%     8.39%      18.92%     9.27%      7.39%      13.55%    8.79%       6.59%
          Tax Haven                       16.19%     17.19%     19.80%     23.50%     26.26%    30.20%     11.52%      9.10%     9.30%      18.48%    20.35%      25.90%




28
       Affiliate R&D per Firm in—
         Europe                           61.42%     64.06%     65.40%     54.99%     54.67%    60.30%     58.75%     63.76%     58.70%     66.00%    66.33%      69.40%
         Asia                             15.70%     12.72%     15.10%     34.30%     22.69%    22.90%     9.77%      6.72%      12.80%     14.29%    13.36%      18.10%
         Canada                           15.45%     15.22%     11.00%     8.43%      14.89%    10.20%     27.07%     20.64%     16.40%     14.80%    13.50%      3.60%
         Mexico                            1.97%      0.97%      2.00%      0.20%      0.00%     2.70%      1.00%      1.67%      1.80%      0.60%     0.69%       5.00%
         Other                             5.46%      7.03%      6.50%     2.08%       5.79%     6.55%      3.42%      7.21%     10.35%      4.31%     6.12%      3.93%
          Tax Haven                       13.96%     13.01%     14.20%     21.57%     21.24%     26.2%      5.27%      9.68%     2.60%      15.16%     8.42%      22.9%
     Notes: The statistics above describe the geography of affiliates and affiliate innovation investment within U.S.-based multinational firms operating in manufacturing,
     Computers and Office Equipment (SIC 357), Motor Vehicles (SIC 371), and Pharmaceutical Drugs (SIC 283). All variables are firm-level average values computed using
     data from the Bureau of Economic Analysis Benchmark Survey of U.S. Direct Investment Abroad for 1994, 1999, and 2004. Tax havens are identified in Gravelle (2015).
                               Table D.6: Alternative Inference Procedures

                                                   Bootstrap                      Within Firm-Year Correlation
                                                Standard Errors                    in Unexpected Productivity
              R&D Specification:        Affiliate Affiliate Interact             Affiliate Affiliate  Interact
                                         Only      & Parent Parent                Only     & Parent    Parent
                                          (1)         (2)       (3)                 (4)      (5)         (6)
Persistence                              0.7553a      0.7444a         0.7430a    0.7436a       0.7445a       0.7430a
                                         (0.0463)     (0.0397)        (0.0399)   (0.0253)      (0.0205)      (0.0205)
Affiliate R&D Elasticity—
  Unconditional—
     Mean                                0.0106c      0.0106c         0.0063      0.0107       0.0106a        0.0062
                                         (0.0057)     (0.0054)        (0.0059)   (0.0038)      (0.0037)      (0.0041)
     Standard Deviation                                               0.0039                                  0.0041
  If Affiliate R&D > 0—
     Mean                                0.0106c      0.0106c         0.0070      0.0107       0.0106a        0.0069
                                         (0.0057)     (0.0054)        (0.0060)   (0.0038)      (0.0037)      (0.0043)
     Standard Deviation                                               0.0036                                  0.0038
Parent R&D Elasticity—
  Unconditional—
    Mean                                               0.0122b        0.0133a                  0.0125a       0.0135a
                                                      (0.0055)        (0.0055)                 (0.0044)      (0.0044)
     Standard Deviation                                               0.0137                                  0.0139
  If Affiliate R&D > 0—
     Mean                                              0.0122b        0.0260a                  0.0125a       0.0203a
                                                      (0.0055)        (0.0068)                 (0.0044)      (0.0055)
     Standard Deviation                                               0.0041                                  0.0002
Labor Elasticity—
    Mean                                 0.4773a      0.4773a         0.4773a    0.4773a       0.4773a       0.4773a
                                         (0.0054)     (0.0056)        (0.0056)   (0.0056)      (0.0056)      (0.0056)
    Standard Deviation                   0.0878        0.0878         0.0878      0.0878       0.0878         0.0878
Capital Elasticity—
    Mean                                 0.3632a      0.3415a         0.3380a    0.3650a       0.3430a       0.3396a
                                         (0.0321)     (0.0409)        (0.0308)   (0.0207)      (0.0215)      (0.0212)
    Standard Deviation                                                            0.0647       0.0647         0.0562
Returns to Scale, Mean                   1.0635        1.0547         1.0532      1.0626       1.0553         1.0539
Observations                              4008          4008           4008        4008         4008           4008
Notes: a denotes 1% significance, b denotes 5% significance, c denotes 10% significance. This table reports GMM
estimates analogous to those in Table 4 but uses alternative procedures to compute the standard errors of the different
reported estimates. In order to compute the standard errors in columns 1 through 3, we bootstrap our estimation
sample 500 times and, for each bootstrap sample, we perform the two-step estimation procedure described in section
4.1. These bootstrap standard errors account for the fact that one of the covariates entering the moment condition
in step 2, vc
            aijt , is a function of the parameter estimates computed in step 1. In columns 4 through 6, we allow for
correlation in ηijt across observations corresponding to different affiliates of the same multinational firm in the same
year.




                                                                 29
                        Table D.7: Robustness: Affiliate Lifetime Within the Firm

                                                  Affiliate ‘Lifetime’, Non-Linear              ‘Lifetime’ Fixed Effects
             R&D Specification:                   Affiliate Affiliate     Interact          Affiliate Affiliate Interact
                                                   Only       & Parent     Parent            Only       & Parent Parent
                                                    (1)           (2)        (3)              (4)          (5)        (6)
Persistence (t − 1)                                0.7442a       0.7361a       0.7352a      0.7453a       0.6970a       0.6949a
                                                   (0.0176)     (0.0185)       (0.0185)     (0.0178)      (0.0240)      (0.0239)
Affiliate ‘Lifetime’ Semi-Elasticity               0.3967a       0.3206a       0.3474a
                                                   (0.0011)     (0.0011)       (0.0011)
Affiliate R&D Elasticity—
  Unconditional—
     Mean                                          0.0104a       0.0104a       0.0065       0.0111a       0.0111a       0.0079b
                                                   (0.0036)     (0.0036)       (0.0041)     (0.0037)      (0.0036)      (0.0041)
     Standard Deviation                                                        0.0040                                   0.0039
  If Affiliate R&D > 0—
     Mean                                          0.0104a       0.0104a       0.0070       0.0111a       0.0111a       0.0082c
                                                   (0.0036)     (0.0036)       (0.0043)     (0.0037)      (0.0036)      (0.0043)
     Standard Deviation                                                        0.0034                                   0.0031
Parent R&D Elasticity—
  Unconditional—
    Mean                                                         0.0107a       0.0117a                    0.0111a       0.0128a
                                                                (0.0039)       (0.0039)                   (0.0043)      (0.0043)
     Standard Deviation                                                        0.0129                                   0.0113
  If Affiliate R&D > 0—
     Mean                                                        0.0107a       0.0238a                    0.0111a       0.0234a
                                                                (0.0039)       (0.0050)                   (0.0043)      (0.0053)
     Standard Deviation                                                        0.0037                                   0.0031
Labor Elasticity—
    Mean                                           0.4773a       0.4773a       0.4773a      0.4773a       0.4773a       0.4773a
                                                   (0.0178)     (0.0056)       (0.0056)     (0.0056)      (0.0056)      (0.0056)
    Standard Deviation                             0.0878        0.0878        0.0878        0.0878        0.0878       0.0878
Capital Elasticity—
    Mean                                           0.3508a       0.3348a       0.3321a      0.3525a       0.3348a       0.3323a
                                                   (0.0176)     (0.0183)       (0.0181)     (0.0180)      (0.0183)      (0.0181)
    Standard Deviation                             0.0657        0.0588        0.0571        0.0602        0.0537       0.0532
Returns to Scale, Mean                             1.0568        1.0504        1.0493        1.0493        1.0575       1.0494
Overidentification Test (p-value)                  0.5403        0.5981        0.5782        0.6526        0.6920       0.7029
Observations                                        4008          4008          4008          4008          4008         4008
Notes: a denotes 1% significance, b denotes 5% significance, c denotes 10% significance. This table reports GMM estimates
corresponding to variants of (21) that incorporate affiliate ‘lifetime’, measured as the duration during which the foreign
affiliate is owned by a U.S. parent. Columns 1 through 3 include our measure of affiliate ‘lifetime’ both linearly and
through a squared term. Columns 4 through 6 account for a full set of cohort fixed effects, each a dummy equal to one for
affiliates sharing a specific value of the ‘lifetime’ variable, and equal to zero otherwise. The indicated R&D specifications
‘Affiliate Only’, ‘Affiliate & Parent’, and ‘Interact Parent’ are as described in Table 4 above. All columns include market-
year fixed effects and a second set of market-year fixed effects that are interacted with a dummy capturing R&D spending
by the affiliate. Standard errors are reported in parentheses. Persistence (t − 1) corresponds to µψ in (21). Affiliate R&D
and Parent R&D R&D Elasticities capture the elasticity of period-t performance with respect to the period t − 1 value of
the corresponding covariate; mean and conditional mean elasticities are reported in all columns, and standard deviations
are shown for columns 3 and 6. Labor Elasticity reports the mean and standard deviation of βl + βll 2lijt + βlk kijt ; Capital
Elasticity does the same for βk + βkk 2kijt + βlk lijt . The standard deviation for each input elasticity appears below its
mean. For each specification, the p-value for the overidentifying restrictions test (Hansen 1982) is included. Measures of
‘lifetime’, labor, capital, value added, and R&D expenditure are from the Bureau of Economic Analysis Survey of U.S.
Direct Investment Abroad.




                                                                   30
                               Table D.8: Accounting for Transfer Pricing

                                                  Drop Tax Havens                      Discrete Affiliate R&D
            R&D Specification:            Affiliate Affiliate Interact            Affiliate Affiliate      Interact
                                           Only      & Parent Parent               Only       & Parent      Parent
                                            (1)         (2)       (3)               (4)          (5)          (6)
Persistence                               0.7473a       0.7391a      0.7404a      0.7746a       0.7643a      0.7644a
                                          (0.0187)      (0.0200)     (0.0199)     (0.0170)     (0.0182)      (0.0182)
Affiliate R&D Elasticity—
  Unconditional—
     Mean                                 0.0118a       0.0118a      0.0094b
                                          (0.0041)      (0.0041)     (0.0046)
     Standard Deviation                                               0.0079
  If Affiliate R&D > 0—
     Mean                                 0.0118a       0.0118a      0.0091b
                                          (0.0041)      (0.0041)     (0.0048)
    Standard Deviation                                                0.0035
Impact of
  Affiliate R&D > 0—                                                               0.0006       0.0043        0.0981
                                                                                  (0.0117)     (0.0116)      (0.0848)
  Affiliate R&D > Median—                                                         0.0320a       0.0311a      -0.1738
                                                                                  (0.0133)     (0.0132)      (0.1499)
Parent R&D Elasticity—
  Unconditional—
    Mean                                                0.0087b      0.0095a                    0.0109a      0.0113a
                                                        (0.0044)     (0.0044)                  (0.0037)      (0.0041)
     Standard Deviation                                               0.0096                                  0.0054
  If Affiliate R&D > 0—
     Mean                                               0.0087b      0.0189a                    0.0109a      0.0162a
                                                        (0.0044)     (0.0058)                  (0.0037)      (0.0041)
     Standard Deviation                                               0.0018                                  0.0026
  If Affiliate R&D > Median—
     Mean                                                                                                    0.0188a
                                                                                                             (0.0041)
     Standard Deviation
Labor Elasticity—
    Mean                                  0.4950a       0.4950a      0.4950a      0.4773a       0.4773a      0.4773a
                                          (0.0060)      (0.0060)     (0.0060)     (0.0056)     (0.0056)      (0.0056)
    Standard Deviation                     0.0853       0.0853        0.0853       0.0878       0.0878        0.0878
Capital Elasticity—
    Mean                                  0.3334a       0.3185a      0.3168a      0.3632a       0.3411a      0.3396a
                                          (0.0191)      (0.0195)     (0.0195)     (0.0192)     (0.0195)      (0.0195)
    Standard Deviation                     0.0527       0.0489        0.0491       0.0641       0.0567        0.0565
Returns to Scale, Mean                     1.0586       1.0526        1.0519       1.0618       1.0529        1.0523
Overidentification Test (p-value)          0.5229       0.4905        0.4611       0.8087       0.7918        0.7753
Observations                                3242         3242          3242         4008         4008          4008
Notes: a denotes 1% significance, b denotes 5% significance, c denotes 10% significance. This table reports GMM
estimates corresponding to several variants of (21). Columns 1–3 estimate the baseline model excluding affiliates in
tax havens identified in (Gravelle 2015); columns 4–6 discretize affiliate R&D using an indicator for positive R&D and
an indicator for above-median R&D spending by the affiliate. R&D specifications ‘Affiliate Only’, ‘Affiliate & Parent’,
and ‘Interact Parent’ are otherwise analogous to those described in Table 4. All columns include market-year fixed
effects and a second set of market-year fixed effects that are interacted with a dummy capturing R&D spending by the
affiliate. Standard errors are reported in parentheses. Persistence corresponds to µψ . Affiliate R&D and Parent R&D
Elasticities capture the elasticity of period-t performance with respect to the period t − 1 value of the corresponding
covariate; mean and conditional mean elasticities are reported in all columns, and standard deviations are shown for
columns 3–6. Labor Elasticity reports the mean and standard deviation of βl + βll 2lijt + βlk kijt ; Capital Elasticity
does the same for βk + βkk 2kijt + βlk lijt . The standard deviation for each input elasticity appears below its mean.
For each specification, the p-value for the overidentifying restrictions test (Hansen 1982) is included. Measures of
labor, capital, value added, and R&D expenditure are from the Bureau of Economic Analysis Survey of U.S. Direct
Investment Abroad.

                                                               31
                             Table D.9: Additional Robustness

                                            Subtracting R&D Labor                    Royalties
             R&D Specification:             Affiliate    Interact              Affiliate Interact
                                            & Parent      Parent               & Parent Parent
                                              (1)           (2)                  (3)          (4)
Persistence                                  0.7421a           0.7405a          0.7253a       0.7252a
                                             (0.0193)          (0.0193)         (0.0186)      (0.0186)
Affiliate R&D Elasticity—
  Unconditional—
     Mean                                    0.0127a           0.0097a          0.0119a       0.0079b
                                             (0.0036)          (0.0042)         (0.0036)      (0.0041)
     Standard Deviation                                        0.0045                          0.0045
  If Affiliate R&D > 0—
     Mean                                    0.0127a           0.0098a          0.0119a       0.0087b
                                             (0.0036)          (0.0044)         (0.0036)      (0.0042)
     Standard Deviation                                        0.0032                          0.0041
Parent R&D Elasticity—
  Unconditional—
    Mean                                     0.0153a           0.0162a          0.0110a       0.0121a
                                              (0.0045          (0.0045)         (0.0039)      (0.0039)
     Standard Deviation                                        0.0117                          0.0114
  If Affiliate R&D > 0—
     Mean                                    0.0153a           0.0270a          0.0110a       0.0225a
                                             (0.0045)          (0.0023)         (0.0039)      (0.0050)
     Standard Deviation                                        0.0020                          0.0047
Royalties
    Mean                                                                        0.0050a       0.0047a
                                                                                (0.0008)      (0.0008)
Labor Elasticity—
    Mean                                     0.4721a           0.4721a          0.4773a       0.4773a
                                             (0.0814)          (0.0053)         (0.0056)      (0.0056)
    Standard Deviation                        0.0059           0.0059            0.0878        0.0878
Capital Elasticity—
    Mean                                     0.3266a           0.3254a          0.3122a       0.3104a
                                             (0.0618)          (0.0621)         (0.0175)      (0.0175)
    Standard Deviation                        0.0183           0.0181            0.0545        0.0542
Returns to Scale, Mean                        1.0466           1.0461            1.0423        1.0422
Overidentification Test (p-value)             0.7660           0.7541            0.6742        0.6643
Observations                                   3685             3685              4008          4008
Notes: a denotes 1% significance, b denotes 5% significance, c denotes 10% significance. This table
reports GMM estimates corresponding to (21), with the indicated R&D specifications ‘Affiliate
& Parent’ and ‘Interact Parent’ as described in Table 4 above. All columns include market-year
fixed effects and a second set of market-year fixed effects that are interacted with a dummy cap-
turing R&D spending by the affiliate. Standard errors are reported in parentheses. Persistence
corresponds to µψ in (21). Affiliate R&D, Parent R&D, Other-Affiliate R&D Elasticities capture
the elasticity of period-t performance with respect to the period t − 1 value of the corresponding
covariate; mean and conditional mean elasticities are reported in all columns, and standard devia-
tions are shown for columns 2 and 4. Labor Elasticity reports the mean and standard deviation of
βl + βll 2lijt + βlk kijt ; Capital Elasticity does the same for βk + βkk 2kijt + βlk lijt . The standard
deviation for each input elasticity appears below its mean. For each specification, the p-value for
the overidentifying restrictions test (Hansen 1982) is included. Measures of labor, capital, value
added, and R&D expenditure are from the Bureau of Economic Analysis Survey of U.S. Direct
Investment Abroad.




                                                        32
              Table D.10: Evaluating Parameter Stability Over Time

                                               Value-Added                    Productivity
                                                 Function                       Process
                              Period:      Pre-1997 Post-1997            Pre-1997   Post-1997
                                             (1)         (2)               (3)          (4)
Persistence                                         0.7654a               0.8040a         0.6967a
                                                    (0.0172)              (0.0514)        (0.0459)
Affiliate R&D Elasticity—
  Unconditional—
     Mean                                           0.0084a               0.0108a         0.0119a
                                                    (0.0033)              (0.0044)        (0.0057)
Parent R&D Elasticity—
  Unconditional—
    Mean                                            0.0080a                0.0062         0.0201a
                                                    (0.0036)              (0.0058)        (0.0075)
Labor Elasticity—
    Mean                                    0.5169a         0.4357a                 0.4773a
                                            (0.0074)        (0.0076)                (0.0056)
    Standard Deviation                       0.1012         0.0795                   0.0878
Capital Elasticity—
    Mean                                    0.3382a         0.3526a                 0.3343a
                                            (0.0284)        (0.0248)                (0.0184)
     Standard Deviation                      0.0849         0.0514                   0.0552
Overidentification Test (p-value)                    0.4536                          0.6617
Observations                                          3917                            4008
Notes: a denotes 1% significance, b denotes 5% significance, c denotes 10% significance. This
table reports GMM estimates corresponding to versions of (21) in which parameters may differ
before and after 1997. Production parameters may differ in columns 1 and 2; productivity process
parameters may differ in column 3 and 4. The R&D specification in all columns corresponds
to ‘Affiliate & Parent’ as described in Table 4. All columns include market-year fixed effects
and a second set of market-year fixed effects that are interacted with a dummy capturing R&D
spending by the affiliate. Standard errors are reported in parentheses. Persistence corresponds
to µψ . Affiliate R&D and Parent R&D Elasticities capture the elasticity of period-t performance
with respect to the period t − 1 value of the corresponding covariate; mean and conditional mean
elasticities are reported in all columns, and standard deviations are shown for columns 2 and
4. Labor Elasticity reports the mean and standard deviation of βl + βll 2lijt + βlk kijt ; Capital
Elasticity does the same for βk +βkk 2kijt +βlk lijt . The standard deviation for each input elasticity
appears below its mean. For each specification, the p-value for the overidentifying restrictions test
(Hansen 1982) is included. Measures of labor, capital, value added, and R&D expenditure are
from the Bureau of Economic Analysis Survey of U.S. Direct Investment Abroad.




                                                       33
           Table D.11: Proximity Between Parent and Affiliate

                Proximity based on:           Host-Country                Industrial
                                             GDP per Capita             Composition
                                             High     Low              High       Low
                                              (1)      (2)              (3)        (4)
Persistence                                 0.7243a      0.6887a     0.7769a      0.7135a
                                            (0.0241)     (0.0343)    (0.0258)     (0.0342)
Affiliate R&D Elasticity—
  Unconditional—
     Mean                                    0.0053      -0.0017      0.0041       0.0059
                                            (0.0053)     (0.0076)    (0.0060)     (0.0072)
     Standard Deviation                      0.0099      0.0413       0.0136       0.0081
  If Affiliate R&D > 0—
     Mean                                    0.0047      -0.0031      0.0059       0.0066
                                            (0.0056)     (0.0076)    (0.0060)     (0.0075)
     Standard Deviation                      0.0060      0.0274       0.0067       0.0076
Parent R&D Elasticity—
  Unconditional—
    Mean                                     0.0038      0.0389a      0.0123       0.0090
                                            (0.0051)     (0.0085)    (0.0084)     (0.0066)
     Standard Deviation                      0.0087      0.0313       0.0246       0.0050
  If Affiliate R&D > 0—
     Mean                                   0.0121b      0.0675a     0.0344a       0.0098
                                            (0.0061)     (0.0101)    (0.0090)     (0.0068)
     Standard Deviation                      0.0016      0.0101       0.0015       0.0072
Labor Elasticity—
    Mean                                    0.5245a      0.4084a     0.4302a      0.5344a
                                            (0.0075)     (0.0090)    (0.0082)     (0.0082)
    Standard Deviation                       0.0935      0.0738       0.0982       0.0605
Capital Elasticity—
    Mean                                    0.3484a      0.3428a     0.4182a      0.3426a
                                            (0.0228)     (0.0280)    (0.0449)     (0.0295)
    Standard Deviation                       0.0579      0.0533       0.0606       0.0782
Returns to Scale, Mean                       1.0765      1.0274       1.0666       1.0848
Overidentification Test (p-value)            0.8259      0.9457       0.6557       0.9294
Observations                                  2107        1489         1645         1547
Notes: a denotes 1% significance, b denotes 5% significance, c denotes 10% significance.
This table reports split-sample GMM estimates corresponding to (21) for affiliates based
on proximity to the U.S. parent. Columns 1 and 2 divide the sample based on GDP per
capita in the affiliate host country; columns 3 and 4 do so based on industrial proximity.
The R&D specification in all columns corresponds to ‘Interact Parent’ as described in
Table 4. All columns include market-year fixed effects and a second set of market-year
fixed effects that are interacted with a dummy capturing R&D spending by the affiliate.
Standard errors are reported in parentheses. Persistence corresponds to µψ . Affiliate
R&D and Parent R&D Elasticities capture the elasticity of period-t performance with re-
spect to the period t−1 value of the corresponding covariate; mean and conditional mean
elasticities are reported in all columns, and standard deviations are shown for columns 2
and 4. Labor Elasticity reports the mean and standard deviation of βl +βll 2lijt +βlk kijt ;
Capital Elasticity does the same for βk + βkk 2kijt + βlk lijt . The standard deviation for
each input elasticity appears below its mean. For each specification, the p-value for the
overidentifying restrictions test (Hansen 1982) is included. Measures of labor, capital,
value added, and R&D expenditure are from the Bureau of Economic Analysis Survey
of U.S. Direct Investment Abroad.




                                                  34
                                         Table D.12: Other Industries

                                                    Motor Vehicles                          Pharmaceuticals
             R&D Specification:            Affiliate   Affiliate Interact           Affiliate Affiliate Interact
                                            Only      & Parent Parent                Only      & Parent Parent
                                             (1)         (2)        (3)               (4)        (5)        (6)
Persistence                                0.6994a       0.6958a       0.6948a      0.7688a       0.7564a      0.7559a
                                           (0.0143)      (0.0144)      (0.0144)     (0.0113)      (0.0116)     (0.0117)
Affiliate R&D Elasticity—
  Unconditional—
     Mean                                   0.0035        0.0031       0.0043c      0.0147a       0.0149a      0.0149a
                                           (0.0024)      (0.0024)      (0.0025)     (0.0023)      (0.0023)     (0.0023)
     Standard Deviation                                                 0.0051                                  0.0032
  If Affiliate R&D > 0—
     Mean                                   0.0035        0.0031       0.0040c      0.0147a       0.0149a      0.0147a
                                          (0.0024))      (0.0024)      (0.0025)     (0.0023)      (0.0023)     (0.0025)
     Standard Deviation                                                 0.0046                                  0.0022
Parent R&D Elasticity—
  Unconditional—
    Mean                                                 0.0060a       0.0058a                    0.0181a      0.0180a
                                                          (0.0018      (0.0018)                   (0.0025)     (0.0025)
     Standard Deviation                                                 0.0032                                  0.0042
  If Affiliate R&D > 0—
     Mean                                                0.0060a       0.0058a                    0.0181a      0.0192a
                                                         (0.0018)      (0.0023)                   (0.0025)     (0.0026)
     Standard Deviation                                                 0.0044                                  0.0013
Labor Elasticity—
    Mean                                   0.5661a       0.5661a       0.5661a      0.4509a       0.4509a      0.4509a
                                           (0.0032)      (0.0032)      (0.0032)     (0.0030)      (0.0030)     (0.0030)
    Standard Deviation                      0.0692        0.0692        0.0692       0.0900       0.0900        0.0900
Capital Elasticity—
    Mean                                   0.2972a       0.2901a       0.2923a      0.2699a       0.2636a      0.2638a
                                           (0.0099)      (0.0749)      (0.0097)     (0.0100)      (0.0094)     (0.0094)
    Standard Deviation                      0.0789        0.0749        0.0791       0.0867       0.0790        0.0787
Returns to Scale, Mean                      1.0628        1.0599        1.0608       1.0043       1.0017        1.0018
Overidentification Test (p-value)           0.7449        0.7312        0.7011       0.7586       0.6415        0.6312
Observations                                 9181          9181          9181         8433         8433          8433
Notes: a denotes 1% significance, b denotes 5% significance, c denotes 10% significance. This table reports GMM
estimates corresponding to (21) and several variants thereof for affiliates in the motor vehicles (columns 1–3) and
pharmaceuticals (columns 4–6) industries. The indicated R&D specifications ‘Affiliate Only’, ‘Affiliate & Parent’,
and ‘Interact Parent’ are as described in Table 4. All columns include market-year fixed effects and a second set of
market-year fixed effects that are interacted with a dummy capturing R&D spending by the affiliate. Standard errors
are reported in parentheses. Persistence corresponds to µψ in (21). Affiliate R&D, Parent R&D, Other-Affiliate R&D
Elasticities capture the elasticity of period-t performance with respect to the period t − 1 value of the corresponding
covariate; mean and conditional mean elasticities are reported in all columns, and standard deviations are shown for
columns 3 and 6. Labor Elasticity reports the mean and standard deviation of βl +βll 2lijt +βlk kijt ; Capital Elasticity
does the same for βk + βkk 2kijt + βlk lijt . The standard deviation for each input elasticity appears below its mean.
For each specification, the p-value for the overidentifying restrictions test (Hansen 1982) is included. Measures of
labor, capital, value added, and R&D expenditure are from the Bureau of Economic Analysis Survey of U.S. Direct
Investment Abroad.




                                                                35
                                 Table D.13: Parent Reduced-Form Evidence

                     Dependent Variable:                                    Affiliate Value Added
                                                              Manufacturing                            Computers
                                                    (1)           (2)       (3)              (4)         (5)            (6)
                                                          a             a           a              a           a
Parent R&D                                        0.4491         0.0230      0.0241       0.7362        0.1182       0.0782a
                                                  (0.0069)       (0.0025)    (0.0022)     (0.0304)      (0.0263)     (0.0237)
Affiliate R&D                                     0.0787a        0.0025      0.0021        0.0052       0.0292       0.0025
                                                  (0.0080)       (0.0026)    (0.0023)     (0.0305)      (0.0178)     (0.0160)
Parent Labor                                                                 0.5808a                                 0.8121a
                                                                             (0.0119)                                (0.0742)
Parent Capital                                                               0.0828a                                 0.0570
                                                                             (0.0089)                                (0.0608)
1st Lag of                                                       0.9508a     0.6690a                    0.8287a      0.5771a
Parent Value Added                                               (0.0025)    (0.0032)                   (0.0261)     (0.0381)
1st Lag of                                                                  -0.4009a                                -0.4500a
Parent Labor                                                                 (0.0124)                                (0.0960)
1st Lag of                                                                   0.0363 a
                                                                                                                     -0.0532
Parent Capital                                                               (0.0089)                                (0.0641)

Observations                                      16992          16992       16992           538          538          538
R2                                                0.3697         0.9342      0.9485        0.6772       0.8901       0.9115

                                                              Motor Vehicles                       Pharmaceuticals
                                                    (1)           (2)        (3)             (4)        (5)        (6)
Parent R&D                                        0.4794a        0.0267a     0.0161a      0.4843a       0.0508a      0.0210a
                                                  (0.0125)       (0.0096)    (0.0081)     (0.0185)      (0.0108)     (0.0045)
Affiliate R&D                                     0.0805a        -0.0029    -0.0152b      0.0936a       0.0055       0.0339a
                                                  (0.0174)       (0.0074)    (0.0044)     (0.0182)      (0.0085)     (0.0073)
Parent Labor                                                                 0.6196a                                 0.6454a
                                                                             (0.0300)                                (0.0529)
Parent Capital                                                               0.0488a                                 0.0985a
                                                                             (0.0289)                                (0.0363)
1st Lag of                                                       0.9333a     0.6475a                    0.8932a      0.6284a
Parent Value Added                                               (0.0120)    (0.0236)                   (0.0136)     (0.0258)
1st Lag of                                                                  -0.3739a                                -0.4285a
Parent Labor                                                                 (0.0346)                                (0.0531)
1st Lag of                                                                   0.0609a                                -0.0083a
Parent Capital                                                               (0.0302)                                (0.0372)

Observations                                       1319           1319        1319          1204         1204         1204
R2                                                0.6352         0.9355      0.9562        0.6333       0.9211       0.9361
Notes: a denotes 1% significance, b denotes 5% significance, c denotes 10% significance. All columns report least-aquares
estimates of variants of (1) for parents of U.S.-based multinational firms in each industry indicated above during 1989–2008.
All specifications include innovation dummies for the parent di0t−1 and affiliates diJt−1 , as well as year fixed effects. The
dependent variable is (log) parent value added. Parent R&D and Affiliate R&D capture elasticities of period-t output
with respect to the period-(t − 1) value of the corresponding covariate. Measures of labor, capital, value added, and R&D
expenditure are from the Bureau of Economic Analysis Survey of U.S. Direct Investment Abroad.




                                                                   36
                Table D.14: Parent Estimates

Persistence                                  0.7286a        0.7342a
                                             (0.1204)       (0.1181)
Affiliate R&D Elasticity—
  Unconditional—
     Mean                                                   -0.0026
                                                            (0.0066)
Parent R&D Elasticity—
  Unconditional—
    Mean                                     0.0497b        0.0494b
                                             (0.0216)       (0.0217)
Labor Elasticity—
    Mean                                     0.8177a        0.8177a
                                             (0.0229)       (0.0229)
    Standard Deviation                       0.0398          0.0398
Capital Elasticity—
    Mean                                     0.1651a        0.1714a
                                             (0.0624)       (0.0702)
    Standard Deviation                       0.2288          0.2246
Returns to Scale, Mean                       1.0664          1.0689
Overidentification Test (p-value)            0.7800          0.6557
Observations                                   538             538
Notes: a denotes 1% significance, b denotes 5% significance, c denotes
10% significance. This table reports GMM estimates for parents of
U.S.-based multinational firms in the computer industry. Column 1
includes only parent R&D and an indicator for positive parent R&D
spending; column 2 also adds total affiliate R&D by firm and an
indicator for positive affiliate R&D spending. All columns include
year fixed effects. Standard errors are reported in parentheses. Af-
filiate R&D and Parent R&D Elasticities capture the elasticity of
period-t performance with respect to the period t − 1 value of the
corresponding covariate. Labor Elasticity reports the mean and stan-
dard deviation of βl + βll 2lijt + βlk kijt ; Capital Elasticity does the
same for βk + βkk 2kijt + βlk lijt . For each specification, the p-value
for a overidentifying restrictions test (Hansen 1982) is included. Mea-
sures of labor, capital, value added, and R&D expenditure are from
the Bureau of Economic Analysis Survey of U.S. Direct Investment
Abroad.




                                        37
                            Table D.15: Joint Tests of Hypothesis

              R&D Specification:                        Affiliate   Affiliate    Interact     Other-
                                                         Only       & Parent      Parent      Affiliate
                                                          (1)         (2)           (3)         (4)
                                     Baseline Model [Table 4]
H0   :   Affiliate R&D Elasticity = 0                < 0.01          < 0.01       < 0.01       < 0.01
H0   :   Parent R&D Elasticity = 0                                   < 0.01       < 0.01       < 0.01
H0   :   Parent-Affiliate R&D Interaction = 0                                     < 0.01       < 0.01
H0   :   Other-Affiliate R&D Elasticity = 0                                                    0.1585
H0   :   Avg. Affiliate R&D = Avg. Parent R&D                        0.7585       < 0.01       0.0108
                                Model with Affiliate Age [Table      6]
H0   :   Affiliate R&D Elasticity = 0                < 0.01          < 0.01       < 0.01
H0   :   Parent R&D Elasticity = 0                                   0.0249       < 0.01
H0   :   Parent-Affiliate R&D Interaction = 0                                     < 0.01
H0   :   Avg. Affiliate R&D = Avg. Parent R&D                        0.9653       0.0116
                           Model with Second Productivity Lag       [Table 6]
H0   :   Affiliate R&D Elasticity = 0              < 0.01            < 0.01       < 0.01
H0   :   Parent R&D Elasticity = 0                                   0.0772       < 0.01
H0   :   Parent-Affiliate R&D Interaction = 0                                     0.0335
H0   :   Avg. Affiliate R&D = Avg. Parent R&D                        0.7509       0.1361
                         Heterogeneity Based on Affiliate Type [Table 7]
‘Vertical’ Affiliates–
H0 : Affiliate R&D Elasticity = 0                                    0.3565       < 0.01
H0 : Parent R&D Elasticity = 0                                       < 0.01       < 0.01
H0 : Parent-Affiliate R&D Interaction = 0                                         < 0.01
H0 : Avg. Affiliate R&D = Avg. Parent R&D                            < 0.01       < 0.01
‘Horizontal’ Affiliates–
H0 : Affiliate R&D Elasticity = 0                                    < 0.01       < 0.01
H0 : Parent R&D Elasticity = 0                                       0.0163       < 0.01
H0 : Parent-Affiliate R&D Interaction = 0                                         < 0.01
H0 : Avg. Affiliate R&D = Avg. Parent R&D                            0.9218       < 0.01
Retail Affiliates–
H0 : Affiliate R&D Elasticity = 0                                    0.4103       < 0.01
H0 : Parent R&D Elasticity = 0                                       0.0163       < 0.01
H0 : Parent-Affiliate R&D Interaction = 0                                         < 0.01
H0 : Avg. Affiliate R&D = Avg. Parent R&D                            0.0123       0.0130
Services Affiliates–
H0 : Affiliate R&D Elasticity = 0                                    0.0245       < 0.01
H0 : Parent R&D Elasticity = 0                                       0.0163       < 0.01
H0 : Parent-Affiliate R&D Interaction = 0                                         0.0301
H0 : Avg. Affiliate R&D = Avg. Parent R&D                            0.1961       0.4943
                       Alternative Estimation Approaches [Table 8]
Estimation Dynamic Panel Approach–
H0 : Affiliate R&D Elasticity = 0                          0.6540                 0.6890
H0 : Parent R&D Elasticity = 0                             < 0.01                 0.0160
H0 : Parent-Affiliate R&D Interaction = 0                                         0.0722
H0 : Avg. Affiliate R&D = Avg. Parent R&D                  < 0.01                 < 0.01
Notes: This table is a supplement to Tables 4 through 9 and D.8 through D.14 above, and reports p-values
for each hypothesis test and specification indicated.



                                                       38
           R&D Specification:                                     Affiliate    Interact
                                                                  & Parent      Parent
                                                                    (1)           (2)
Estimation Following ACF (2015)–
H0 : Affiliate R&D Elasticity = 0                                  0.6210      0.8520
H0 : Parent R&D Elasticity = 0                                     < 0.01      < 0.01
H0 : Parent-Affiliate R&D Interaction = 0                                      0.0483
H0 : Avg. Affiliate R&D = Avg. Parent R&D                          < 0.01      < 0.01
                      Correlated Unobservables [Table 9]
Placebo Exercise: Investment in Physical Capital–
H0 : Affiliate R&D Elasticity = 0                                  0.0177      0.0266
H0 : Parent Investment in K Elasticity = 0                         0.1787      0.3192
H0 : Parent Investment-Affiliate R&D Interaction = 0                           0.2197
H0 : Avg. Affiliate R&D = Avg. Parent Investment in K              < 0.01      < 0.01
Affiliate-Specific Unobservable–
H0 : Affiliate R&D Elasticity = 0                                  0.9367      0.3149
H0 : Parent R&D Elasticity = 0                                     < 0.01      < 0.01
H0 : Parent-Affiliate R&D Interaction = 0                                      0.8603
H0 : Avg. Affiliate R&D = Avg. Parent R&D                          < 0.01      < 0.01
                          Standard Errors [Table D.6]
Bootstrap Standard Errors–
H0 : Affiliate R&D Elasticity = 0                                  0.0129      < 0.01
H0 : Parent R&D Elasticity = 0                                     < 0.01      < 0.01
H0 : Parent-Affiliate R&D Interaction = 0                                      < 0.01
H0 : Avg. Affiliate R&D = Avg. Parent R&D                          0.7309      < 0.01
Correlated Firm-Year Unobservable–
H0 : Affiliate R&D Elasticity = 0                                  0.0129      < 0.01
H0 : Parent R&D Elasticity = 0                                     < 0.01      < 0.01
H0 : Parent-Affiliate R&D Interaction = 0                                      < 0.01
H0 : Avg. Affiliate R&D = Avg. Parent R&D                          0.7309      < 0.01
                       Additional Robustness [Table D.9]
Subtracting R&D Labor–
H0 : Affiliate R&D Elasticity = 0                                  < 0.01      < 0.01
H0 : Parent R&D Elasticity = 0                                     < 0.01      < 0.01
H0 : Parent-Affiliate R&D Interaction = 0                                      0.0217
H0 : Avg. Affiliate R&D = Avg. Parent R&D                          < 0.01      < 0.01
Royalties–
H0 : Affiliate R&D Elasticity = 0                                  < 0.01      < 0.01
H0 : Parent R&D Elasticity = 0                                     < 0.01      < 0.01
H0 : Parent-Affiliate R&D Interaction = 0                                      0.0162
H0 : Avg. Affiliate R&D = Avg. Parent R&D                          0.8643      0.0322
                           Stability of Parameters [Table D.10]
Value-Added Function–
H0 : Affiliate R&D Elasticity = 0                                  0.0104
H0 : Parent R&D Elasticity = 0                                     0.0246
H0 : (βl , βll , βlk )pre = (βl , βll , βlk )post                  0.3262
H0 : (βk , βkk )pre = (βk , βkk )post                              0.1871
Notes: This table is a supplement to Tables 4 through 9 and D.8 through D.14 above, and
reports p-values for each hypothesis test and specification indicated.



                                               39
            R&D Specification:                                                     Affiliate     Interact
                                                                                   & Parent       Parent
                                                                                     (1)            (2)
                          Stability of Parameters [Table D.10] (cont.)
Value-Added Productivity–
H0 : Affiliate R&D Elasticity = 0 (Pre 1997)                                        0.0154
H0 : Affiliate R&D Elasticity = 0 (Post 1997)                                       0.0386
H0 : Parent R&D Elasticity = 0 (Pre 1997)                                           < 0.01
H0 : Parent R&D Elasticity = 0 (Post 1997)                                          0.0251
H0 : Avg. Affiliate R&D = Avg. Parent R&D (Pre 1997)                                0.8784
H0 : Avg. Affiliate R&D = Avg. Parent R&D (Post 1997)                               0.1830
H0 : Avg. Affiliate R&D (Pre 1997) = Avg. Affiliate R&D (Post 1997)                 0.8784
H0 : Avg. Parent R&D (Pre 1997) = Avg. Parent R&D (Post 1997)                       0.1830
                            Parent-Affiliate Proximity [Table D.11]
Host-Country GDP per Capita–
H0 : Affiliate R&D Elasticity = 0 (High)                                                          0.0437
H0 : Affiliate R&D Elasticity = 0 (Low)                                                           < 0.01
H0 : Parent R&D Elasticity = 0 (High)                                                             0.0259
H0 : Parent R&D Elasticity = 0 (Low)                                                              < 0.01
H0 : Parent-Affiliate R&D Interaction = 0 (High)                                                  0.0892
H0 : Parent-Affiliate R&D Interaction = 0 (Low)                                                   < 0.01
H0 : Avg. Affiliate R&D = Avg. Parent R&D (High)                                                  0.3418
H0 : Avg. Affiliate R&D = Avg. Parent R&D (Low)                                                   < 0.01
Industrial Composition–
H0 : Affiliate R&D Elasticity = 0 (High)                                                          < 0.01
H0 : Affiliate R&D Elasticity = 0 (Low)                                                           0.4755
H0 : Parent R&D Elasticity = 0 (High)                                                             < 0.01
H0 : Parent R&D Elasticity = 0 (Low)                                                              0.0199
H0 : Parent-Affiliate R&D Interaction = 0 (High)                                                  < 0.01
H0 : Parent-Affiliate R&D Interaction = 0 (Low)                                                   0.5926
H0 : Avg. Affiliate R&D = Avg. Parent R&D (High)                                                  0.0130
H0 : Avg. Affiliate R&D = Avg. Parent R&D (Low)                                                   0.6465
                                 Other Industries [Table D.12]
Motor Vehicles–
H0 : Affiliate R&D Elasticity = 0                                                   < 0.01        0.0934
H0 : Parent R&D Elasticity = 0                                                      < 0.01        < 0.01
H0 : Parent-Affiliate R&D Interaction = 0                                                         0.0912
H0 : Avg. Affiliate R&D = Avg. Parent R&D                                           0.3442        0.6338
Pharmaceuticals–
H0 : Affiliate R&D Elasticity = 0                                                   < 0.01        < 0.01
H0 : Parent R&D Elasticity = 0                                                      < 0.01        < 0.01
H0 : Parent-Affiliate R&D Interaction = 0                                                         0.1102
H0 : Avg. Affiliate R&D = Avg. Parent R&D                                           0.3279         0.222
                                Parent Estimates [Table D.14]
H0 : Affiliate R&D Elasticity = 0                                                                 0.8857
H0 : Parent R&D Elasticity = 0                                                      0.0635        0.0674
Notes: This table is a supplement to Tables 4 through 9 and D.8 through D.14 above, and reports p-values for
each hypothesis test and specification indicated.




                                                         40
E   Extra Figures

        Figure E.1: Distribution of Performance Impact of Parent R&D: Evolution over Time




         Notes: For each percentile indicated on the horizontal axis, the vertical axis indicates the long-run
         affiliate performance without parent R&D relative to the long-run affiliate performance level in our
         benchmark specification. All lines correspond to the evolution of performance in (13) and use the
         estimates in column (3) of Table 4. Each line in this figure uses data on R&D investment only for
         the corresponding year.




    Figure E.2: Distribution of Affiliate Performance Relative to Firm Parent: Evolution over Time




         Notes: For each percentile indicated on the horizontal axis, the vertical axis indicates the expected
         long-run affiliate performance relative to the expected long-run parent performance. All lines com-
         pute the expected long-run affiliate performance using the evolution of performance in (13) and the
         estimates in column (3) of Table 4. Each line in this figure uses data on R&D investment only for
         the corresponding year.




                                                               41
                      Figure E.3: Distribution of Gross Return to Parent R&D




       Notes: For each percentile indicated on the horizontal axis, the vertical axis indicates the long-run
       gross return to the investment in R&D performed by U.S. parents (see equation (27)). The solid
       line computes the expected long-run affiliate performance using the estimates in column 3 of Table
       4. The dashed line uses the estimates in column 2 of Table 4. The dotted line uses the estimates
       reported in columns 2 and 4 of Table 7. These estimates are combined with calibrated values of
       (χn , χa , χp , δ) and data on R&D investment for all affiliate-years in the sample used to compute
       the estimates in Table 4. We assume that δ = 0.9 and set (χn , χa , χp ) to equal their median values
       across the distribution of U.S. multinationals.




Figure E.4: Distribution of Gross Return to Parent R&D: Evolution over Time (Without Extremes)




       Notes: For each percentile indicated on the horizontal axis, the vertical axis indicates the long-run
       gross return to the investment in R&D performed by U.S. parents (see equation (27)). All lines
       compute the expected long-run affiliate performance using the estimates in column 3 of Table 4.
       These estimates are combined with calibrated values of (χn , χa , χp , δ) and data on R&D investment
       for all affiliate-years in the sample used to compute the estimates in Table 4. Specifically, we
       assume that δ = 0.9 and set (χn , χa , χp ) to equal their median values across the distribution of
       U.S. multinationals. Each line in this figure uses data on R&D investment and value added only for
       the corresponding year. The reported distributions exclude affiliates below the fifth percentile and
       above the ninetieth percentile. An analogous figure without this censoring appears in Figure E.5.




                                                             42
  Figure E.5: Distribution of Gross Return to Parent R&D: Evolution over Time




Notes: For each percentile indicated on the horizontal axis, the vertical axis indicates the long-run
gross return to the investment in R&D performed by U.S. parents (see equation (27)). All lines
compute the expected long-run affiliate performance using the estimates in column 3 of Table 4.
These estimates are combined with calibrated values of (χn , χa , χp , δ) and data on R&D investment
for all affiliate-years in the sample used to compute the estimates in Table 4. Specifically, we assume
that δ = 0.9 and set (χn , χa , χp ) = (1, 1, 1). Each line in this figure uses data on R&D investment
and value added only for the corresponding year.




                Figure E.6: Distribution of Gross Return to Parent R&D




Notes: For each percentile indicated on the horizontal axis, the vertical axis indicates the long-run
gross return to the investment in R&D performed by U.S. parents (see equation (27)). All the three
lines use the estimates in column 3 of Table 4 and assume δ = 0.9. The three lines differ in the
calibrated values of (χn , χa , χp ). The solid line sets these three parameters to the percentile 25 of
their corresponding distribution. The dashed line sets them to the median of their corresponding
distribution. The dotted line sets them to the percentile 75 of their corresponding distribution.




                                                        43
            Figure E.7: Gross Return to Parent R&D (Without Extremes):
                         Accounting for Value-added Growth Only




Notes: For each percentile indicated on the horizontal axis, the vertical axis indicates the long-run
gross return to the investment in R&D performed by U.S. parents (see equation (27)). All the three
lines use the estimates in column 3 of Table 4 and assume δ = 0.9. The three lines assume χn = 0
and differ in the calibrated values of (χa , χp ). The solid line sets these three parameters to the
percentile 25 of their corresponding distribution. The dashed line sets them to the median of their
corresponding distribution. The dotted line sets them to the percentile 75 of their corresponding
distribution. The reported distributions exclude affiliates below the fifth percentile and above the
ninetieth percentile. An analogous figure without this censoring appears in Figure E.6 in Appendix
E.



                        Figure E.8: Gross Return to Parent R&D:
                         Accounting for Value-Added Growth Only




Notes: For each percentile indicated on the horizontal axis, the vertical axis indicates the long-run
gross return to the investment in R&D performed by U.S. parents (see equation (27)). All the three
lines use the estimates in column 3 of Table 4 and assume δ = 0.9. The three lines assume χn = 0
and differ in the calibrated values of (χa , χp ). The solid line sets these three parameters to the
percentile 25 of their corresponding distribution. The dashed line sets them to the median of their
corresponding distribution. The dotted line sets them to the percentile 75 of their corresponding
distribution.



                                                      44
Figure E.9: Distribution of Affiliate Share of Gross Return to Parent R&D: Evolution over Time




      Notes: For each percentile indicated on the horizontal axis, the vertical axis indicates the the share
      of the long-run gross return to investment in R&D performed by U.S. parents that can be attributed
      to affiliates. All lines compute the expected long-run affiliate performance using the estimates in
      column (3) of Table 4. These estimates are combined with calibrated values of (χn , χa , χp , δ) and
      data on R&D investment for all affiliate-years in the sample used to compute the estimates in Table
      4. We assume that δ = 0.9 and (χn , χa , χp ) = (1, 1, 1).




                                                            45
