                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  THE IMPORTANCE OF FAMILY INCOME IN THE FORMATION AND EVOLUTION
               OF NON-COGNITIVE SKILLS IN CHILDHOOD

                                        Jason Fletcher
                                       Barbara L. Wolfe

                                      Working Paper 22168
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22168


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2016




The authors thank Elaine Liu, Elise Gould, and Jane Waldfogel for helpful comments. Fletcher
thanks the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation Health & Society Scholars program for its financial
support. The results in this paper are not the result of for-pay consulting. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Jason Fletcher and Barbara L. Wolfe. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Importance of Family Income in the Formation and Evolution of Non-Cognitive Skills
in Childhood
Jason Fletcher and Barbara L. Wolfe
NBER Working Paper No. 22168
April 2016
JEL No. I21,J24

                                         ABSTRACT

Little is known about the relationship between family income and children’s non-cognitive (or
socio-emotional) skill formation. This is an important gap, as these skills have been hypothesized
to be a critical link between early outcomes and adult socioeconomic status. This paper presents
new evidence of the importance of family income in the formation and evolution of children’s
non-cognitive skills using a recent US panel dataset that tracks children between grades K-5.
Findings suggest an important divergence in non-cognitive skills based on family income that
accumulates over time and does not seem to be explained by children’s health status differences.


Jason Fletcher
University of Wisconsin-Madison
La Follette School of Public Affairs
1225 Observatory Drive
Madison, WI 53706
and NBER
jfletcher@lafollette.wisc.edu

Barbara L. Wolfe
1225 Observatory Dr
University of Wisconsin
Madison, WI 53706
and NBER
BWolfe@wisc.edu
The Importance of Family Income in the Formation and Evolution of Non-Cognitive Skills in

Childhood

“Genius is 1 percent inspiration and 99 percent perspiration.” Thomas Edison



Introduction:

       Parental socio-economic status is an important determinant of a child’s future socio-

economic status (SES), and the pathway to this link is thought to be some combination of genes

(inheritance), parental time investments in the child weighted by the quality of that time, access

to marketed goods and services, community resources and other aspects of the home

environment. The intermediate outcome of this combination of factors is a variety of forms of

human capital, and ones most frequently studied are health and cognitive development (years of

schooling and test scores, for example.) Numerous papers have been written on poor-nonpoor

gaps in health and school performance among children but far fewer on non-cognitive gaps by

SES, even though evidence is accumulating that these non-cognitive skills may also be critically

important as determinants of future success.

       Beginning primarily with work by Case et al. (2002), economists and other social

scientists have focused on the childhood origins of the large differences in health and economic

status during adulthood. This work showed that the relationship between family income and

child health grows stronger as children age, likely in part due to the cumulative effects of living

in low-income households who face associated stress, more frequent health shocks and limited

access to health care. This research has spawned a large set of papers that show that these

empirical relationships can be found across countries with very different welfare and health




                                                                                                      1"
"
systems as well as across time periods (Currie and Stabile 2003, Condliffe and Link 2008,

Khanama et al. 2009, Propper et al. 2007; See Fletcher and Wolfe 2014 for review).

              A relatively less studied but related question is whether similar patterns exist in other

areas of childhood development, such as so-called “non-cognitive” (socio-emotional/

personality) skills. As opposed to cognitive skills, which are measured by scores on tests such as

reading, math, history or science as well as IQ tests, noncognitive skills are both more difficult to

measure and there is less agreement on which ones are important.1,2 The limited agreement on

both the conceptualization of noncognitive skills and inconsistent measurement may contribute

to the lack of attention by economists.

             The limited study of non-cognitive or socio-emotional skills is a potentially important

omission since socio-emotional skills may be a critical factor in predicting a range of important

adult outcomes. This domain of skill formation has also become the subject of intense study in

economics in recent years3. For example, work with the NLSY (Heckman, Sixtrud and Urzua

2006) found that locus of control and self-esteem were likely critical in determining years of

schooling4,5. In a recent overview paper, Brunello and Schlotter (2011) suggest that

noncognitive skills are important as determinants of these skills but also of cognitive skills more

""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
1
  For adults, economists have tended to use a five-factor model related to personality psychology: conscientiousness,
emotional stability, agreeableness, extraversion and autonomy (Nyhus and Pns, 2005). These overlap but are not
entirely identical to the big five among psychologists who use “OCEAN”; openness to experience,
conscientiousness, extraversion, agreeableness and neuroticism (similar to emotional stability). See John 1990.
2
  For children, while there is some overlap (independence for example), there is somewhat more emphasis on
maturity, learning skills, motivation, attention, patience, and the ability to act appropriately (externalizing and
internalizing behaviors)(see ter Weel 2008 and related papers in the symposium covered by the 2008 volume of the
Journal of Human Resources).
3
  Heckman stated...”the preoccupation with cognition and academic smarts as measured by test scores to the
exclusion of social adaptability and motivation causes a serious bias in the evaluation of many human capital
interventions..” 1999, p. 1 Heckman J, (1999), Policies to Foster Human Capital, NBER Working Paper 7288
4
  Their results suggest that going from the 25th to 75th percentile in the distribution of non-cognitive skills is
associated with a 25 percentage point increase in the probability of having graduated college by age 30
5
  Fletcher (2012) shows evidence that the personality trait of extroversion is positively related to labor market
outcomes. A recent paper (Savelyev, 2012) also documents the importance of one particular noncognitive skill,
conscientiousness, as a determinant of life expectancy for men.

                                                                                                                   2"
"
generally and cite evidence of the importance of this under-researched area of human capital.

They also stress the very limited knowledge of the determinants of noncognitive skills and raise

(but do not answer) the question of whether these are malleable and might respond to

interventions.

        The objective of this paper is to increase our knowledge of the ways in which family

socioeconomic status, in particular income, influences the acquisition of noncognitive skills as a

child grows up. We study this issue for a particular set of noncognitive skills; a priori we have

no expectation that the tie from parental income to noncognitive skills will be similar, much less

the same, across all noncognitive skills. In supplementary analysis, we also attempt to ascertain

the links from noncognitive skills to cognitive skills and/or whether noncognitive skills appear to

be influenced by earlier cognitive skills in order to further understand the importance and

determinants of the various non-cognitive measures in the data.

        Increasing our understanding of the factors critical in explaining the formation of socio-

emotional skills during childhood and also whether the divergence in these skills is in part due to

family resources is our focus. Evidence on this question may provide clues on whether policies

that increase the resources of low income households may have positive effects on children’s

socio-emotional development, though the descriptive results in this paper serve only as a first

step in this direction. .

        This paper uses a recent panel study from the US that tracks a national sample of children

between Kindergarten and 5th grade to examine the associations between family income and a

broad set of measures of children’s socio-emotional skill development. The panel nature of the

data allows measures of permanent family income to be assessed and the sampling structure of

the data allows the inclusion of neighborhood measures of human capital, including income. The



                                                                                                     3"
"
rich set of survey questions enables us to separate the potential direct effects of family income on

skills with the indirect effects that might operate through children’s health. In particular, we

hypothesize that children growing up in homes with greater income will 1) have higher socio-

emotional (noncognitive) skills and 2) that these effects will accumulate over time such that the

tie between family income and each socio-emotional scale variable will increase as the child

ages. The results from the analysis suggest important deficits in socio-emotional skills at school-

entry for children from low-income households that grow as children age. The deficits are

apparent for all measured skills and each skill has a unique trajectory over time, though by 5th

grade the original differences by family income have often doubled or tripled in size. We also

find very little evidence that the deficits are driven by differences in children's health.



Background Literature

       Although there is a substantial body of work in psychology and other allied disciplines

exploring aspects of the determinants and consequences of non-cognitive skills, much less

research exists within economics. What is available is relatively recent and has focused on the

consequences of non-cognitive skills, typically on labor market outcomes or schooling outcomes.

In contrast, virtually no research in the economics literature has focused on understanding the

determinants of non-cognitive skills or their evolution using panel data. Broadly, consequences

of poor non-cognitive skills have been found in several areas of the labor market, including job

performance, wages, and occupational choice, as well as in educational outcomes for children of

all ages. Additionally, some economics research has attempted to understand the potential

complementarities between non-cognitive skills and cognitive skills in these labor market

outcomes and have broadly shown extensive complementarity.



                                                                                                    4"
"
             Amongst the early economics study of the importance of non-cognitive skills was the

study of general education degrees (or GED) recipients (Heckman and Rubinstein 2001), which

provided evidence that while GED recipients have cognitive test scores equal to those of high

school graduates, on average, they only have earnings equal to those of high school dropouts.

One explanation for this pattern is that GED recipients tend to have limited non-cognitive skills.

It is this lack of skills that prevents them from being successful in the military, the labor force

and in personal relationships.

             With this evidence on labor market outcomes, there has also been interest in whether

educational attainments and health are affected directly. For example, in an early examination,

Coleman and DeLeire (2003) use a measure of locus of control6 to explore the importance of this

particular noncognitive trait in influencing years of schooling. More recently, a broad overview

paper on personality characteristics (a variety of noncognitive factors) and their importance for

years of schooling found that conscientiousness was an important predictor of both grades and

years of schooling, while openness to experience was important for years of schooling (Borghans

et al 2006). This paper reports on a meta analysis from the psychology literature which looks at

evidence on the importance of personality traits in explaining job performance, health and

schooling success. This review suggested that while IQ was a more important factor than any of

the big 5 personality traits, conscientiousness was an important factor for college grades and

years of schooling. Indeed, conscientiousness was the single most important predictor of life

expectancy (more important than IQ), but the two were reversed in terms of predicting job

performance. Conscientiousness was found to be important for all jobs while IQ was most

""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
6
  Locus of control refers to the extent to which individuals believe that they can control events that may affect them.
This measure ranges from internal locus of control, where individuals believe they generally have control over their
lives, and external locus of control, where individuals believe that others (the environment, a higher power, etc.)
control their outcomes.

                                                                                                                      5"
"
important for complex jobs, including professors, scientists and senior managers (Schmidt and

Hunter 2004). Coneus, Gernandt and Saam (2009) also explored this issue using the German

Socio-economic panel and found an important role for noncognitive skills in reducing the

probability of dropping out of school and that the importance of these skills increased with age.

       Further decoupling the importance of non-cognitive skills for education and labor market

success, Judge and Hurst (2007) showed that positive self reports of self esteem, internal locus of

control, and emotional stability usefully predict future income over and above both grades and

years of schooling using data for the U.S. from NLSY 1979. In essence they find that more

schooling and better grades are important for those with positive personality traits but do not pay

off otherwise. They speculate that those who rate high on these traits search for challenging and

rewarding jobs, persist on difficult tasks, and are motivated to tackle any failure.

       This emerging evidence on the importance of non-cognitive skills on adult

socioeconomic outcomes then leads to the question of how early in life these skills appear to be

important determinants of outcomes. A study using British data attempted to understand the

importance of cognitive and noncognitive skills on years of schooling (Carneiro, Crawford and

Goodman 2006). Noncognitive skills were measured by social adjustment at age 11 and the

authors found that children who had higher levels of social adjustment at age 11 were more

likely to remain in school past age 16 and to get a higher degree. They also found that the

influence of higher cognitive skills on these two outcomes is low if social adjustment is low but

important if social adjustment skills are high, again suggesting interactive effects.

       With these findings suggesting the importance of the early development of non-cognitive

skills on later life outcomes, a few tentative policy-related findings have also emerged. For

example, Cunha et al. (2006) suggest that much of the effectiveness of early childhood



                                                                                                    6"
"
interventions seem to come from increasing noncognitive skills and motivation. The authors

suggest that while IQ is fairly stable after age 10, self-control, motivation and other traits are

malleable at later ages (see also Heckman 2000).7,8

             This emerging evidence of the importance of non-cognitive skills for adolescent and adult

socioeconomic outcomes as well as the preliminary work suggesting that these skills are

malleable for school-aged children suggest a need to further document the critical determinants

of non-cognitive skills during childhood.9 Indeed, there is very little evidence of the links

between family income and socioemotional skills development during childhood10. One of the

few examinations in the literature was done by Violato et al. (2011), utilizing data from the UK.

The authors find substantial links that are “explained” by several family processes such as

parental stress and investments in children. However, these authors focus on younger aged

children (through age 5), while the current paper traces outcomes between the ages of 6 and 12.11



Data

             In this paper we use the Early Childhood Longitudinal Study-Kindergarten Cohort data

(ECLS-K). These panel data were collected beginning in 1998/99 and follow children from

Kindergarten through 5th Grade (in spring of 2004), so that the ages of the children span from



""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
7
  Though, as one would expect, there is also great persistence in these measures during childhood. See Morgan et al.
2009 for evidence of the persistence of externalizing and internalizing behaviors between ages 6-12.
8
  This type of evidence is also consistent with evidence using animals (see Knudson et al. 2006 and Suomi 1999),
where experimental manipulation of the resources early in development are tracked to show relationships with
measures of motivation or other “non-cognitive skills”.
9
  Additionally, Gupta and Simonsen (2010) provide evidence that child care quality influences non-cognitive
outcomes for some children at age seven using Danish data.
10
   There is more conclusive evidence of the impacts of family income on cognitive skills. For example, see Dahl
and Lochner (2012) for one such analysis.
11
   The data also contain a limited number of socioemotional skills and these skills are often not assessed the same
way as children age. The authors do include a temperament scale for 9-month old children and a behavior scale for
ages 3 and 5.

                                                                                                                  7"
"
roughly 6 to 12 years old12. The core survey contains reports by parents, children, and teachers

in a variety of standard domains, though the study focuses on educational experiences of school-

age children.13 Since income is measured at each wave, we construct a measure of “permanent

income” that averages the income measures up to the current survey grade.14 In addition to

standard sociodemographic and education questions, the study collected direct cognitive and

noncognitive assessments in each wave, including reading and mathematics test scores, and

social/emotional scales. The social and emotional development assessments were created to

focus on aspects of social competence that include social skills (self control, cooperation) and

problem behaviors (impulsivity and aggression). These assessments were formed based on

reports of both teachers and parents, though we focus on teacher reports in this paper15. The

social ratings scale (SRS) is an adaptation of the Social Skills Rating System developed by

Gresham and Elliott (1990), where frequency scales are used. The behaviors are reported as

exhibited: 1 never; 2 occasionally/sometimes; 3 regularly but not all the time; and 4 most of the

time.

        The scales included in the data are meant to capture multiple domains of socio-emotional

skills and are based on work by Gresham & Elliott (1990). The primary aggregated scales are

under the umbrella of a set of Social Ratings Scales, with labels including “Interpersonal Skills”,

“Externalizing Symptoms”, “Internalizing Symptoms”, “Self Control Skills” and “Approaches to
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
12
   While the panel follows children through 8th grade, there are no teacher-reported socio-emotional measures
collected during the 8th grade wave.
13
   According to the ECLS, trained evaluators assessed children in schools while parents were surveyed by phone.
Teachers and school administrators completed questionnaires at their schools. Details on assessments can be found
at http://nces.ed.gov/ecls/kinderassessments.asp.
14
   For example, the measure of permanent income for 3rd graders is the average of the income reports for
Kindergarten, First Grade, and Third Grade for each student. This has the disadvantage of increasing in accuracy as
the child ages. We prefer it to permanent income across all grades as that measure would include measures after the
observed measure of noncognitive skills.
15
   Teacher assessments are likely to be comparable, at least across children in the same classroom, than those of
individual parents. Teacher assessments may be relative within their current and past classrooms; nevertheless we
view them as likely more consistent and informative than parent’s assessments, which are based on a far smaller set
of children.

                                                                                                                  8"
"
Learning.” The subcomponents of the Approaches to Learning scale have been released to

researchers through a separate contractual agreement and include the following items: “Keeps

belongings organized”; “Shows eagerness to learn new things”; “Works independently”; “Easily

adapts to changes in routine”; “Persists in completing tasks”; and “Pays attention well”.

       Table 1 presents summary statistics for grades Kindergarten and 5th grade and include all

children present in the sample for each grade. The social ratings scales range from 1-4, but since

they are averages of many sub-scales, they are “continuous”. The scales do not substantially

increase between Kindergarten and 5th grade suggesting that teachers may treat them as relative

rather than absolute skills. Special education rates increase from 4 to 10% between K and 5th

grade. The similarities in the observable characteristics (e.g. maternal education, birth weight) in

the table between Kindergarten and 5th grade suggest that attrition issues are not substantial.

Table 2 further divides the Approaches to Learning scale into its relevant subscales. Since these

sub-scales include values of 1-4, we also provide the descriptive distributions of the sub-scales in

the sample. Many scales are quite stable between Kindergarten and 5th grade, though most show

slight decreases, with the “eager to learn” subscale exhibiting the most prominent decline as

these children age.

       Below we test our hypothesis that as children age there is an increasing tie between

family income and the full set of available social-emotional skill indices. Thus we hypothesize

that the disparity in noncognitive skills increases over the childhood period with children in

higher income families increasingly being more advantaged. Our hypothesis is consistent with

most evidence examining childhood health and some evidence regarding cognitive outcomes

(e.g. Case et al. 2002). Our prior work using the same data set we use here provided evidence of

the steepening of the income gradient with regard to health (Fletcher and Wolfe, 2011). We



                                                                                                   9"
"
believe that the same link will exist between income and noncognitive skills. These skills are

likely to be sensitive to stress, family stability, parents’ emotional status and safety in one’s

neighborhood. All of these are tied to income. All of them have some likely overlap in the way

they influence health16. It is on this basis that we formed our hypothesis. In particular we

hypothesize that children growing up in homes with greater income will 1) have higher socio-

emotional (noncognitive) skills and 2) that these differences will increase over time such that the

tie between family income and each socio-emotional scale variable will be greater as the child

ages. The basis for our hypothesis is that children in lower income families are likely to

experience more stress, more family instability, see fewer successful role models in their

neighborhood, and may also be more exposed to environmental hazards, among other

experiences of disadvantage.17

             To test these hypotheses, we employ a standard empirical human capital model:

                            Sit = β0 + β1 log(Yit ) + δX it + ε it

where Sit the skill of interest for child i at time t is a function of family income and a vector of

demographic control variables including age, sex, race, parental characteristics such as

education, age, and marital status. We expect that the coefficient on log Y will be positive in our

regression estimates for each grade. We also expect that the coefficient on log Y will be larger at

higher grades. In some specifications, we add measures of child health, such as birth weight and

self (mother) reported health status to potentially separate the direct effects of family income on


""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
16
   In Fletcher and Wolfe 2014 we provide evidence on the income gradient of health where the coefficient on
income is increasing as a child ages (that is, is in a higher grade). All of the coefficients on log family income are
significant at the 1 percent level. The other control variables all have the expected signs but few are statistically
significant at standard levels: the exceptions are racial dummy variables and maternal education. The increasing tie
between income and health can be substantiated by converting the coefficients into marginal effects.
17
   Recent evidence shows that gray matter in areas of the brain such as the prefrontal lobe, which is important for
executive function or non cognitive functions, exhibit a maturation gap among children growing up in poor families.
See Pollak et al 2015. That work shows this exists even for children of low income parents who are well-educated.

                                                                                                                   10"
"
skill development from the indirect effects that may operate through child health including early

child health (Case et al. 2002). We expect that using permanent income (income measured in all

years prior and contemporary with the time noncognitive skills are measured) will show a steeper

tie between income and noncognitive outcomes than the use of single-year current income. This

is because noncognitive skills develop over time and so will be influenced by prior income as

well as current income and because permanent income is a better measure of family income. We

conduct a test of this hypothesis to try and separate the effect of less noise in the measure from a

cumulative effect. Specifications use OLS regression analysis, though the aggregated scales are

continuous and the sub-scales take values 1-4, as described above.



Results

       In all analyses that follow, we use the 5th grade longitudinal sample weights provided in

the ECLSK. We begin by examining whether there are differences in socioemotional skills by

family income as children enter school. In Table 3, we present the income differences in our set

of socioemotional skills at Kindergarten. The first three measures of socioemotional skills,

approaches to learning, interpersonal skills and self-control are all positive indicators; the last

two, externalizing and internalizing are negative indicators. All five show the expected

relationship to a family’s permanent income at Kindergarten entry. Externalizing appears

somewhat less robustly tied to family income – the statistical significance is only at the 10

percent level. Overall these simple relationships suggest that children from lower income

families begin school with disadvantages in terms of their noncognitive skills and that this holds

across multiple measure of skills. We expect these differences to grow, but it is possible that




                                                                                                      11"
"
once children spend time in school, differences tied to parental resources could be reduced or

even eliminated.

             In Table 4, we begin our examination of the determinants of trajectories of

socioemotional skills by focusing on the Approaches to Learning scale18. Our focus is on the tie

to family income. We find substantial evidence that children living in higher income families

have higher scores on approaches to learning. And the general pattern is one of increasing

advantage as the children age though the pattern is primarily observed between K and 5th grade.

The results (coefficients) show that the tie from income to approaches to learning more than

doubles from kindergarten to the fifth grade.19 In terms of other included variables, males have

lower scores on this scale than females—a nearly 1/3 standard deviation difference that grows as

the children age. Black students enter school with lower scores on this scale and this difference

also grows to over 1/10th of a standard deviations. In contrast, Hispanic students have a relative

advantage that fluctuates over time in comparison to whites. Children with parents with higher

education also have small and persistent advantages on this skill measure.

             Table 5 shows these results are quite similar for each of the subscales: attention,

organized, eager to learn, independent, adaptable and persistence. All of these exhibit an

analogous pattern in terms of the tie to family income. The ties are strongest for organization and

persistence. We provide formal tests of statistical differences in these tables; typically the

differences between Kindergarten and first grade are not statistically significant nor are the

differences between 3rd and 5th grade, though there are typically substantial differences between

Kindergarten and 3rd and/or 5th grades.

""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
18
   Recall that the scale includes measures such as: “Keeps belongings organized”; “Shows eagerness to learn new
things”; “Works independently”; “Easily adapts to changes in routine”; “Persists in completing tasks”; and “Pays
attention well”.
19
   The exception to this trend is the result for grade 1, but this too shows a positive tie between parental income and
the approaches to learning scale.

                                                                                                                     12"
"
       Table 6 presents results for several additional indices of socio-emotional behavior, self-

control, interpersonal skills, and mental health outcomes and special education status. Consistent

with the results for approaches to learning in Table 4, we find sizeable differences in many of the

skill indices by family income, and these gaps double in size as children age from kindergarten

through 5th grade. For mental health outcomes, we examine internalizing and externalizing

scales. Internalizing scales are more akin to measures of depression and anxiety whereas

externalizing measures are typically thought of as emotional behavioral disorders and conduct

disorders. We find relatively large differences in the evolution of these scales as children age.

Children from poorer families have higher externalizing scores at school entry, but the disparity

is relatively constant beginning with first grade and continuing through fifth grade. In contrast,

children from poorer families also enter Kindergarten with higher internalizing score, and this

gap triples by 5th grade. We find little evidence of initial differences in special education status

by family income, though by 5th grade family income is a strong predictor of placement.

Finally, we present a summary measure of all the socioemotional skills in the data using factor

analysis and again find large initial differences in these skills at Kindergarten entry that grow

substantially by fifth grade.



Robustness and Potential Mechanisms

       We consider several additional examinations of potential mechanisms that may account

for a portion of the patterns we find in the data. We first ask whether it is family income that

directly influences non-cognitive skills or whether it is the purchase of attendance at schools with




                                                                                                    13"
"
peers who have higher noncognitive skills20. The results presented in Table 7 suggest that family

income plays a direct role but that part of the influence may be through “purchasing” better

school peers, which may occur through paying for private school tuition or, more commonly,

through purchasing housing in areas with “better schools” (defined here according to average

noncognitive ability of students attending the school). For most estimates and nearly all of our

measures of noncognitive skills, including, in particular, the combined factor, self control,

organization, eager to learn, interpersonal skills, adaptability independent and approaches to

learning, the direct influence of family income is positive, it increases as the child ages, and the

family level gradient is reduced by the inclusion of the average noncognitive factor of other

classmates sampled in the ECLS-K21.

             Interestingly, for many of these outcomes the results for 5th grade differ and suggest that

when the school-level noncognitive factor is included, the influence of family income actually

increases. These results then provide evidence of the robustness of the income gradient of

noncognitive skills and also suggest that school composition in terms of these skills may be most

important in the earliest grades. This is consistent with literature on the importance of readiness

to learn in the earliest grades, a philosophy tied to Head Start funding.22 It is also consistent with

findings on the Perry Pre-School project, which did not appear to increase IQ, though it did

improve scores and personality traits. (Heckman et al 2010).


""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
20
   We recognize that this approach faces the difficulties identified by Manski (1993) as the reflection problem.
However we are less interested in how the school group influences the individual but rather whether inclusion of the
group “behaviors” reduces the influence of family income. Given this we proceed but with caution.
21
   An alternative explanation of these findings is that, since the socioemotional skill measures are reported by the
teacher for all children in the classroom, we are in part controlling for teacher styles of reporting and not objective
measures of skills.
22
   When we run a set of similar estimates using test scores as the outcome and a test score factor for the school we
find a somewhat similar pattern. In these specifications, there is a strong tie between family income and
performance on tests (math, reading or a combination) that is increasing over grades K to 8th grade. The inclusion of
the school mean test score factor reduces the influence of income slightly with the greatest reduction in Kindergarten
(by more than half) but only by about 10% by grades 5 and 8. Results are available from the authors by request.

                                                                                                                   14"
"
             A second examination we include is a focus on the potential links between child health

and socioemotional skills and family income. As we noted above, there is substantial evidence

of strong links between family income and childhood health across many countries and time

periods, including the dataset used in this study (see Fletcher and Wolfe 2014). Thus, it could be

the case that an important channel linking family income and children’s non-cognitive skills is

through this established health channel. Our results in Table 8 suggest that child health could

play a role in the process. For about half of our socioemotional measures, we find statistical

differences in specifications that control for lagged child health compared with our baseline

results. In general, controlling for health reduces the links between family income and

socioemotional skill by 5th grade, though these reductions do not change the qualitative results

we present earlier and are typically in the 15-30% range of reductions in the socioemotional skill

gradients.

Robustness: Testing alternative measures of income

             In our core estimates, we used permanent family income defined as the average income

over all years up to and including the year the child is being observed. But there are alternative

definitions that can be used as well – current income (year t income), a rolling average of three

separate observations of income (such that income in kindergarten is the average of kindergarten,

first and third grades, and so on); the latter approach has the advantage of consistency in

removing “noise” in our measure of income.23 We explore these in our tests of robustness in

Appendix Table B. Both of these compare results for grades K, 1, 3 and 5 for each of these three

measures of family income for all of our dependent variables. The other variables in the

regressions remain unchanged.


""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
23
     We note however that the standard deviations of our various measures of income do not differ substantially.

                                                                                                                   15"
"
             The results overall suggest a good deal of consistency across these measures of income.

Although in principle the measure of permanent income has the disadvantage of including

income flows following the measurements of socioemotional skills, the alternative measures of

income each suffer disadvantages. Contemporaneous income (Measure 2 in the table) is

predicted to lead to attenuated estimates because of its noise as a single measure. The use of

rolling averages (Measures 3 and 4) have the advantage that they do not include “future” income

but have the disadvantage of becoming more precise as children age (we only have one measure

of income for Kindergarteners but four measures for 5th graders). With these issues outlined, the

practical impact of the various disadvantages of each measure appears to be small for our

qualitative results. Indeed, as shown in Appendix Table B, all of our results are substantially

robust across the four measures of income, with the Kindergarten results far below those for fifth

grade. The final column reports the p-values of a joint test of differences in these coefficients

based on income measurement compared with the baseline measures we use in the main text; we

only find one statistical difference and the even then the coefficients are qualitatively the same.

Figure 1 captures the differences.24



Robustness: Child Fixed Effects

             While a substantial pathway linking family income with child noncognitive scores does

not appear to be primarily through school (and peer) selection, we may be capturing

intergenerational links between parent and child noncognitive skills that could be from shared

genetic backgrounds. To partially examine this issue, we estimated a pooled set of results using

child fixed effects. For a number of reasons, we consider these results as a check of robustness
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
24
  "Another robustness check we present in Appendix Table C is whether using an unbalanced sample differs with the
results using a balanced sample. Although statistical tests uncover differences in the coefficients in a few cases, the
qualitative results do not change using the balanced sample.

                                                                                                                    16"
"
but otherwise not conclusive nor our preferred specifications. Adding interactions between

family income and survey wave (i.e. grade) is the way we examine whether the income effects

are driven by time-invariant factors.25 These specifications have some disadvantages, including

the need to use contemporaneous measures of income and the reduction in both exogenous and

endogenous variation in the processes we seek to understand. In particular, in the fixed effects

model, we remove the “permanent” component of income, which is the primary focus of this

article; in addition, measurement error in family income and in the socioemotional measures

could attenuate our results without signaling an important role for intergenerational transmission

of socioemotional skills tied to income. These analyses also do not adequately take into account

the dynamic effects26 of income on socioemotional skill accumulation, which limits our ability to

interpret the results.

             Appendix Table D reports these results. We find evidence that controlling for child fixed

effects (and thus time-invariant parental characteristics) does not eliminate the effects of income,

although the effects are clearly smaller and less significant. The estimated pattern is suggestive

evidence that income is not simply proxying for parental non-cognitive skills rather than of

family resources. This result is consistent with the limited role of parental schooling in our core

estimates.



Conclusion

             In this paper, we use a recent US panel of school-aged children followed between

Kindergarten and 5th grade to examine the effects of family income on children’s non-cognitive

""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
25
   We thank Elaine Liu for suggesting this line of inquiry.
26
  "One way to think about this issue is that, like sibling fixed effects models, if there are spillovers between units, the
estimates will be biased. Likewise, if income in one year has an impact on future socioemotional skills, we would
be capturing these within-person spillovers and thus estimating biased effects.

                                                                                                                        17"
"
skill development. Although economists have long examined the relationships between family

circumstances and children’s health and cognitive development (i.e. school performance and test

scores), there is very limited research providing information examining the potential effects on a

broader and complementary set of skills. We find strong evidence of the importance of this often

overlooked set of outcomes.

       For our national sample, we document several stylized facts. We provide evidence that

children enter Kindergarten with substantial differences in non-cognitive skill endowments based

on family resources. We then trace the evolution of these skill differences as children age

through the 5th grade (12 years old) and show that the disadvantages grow substantially—often

doubling or tripling in magnitude over the six years of this study window. We finally assess

whether these skill differences can be explained by alternative measures of income, differences

in children’s health, differences in parental time invariant characteristics (such as their own non-

cognitive skills) or differences in peer (classmate) skills. In each case, we find our results to be

largely robust to these alternatives, suggesting a compelling link between family income and

children’s non-cognitive skill development net of these other factors that are independently

associated with family income.

       These results are important for understanding the intergenerational transmission of

poverty or SES more generally. They suggest that beyond those outcomes already studied

(health and cognitive outcomes) that family income also influences noncognitive skills. These

skills are themselves important in determining an individual’s success in schooling and in later

employment outcomes. Noncognitive skill differences seem to be an important route by which

one’s family of origin influences one’s future family’s SES.




                                                                                                   18"
"
References

Blau DM. (1999). The effect of income on child development. Review of Economics and

Statistics 81: 261–276.



Borghans, L., Duckworth, A., Heckman, J. and B. ter Weel (2008). The Economics and

Psychology of Personality Traits. Journal of Human Resources, 43(4), 972-105



Brunello, Giorgio and Martin Schlotter (2011). Non Cognitive Skills and Personality Traits:

Labour Market Relevance and their Development. IZA DP No. 5743. May. in Education &

Training System



Carneiro, P., Crawford, C. and A. Goodman (2007). The Impact of Early Cognitive and

Non-Cognitive Skills on Later Outcomes, CEE Discussion Paper 009



Case, Anne, Darren Lubotsky, and Christina Paxson. (2002). Economic Status and Health in

Childhood: The Origins of the Gradient.” American Economic Review, 92(5): 1308-1334



Classens, Amy, Greg Duncan, and Mimi Engel. (2009). “Kindergarten Skills and Fifth-grade

Achievement: Evidence from the ECLS-K.” Economics of Education Review, 28(4): 415-427



Coleman, Margo and Thomas DeLeire. (2003). “An Economic Model of Locus of Control and

the Human Capital Investment Decision.” Journal of Human Resources 38(3): 701-721.




                                                                                              19"
"
Condliffe, Simon, and Charles R. Link. (2008). “The Relationship between Economic Status and

Child Health: Evidence from the United States.” American Economic Review 98(5): 1605–1618.



Coneus, K., J. Gernandt, and M. Saam (2009). Noncognitive skills, school achievements and

educational dropout. Discussion Paper 09-019, ZEW,Mannheim, Germany



Crosnoe, Robert. (2006). “Health and the Education of Children from Racial/Ethnic Minority

and Immigrant Families.” Journal of Health and Social Behavior 47: 77-93



Cunha, F., J. J. Heckman, L. J. Lochner and D. V. Masterov. (2006)“Interpreting the Evidence

on Life Cycle Skill Formation,” Eds. E.A. Hanushek and F. Welch, Handbook of the Economics

of Education, 12, 697-812, Amsterdam: North-Holland.



Currie, Janet, and Mark Stabile. (2003). “Socioeconomic Status and Child Health: Why Is the

Relationship Stronger for Older Children?” American Economic Review 93(5): 1813–1823.



Dooley M, Stewart J.(2007). Family income, parenting styles and child behavioural-emotional

outcomes. Health Economics 16: 145–162.



Fletcher, Jason M. (2012). “The Effects of Personality Traits on Adult Labor Market

Outcomes: Evidence From Siblings” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization




                                                                                               20"
"
Fletcher, Jason M. and Barbara L. Wolfe. (2014). “Increasing Our Understanding of the Health-

Income Gradient.” Health Economics



Gresham, F., and Elliot, S. (1990). Social skills rating system. Circle Pines, MN: American

Guidance Services, Inc.



Grossman, Michael. 1972. “On the Concept of Health Capital and the Demand for Health.”

Journal of Political Economy 80(2): 223–255.



Gupta, ND, and Marianne Simonsen, 2010. "Non-cognitive child outcomes and universal high

quality child care" Journal of Public Economics, 94(1-2) 20-43.



Hair, N, J. Hansen, B Wolfe and S Pollak 2015 JAMA Pediatrics



Heckman J, (1999), Policies to Foster Human Capital, NBER Working Paper 7288



Heckman, J.J. (2000). “Policies to foster human capital”. Research in Economics 54 (1), 3–56.



Heckman J. 2008. Role of income and family influence on child outcomes. Annals of the New

York Academy of Science 1136: 307–323.



Heckman, J. J. and Y. Rubinstein. (2001)“The Importance of Noncognitive Skills: Lessons from

the GED Testing Program,”. American Economic Review, 91(2), 145-149.



                                                                                                21"
"
Heckman, J., Stixrud, N. and S. Urzua (2006). The Effects of Cognitive and Noncognitive

Abilities on Labor Market Outcomes and Social Behavior. Journal of Labor Economics 24 (3),

411-48



Heckman, J, Seong Hyeok Moon, Rodrigo Pinto, Peter Savelyev, Adam Yavitz (2010).

Analyzing Social Experiments As Implemented: A Reexamination Of The Evidence From The

HighScope Perry Preschool Program. Quantitative Economics. 1, 2 (November).



Judge, Timothy A. and Charlice Hurst. (2007). "Capitalizing on One's Advantages: Role of Core

Self-Evaluations." Journal of Applied Psychology 92(5): 1212-2



Khanama, Rasheda, Hong Son Nghiemb, and Luke B. Connelly. (2009). “Child Health and the

Income Gradient: Evidence from Australia.” Journal of Health Economics 28(4): 805–817.



Knudsen, E.I. (2004). “Sensitive periods in the development of the brain and behavior”. Journal

of Cognitive Neuroscience 16 (1), 1412–1425.



Knudsen, E.I., Heckman, J.J., Cameron, J., Shonkoff, J.P. (2006). “Economic, neurobiological,

and behavioral perspectives on building America’s future workforce”. Proceedings of the

National Academy of Sciences 103 (27), 10155–10162.




                                                                                              22"
"
Manski, Charles. (1993). “Identification of Endogenous Social Effects: The Reflection Problem”

Review of Economic Studies, 60:531-42.

Morgan, Paul L., George Farkas, and Qiong Wu. (2009). “Kindergarten Predictors of Recurring

Externalizing and Internalizing Psychopathology in the Third and Fifth Grades.” Journal of

Emotional and Behavioral Disorders, 17(2): 67-79



Murasko, Jason E. (2008). “An Evaluation of the Age-Profile in the Relationship between

Household Income and the Health of Children in the United States.” Journal of Health

Economics 27(6): 1489–1502.



Neidell, Matthew and Jane Waldfogel. (2011). “Cognitive and Non-Cognitive Peer Effects in

Early Education.” Review of Economics and Statistics 92(3).



Propper, Carol, John Rigg, and Simon Burgess. (2007). “Child Health: Evidence on the Roles of

Family Income and Maternal Mental Health from A UK Birth Cohort.” Health Economics, 16:

1245-1269



Savelyev, Peter (2012). “Conscientiousness, Education, and Longevity Of High-Ability

Individuals.” Vanderbilt University Working Paper. February 17.



Suomi, S.J. (1999). “Developmental trajectories, early experiences, and community

consequences: Lessons from studies with rhesus monkeys”. In: Keating, D.P., Hertzman, C.




                                                                                             23"
"
(Eds.), Developmental Health and the Wealth of Nations: Social, Biological, and Educational

Dynamics. Guilford Press, New York, pp. 185–200.



Ter Weel, Bas. (2008). “The Noncognitive Determinants of Labor Market and Behavioral

Outcomes.” Journal of Human Resources. 43(4):729-37.



Violato, Mara, Stavros Petrou, Ron Gray, and Maggie Redshaw. (2011). “Family Income and

Child Cognitive Development in the United Kingdom: Does Money Matters?” Health

Economics,



Wolfe, Barbara, Jessica Jakubowski, Robert Haveman, Hannah Goble, and Marissa Courey.

(2010). “Casino Revenue and American Indian Health: The Link between Tribal Gaming and the

Health Status and Behaviors of American Indians.” Mimeo, Madison, WI.




                                                                                              24"
"
                                            Appendix A

Tie between non-cognitive and cognitive skills

        In order to gain some insight into the importance of noncognitive skills for traditionally

measured measures of cognitive skills, we create a “noncognitive factor,” which is calculated as

the first principle component of the SRS scales described above. As expected, it loads positively

on each scale except for the internalizing/externalizing measures. This non-cognitive factor thus

captures the core common elements of all of the measured noncognitive skills. We then ask the

role of these factors in explaining cognitive skills as captured by test scores. For test scores we

also combine the reading and mathematics scores using factor analysis. We call the combination

“test score factor”.

        In order to first establish some notion of the importance for the non-cognitive skills on

future outcomes, we estimate a set of models in which the test score factor is the dependent

variable and either the noncognitive test score factor (or all of the separate scores for the

noncognitive factors) is included in a regression. Also included is a set of control variables such

as the child’s sex, age, race dummies, birth weight, each of the two parents’ schooling levels

when available, mother’s age, and whether or not the parents were married at the time of data

collection. The results using the noncognitive factor suggest a strong and statistically significant

relationship between the non-cognitive factor to the test score factor. We lag the noncognitive

factor in order to avoid any simultaneity issues.

        The results, reported in Appendix Table A suggest the following: lagged noncognitive

factors are a very important determinant of test scores. The tie is consistent over time with a

coefficient between 0.26 and 0.30, and significant at the 1 percent level in all grades. Because

the factors are each standardized, the results suggest that a one-standard deviation increase in



                                                                                                    25"
"
lagged non-cognitive skills is associated with between a 0.25-0.30 standard deviation increase in

current-period test scores.27

             But which components of noncognitive skills seem most related to test score

performance? Our next results disaggregate the “non-cognitive factor” into its component parts

and suggest that being independent, being eager to learn, paying attention, and being persistence

are highly associated with test scores. In terms of negative skills, those most detrimental to

performance on test scores are internalizing, interpersonal skills, and self-control. The latter are

surprising in two respects –two of these noncognitive skills may have been expected to be

positive (interpersonal skills and self control). We also find a lack of association between

externalizing behavior and test scores. Even with these surprises, the estimates provide strong

confirmation of the tie between noncognitive skills and cognitive skills




""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
27
  Classens et al. (2009) examine longitudinal ties between these non-cognitive skills at Kindergarten and academic
performance in grade 5. They show that only measures of attention are related and that Kindergarten academic
performance is a better predictor of 5th grade performance.

                                                                                                                26"
"
                                            Figure 1
    Differences in the Association between Family Income and Childhood Outcomes based on
                                        Income Measure

                             Approaches*to*Learning
            0.140
            0.120
            0.100
            0.080
            0.060
            0.040
            0.020
            0.000
                         K              1                3             5

                                Permanent      Current       Rolling




                                                                                           27#
#
 Tables
                                          Table 1
                                    Descriptive Statistics
                                  ECLS-K: Grades K and 5
Variable                       Obs     Mean          Std.       Obs    Mean     Std.
Approaches to Learning Scale     7240         3.12         0.68   7172     3.05      0.69
Self Control Scale               7199         3.18         0.61   7109     3.22      0.61
Interpersonal Scale              7175         3.13         0.62   7041     3.07      0.65
Externalizing Scale              7212         1.68         0.64   7128     1.68      0.60
Internalizing Scale              7182         1.56         0.49   7065     1.65      0.55
Special Education                7405         0.04         0.20   7525     0.10      0.30
Math Score                       7385        51.08         9.81   7491    51.09      9.76
Reading Score                    7144        51.05         9.74   7484    51.09      9.85
Poor Health                      7431         0.17         0.37   7525     0.20      0.40
Child Health Rating              7431         4.33         0.83   7525     4.25      0.85
Log (Current Income)             7404        10.51         0.96   7525    10.59      0.88
Current Income                   7430 52608.33 51303.95           7525 55451.82 43492.83
Permanent Income                 7431 52663.35 51807.99           7525 54063.61 41301.97
Poverty Status                   7431         0.21         0.41   7525     0.18      0.38
Parent Health                    7411         2.26         0.79   7500     2.27      0.79
Parent Depressed                 7395         1.34         0.52   7470     1.35      0.53
Male                             7431         0.52         0.50   7525     0.52      0.50
Age (Yrs)                        7426         6.23         0.38   7494    11.37      0.30
Black                            7431         0.17         0.37   7525     0.16      0.37
Hispanic                         7431         0.17         0.38   7525     0.18      0.39
Other Race                       7431         0.04         0.20   7525     0.04      0.21
Birth weight                     7290         7.38         1.32   7061     7.40      1.32
Maternal Education               7431        13.48         2.45   7525    13.44      2.43
Paternal Education               7431        13.53         2.50   7525    13.51      2.47
Maternal Age                     7431        33.77         6.39   7525    39.32      6.74
Parents Married                  7431         0.71         0.45   7525     0.70      0.46
Missing Family Information       7431         0.22         0.42   7525     0.24      0.43
Missing 1 Wave                   7431         0.21         0.41   7525     0.21      0.41
Missing 2 Waves                  7431         0.07         0.26   7525     0.07      0.26
Missing 3 Waves                  7431         0.02         0.13   7525     0.02      0.13
Missing 4 Waves                  7431         0.00         0.05   7525     0.00      0.03
Missing Family Information       7431         0.02         0.15   7525     0.00      0.00




                                                                                      28"
 "
                                             Table 2
                                       Descriptive Statistics
                         Approaches to Learning Subscales, Grades K and 5
    Variable                  Obs       Mean         Std.        Obs      Mean    Std.
    Attention Scale             7229          3.04          0.86   7156      2.95      0.87
    Attention = 1               7229          0.03          0.17   7156      0.04      0.19
    Attention = 2               7229          0.26          0.44   7156      0.30      0.46
    Attention = 3               7229          0.35          0.48   7156      0.35      0.48
    Attention = 4               7229          0.36          0.48   7156      0.32      0.47
    Organized Scale             7174          2.98          0.87   7140      2.91      0.95
    Organized = 1               7174          0.04          0.20   7140      0.07      0.26
    Organized = 2               7174          0.26          0.44   7140      0.27      0.44
    Organized = 3               7174          0.38          0.48   7140      0.32      0.47
    Organized = 4               7174          0.32          0.47   7140      0.33      0.47
    Eager to Learn Scale        7224          3.27          0.80   7162      2.98      0.87
    Eager = 1                   7224          0.01          0.11   7162      0.03      0.18
    Eager = 2                   7224          0.18          0.38   7162      0.29      0.46
    Eager = 3                   7224          0.33          0.47   7162      0.34      0.47
    Eager = 4                   7224          0.48          0.50   7162      0.33      0.47
    Independent Scale           7231          3.19          0.83   7168      3.16      0.81
    Independent = 1             7231          0.02          0.16   7168      0.02      0.15
    Independent = 2             7231          0.20          0.40   7168      0.20      0.40
    Independent = 3             7231          0.34          0.47   7168      0.38      0.49
    Independent = 4             7231          0.44          0.50   7168      0.40      0.49
    Adapts Scale                7217          3.12          0.82   7120      3.02      0.82
    Adapt = 1                   7217          0.03          0.16   7120      0.03      0.17
    Adapt = 2                   7217          0.20          0.40   7120      0.23      0.42
    Adapt = 3                   7217          0.40          0.49   7120      0.42      0.49
    Adapt = 4                   7217          0.37          0.48   7120      0.31      0.46
    Persists Scale              7222          3.14          0.87   7151      3.03      0.89
    Persists = 1                7222          0.03          0.18   7151      0.05      0.21
    Persists = 2                7222          0.22          0.41   7151      0.25      0.43
    Persists = 3                7222          0.32          0.47   7151      0.34      0.47
    Persists = 4                7222          0.43          0.49   7151      0.37      0.48




                                                                                              29"
"
                                            Table 3
    Initial Differences in Socioemotional Skills based on Family Income at School Entry
                      Grade                                    K
                                                         Approaches to
                                                           Learning
                      Log Permanent Income                 0.052***
                                                            (0.018)
                                                         Interpersonal
                      Log Permanent Income                 0.044***
                                                            (0.016)
                                                          Self Control
                      Log Permanent Income                  0.036**
                                                            (0.016)
                                                         Externalizing
                      Log Permanent Income                  -0.038*
                                                            (0.021)
                                                         Internalizing
                      Log Permanent Income                 -0.035**
                                                            (0.015)
             Robust standard errors clustered at the school-level. 1%***, 5%**, 10%*.
             Control variables include male, age, 3 race dummies, birth weight, maternal
             education, paternal education, maternal age, whether parents are married and if
             there is missing parental information. 5th grade longitudinal sample weights
             provided in the ECLSK are used.




                                                                                               30"
"
                                                    Table 4
                     Income Gradient in the Approaches to Learning Scale During K-5th Grade
                              Approaches to         Approaches to         Approaches to         Approaches to
Outcome                         Learning               Learning              Learning             Learning
Grade                               K                      1                    3                    5

Log (Perm Income)                 0.052***               0.046*              0.072***              0.115***
                                   (0.018)              (0.024)               (0.027)               (0.027)
Male                             -0.331***            -0.292***             -0.358***             -0.425***
                                   (0.028)              (0.030)               (0.030)               (0.027)
Age                               0.214***             0.222***              0.134***                 0.049
                                   (0.037)              (0.040)               (0.039)               (0.043)
Black                               -0.079               -0.087                -0.086              -0.109**
                                   (0.053)              (0.058)               (0.057)               (0.054)
Hispanic                             0.058               0.074*              0.118***                 0.048
                                   (0.036)              (0.041)               (0.042)               (0.039)
Other Race                          -0.033                0.003                -0.002                 0.006
                                   (0.057)              (0.069)               (0.072)               (0.059)
Birth weight                       0.023**             0.030***                 0.002                -0.003
                                   (0.011)              (0.011)               (0.012)               (0.012)
Maternal Education                0.018***             0.023***              0.026***               0.015**
                                   (0.006)              (0.008)               (0.008)               (0.007)
Paternal Education                0.017***              0.017**               0.018**              0.020***
                                   (0.007)              (0.007)               (0.008)               (0.007)
Maternal Age                         0.000               -0.002                -0.001                -0.001
                                   (0.002)              (0.002)               (0.003)               (0.002)
Parents Married                    0.120**              0.137**              0.188***                 0.046
                                   (0.058)              (0.056)               (0.055)               (0.045)
Missing Family
Information                         -0.068                  -0.016              -0.028              -0.088*
                                   (0.068)                 (0.068)             (0.058)              (0.051)
Constant                           0.699**                   0.342               0.530              1.082**
                                   (0.304)                 (0.386)             (0.467)              (0.550)
Observations                         7,078                   6,551               5,907               6,717
R-squared                            0.133                   0.116               0.155               0.184
                                                                                     th
          Robust standard errors clustered at the school-level. 1%***, 5%**, 10%*. 5 grade longitudinal
          sample weights provided in the ECLSK are used.




                                                                                                     31"
           "
                                                     Table 5
            Examination of Tie between Family Income and Sub-Scales of Approaches to Learning Measure
                     Approaches to                                  Eager to
Outcomes               Learning        Attention    Organized        Learn      Independent    Adaptation      Persists

Permanent Income        0.047***        0.041**      0.045**        0.040**        0.026        0.071***       0.056***
                        (0.016)         (0.020)      (0.022)        (0.019)       (0.020)       (0.021)        (0.020)
Income X 1st Grade       0.002           -0.006       0.022          -0.000        0.004         -0.000         -0.001
                        (0.020)         (0.026)      (0.026)        (0.025)       (0.026)       (0.026)        (0.027)
Income X 3rd Grade       0.041*           0.039       0.047          0.040        0.088***       -0.004        0.057**
                        (0.022)         (0.028)      (0.032)        (0.027)       (0.028)       (0.033)        (0.029)
Income X 5th Grade      0.061***        0.066**      0.082***       0.063**       0.073***       0.051*        0.083***
                        (0.022)         (0.028)      (0.031)        (0.029)       (0.028)       (0.029)        (0.029)

Observations             26,253         26,199        26,135        26,208         26,222        26,116           26,162
R-Squared                0.143           0.115         0.114        0.095          0.085          0.072            0.113
1st vs. 3rd Grade        0.083           0.123         0.435        0.152          0.006          0.914            0.062
1st vs. 5th Grade        0.017           0.024         0.066        0.044          0.034          0.102            0.011
3rd vs. 5th Grade        0.376           0.368         0.301        0.449          0.614          0.108            0.402
           Robust standard errors clustered at the school-level. 1%***, 5%**, 10%*. Same controls as
           previous tables.
           “Pays attention well”. “Keeps belongings organized”; “Shows eagerness to learn new things”;
           “Works independently”; “Easily adapts to changes in routine”; “Persists in completing tasks”. 5th
           grade longitudinal sample weights provided in the ECLSK are used. P-values of F-tests are
           listed for differences in coefficients across grades.




                                                                                                            32"
           "
                                                            Table 6
                                   Income Gradient in Socioemotional Skills During K-5th Grade
                                                    Additional Skill Domains
                                     Self      Interpersonal   Externalizing   Internalizing    Special    Non Cognitive
            Outcomes                Control        Skills         Scale            Scale       Education      Factor

            Income Measure          0.035**       0.036**        -0.034*         -0.030**        -0.005      0.064***
                                    (0.015)       (0.015)        (0.018)          (0.013)       (0.006)      (0.023)
            Income X 1st Grade       -0.007        0.002          -0.008         -0.042**        0.003        0.004
                                    (0.018)       (0.020)        (0.019)          (0.016)       (0.006)      (0.027)
            Income X 3rd Grade      0.048**        0.027          -0.034        -0.054***        -0.006      0.069**
                                    (0.022)       (0.022)        (0.023)          (0.018)       (0.009)      (0.031)
            Income X 5th Grade        0.031       0.042*          -0.028        -0.058***      -0.025**      0.099***
                                    (0.021)       (0.023)        (0.022)          (0.019)       (0.012)      (0.033)

            Observations             26,064       25,941          26,134         25,977         27,970        25,100
            R-Squared                0.092        0.097           0.105          0.035          0.038         0.145
            1st vs. 3rd Grade        0.013        0.277           0.187          0.513          0.240         0.041
            1st vs. 5th Grade        0.104        0.102           0.365          0.424          0.011         0.008
            3rd vs. 5th Grade        0.488        0.536           0.802          0.825          0.134         0.398

Robust standard errors clustered at the school-level. 1%***, 5%**, 10%*. 5th grade longitudinal sample weights provided in the
ECLSK are used. Additional Controls: Constant, Missing Family information indicator, Maternal Age. P-values of F-tests are listed
for differences in coefficients across grades.




                                                                                                                                    33
"
                                                                 Table 7
                                                 Income Gradient of Socioemotional Skills
                                                  Adding Controls for Cohort Level Skills
                                                Income       Income X     Income X      Income X
                                                Measure      1st Grade    3rd Grade     5th Grade     Cohort Control             P-Value
Approaches to Learning        Baseline            0.047***       0.002        0.041*       0.061***
                         Cohort Level Control     0.035**        0.005         0.031       0.062***     0.214***       (0.020)     0.001
        Attention             Baseline            0.041**       -0.006         0.039        0.066**
                         Cohort Level Control       0.032       -0.007         0.028        0.070**     0.182***       (0.026)     0.117
        Organized             Baseline            0.045**        0.022         0.047       0.082***
                         Cohort Level Control      0.041*        0.021         0.042        0.076**     0.215***       (0.028)     0.898
      Eager to Learn          Baseline            0.040**       -0.000         0.040        0.063**
                         Cohort Level Control      0.032*       -0.010         0.009         0.050      0.201***       (0.024)     0.000
       Independent            Baseline              0.026        0.004       0.088***      0.073***
                         Cohort Level Control       0.018        0.014       0.083***       0.074**     0.179***       (0.026)     0.489
       Adaptation             Baseline            0.071***      -0.000        -0.004        0.051*
                         Cohort Level Control     0.048**        0.008        -0.006         0.047      0.294***       (0.026)     0.001
         Persists             Baseline            0.056***      -0.001       0.057**       0.083***
                         Cohort Level Control      0.036*        0.004         0.036       0.084***     0.227***       (0.026)     0.000
       Special Ed             Baseline              -0.005       0.003        -0.006       -0.025**
                         Cohort Level Control       -0.005       0.001        -0.014      -0.035***      0.003         (0.008)     0.022
       Self Control           Baseline            0.035**       -0.007       0.048**         0.031
                         Cohort Level Control       0.024       -0.008         0.023        0.046**     0.222***       (0.020)     0.000
      Interpersonal           Baseline            0.036**        0.002         0.027        0.042*
                         Cohort Level Control       0.023        0.001         0.017        0.059**     0.227***       (0.020)     0.000
      Externalizing           Baseline             -0.034*      -0.008        -0.034        -0.028
                         Cohort Level Control       -0.029      -0.004        -0.031        -0.036      -0.121***      (0.019)     0.371
       Internalizing          Baseline            -0.030**     -0.042**     -0.054***     -0.058***
                         Cohort Level Control      -0.025*     -0.040**     -0.050***     -0.075***     -0.085***      (0.016)     0.064
                                                                                                            th
  Robust standard errors clustered at the school-level. 1%***, 5%**, 10%*. Standard Errors not shown. 5 grade longitudinal sample
  weights provided in the ECLSK are used. Same controls as previous tables. P-values of F-tests are listed for differences in
  coefficients across specifications.




                                                                                                                                       34"
  "
                                                              Table 8
                                              Income Gradient of Socioemotional Skills
                                               Adding Controls for Child Health Status
                                    Income        Income X    Income X      Income X
                      VARIABLES     Measure       1st Grade   3rd Grade     5th Grade    Health Lag   (SE)        P-Value
    Approaches to
      Learning           Base        0.047***       0.002        0.041*      0.061***
                       Health Lag    0.047***       -0.001        0.031        0.051**    0.029***      (0.009)      0.067
       Attention         Base        0.041**        -0.006        0.039        0.066**
                       Health Lag    0.041**        -0.008        0.030        0.056*      0.024**      (0.011)      0.021
      Organized          Base        0.045**        0.022         0.047      0.082***
                       Health Lag    0.043**        0.017         0.035        0.071**    0.042***      (0.011)      0.034
    Eager to Learn       Base        0.040**        -0.000        0.040        0.063**
                       Health Lag    0.040**        -0.002        0.030        0.055*       0.018       (0.011)      0.036
     Independent         Base           0.026       0.004       0.088***     0.073***
                       Health Lag       0.025       0.001       0.077***       0.065**    0.028***      (0.010)      0.097
      Adaptation         Base        0.071***       -0.000       -0.004        0.051*
                       Health Lag    0.071***       -0.003       -0.016         0.031     0.032***      (0.012)      0.040
       Persists          Base        0.056***       -0.001       0.057**     0.083***
                       Health Lag    0.055***       -0.005        0.047        0.077**    0.032***      (0.011)      0.348
      Special Ed         Base          -0.005       0.003        -0.006       -0.025**
                       Health Lag      -0.004       0.003        -0.008       -0.026**     -0.006       (0.004)      0.018
     Self Control        Base        0.035**        -0.007       0.048**        0.031
                       Health Lag    0.035**        -0.008       0.044**        0.020       0.012       (0.008)      0.180
     Interpersonal       Base        0.036**        0.002         0.027        0.042*
                       Health Lag    0.035**        0.001         0.021         0.037       0.007       (0.009)      0.118
     Externalizing       Base         -0.034*       -0.008       -0.034        -0.028
                       Health Lag    -0.036**       -0.008       -0.028        -0.022      -0.005       (0.008)      0.215
     Internalizing       Base        -0.030**      -0.042**     -0.054***    -0.058***
                       Health Lag    -0.030**      -0.041**     -0.050***    -0.063***     -0.011       (0.007)      0.001
    Non Cog Factor       Base        0.064***       0.004        0.069**     0.099***
                       Health Lag    0.064***       0.002        0.057*        0.084**     0.030**      (0.012)      0.117
Robust standard errors clustered at the school-level. 1%***, 5%**, 10%*. Standard Errors not shown. 5th grade longitudinal sample
weights provided in the ECLSK are used. Same controls as previous tables. P-values of F-tests are listed for differences in
coefficients across specifications. The “health lag” variable for Kindergarten is measured as birth weight.




                                                                                                                                    35"
"
   Appendix Tables
                                                               Appendix Table A
                                          The Effects of Lagged Non-Cognitive Skills on Test Scores
Outcome                            Test Score Factor
Grade                                      1                 1           3            3            5           5            8             8
Lagged Non Cognitive Factor            0.303***                      0.280***                  0.284***                 0.259***
                                        (0.010)                       (0.010)                   (0.010)                  (0.010)
Lagged Internalizing                                     -0.044**               -0.067***                  -0.081***                 -0.089***
                                                          (0.018)                 (0.019)                    (0.019)                   (0.021)
Lag Externalizing                                          0.016                    0.000                     -0.030                    -0.033
                                                          (0.020)                 (0.021)                    (0.021)                   (0.023)
Lag Attention                                           0.124***                 0.115***                   0.098***                  0.099***
                                                          (0.015)                 (0.016)                    (0.016)                   (0.020)
Lag Organized                                              0.007                -0.031***                  -0.047***                 -0.040***
                                                          (0.012)                 (0.011)                    (0.011)                   (0.013)
Lag Eager to Learn                                      0.124***                 0.167***                   0.115***                  0.108***
                                                          (0.015)                 (0.015)                    (0.014)                   (0.016)
Lag Independent                                         0.208***                 0.247***                   0.286***                  0.178***
                                                          (0.015)                 (0.016)                    (0.017)                   (0.019)
Lag Adapt                                                  0.021                    0.002                      0.008                     0.002
                                                          (0.013)                 (0.014)                    (0.014)                   (0.016)
Lag Persist                                             0.063***                   -0.000                    0.030**                  0.077***
                                                          (0.014)                 (0.014)                    (0.015)                   (0.018)
Lag Self Control                                        -0.093***                  -0.045                  -0.089***                 -0.083***
                                                          (0.026)                 (0.028)                    (0.026)                   (0.029)
Lag Interpersonal                                        -0.048**               -0.113***                  -0.093***                  -0.066**
                                                          (0.023)                 (0.023)                    (0.023)                   (0.026)

Observations                             8,412              8,412         7,263     7,263      6,561         6,561         5,994        5,994
R-squared                                0.325              0.382         0.356     0.423      0.361         0.431         0.358        0.395
                                                                                                                                 th
                    Robust standard errors clustered at the school-level. 1%***, 5%**, 10%*. See Table 4 for control variables. 5 grade
                    longitudinal sample weights provided in the ECLSK are used.

                                                                                                                                    36#
   #
                Appendix Table B: Examination of Differences in the Associations between Family Income and
                                     Childhood Outcomes based on Income Measure
                            Income        Income        Income X 1st       Income X 3rd       Income X 5th    P value
                           Definition    Measure            Grade              Grade               Grade
Approaches to Learning         1         0.047***            0.002             0.041*            0.061***
                               2         0.051***            0.003             0.041*            0.055***     0.499
                               3         0.047***            0.001             0.041*            0.058***     0.293
                               4         0.047***            0.002            0.046**            0.055***     0.382
       Attention               1          0.041**           -0.006              0.039             0.066**
                               2          0.044**           -0.013              0.036             0.058**     0.216
                               3          0.041**           -0.006              0.039             0.064**     0.202
                               4          0.042**           -0.006              0.044             0.061**     0.288
      Organized                1          0.045**            0.022              0.047            0.082***
                               2          0.046**            0.027              0.049            0.078***     0.162
                               3          0.045**            0.022              0.047            0.081***     0.194
                               4          0.045**            0.022              0.050            0.080***     0.409
    Eager to Learn             1          0.040**           -0.000              0.040             0.063**
                               2          0.045**            0.010              0.041             0.068**     0.329
                               3          0.041**            0.000              0.040             0.065**     0.117
                               4          0.041**            0.001              0.043             0.061**     0.293
     Independent               1            0.026            0.004            0.088***           0.073***
                               2           0.032*            0.003            0.090***           0.070***     0.289
                               3            0.026            0.004            0.088***           0.071***     0.342
                               4            0.028            0.005            0.102***            0.067**     0.249
      Adaptation               1         0.071***           -0.000             -0.004              0.051*
                               2         0.074***           -0.004              0.000               0.041     0.020
                               3         0.070***           -0.000             -0.004               0.045     0.582
                               4         0.072***            0.001              0.010               0.044     0.237
       Persists                1         0.056***           -0.001            0.057**            0.083***
                               2         0.063***            0.008            0.058**            0.073***     0.278
                               3         0.055***           -0.001            0.057**            0.078***     0.355
                               4         0.055***           -0.001             0.057*            0.074***     0.277
  Special Education            1           -0.005            0.003             -0.006            -0.025**
                               2           -0.005            0.003             -0.011             -0.020*     0.311
                               3           -0.004            0.003             -0.006            -0.023**     0.489
                               4           -0.004            0.003             -0.008             -0.021*     0.151
     Self Control              1          0.035**           -0.007            0.048**               0.031
                               2          0.035**           -0.006             0.038*               0.022     0.577
                               3          0.035**           -0.007            0.048**               0.029     0.227
                               4          0.037**           -0.006            0.057***              0.029     0.254
    Interpersonal              1          0.036**            0.002              0.027              0.042*
                               2          0.035**           -0.003              0.024               0.028     0.502
                               3          0.035**            0.001              0.027               0.037     0.454
                               4          0.036**            0.002              0.034               0.032     0.282
     Externalizing             1          -0.034*           -0.008             -0.034              -0.028
                               2          -0.031*           -0.006             -0.020              -0.015     0.665
                               3          -0.034*           -0.008             -0.034              -0.024     0.294
                               4          -0.033*           -0.008             -0.030              -0.018     0.503
     Internalizing             1         -0.030**          -0.042**          -0.054***          -0.058***
                               2         -0.029**         -0.046***          -0.055***           -0.040**     0.569
                               3         -0.030**          -0.042**          -0.054***          -0.054***     0.254
                               4         -0.029**          -0.042**          -0.055***           -0.047**     0.475



                                                                                                        37"
            "
Income Measure 1: baseline; Measure 2 is contemporaneous income; Measure 3 is 3 year rolling average; Measure 4
is 2 year rolling average. Robust standard errors clustered at the school-level (not shown). Same controls as
previous tables. 5th grade longitudinal sample weights provided in the ECLSK are used.




                                                                                                           38"
"
                                           Appendix Table C
                                Robustness Check using Balanced Samples
                                Income      Income X     Income X         Income X
                                Measure     1st Grade    3rd Grade        5th Grade   Observations   P value
    Approaches to
      Learning         base     0.047***        0.002       0.041*        0.061***      26,253
                     balanced   0.054***       -0.003        0.025          0.053**     24,228       0.060
       Attention       base     0.041**        -0.006        0.039          0.066**     26,199
                     balanced   0.051**        -0.014        0.021          0.056*      24,177       0.018
      Organized        base     0.045**         0.022        0.047        0.082***      26,135
                     balanced   0.052**         0.018        0.026          0.076**     24,127       0.156
    Eager to Learn     base     0.040**        -0.000        0.040          0.063**     26,208
                     balanced   0.057***       -0.009        0.014           0.050      24,186       0.000
     Independent       base       0.026         0.004     0.088***        0.073***      26,222
                     balanced     0.029        -0.002      0.075**          0.071**     24,202       0.121
      Adaptation       base     0.071***       -0.000       -0.004          0.051*      26,116
                     balanced   0.076***        0.004       -0.015           0.036      24,107       0.239
       Persists        base     0.056***       -0.001      0.057**        0.083***      26,162
                     balanced   0.059***       -0.005       0.051*        0.082***      24,146       0.933
      Special Ed       base       -0.005        0.003       -0.006         -0.025**     27,970
                     balanced     -0.000       -0.001       -0.011         -0.027**     25,792       0.154
     Self Control      base     0.035**        -0.007      0.048**           0.031      26,064
                     balanced   0.036**        -0.008      0.044**           0.028      24,053       0.974
     Interpersonal     base     0.036**         0.002        0.027          0.042*      25,941
                     balanced   0.033**         0.001        0.024          0.049*      23,953       0.387
     Externalizing     base      -0.034*       -0.008       -0.034          -0.028      26,134
                     balanced   -0.035**       -0.009       -0.029          -0.031      24,119       0.971
     Internalizing     base     -0.030**     -0.042**     -0.054***       -0.058***     25,977
                     balanced   -0.032**      -0.036*      -0.045**       -0.060***     23,983       0.001
    Non Cog Factor     base     0.064***        0.004      0.069**        0.099***      25,100
                     balanced   0.073***       -0.004        0.053        0.094***      23,190       0.586




                                                                                                               39#
#
                                                                     Appendix Table D
                                              The Effects of Current Family Income on Non-Cognitive Skills
                                                          Pooled Panel with Child Fixed Effects
                                                 Non Cog        Non Cog        Approaches to      Approaches to
Outcome                                            Factor         Factor          Learning           Learning        Attention Attention
Fixed Effects                                       None           Child            None                Child            None       Child
Log (Current Income)                             0.067***        0.045*           0.051***              0.029         0.044**      0.029
                                                  (0.022)        (0.027)           (0.016)            (0.019)          (0.020)    (0.024)
Grade = 1                                       -0.234***        -0.105*         -0.253***          -0.142***        -0.286*** -0.166***
                                                  (0.043)        (0.064)           (0.031)            (0.044)          (0.039)    (0.059)
Grade = 3                                       -0.746***        -0.354*         -0.625***           -0.301**        -0.778*** -0.436***
                                                  (0.110)        (0.183)           (0.077)            (0.123)          (0.096)    (0.166)
Grade = 5                                       -1.187***        -0.530*         -0.952***            -0.406*        -1.202*** -0.631**
                                                  (0.179)        (0.309)           (0.127)            (0.208)          (0.158)    (0.279)
1st Grade X Log (Current Income)                    0.006         -0.010            0.003              -0.000           -0.013     -0.022
                                                  (0.029)        (0.028)           (0.021)            (0.021)          (0.027)    (0.027)
3rd Grade X Log (Current Income)                  0.067**         0.040            0.041*               0.027            0.036     0.015
                                                  (0.032)        (0.032)           (0.022)            (0.022)          (0.028)    (0.031)
5th Grade X Log (Current Income)                 0.081***       0.062**           0.055***            0.040**         0.058**      0.038
                                                  (0.030)        (0.028)           (0.021)            (0.019)          (0.026)    (0.025)
Observations                                       24,284        24,284            25,392              25,392           25,341    25,341
R-squared                                           0.145         0.684             0.143               0.655            0.114     0.619
                                                                                                                     th
         Robust standard errors clustered at the school-level. 1%***, 5%**, 10%*. Same controls as previous tables. 5 grade longitudinal
         sample weights provided in the ECLSK are used.




                                                                                                                                      40#
        #
                                                                 Appendix Table D (cont’d)
                                               The Effects of Current Family Income on Non-Cognitive Skills
                                                            Pooled Panel with Child Fixed Effects
                                          Self          Self
Outcome                                Control       Control       Interpersonal     Interpersonal Externalizing Externalizing Internalizing   Internalizin
Fixed Effects                            None          Child             None             Child         None         Child         None            Child
Log Current Income                     0.035**         0.014           0.035**            0.017       -0.031*       -0.017       -0.029**          0.004
                                       (0.014)       (0.019)           (0.015)          (0.021)       (0.017)      (0.019)        (0.012)         (0.015)
Grade = 1                            -0.094***      -0.093**         -0.110***          -0.085*         0.027        0.019       0.078***          0.039
                                       (0.027)       (0.046)           (0.029)          (0.047)       (0.029)      (0.044)        (0.024)         (0.046)
Grade = 3                            -0.267***       -0.253*         -0.337***         -0.262**      0.218***        0.177       0.258***          0.155
                                       (0.067)       (0.131)           (0.072)          (0.134)       (0.074)      (0.127)        (0.059)         (0.130)
Grade = 5                            -0.404***       -0.391*         -0.538***          -0.409*       0.270**        0.216       0.373***          0.200
                                       (0.111)       (0.220)           (0.119)          (0.227)       (0.119)      (0.212)        (0.097)         (0.219)
1st Grade X Log (Current Income)        -0.006        -0.006            -0.003           -0.009        -0.006        0.002      -0.046***        -0.035**
                                       (0.020)       (0.020)           (0.021)          (0.023)       (0.021)      (0.019)        (0.017)         (0.016)
3rd Grade X Log (Current Income)        0.038*         0.030             0.024            0.021        -0.020       -0.018      -0.055***        -0.039**
                                       (0.022)       (0.021)           (0.021)          (0.024)       (0.024)      (0.021)        (0.018)         (0.019)
5th Grade X Log (Current Income)         0.022         0.027             0.028            0.027        -0.015       -0.017       -0.040**         -0.029*
                                       (0.019)       (0.019)           (0.021)          (0.021)       (0.021)      (0.018)        (0.018)         (0.017)
Constant                              2.456***      2.595***          2.297***         2.639***      2.086***     1.886***       2.088***        1.677***
                                       (0.162)       (0.299)           (0.175)          (0.306)       (0.172)      (0.291)        (0.137)         (0.294)

Observations                           25,207         25,207        25,090          25,090           25,275          25,275         25,128        25,128
R-squared                               0.093          0.594         0.098           0.577            0.105           0.665          0.035         0.485
                                                                                                                      th
          Robust standard errors clustered at the school-level. 1%***, 5%**, 10%*. Same controls as previous tables. 5 grade longitudinal
          sample weights provided in the ECLSK are used.




                                                                                                                                         41#
            #
