NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE CAUSES AND CONSEQUENCES OF TEST SCORE MANIPULATION:
EVIDENCE FROM THE NEW YORK REGENTS EXAMINATIONS
Thomas S. Dee
Will Dobbie
Brian A. Jacob
Jonah Rockoff
Working Paper 22165
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22165

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2016

We are extremely grateful to Don Boyd, Jim Wyckoff, and personnel at the New York City
Department of Education and New York State Education Department for their help and support.
We also thank Josh Angrist, David Deming, Rebecca Diamond, Roland Fryer, Larry Katz, Justin
McCrary, Petra Persson, Crystal Yang, and numerous seminar participants for helpful comments
and suggestions. Elijah De la Campa, Kevin DeLuca, Samsun Knight, Sean Tom, and Yining Zhu
provided excellent research assistance. All remaining errors are our own. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Thomas S. Dee, Will Dobbie, Brian A. Jacob, and Jonah Rockoff. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Causes and Consequences of Test Score Manipulation: Evidence from the New York
Regents Examinations
Thomas S. Dee, Will Dobbie, Brian A. Jacob, and Jonah Rockoff
NBER Working Paper No. 22165
April 2016
JEL No. I20,I21,I24
ABSTRACT
In this paper, we show that the design and decentralized, school-based scoring of New York’s
high school exit exams – the Regents Examinations – led to the systematic manipulation of test
sores just below important proficiency cutoffs. Our estimates suggest that teachers inflate
approximately 40 percent of test scores near the proficiency cutoffs. Teachers are more likely to
inflate the scores of high-achieving students on the margin, but low-achieving students benefit
more from manipulation in aggregate due to the greater density of these students near the
proficiency cutoffs. Exploiting a series of reforms that eliminated score manipulation, we find
that inflating a student’s score to fall just above a cutoff increases his or her probability of
graduating from high school by 27 percent. These results have important implications for
educational attainment of marginal high school graduates. For example, we estimate that the
black-white graduation gap is about 5 percent larger in the absence of test score manipulation.

Thomas S. Dee
Stanford University
520 Galvez Mall, CERAS Building, 5th Floor
Stanford, CA 94305-3084
and NBER
tdee@stanford.edu
Will Dobbie
Industrial Relations Section
Princeton University
Firestone Library
Princeton, NJ 08544-2098
and NBER
wdobbie@princeton.edu

Brian A. Jacob
Gerald R. Ford School of Public Policy
University of Michigan
735 South State Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
and NBER
bajacob@umich.edu
Jonah Rockoff
Columbia University
Graduate School of Business
3022 Broadway #603
New York, NY 10027-6903
and NBER
jonah.rockoff@columbia.edu

In the U.S. and across the globe, educational quality is increasingly measured using standardized
test scores. These standardized test results can carry particularly high stakes for both students and
educators, with students’ scores often determining, at least in part, grade retention, high school
graduation, school closures, and teacher and administrator pay. The tendency to place high stakes
on student test scores has led to concerns about the reliability and fidelity of standardized test
results (e.g., Neal 2013), as well as about outright cheating; the latter evidenced by Jacob and
Levitt’s (2003) study of testing in Chicago public schools and the 2009 cheating scandal in Atlanta
that led to the incarceration of a number of school administrators.1 However, despite widespread
concerns over test validity and the manipulation of scores, we know little about the factors that lead
educators to manipulate student test scores (e.g., accountability policies versus individual students
traits). Furthermore, there is also little empirical evidence on whether test score manipulation
has any long-run consequences for students’ educational outcomes and performance gaps by race,
ethnicity, and gender.
In this paper, we examine the causes and consequences of test score manipulation in the context
of the New York State Regents Examinations, high-stakes exit exams that measure student performance for New York’s secondary-school curricula. The Regents Examinations carry important
stakes for students, teachers, and schools, based largely on students meeting strict score cutoffs.
Moreover, the Regents Examinations were graded locally for most of our sample period (i.e., by
teachers in a student’s own school), making it relatively straightforward for teachers to manipulate
the test scores of students whom they know and whose scores may directly affect them.
In the first part of the paper, we use data from New York City public schools to document
sharp discontinuities in the distribution of student scores at proficiency cutoffs, demonstrating that
teachers purposefully manipulated Regents scores in order to move marginal students over the
performance thresholds. Formal estimates suggest that approximately 6 percent of all Regents
exams in core academic subjects were inflated to fall just above the performance cutoffs between
the years 2004 and 2010. Teachers also inflated more than 40 percent of Regents exams within the
range of scores that were most at risk for manipulation because they would have been just below
the cutoffs. However, test score manipulation was reduced by approximately 80 percent in 2011
when the New York State Board of Regents ordered schools to end the longstanding practice of
re-scoring exams with scores just below proficiency cutoffs, and disappeared completely in 2012
when the Board ordered that Regents exams be graded by teachers from other schools in a small
number of centrally administered locations. These results suggest that both re-scoring policies and
local grading are key factors in teachers’ willingness or ability to manipulate test scores.
Importantly, we find that the extent of pre-reform manipulation varied systematically across
schools and students in a way that suggests the effects of manipulation were highly inequitable.
1
See https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Atlanta Public Schools cheating scandal. In related work, there is evidence
that test-based accountability pressures lead some teachers to narrow their instruction to the tested content (Jacob
2005) and target students who are near performance thresholds (Neal and Schanzenbach 2010). There is also evidence
some schools sought to advantageously manipulate the test-taking population following the introduction of test-based
accountability (Figlio and Getzler 2002, Cullen and Reback 2002, Jacob 2005).

1

Black and Hispanic students and students with lower baseline scores and worse behavioral records
all benefited more from the manipulation in aggregate due to the greater density of these students
near the proficiency cutoffs. However, these same students were all significantly less likely to have
a test manipulated conditional on scoring near a proficiency cutoff. We find that approximately
45 percent of the racial gaps in manipulation were due to across-school factors, with the remaining
55 percent due to within-school determinants of the probability of having a score manipulated.
Conversely, nearly all of the differential treatment on baseline score and behavioral dimensions can
explained by within-school differences in the probability of having a score manipulated.
In the second part of the paper, we estimate the impact of test score manipulation on subsequent student outcomes using the arguably exogenous timing of the decisions by the New York
State Board of Regents to end the practice of re-scoring exams and to centralize scoring. Using a difference-in-differences research design, we find that having an exam score manipulated to
fall above a performance cutoff increases the probability of graduating from high school by 21.9
percentage points, a 27.4 percent increase from the sample mean.2 The effects on high school
graduation are larger for students eligible for free or reduced price lunch and students with higher
baseline test scores, but remain economically and statistically significant for all student subgroups.
Estimates from a second empirical strategy that exploits across-school differences in manipulation
yield similar results. Taken together with our earlier results showing across-group differences in
manipulation, these difference-in-differences estimates suggest that test score manipulation had
important, inequitable effects on the graduation outcomes of students in New York City. Indeed,
our point estimates suggest that the black-white gap in graduation rates would have increased
from 15.6 percentage points to 16.3 percentage points without test score manipulation, and that
the fraction of students in our sample graduating from high school would have decreased by 1.2
percentage points without manipulation.
However, we also find that having an exam score manipulated decreases the probability of
meeting the requirements for a more advanced high school diploma by 11.0 percentage points, a
50.2 percent decrease from the sample mean. Having a score manipulated also modestly decreases
the probability of passing a physical science exam such as Chemistry or Physics, and passing an
advanced math sequence that covers topics such as geometry and trigonometry, the two most
important requirements for the more advanced diploma, with larger effects when the manipulation
occurs on the introductory math and science exams. These results are consistent with the idea
that test score manipulation has somewhat heterogeneous effects on human capital accumulation.
Students on the margin of dropping out are “helped” by test score manipulation because they are
not forced to retake a class that may lead them to leave high school. Conversely, students on
the margin of the advanced diploma may be “hurt” by test score manipulation because they are
2
An important limitation of our difference-in-differences analysis is that we are only able to estimate the effect of
eliminating manipulation in partial equilibrium. There may also be important general equilibrium effects of test score
manipulation that we are unable to measure using our empirical strategy. For example, it is possible that widespread
manipulation may change the way schools teach students expected to score near proficiency cutoffs. It is also possible
that test score manipulation can change the signaling value of course grades or a high school diploma.

2

not pushed to re-learn the introductory material or re-take the introductory class that the more
advanced coursework requires.
In the final part of the paper, we present several pieces of evidence to help us shed light on the
motivations for test score manipulation prior to the grading reforms. First, we find nearly identical
levels of manipulation before the passage of No Child Left Behind (NCLB) and the creation of New
York City’s own school accountability system. Manipulation was also remarkably similar in schools
that are and are not subject to sanctions under either accountability system. Second, we find that
a randomized experiment that paid high school teachers for improving several student outcomes,
most of which related to Regents exam pass rates, had no effect on test score manipulation. Third,
we find evidence of manipulation around both the lowest cutoffs on core exams (which determine
eligibility for a basic high school diploma) and for higher cutoffs on elective exams, which provide
students with secondary benefits such as taking advanced coursework, automatic admission to some
public colleges, or the granting of college credit. We argue that, taken together, these three results
suggest that altruism among teachers provide an important motivation for teachers’ manipulation of
test scores (i.e., helping students avoid any sanctions involved with failing an exam). Interestingly,
we also find that a teacher’s propensity to manipulate a student’s exam is influenced by other
student-specific information (e.g., their prior test scores and good behavior).
Our results contribute to an emerging literature that documents both the moral hazard that
can be created by test-scoring procedures and the impact of such test manipulation for horizontal
equity (e.g., fairness issues raised by differential manipulation) and vertical equity (e.g., the gaps in
student outcomes). In early work, Jacob and Levitt (2003) find that test score manipulation occurs
in roughly five percent of elementary school classrooms in the Chicago public schools, with the
frequency of manipulation responding strongly to relatively small changes in incentives. Outside of
the U.S., Lavy (2009) finds that a teacher incentive program in Israel increased teacher effort but
did not affect test score manipulation, and Angrist, Battistin, and Vuri (2014) find that small classes
increase test score manipulation in Southern Italy due to teachers shirking when they transcribe
answer sheets. The paper most closely related to ours is parallel work by Diamond and Persson
(2016), who find significant manipulation of test scores just above discrete grade cutoffs in Sweden.
Diamond and Persson (2016) estimate the long-run impact of this score manipulation using students
scoring just outside the manipulable range as the control group for students inside the manipulable
range. Using this approach, they find that having a score inflated increases educational attainment
by 0.5 to 1 year, with larger attainment effects and some evidence of earnings effects for lowskill students. However, Diamond and Persson (2016) find no evidence of the negative human
capital effects we document in our setting. Finally, in related work, Ebenstein, Lavy, and Roth
(forthcoming) find that quasi-random declines in exam scores due to pollution exposure have a
negative effect on post-secondary educational attainment and earnings.
This paper is also related to an important literature on bias in local grading. Lavy (2008)
uses the difference between non-blind and blind exams in Israel to show teachers grade girls more
leniently than boys. Using a similar methodology, Hinnerich, Hoglin, and Johannesson (2011)

3

find no evidence of gender bias in Sweden, while Burgess and Greaves (2013) find that white
students were graded more leniently than non-white students in England. Hanna and Linden (2012)
randomly assign student characteristics to exams in India, finding that teachers grade exams from
higher-caste students more leniently than lower-caste students. Most recently, Lavy and Sand
(2015) show that teachers’ grading biases can have important impacts on subsequent achievement
and enrollment.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section I describes the Regents Examinations and their use in student and school evaluations. Section II details the data used in our
analysis. Section III describes our empirical design and documents manipulation on the Regents
exams. Section IV estimates the impact of manipulation on student outcomes. Section V explores
potential motivations for the manipulation of Regents scores, and Section VI concludes.

I. New York Regents Examinations
In 1878, the Regents of the University of the State of New York implemented the first statewide
system of standardized, high-stakes secondary school exit exams. Its goals were to assess student
performance in the secondary-school curricula and award differentiated graduation credentials to
secondary school students (Beadie 1999, NYSED 2008). This practice has continued in New York
state to the present day.3
A. Regents Examinations and High School Graduation
In recent years, public high school students in New York must meet certain performance thresholds
on Regents examinations in five “core” subjects to graduate from high school: English, Mathematics, Science, U.S. History and Government, and Global History and Geography.4 Regents exams
are also given in a variety of other non-core subject areas, including advanced math, advanced
science, and a number of foreign languages.5 Regents exams are administered within schools in
3

The original Regents exams were administered as high school entrance exams for 8th grade students as early
as 1865. These entrance exams were phased out relatively quickly, however. Among other changes over time, New
York introduced a new minimum competency test in the late 1970s that students were required to pass in order to
graduate from high school. This competency test was replaced in the late 1990s by graduation requirements tied to
the more demanding, end-of-course Regents Examinations described in this section (Chudowsky et al. 2002).
4
The mathematics portion of the Regents exam has undergone a number of changes during our sample period
(2004-2013). From 1977-2002, students were required to pass the Sequential Math 1 exam, which covered primarily
algebra, to graduate from high school. Sequential Math 2 and Sequential Math 3 were optional math courses available
for students wanting to cover more advanced material. From 2003 to 2009, students were required to pass the Math
A exam, which covered approximately the same material as the first 1.5 courses in the Sequential Math sequence,
to graduate. Compared to Sequential Math 1, Math A had fewer multiple choice questions and more long-answer
questions, and included a number of new subjects like geometry and trigonometry. A Math B exam was also available
during this period for more advanced students. From the 2009 to the present, the Regents exams reverted back to
year long math courses separated into Algebra, Geometry, and Algebra 2. Students are only required to pass this
first Algebra course to graduate from high school. There was a year of overlap between the Math A/B exams and
the current math exams because while Math A was typically taken by 10th grade students, the first Algebra course
under the current system is typically taken by 9th grade students.
5
New York recently approved alternatives to the Regents Examinations based on comparable performance thresholds in Advanced Placement, International Baccalaureate, and SAT II exams (NYSUT 2010). Information on these

4

January, June, and August of each calendar year, with students typically taking each exam at the
end of the corresponding course.
An uncommon and important feature of the Regents exams is that they are graded by teachers
from students’ own schools. The State Education Department of New York provides explicit guidelines for how the teacher-based scoring of each Regents exam should be organized (e.g., NYSED
2009), which we discuss in greater detail below. After the exams are graded locally at schools, the
results are sent to school districts and, ultimately, to the New York State Education Department.
Regents exam scale scores range from 0 to 100. In order to qualify for a “local diploma,” the
lowest available in New York, students entering high school before the fall of 2005 were required to
score at least 55 on all five core examinations. The requirements for a local diploma were then raised
for each subsequent entry cohort, until the local diploma was eliminated altogether for students
entering high school in the fall of 2008. For all subsequent cohorts, the local diploma has only been
available to students with disabilities. In order to receive a (more prestigious) Regents Diploma,
students in all entry cohorts were required to score at least 65 on all five core Regents exams.6 To
earn the even more prestigious “Advanced” Regents Diploma, students must also score at least a
65 on additional elective exams in math, science, and foreign language. Appendix Table 1 provides
additional details on the degree requirements for each cohort in our sample.7
B. The Design and Scoring of Regents Examinations
Regents examinations contain both multiple-choice and open-response or essay questions. For
example, the English exam typically includes both traditional multiple-choice questions and openresponse questions that ask students to read a passage (e.g., a speech, an informative text with
tables or figures, or a literary text) and respond to an essay prompt. Similarly, both the U.S.
History and Global History exams include multiple-choice questions, open-response questions, and
thematic essays, while the foreign language exams also contain a speaking component. Scoring
materials provided to schools include the correct answers to multiple-choice questions, and detailed,

alternatives to the Regents exams is not included in our data.
6
Beginning with students entering high school in the fall of 2005, eligible students may appeal to graduate with
a local or Regents diploma using a score between 62 and 64. Students are eligible to appeal if they have taken the
Regents Examination under appeal at least two times, have at least one score between 62 and 64 on this exam,
have an attendance rate of at least 95 percent for the most recent school year, have a passing course average in the
Regents subject, and is recommended for an exemption by the student’s school. In addition, students who are English
language learners and who first entered school in the U.S. in grade 9 or above may appeal to graduate with a local
diploma if they have taken the required Regents Examination in English language arts at least twice and earned a
score on this exam between 55 and 61.
7
In addition to the important proficiency cutoffs at 55 and 65, there are also less important cutoffs at 75 and
85 scale score points. The 75 point cutoff is sometimes used by New York state community colleges as either a
prerequisite or qualification for credit towards a degree, and the 85 point cutoff is often used by high schools as
a prerequisite for courses (e.g., Advanced Placement) and by New York State colleges as either a prerequisite or
qualification for credit towards a degree. Beginning with students who entered 9th grade in the fall of 2009, an
additional accolade of “Annotation of Mastery” also became available for students scoring above 85 on three Regents
exams in science or math. While we focus on the relatively more important cutoffs at 55 and 65 in our analysis, there
is also visual evidence of a small amount of manipulation at both the 75 and 85 cutoffs.

5

subject-specific instructions for evaluating open-response and essay questions.8
To help ensure consistent scoring, essays are given a numeric rating of one to four by two
independent graders. If the ratings are different but contiguous, the final essay score is the average
of the two independent ratings. If the ratings are different and not contiguous, a third independent
grader rates the essay. If any two of the three ratings are the same, the modal rating is taken. The
median rating is taken if each of the three ratings is unique. The number of correct multiple-choice
items, the number of points awarded on open-response questions, and the final essay scores are then
converted into a final scale score using a “conversion chart” that is specific to each exam. Scale
scores range from 0 to 100 on all Regents exams, but typically not all 100 scale scores are possible
on any single exam.
During our primary sample period (2003-2004 to 2009-2010), math and science Regents exams
with scale scores between 60 and 64 were required to be re-scored, with different teachers rating the
open-response questions.9 Principals at each school also had the discretion to mandate that math
and science exams with initial scale scores from 50 to 54 be re-scored. This re-scoring policy is clearly
important for our study. Although we find evidence of manipulation in every Regents exam subject
area, the policy of re-scoring math and science exams may influence how principals and teachers
approach scoring Regents exams more generally. We discuss the impact of this re-scoring policy
on our results in greater depth in Section III.C, where we use changes in the Regents re-scoring
policies between 2011 and 2013 to examine the mechanisms leading to test score manipulation.
C. Regents Examinations and School Accountability
Beginning in 2002-2003, high schools in New York state have been evaluated under the state
accountability system developed in response to the federal No Child Left Behind Act (NCLB).
Whether a public high school in New York is deemed to be making Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP)
towards NCLB’s proficiency goals depends on five measures, all of which are at least partially based

8

For the English and social-studies exams, principals are required to designate a scoring coordinator who is
responsible for managing the logistics of scoring, assigning exams to teachers, and providing teachers with necessary
training. For essay questions, the materials available to support this training include scoring rubrics and pre-scored
“anchor papers” that provide detailed commentary on why the example essays merited different scores. For openended questions, the materials include a rubric to guide scoring. A single qualified teacher grades the open-ended
questions on the social-science exams. In the math exams, the school must establish a committee of three mathematics
teachers to grade the examinations, and no teacher should rate more than a third of the open-ended questions in
mathematics. In the science exams, the school must establish a committee of two science teachers to grade the
examinations, and no teacher should rate more than a half of the open-ended questions.
9
Grading guidelines distributed to teachers typically included the following text explaining this policy: “All
student answer papers that receive a scale score of 60 through 64 must be scored a second time to ensure the accuracy of the score. For the second scoring, a different committee of teachers may score the student’s paper or
the original committee may score the paper, except that no teacher may score the same open-ended questions that
he/she scored in the first rating of the paper. The school principal is responsible for assuring that the student’s final
examination score is based on a fair, accurate and reliable scoring of the student’s answer paper.” See for example: https://www.jmap.org/JMAPRegentsExamArchives/INTEGRATEDALGEBRAEXAMS/0610ExamIA.pdf.
Two exceptions to this rule that we are aware of are the Chemistry examination in June 2001, which was only
based on multiple choice questions, and the Living Environment exam in June 2001, where exams with scale scores
from 62 to 68 were to be re-scored.

6

on the Regents Examinations.10 Motivated by perceived shortcomings with NCLB, the NYCDOE
implemented its own accountability system starting in 2006-2007. The central component of the
NYCDOE accountability system is the school progress reports, which assigned schools a letter grade,
ranging from A to F. For high schools, the school grades assigned through the NYC accountability
system also depend heavily on Regents pass rates, particularly pass rates in the core academic
subjects that determine high school graduation.11 We examine the role of these accountability
systems in motivating test score manipulation in Section V.

II. Data
We use administrative enrollment and test score data from the New York City Department of
Education (NYCDOE).12 The NYCDOE data contain student-level administrative records on approximately 1.1 million students across the five boroughs of the NYC metropolitan area. The
data include information on student race, gender, free and reduced-price lunch eligibility, behavior, attendance, matriculation for all students, state math and English Language Arts test scores
for students in grades three through eight, and Regents test scores for high school students. The
10

First, 95 percent of a school’s 12th graders must have taken the Regents Examinations in mathematics and
English or an approved alternative (NYSED 2010). Second, the same must be true for all sub-groups with at least 40
students. Third and fourth, a school’s performance indices based on the Regents examinations in math and English
must meet the statewide objectives for both its overall student population and among accountability sub-groups.
The subject-specific performance indices are increasing in the share of students whose scale scores on the Regents
Examination exceed 55, with students whose scores exceed 65 having twice the impact on this index. Specifically, the
performance index equals 100 · [(count of cohort with scale scores ≥ 55 + count of cohort with scale scores ≥ 65) /
cohort size] (NYSED 2010). Thus, the performance index ranges from 200 when all students have scale scores of 65
or higher to 0 when all students have scale scores below 55. These state-mandated performance objectives increased
annually in order to meet NCLB’s mandated proficiency goals for the school year 2013-2014. The fifth measure
relevant to whether a high school makes AYP under New York’s accountability system is whether its graduation rate
meets the state standard, which is currently set at 80 percent. Like the other criteria, this standard is also closely
related to the Regents Examinations, since eligibility for graduation is determined in part by meeting either the 55
or 65 scale score thresholds in the five core Regents Examinations.
11
To form the school grades, the NYCDOE calculated performance within three separate elements of the progress
report: school environment (15 percent of the overall score), student performance (20-25 percent), and student
progress (55-60 percent). The school environment score was determined by responses to surveys of students (in grades
6 and above), parents, and teachers, as well as student attendance rates. For high schools, student performance is
measured using the four year graduation rate, the six year graduation rate, a ‘weighted’ four year graduation rate,
and a ‘weighted’ six year graduation rate. The weighted graduation rates assign higher weights to more advanced
diploma types based on the relative level of proficiency and college readiness the diploma indicates. Student progress
is measured using a variety of metrics that indicate progress toward earning a high school degree. Most importantly
for our analysis, student progress includes the number of passed Regents exams in core subjects. Student progress also
depends on a Regents pass rate weighted by each student’s predicted likelihood of passing the exam. A school’s score
for each element (e.g., student progress) is determined both by that school’s performance relative to all schools in the
city of the same type and relative to a group of peer schools with observably similar students. Performance relative
to peer schools is given triple the weight of citywide relative performance. A school’s overall score was calculated
using the weighted sum of the scores within each element plus any additional credit received. Schools can also receive
“additional credit” for making significant achievement gains among students with performance in the lowest third of
all students citywide who were Hispanic, Black, or other ethnicities, and students in English Language Learner (ELL)
or Special Education programs. See Rockoff and Turner (2010) for additional details on the NYCDOE accountability
system.
12
Appendix A contains all of the relevant information on the cleaning and coding of the variables used in our
analysis. This section summarizes the most relevant information from the appendix.

7

Regents data provide exam-level information on the subject, month, and year of the test, the scale
score, and a school identifier. We have complete NYCDOE data spanning the 2003-2004 to 20122013 school years, with Regents test score and basic demographic data available from the 2000-2001
school year.
We also collected the charts that convert raw scores (e.g., number of multiple choice correct,
number of points from essays), to scale scores for all Regents exams taken during our sample period.
We use these conversion charts in three ways. First, we identify a handful of observations in the
New York City data that contain errors in either the scale score or test identifier, i.e., that do not
correspond to possible scale scores on the indicated exam. Second, we map raw scores into scale
scores for math and science exams so that we can account for predictable spikes in the distribution
of scale scores when this mapping is not one to one. Third, we identify scale scores that are most
likely to be affected by manipulation around the proficiency cutoffs. See Section III.A for additional
details on both the identification of manipulable scores and the mapping of raw to scale scores.
We make several restrictions to our main sample. First, we focus on Regents exams starting
in 2003-2004 when tests can be reliably linked to the student enrollment files. We return to tests
taken in the school years 2000-2001 and 2001-2002 in Section V to assess manipulation prior to the
introduction of NCLB and the NYC school accountability system. Second, we use each student’s
first exam for each subject to avoid any mechanical bunching around the performance thresholds
due to re-taking behavior. In practice, however, results are nearly identical when we include retests. Third, we drop August exams, which are far less numerous and typically taken after summer
school, but our results are again similar if we use all test administrations. Fourth, we drop students
who are enrolled in middle schools, a special education high school, or any other non-standard high
school (e.g., dropout prevention schools). Fifth, we drop observations with scale scores that are
not possible on the indicated exam (i.e. where there are reporting errors), and all school-exam cells
where more than five percent of scale scores are not possible. Finally, we drop special education
students, who are subject to a different set of accountability standards during our sample period (see
Appendix Table 1), although our results are again similar if we include special education students.
These sample restrictions leave us with 1,630,259 core exams from 514,679 students in our primary
window of 2003-2004 to 2009-2010. Table 1 contains summary statistics for the resulting dataset,
and Appendix A includes additional information on our sample restrictions and the number of
observations dropped by each.

III. The Manipulation of Regents Exam Scores
A. Documenting the Extent of Manipulation: Estimates from 2004-2010
We begin by examining bunching in the distribution of core Regents exam scores near the proficiency
thresholds at 55 and 65 points for all core Regents exams taken between 2003-2004 and 2009-2010
in Figure 1. We initially focus only on tests during this time period, as exams taken after 2009-2010
are subject to a different set of grading policies which we discuss in see Section III.C.

8

To construct Figure 1 and all subsequent test score plots, we first collapse the data to the
subject-year-month-score level (e.g., Living Environment, June 2004, 77 points). We then make
adjustments to account for two mechanical issues that affect the smoothness of the distribution
of scale scores. First, we adjust for instances when the number of raw scores that map into each
scale score is not one to one, which causes predictable spikes in the scale score frequency.13 We
also adjust Integrated Algebra and Math A exams for an alternating pattern of spikes in frequency
at very low, even raw scores (i.e., 2, 4, 6, etc.) likely due to students who only received credit for
a small number of multiple choice questions, worth two scale score points each. For these exams,
we average adjacent even and odd scores below 55, which generates total smoothness at this part
of the distribution. All of our results are similar but slightly less precise if we do not make these
adjustments. Finally, we collapse the adjusted counts to the scale score level and, in Figure 1,
plot the fraction of tests in each scale score around the proficiency thresholds, demarcated by the
vertical lines at 55 and 65 points.
Figure 1 shows that there are clear spikes around the proficiency cutoffs in the otherwise smooth
test score distribution, and the patterns are strongly suggestive of manipulation. The scores immediately below these cutoffs appear less frequent than one would expect from a well-behaved
empirical distribution, and the scores at or just above the cutoffs appear more frequent than one
would expect. In Appendix Figures 1 and 2, we show that this pattern is still apparent when we
examine test scores separately by subject or by year.14
To estimate the magnitude and statistical significance of any manipulation in Figure 1 formally,
we construct a counterfactual test score distribution using the approach developed by Chetty et
al. (2011).15 First, we fit a polynomial to the counts plotted in the figure, excluding data near the
proficiency cutoffs with a set of indicator variables, using the following regression:
Fsemt =

q
X
i=0

πiemt · (Score)i +

X

λiemt · 1[Score = i] + εsemt

(1)

i∈−Mcemt ,+Mcemt

where Fsemt is the fraction of students with a Regents scale score of s on exam e in month m
and year t, Score is the Regents scale score, q is the order of the polynomial, −Mcemt denotes
the potentially manipulable scores to the left of the proficiency cutoff c, and +Mcemt denotes the
potentially manipulable scores at or to the right of the proficiency cutoff. We define an estimate of
the counterfactual distribution {Fbsemt } as the predicted values from (1) omitting the contribution
P
of the indicator variables around the cutoffs: Fbsemt = qi=0 π
biemt ·(Score)i . In practice, we estimate
13
For example, on the June 2004 Living Environment Exam, a scale score of 77 points corresponds to either a
raw score of 57 or 58 points, while scale scores of 76 or 78 points correspond only to raw scores of 56 or 59 points,
respectively. Thus, the frequency of scale score 77 (1,820 exams) is roughly two times higher than the frequency of
scale scores of 76 (915) or 78 (917). Our approach is based on the assumption of continuity in underlying student
achievement, and thus we adjust the frequencies when raw to scale score mappings are not one to one.
14
Appendix Figure 2 shows that the amount of manipulation around the 55 cutoff is decreasing over time. This
pattern is most likely due to the decreasing importance of the 55 cutoff for graduation over time (see Appendix Table
1). We therefore focus on the 65 cutoff when examining manipulation after 2010.
15
See Saez (2010), Kleven and Waseem (2013), and Persson (2015) for other examples of “bunching” estimators.

9

{Fbsemt } using a sixth-degree polynomial (q=6) interacted with the exam subject e, but constant
across years for the same exam subject. Our results are not sensitive to changes in either the
polynomial order or whether we allow the polynomial to vary by year or subject.
A key step in estimating equation (1) is identifying the potentially manipulable test scores
around each cutoff. In other applications of “bunching” estimators, such as constructing counterfactual distributions of taxable income around a kink in marginal tax rates, it has not generally
been possible to specify ex ante the range of the variable in which manipulation might take place.
However, in our case we believe that we are able to identify potentially manipulable or manipulated test scores on both the right and left sides of the proficiency cutoffs based on knowledge of
the Regents grading rules. We define a score as manipulable to the left of each proficiency cutoff
if it is between 50-54 or 60-64. Recall that math and science exams scored between 60-64 are
automatically re-graded during our sample period, with many principals also choosing to re-grade
exams scored between 50-54. This range is also consistent with the patterns observed in Figure 1.
To the right of each cutoff, we define a score as manipulable differently by subject area. In math
and science, it is always possible to award enough additional raw points through partial credit on
open-response questions in order to move a student from just below the cutoff to exactly a score of
55 or 65. In contrast, for the exams in English and social studies, a score of exactly 55 or 65 may
not always be possible if manipulation is done through changes in scores to essay questions. This
is because changes in essay ratings of just one point typically change the scale score by four points.
We therefore define a score as manipulable for the math and science exams if it is the closest scale
score to the right of the proficiency threshold. For the English and social science exams, we define
a score as manipulable to the right of the cutoff if it is within 1 essay point of the proficiency
threshold. This differential range by subject is consistent with the patterns observed in Appendix
Figure 1. Our estimates are not sensitive to changes in the manipulable score region to either the
left or right side of the proficiency cutoffs.
If our demarcation of the manipulable range is accurate, then the unadjusted counterfactual
distribution from equation (1) should satisfy the integration constraint, i.e. the area under the
counterfactual distribution should equal the area under the empirical distribution. Consistent with
this assumption, we find that the missing mass from the left of each cutoff is always of similar
magnitude to the excess mass to the right of each cutoff. In contrast, Chetty et al. (2011) must
use an iterative procedure to shift the counterfactual distribution from equation (1) to the right
of the tax rate kink to satisfy the integration constraint. Given that the integration constraint is
satisfied in our context, we use an average of the missing mass and excess mass at each cutoff to
increase the precision of our estimates. However, our results are similar if we only use the excess
mass to the right of each cutoff.
Let βcemt denote the excess number of test takers who are located to the right of the cutoff c
for exam e in month m and year t, or the total amount of manipulation for that cutoff and test
administration. Given the setup discussed above, our estimate of the total amount of manipulation
P
P
for each test administration is βbcemt = 1 ·
(Fset − Fbsemt )+ 1 ·
(Fset − Fbsemt ) =
2

i∈+Mcemt

10

2

i∈−Mcemt

1
2

·

P

i∈+Mcemt

biemt +
λ

1
2

·

P

i∈−Mcemt

bi . We also report an estimate of “in-range” manipulation,
λ

or the probability of manipulation conditional on scoring just below a proficiency cutoff, which is
defined as the excess mass around the cutoff relative to the average counterfactual density in the
P
manipulable score regions: βbcemt / i∈−Mcemt ,+Mcemt Fbsemt . We calculate both total and in-range
manipulation at the cutoff-exam-year level to account for the fact that each test administration
potentially has a different set of manipulable scores. In pooled specifications such as that shown in
Figure 1, we report the average manipulation across all cutoff-exam-year administrations weighted
by the number of exams in each exam-year. In practice, our results are not sensitive to changes
in the polynomial order, the manipulable score region, or the way we weight manipulation totals
across exams because the manipulation estimates we document are much larger than the changes
induced by varying the specification.
We calculate standard errors for our manipulation estimates using a version of the parametric
bootstrap procedure developed in Chetty et al. (2011). Specifically, we draw with replacement from
the entire distribution of estimated vector of errors εbset in (1) at the score-exam-test administration
level to generate a new set of scale score counts at the exam-test administration level. We then
apply the approach described above to calculate 200 new manipulation estimates, and define the
standard error as the standard deviation of these 200 bootstrapped estimates.
The dotted line in Figure 1 shows the counterfactual density {Fbsemt } predicted using (1), as
well as our point estimates and standard errors for manipulation. Using the above parameters,
we estimate the average amount of manipulation on the Regents core exams to be 5.8 (se=0.04).
That is, we estimate that approximately 6 percent of all Regents core exams between 2004 and
2010 were manipulated to fall just above a proficiency cutoff. Within the range of potentially
manipulable scores, we estimate that an average of 44.5 (se=0.26) percent of Regents core exams
were manipulated to fall just above a cutoff. These estimates confirm our qualitative conclusion
that test scores are far more likely to fall just above a proficiency cutoff than one would expect from
a well-behaved empirical distribution. Appendix Table 2 presents results separately for all subjects
and test administrations. There is economically and statistically significant manipulation of all
Regents core exams in our sample. None of the results suggest that the manipulation documented
in Figure 1 is the result of one particular subject or administration.16
To provide further evidence that Regents scores near cutoffs were being manipulated, Appendix
Figure 3 examines the score distributions for math and English exams taken by New York City
students in grades 3 to 8, which also involve high stakes around specific cutoffs but are graded
centrally by the state. The distributions for the grade 3 to 8 exams trend smoothly through the
16

The math and science exams tend to have lower levels of manipulation than the English and social science
exams. The math and science exams also have fewer open response questions and more multiple choice questions
compared to the English and social science exams. The June 2001 Chemistry exam is the only test in our data
that consists of multiple-choice questions. Dee et al. (2011) show there is a clear discontinuity in the distribution of
Chemistry test scores at 65 points despite the lack of open-response questions. However, the amount of manipulation
is significantly less than otherwise similar elective exams. Both sets of results are consistent with the idea that
teachers view manipulation on multiple choice items as more costly than open-response items, but not so costly as
to eliminate manipulation entirely.

11

proficiency cutoff for these centrally graded exams, and estimates of a discontinuity in the distribution at the proficiency cutoff produce very small point estimates that are statistically insignificant.
Thus, there seems to be nothing mechanical about the construction of high stakes tests in New
York State that could reasonably have lead to the patterns we see in Figure 1.
Finally, we note that Dee et al. (2011) find evidence of similar manipulation in state-wide data
from the June 2009 administration of the Regents exams and show that the manipulation was not
specific to New York City. Unfortunately, these state-wide data do not provide include information
on student characteristics and are only available for one year.
B. Heterogenous Treatment of Students
This section examines how test score manipulation differentially impacts students and schools in
New York City. Differences in the amount of total manipulation across schools or students have
important implications for widely used performance metrics, such as the Regents pass rates used
in NCLB and the NYCDOE accountability system. Similarly, differences in the amount of in-range
manipulation across students or schools may suggest that local grading results in unfair or biased
assessments (e.g., Lavy 2008), particularly given the fact that not all students with scores just
below the cutoffs have their scores manipulated. Finally, differences in both total and in-range
manipulation may have important implications for across-student and across-school performance,
particularly if test score manipulation has significant effects on longer-run academic outcomes such
as high school graduation.
We examine how manipulation varies across students and schools in four ways. First, we
estimate aggregate results separately by various dichotomous school characteristics. We then separately estimate the amount of manipulation for each high school in our sample. These school-specific
estimates shed light on how manipulation varies across both observed and unobserved school characteristics, and, unlike our aggregate results, allow us to explore how both school manipulation
varies across continuous school characteristics and what school characteristics are most predictive
in a multivariate regression framework. Third, we estimate aggregate results separately by various
dichotomous student characteristics. Finally, we use a simple Monte Carlo procedure to examine
whether any differences in manipulation across students is due to across- or within-school variation.
In Section IV.C, we consider the potential implications of the differential treatments documented
below.
Differences Across Schools: Figure 2 reports results separately for mutually exclusive school
subgroups. We estimate the school subgroup results using separate sixth order polynomials for
each subgroup. We calculate subgroup specific standard errors using the bootstrap procedure
described above where we sample only within the subgroup specific vector of errors. We find that
schools in the top half of black and Hispanic enrollment (more than 79.2 percent) manipulate 7.0
(se=0.04) percent of all core exams and 43.8 (se=0.22) percent of in-range exams. In schools in
the bottom half of black and Hispanic enrollment, 4.6 (se=0.05) percent of all core exams are

12

manipulated and 45.7 (se=0.40) percent of in-range exams are manipulated. We similarly find that
schools with higher fractions of students eligible for free or reduced price lunch (more than 60.9
percent) manipulate about 1.6 percentage points more exams than schools with fewer disadvantaged
students, but are about 3.1 percentage points less likely to manipulate in-range exams. Finally,
schools whose students had low average 8th grade test scores (below -0.121 standard deviations)
manipulate about 3.1 percentage points more exams than schools with higher average achievement,
and 2.6 percentage points more likely to manipulate in-range exams.
To explore this issue further, we separately estimate the amount of total and in-range manipulation for each high school in our sample. For each test subject, we split high schools into five
equal sized bins based on average Regents score for that test administration. We then estimate
the counterfactual distribution for all exams in the test score bin using equation (1). We allow
the counterfactual distribution of exams to vary by test quintile to account for the fact that highand low-achieving schools have different test score distributions. Results are qualitatively similar
splitting schools into fewer or more quantiles, or restricting to the subset of very large high schools
where we can estimate school-specific counterfactual distributions. After estimating the counterfactual distribution for each subject x average test score quintile, we calculate the total and in-range
manipulation for each school using the procedure outlined above. This procedure provides us with
a measure of total and in-range manipulation at the school x test x year x month x cutoff level.
We limit our analysis to observations with at least 10 students scoring in the manipulable range
for the school x year x month x cutoff, which leaves us with 9,392 observations spread across 276
schools ranging from 2004 to 2010.
Appendix Figure 4 plots the distribution of total and in-range manipulation estimates from
the above sample collapsed to the school level. Consistent with our results from Figure 1, we find
considerable mass around 4 to 5 percent for total manipulation and around 50 percent for in-range
manipulation. At the same time, there are many high schools with extremely high or low estimated
manipulation. Because each of these individual estimates is measured with error, the distribution
shown in Appendix Figure 4 will overstate the true variance of school “effects” in the population
(Jacob and Rothstein, forthcoming). To recover the true distribution of school effects in our sample,
we estimate the following random effects model:
M anipulationcemth = αe + αm + αct + υh + εcemth

(2)

where M anipulationcemth is the estimated total or in-range manipulation at cutoff c for exam
subject e in month m and year t at high school h, αe are exam subject effects, αm are month
effects, αct are cutoff x year effects, and υh is a random school effect.
Estimates of equation (2) suggest considerable across-school variation in manipulation, particularly for in-range manipulation. The mean school effect υh for total manipulation the standard
deviation in school effects equal to 1.44 percentage points based on a baseline mean school effect
of 3.76 percentage points. For in-range manipulation, however, the standard deviation is 16.6 per-

13

centage points on a mean of 47.5 percentage points.17 These estimates confirm that, even after
accounting for measurement error, schools differ considerably in their propensity to manipulate test
scores.
To examine whether the variation across schools is associated with observable school characteristics, we estimate several extensions of the above random effects model. Table 2 presents results from
a series of regressions of equation (2) that include selected school-level observable characteristics.
The observations are weighted by the number of in-range exams contributing to the manipulation
estimate. Not surprisingly, we find that total manipulation is markedly higher in schools that have
higher fractions of students who tend to score closer to the cutoffs: black and Hispanic students,
students eligible for free or reduced price lunch, and students with lower 8th grade test scores.
Similarly, in-range manipulation is higher for schools that have a higher fraction of black and
Hispanic students, a higher fraction of students eligible for free or reduced price lunch, and lower
8th grade test scores, though the free lunch result is not statistically significant. In contrast to the
total manipulation results, only the point estimate on the fraction of black and Hispanic students
remains statistically significant when we include all three school characteristics in the regression.
The results from this combined specification suggest that a ten percentage point increase in the
fraction of black and Hispanic students is associated with a 1.78 (se=0.95) percentage point lower
probability of manipulating an in-range test score, a 3.8 percent decrease from the mean in-range
manipulation estimate.
Differences Across Students: Figure 3 reports results separately for mutually exclusive student
subgroups. Following our school subgroup results, we estimate the student subgroup results using
separate sixth order polynomials for each subgroup and calculate subgroup specific standard errors
using the bootstrap procedure described above where we sample only within the subgroup specific
vector of errors. We find no meaningful differences in the manipulation for female and male students
or students eligible and not eligible for free and reduced price lunch. In contrast, Figure 3 shows
that 48.1 (se=0.62) percent of in-range core exams are manipulated for white and Asian students,
compared to 43.7 (se=0.22) percent for black and Hispanic students. However, because black and
Hispanic students have lower Regents scores on average, total manipulation for black and Hispanic
students is nearly twice as large as the manipulation for white and Asian students. Thus, although
black and Hispanic students are more likely to have a test score near a cutoff, and therefore be at
risk for manipulation, white and Asian students are more likely to have their test scores manipulated
if they happen to score just below a cutoff. In Panel D of Figure 3, we find that 8.0 (se=0.06)
percent of all exams and 44.1 (se=0.27) of in-range exams are manipulated for students with below
median 8th grade test scores (below 0.123 standard deviations). In contrast, 4.4 (se=0.05) percent
of all exams and 44.9 (se=0.35) percent of in-range exams are manipulated for students with above
median 8th grade test scores. Panel E of Figure 3 similarly shows students with either a behavioral
17

Estimates from equation (2) in tabular form are available upon request. Consistent with our earlier results,
in-range manipulation is somewhat higher in English and history than math and science. Manipulation rates are
also similar across cutoffs in 2004, but over time the prevalence of manipulation increased (decreased) at the 65 (55)
cutoff as the high school graduation requirements have changed.

14

violation or more than 20 absences are somewhat more likely to have a manipulated exam in general
compared to students with no behavioral or attendance violations, but just over 3 percentage points
less likely to have an in-range exam manipulated.
While we can easily measure differences in manipulation between students in different groups,
these will reflect the total of both within- and across-school variation in manipulation. To isolate
across-school variation, and thus gauge the magnitude of the within-school component, we use a
simple but intuitive Monte Carlo technique. We reassign characteristics randomly among students
taking the same exam within each school, keeping the fraction of students with each subgroup
designation constant both within schools and across all schools. We then we estimate manipulation
for the randomly assigned synthetic subgroups, allowing the sixth order polynomial to be different
in each synthetic subgroup. Finally, we repeat this entire process 100 times with different sixth
order polynomials in each permutation in order to generate a distribution of total and in-range
manipulation based on these synthetic subgroups. By comparing the actual differences across
student groups reported in Figure 3 to the synthetic results which, by design, reflect only the acrossschool differences in manipulation, we can assess the magnitude of any within-school differences
in manipulation. However, one limitation of this approach is that reassignment of students will
not only lead to differences among students within the manipulable range, but will also influence
all students and thus may influence the counterfactual distribution we estimate for a particular
subgroup.
We report synthetic subgroup manipulation estimates in Table 3, alongside the actual subgroup
estimates. Interestingly, the in-range manipulation advantage for whites and Asians is still present
when ethnicity is assigned randomly within schools, though the point estimate is approximately
45 percent as large as the point estimate using true, or non-synthetic, data. These results suggest
that nearly half of the white and Asian advantage is due to differences in manipulation across the
schools these students attend, but that about 55 percent of the advantage is due to within-school
differences in how white and Asian students are treated, conditional on having a score close to the
cutoff.
Of course, any within-school difference in manipulation for white and Asian students may
driven by other characteristics correlated with ethnicity. Indeed, we find no differences in in-range
manipulation across students with high and low baseline test scores when this characteristic is
assigned randomly within schools, nor do we see any difference in in-range manipulation when
behavior and attendance records are assigned randomly within schools. These results suggests that
nearly all of the advantage for students with high baseline test scores or good behavior records is
due to within-school differences in the probability of having a test score manipulated.
In summary, we find that students with higher baseline test scores and better behavior with
scores near the cutoff are more likely than their within-school peers to have their scores manipulated.
This is consistent with teachers using soft information about students’ true knowledge of the tested
material, or some other measure of merit, when deciding to manipulate a score near the cutoff.
We also find that schools serving black and Hispanic students have somewhat lower propensities

15

to manipulate scores near the cutoff, although they have greater fractions of their students with
scores in this range. Meanwhile, student gender and poverty are not correlated with the extent of
manipulation.
C. The End of Manipulation: Estimates from 2011-2013
On February 12, 2011, the Wall Street Journal published an expose piece regarding manipulation
on the Regents exams, including an analysis of state-wide data that reporters had obtained via a
FOIA request and shared with the authors of this paper (see Dee et al. 2011 for additional details).
The New York Times published a similar story and the results of its own analysis on February
19th, including a statement by a New York State Education Department official that anomalies in
the Regents score distribution had been known for some time.18 In May 2011, the New York State
Board of Regents ordered schools to end the longstanding practice of re-scoring math and science
exams with scores just below the proficiency cutoffs, and included explicit instructions on June
2011 exams in all subject areas specifying that “schools are no longer permitted to rescore any of
the open-ended questions on this exam after each question has been rated once, regardless of the
final exam score.”19 In October 2011, the Board of Regents further mandated that teachers would
no longer be able to score their own students’ state assessments as of the 2012-2013 school year.
In response to the state mandate that exams no longer be graded locally, the NYCDOE implemented a pilot program to grade various January 2012 and June 2012 core exams at centralized
locations. Out of the 330 high schools in our sample offering Regents exams in 2012, 27 participated
in the pilot program for the January exams, and 164 high schools participated for the June exams.
Appendix Table 3 reports summary statistics for students taking a core Regents exam at pilot and
non-pilot high schools in 2010-2011 – the year prior to the implementation of the pilot program.
Students in pilot schools are more likely to be white and less likely to be Hispanic than students
in non-pilot schools. However, there are no statistically significant differences for 8th grade test
scores or performance on core Regents exams in the baseline period. None of the results suggest
important differences between pilot and non-pilot schools before the implementation of the pilot
program.20 In 2013, all of New York City’s high schools began using centralized scoring for all
18

In 2009, the New York State Comptroller released results from an audit of local scoring practices. The report
identified a number of specific shortcomings in scoring procedures, concluding that the oversight by the New York
State Education Department was not adequate to assure the accuracy of Regents scores (DiNapoli 2009). The report
also made clear that the Education Department had known about widespread scoring inaccuracies from periodic
statewide reviews in which trained experts re-scored randomly selected exams from a sample of schools throughout
the state. For example, a review of June 2005 exams found that 80 percent of the randomly re-scored exams received
a lower score than the original, official score. For 34 percent of the re-scored exams, the difference in scoring was
substantial – as much as 10 scale score points. The audit noted that an earlier audit during the 2003-2004 school
year also found similar results.
19
See for example: http://www.nysedregents.org/integratedalgebra/811/ia-rg811w.pdf. A different, perhaps
cheaper means to eliminate manipulation, was recommended by Dee et al. (2011): withhold the algorithm that
converts raw to scale scores until after schools had submitted student scores to the state. As the algorithm changed
from year to year, schools could not easily identify students whose score was just below a cutoff. This recommendation
was not taken by the New York State Education Department.
20
In our discussions with NYCDOE officials, there was no specific formula used to select schools or particular
targeting of schools with certain characteristics. We were informed that recruitment for the pilot was driven through

16

Regents exams as mandated by the state.
In this section, we explore the implications of these swift, widespread, and arguably exogenous
changes to the Regents grading policies on the extent of manipulation. Figure 4 plots the empirical
distribution of test scores for core Regents exams taken in June between 2009-2010 and 20122013, the last year of data available. We focus on June exams to simplify the analysis given the
staggered introduction of the pilot program, but results are identical using both January and June
test administrations. We plot the results separately by participation in the 2012 pilot program to
grade exams centrally. We also calculate manipulation only around the 65 cutoff, as the score of
55 was no longer a relevant cutoff for the vast majority of students in these cohorts (see Appendix
Table 1). In June 2009-2010, pilot and non-pilot schools manipulated 72.9 (se=0.99) and 63.3
(se=0.54) percent of in-range exams, respectively.21 Manipulation dropped to 17.2 (se=0.78) and
13.1 (se=0.39) percent of in-range exams in pilot and non-pilot schools, respectively, when schools
were told to stop re-scoring math and science exams below the cutoff in June 2011. Thus, the extent
of manipulation was greatly reduced, but clearly not eliminated, when state officials explicitly
proscribed the practice of re-scoring exams with scores just below the proficiency cutoffs. Using
the variation created by the pilot program, we find a clear role for the centralization of scoring
in eliminating score manipulation. In June 2012, manipulation dropped from 17.2 percent to a
statistically insignificant -0.8 percent (se=0.55) of in-range exams in pilot schools. Yet it remained
fairly steady in non-pilot schools, whose exams were still graded by teachers within the high school,
going from 13.1 percent to 12.8 percent (se=0.49). In line with these results, manipulation appears
to have been completely eliminated in June 2013, when both pilot and non-pilot schools had adopted
centralized grading. Of course, we cannot say with certainty whether centralization by itself would
have eliminated manipulation in absence of the state’s statements regarding re-scoring math and
science exams, since we do not observe high schools operating under these conditions.
Appendix Figure 5 reports results separately for each core exam subject. The results are similar
across all subjects, with the exception of Global History. These results are likely due to the fact that
only 14 out of 163 schools pilot schools included Global History in the pilot program. In comparison,
159 schools included Integrated Algebra, 149 included Comprehensive English, 139 included Living
Environment, and 134 included U.S. History. Our main results are therefore somewhat stronger if
we drop Global History or limit the sample for each pilot school to the included subjects.
At the time that state and city policy changes eliminated the practice of score manipulation, it
was unclear if this would have important long-term implications for students’ academic achievement
high school “networks,” i.e., mandatory but self-selected affiliations of 20-25 schools who work together to reduce
administrative burdens through economies of scale. We find that network affiliation explains roughly 30 percent of
pilot participation using random effects regressions. About half of the high schools in the NYCDOE share their
building with another high school, and it is clear that co-located schools exhibited similar participation. Among the
roughly one third of high schools that co-located in buildings with four or more high schools, we find that building
location explains almost 90 percent of the variation in participation using random effects regressions.
21
As can be seen in Appendix Figure 2, in-range manipulation in 2010 across both the 55 and 65 cutoffs remained
at roughly 40 percent, in line with prior years. However, manipulation at the 55 cutoff had greatly decreased at this
point, as this cutoff was no longer relevant for almost all students taking exams in 2010, while manipulation at the
65 cutoff was quite large.

17

and attainment. After all, students whose exams would have been manipulated may simply have
re-taken and passed the test shortly thereafter. Only now are we able to observe key outcomes, like
high school graduation, for the cohorts of students potentially impacted by these policy changes.
In the next section, we use these arguably exogenous policy changes to help identify the causal
impact of manipulation. Armed with these estimates, we then gauge the degree to which the
longstanding practice of manipulation may have distorted levels and gaps in academic achievement
among various groups of students.

IV. The Causal Effect of Test Score Manipulation on Educational Attainment
The swift, widespread elimination of manipulation following changes to Regents grading policies
provides us with an identification strategy to estimate the causal impact of test score manipulation
on a key longer term outcome, high school graduation, as well as significant intermediate outcomes,
such as test re-taking and the number of years of high school education. Specifically, we can compare
the outcomes of students with scores close to the cutoff before and after the policy changes. We
can also control for any secular shifts in the characteristics of students in the “manipulable range”
using prior trends, as well as parallel trends among students with scores just above this range
in a differences-in-differences framework. In addition, we present results from a cross-sectional
methodology, motivated by the approach used by Diamond and Persson (2016), as a secondary
strategy to estimate the impact of manipulation on cohorts taking exams several years prior to
the reforms. As we explain below, this cross-sectional strategy relies on stronger identification
assumptions, but allows us to also examine college enrollment outcomes.
A. Difference-in-Differences Estimates
Our difference-in-differences approach exploits the sharp reduction in score manipulation following
New York’s policy changes starting in 2011. Intuitively we compare the evolution of outcomes for
students with scores just inside the manipulable range, pre- vs. post-reform, to the evolution of
outcomes for students with scores just above the manipulable range. The latter group of students
helps us establish a counterfactual of what would have happened to the outcomes of students scoring
in the manipulable range if the grading reforms had not been implemented. More specifically, we
estimate the reduced form impact of the grading reforms using the following specification:
yisemth = α3h + α3et + α3s + α3s · Year + Xi β3 + γ3 · 1[69 ≥ Score ≥ 60] · 1[Year ≥ 2011]
+ φ3 · 1[59 ≥ Score ≥ 50] · 1[Year ≥ 2011] + εisemth (3)
where yisemth is the outcome of interest for student i with score s on exam e in month m and year
t at high school h, α3h are school effects, αet are exam by year effects, αs are 10-point Regent
score effects, α3s · Year are linear trends in year interacted with Regents score bins to account for
the increasingly stringent graduation requirements during this time period (see Appendix Table 1),

18

and Xi includes controls for gender, ethnicity, free lunch eligibility, 8th grade test scores. We also
control for the effect of the grading reforms on students scoring between 0-59 as these students are
also likely to be affected by the reform if or when they retake the exam. We stack student outcomes
across all core Regents exams and adjust our standard errors for clustering at both the student and
school level. Results are similar when we estimate (3) for each exam separately when there is only
one observation per student (see Appendix Table 4).22
The parameter γ3 can be interpreted as the differential effect of the reform on students scoring
between 60-69 compared to the omitted group of students scoring between 70-100.23 As the reform
eliminated manipulation, we might expect our estimates of γ3 to be negative for outcomes such
as passing the exam and graduating from high school. However, the key identifying assumption
is that in the absence of the Regents grading reforms (and conditional on our baseline controls
and linear trends within 10-point score bins), any discontinuous change in outcomes for students
scoring between 60-69 at the time of the reforms would have been identical to the change for
students between 70-100. This assumption would be violated if the implementation of the grading
reforms was coincident with unobservable changes in the types of students in each group. Below,
we will present several tests in support of our approach.
We begin with a descriptive examination of how mean student outcomes evolved between 20042013 for those scoring between 60-69 (i.e. students likely to be affected by test score manipulation)
and between 70-100 (i.e. students unlikely to be affected by test score manipulation). Figure 5
presents reduced form estimates from a variant of equation (3) that include the interaction of scoring
between 60-69 and each pre-reform year so that we can examine any pre- and post-reform trends.
We omit the interaction with 2010 so that all coefficients are relative to that omitted year. We
also omit student baseline controls and the linear trends in year interacted with Regents score bins
so that the coefficients simply show how outcomes evolve over time for students scoring between
60-69.24 We also focus on students entering high school between 2003-2004 and 2009-2010 where
we observe high school graduation. We measure graduation using an indicator for any diploma
type at four years. We do not include GED diplomas in our graduation measure, but we do not
examine GED separately as we cannot measure GED reliably in our data.
In Panel A of Figure 5, we examine the fraction of students scoring 65 or above on their first
attempt on these exams. There is a sudden drop of around 18 percentage points in the probability
of scoring 65 or above for students scoring between 60-69 following the implementation of the
grading reforms in 2011, confirming, as we discussed in Section III.C, that the Regents grading
22

The effect of manipulation on high school graduation is largest for Living Environment, the first exam taken by
most students. Effects are also somewhat larger for English and U.S. History, the last exams taken by most students.
Note that the number of observations varies by subject in Appendix Table 4 because we do not observe every exam
for every student. We observe 4.3 out of 5 core exams for the typical student in our sample.
23
Results are similar if we drop students score between 0 and 59 or limit the comparison group to students scoring
between 70-79.
24
Appendix Figure 6 presents unadjusted means for students taking the English Language Arts or U.S. History
Regents exam for the first time, as these subjects are typically taken in 11th grade as the last two core exams; this
allows us to isolate cohorts of test takers likely (un)affected by the grading reforms in the raw data. The results
largely follow those from Figure 5.

19

reforms significantly decreased test score manipulation. In Panel B of Figure 5, we show that
the fall in pass rates also coincides with a sharp increase in test retaking, from around 15 to 18
percent, suggesting that almost all marginal students who failed these Regents exams made a second
attempt. In Panel C, we look at the rates of passing the exam within a full calendar year after the
first attempt. We see a similar sudden drop, but of a smaller magnitude of roughly 6-7 percentage
points, suggesting that the majority of these marginal students (but clearly not all of them) were
able to pass the exam on a subsequent attempt. We cannot examine re-taking within a full calendar
year for the 2013 exams as our data do not extend far enough. Importantly, we also observe clear
upwards trends in the probability of scoring 65 or above during the pre-reform period. As discussed
above, this upwards trend is consistent with the greater emphasis on the 65 point cutoff during this
time period and suggests the inclusion of linear trends in our primary specification.
Panel D of Figure 5 shows that the coefficients on the interactions in 2005-2009 are all small,
not statistically different from zero, and there is no trend in the coefficient values during this time
period, suggesting similar pre-reform trends for students scoring between 60-69 and between 70-100.
In Appendix Figure 6, we show that high school graduation rates were essentially flat for these two
groups of students, with no indication of different pre-reform trends. However, starting in 2011,
graduation rates suddenly drop by about 3 to 5 percentage points for students scoring between 6069. Together, the data series shown in Figure 5 strongly suggest that the scoring reforms imposed
by New York state had significant impact on students whose scores fell just below the 65 cutoff on
the Regents core exams. While most of these students still eventually graduated, 25-30 percent of
them appear to have been unable to pass the exam on a subsequent attempt and thus could not
graduate from high school.
Regression estimates of equation (3) that also include baseline controls and linear trends are
shown in Table 4, pooling all of the core Regents exams. We report the coefficient on the interaction
between scoring between 60-69 on an exam and the exam being taken after the grading reforms
were implemented in 2011. We also present results with and without school fixed effects, but
these controls have very little impact on our estimates. First stage results (Columns 1 and 2)
for effects on the probability of scoring 65 or higher are consistent with the patterns observed in
Figure 5. The grading reforms are estimated to decrease the probability of scoring 65 or above
by 15.9 (se=0.7) percentage points, a substantial decrease from the mean pass rate of 80 percent
for students scoring between 60-69 in 2010. Reduced form estimates for high school graduation
(Columns 3 and 4) indicate that students scoring between 60-69 are roughly 3.5 percentage points
(se=0.4) less likely to graduate high school following the grading reforms.
In Columns 5-6 of Table 4, we present two-stage least squares estimates that provide the local
average treatment effect of passing a Regents exam due to test score manipulation. Using this
specification, we find that having a score inflated to fall just above the proficiency cutoff increases
the probability of graduating from high school by 21.9 percentage points (se=2.9). This is a
substantial effect, given an exam-weighted mean graduation rate of 79.8 percent for students in our
sample. In other words, consistent with the patterns seen in Figure 5, we estimate that roughly a

20

quarter of “marginal” Regents passers would not have graduated from high school if their scores
had not been manipulated.
It is possible that the effects of manipulation were heterogeneous, and in Table 5 we report
estimates from our preferred two-stage least squares specification for mutually exclusive student
subgroups. Effects on high school graduation are similar by ethnicity, but we find somewhat larger
effects for female students, students from poor households, and students with higher 8th grade
test scores. We estimate that manipulation increases the probability that female students graduate
high school by 24.4 (se=3.4) percentage points, 5.1 percentage points more than male students.
Manipulation also has a 4.4 percentage point larger effect on students eligible for free or reduced
price lunch compared to students not eligible for free or reduced price lunch, and 5.9 percentage
points larger for students with above median 8th grade test scores compared to students with below
median scores.
Appendix Table 5 presents estimates using a variety of specifications and instruments to assess
the robustness of our main two-stage least squares results. Column 1 uses the interactions of scoring
between 60-69 and year-specific indicators for taking the test between 2011-2013 for a total of three
instrumental variables. Column 2 adds an interaction with an indicator for participating in the
centralized grading pilot program for a total of six instrumental variables. The estimated effect
of manipulation on high school graduation ranges from 17.8 (se=2.5) to 19.1 (se=2.6) percentage
points, and none of the point estimates are statistically distinguishable from our preferred estimates
in Table 4.
In a further test for potential sources of bias in our main specification, we run placebo regressions where the dependent variable is a fixed student characteristic, rather than a student outcome.
These estimates are shown in Panel A of Appendix Table 6. We do find several small but statistically significant “effects” of the reforms on student characteristics. However, if anything these
results suggest that our estimates may be slightly biased against finding that the reforms lowered
graduation rates for marginal students whose scores were no longer manipulated. We find that
students scoring 60-69 following the elimination of re-scoring are approximately 1.5 (se=0.7) percentage points more likely to be eligible for free or reduced price lunch, but also have 8th grade
test scores that are 0.053 (se=0.007) standard deviations higher following the grading reforms. To
provide an indication of the magnitude of the potential bias due to these differences in baseline
characteristics, we also examine differences in predicted high school graduation (using all of the
baseline characteristics listed in Panel A of Appendix Table 6). The coefficient indicates that
predicted graduation rates are 0.8 percentage points higher (se=0.1) for students scoring 60-69 following the elimination of re-scoring. Thus, while our difference-in-difference regression may contain
some specification error, our analysis of student unobservables indicates that the true effect of test
score manipulation on graduation rates may be even slightly larger than our two-stage least squares
estimates suggest.
Most regents exams are taken well before the end of high school, and failing these exams may
effect whether students continue to progress towards graduation or drop out of school. We therefore

21

examine two additional measures of secondary school attainment: the highest grade (from 9 to 12)
in which the student is enrolled in NYC public schools and the number of years the student is
enrolled in NYC public schools. We select these two measures because they represent two opposing
ways to address the issue of grade repetition, i.e., if a student is forced to repeat a grade, does this
repeated year of education represent additional educational attainment? If we measure attainment
based on highest grade then repetition does not count as attainment, while if we measure based
on years enrolled then repetition counts fully. Results from our preferred two-stage least squares
specification on these outcomes are shown in Panel A of Appendix Table 7. We find large effects
of manipulation on both of these attainment measures. Having an exam manipulated increases
educational attainment by 0.41 grade levels (se=0.04), a 3.4 percent increase from the sample mean,
and 0.54 school years (se=0.04), a 13.1 percent increase from the sample mean.25 These results
suggest that manipulation lengthened the extent of secondary education for marginal students,
rather than just increase graduation rates for students who were already at the very end of their
high school careers.
In Panel B of Appendix Table 7, we examine the quality of the high school degree. Information
on diploma type (i.e., Regents vs. Advanced Regents) is not available over the entire sample
period, so we measure the quality of the high school degree using indicator variables for whether a
student has fulfilled all of the requirements for a specific degree type. Having an exam manipulated
increases the probability of meeting the requirements for a Regents diploma, the lowest diploma for
most students during this time period, by 33.8 (se=5.3) percentage points, a 54.7 percent increase
from the sample mean. However, the probability of meeting the requirements for the Advanced
Regents diploma decreases by 11.0 (se=5.2) percentage points, a 50.2 percent decrease from the
sample mean. In Panel C, we show that having a score manipulated also modestly decreases the
probability of meeting the two most important requirements for an Advanced Regents diploma:
passing a physical science exam such as Chemistry or Physics, and passing an advanced math
sequence that covers topics such as geometry and trigonometry. In results available upon request,
we find that both the Advanced Regents and advanced coursework results are larger in students
predicted to be near the margin of Advanced Regents receipt.
To shed further light on the mechanisms underlying this surprising result, Appendix Table 8
presents estimates separately by exam subject. The negative effect of manipulation on meeting
the requirements for an Advanced Regents diploma are largest for the Living Environment and
Math A/Integrated Algebra exams. In contrast, the effects of meeting the requirements for an
Advanced Regents diploma are small and not statistically distinguishable from zero for the English
and Social Science exams. These results are consistent with the idea that test score manipulation
has somewhat heterogeneous effects. Students on the margin of dropping out are “helped” by test
score manipulation because they are not forced to retake a class that may lead them to leave high
school. Conversely, students on the margin of an Advanced Regents diploma may be “hurt” by test
25

The sample mean is slightly higher than four years because many students in our sample repeat at least one
high school grade. Ninth grade is the most commonly repeated grade.

22

score manipulation because they are not pushed to re-learn the introductory material or re-take
the introductory class that the more advanced coursework requires.26
B. Across-School Estimates
In addition to our main difference-in-difference results, we also present estimates from a crosssectional methodology motivated by the approach used by Diamond and Persson (2016).27 This
allows us to examine outcomes for students entering high school before 2005-2006 on whom we have
information on the type of high school diploma awarded and college enrollment. While these cohorts
are too old to be affected by the Regents grading reforms described above, we can use the variation
across schools in the extent of in-range manipulation (from the random effects specification given
by equation (2)) to provide estimates of the impact of manipulation on these outcomes. Specifically,
we estimate the reduced form impact of attending a high manipulation school using the following
specification:
yisemth = α4h + α4et + α4s + α4s · Year + Xi β4 + γ4 · 1[69 ≥ Score ≥ 60] · M anipulationh
+ φ4 · 1[59 ≥ Score ≥ 50] · M anipulationh + εisemth (4)
where yisemth is the outcome of interest for student i with score s on exam e in month m and year
t at high school h, α4h are school effects, αet are exam by year effects, αs are 10-point Regent score
effects, α3s · Year are linear trends in year interacted with Regents score bins to account for the
increasingly stringent graduation requirements during this time period (see Appendix Table 1), and
Xi includes controls for gender, ethnicity, free lunch eligibility, 8th grade test scores. M anipulationh
is an estimate of in-range manipulation for high school h from the random effects specification as
described as Section III.A. To increase the precision of our estimates, we estimate M anipulationh
only exams only around the 65 cutoff in the test administrations where we have information on
high school graduation. Results are similar if we use a measure of manipulation M anipulationh
that uses information across both cutoffs or all test administrations. When estimating equation
(4), we stack student outcomes across all core Regents exams and adjust our standard errors for
clustering at both the student and school level.
The parameter γ4 can be interpreted as the differential impact of attending a “high” manipulation school for students scoring between 60-69 compared to other students at the same high school.
26

Manipulation on the Global History exam has a positive impact on passing a physical science or advanced
math exam. This result may be because Global History is taken before these advanced science and math exams,
and re-taking Global History therefore crowds out other courses. There is no effect of manipulation on English or
U.S. History exams on passing either advanced science or math, likely because English and U.S. History are taken
concurrently with the advanced science and math coursework at most high schools.
27
Recall that Diamond and Persson (2016) estimate the impact of test score inflation in Sweden using students
outside the manipulable score range to impute counterfactual outcomes for students inside the manipulable score
range. Thus, in their specification, students scoring just outside the manipulable range form the control group
for students inside the manipulable range. In contrast, our across-school specification uses students scoring in the
manipulable range in “low” manipulation schools form the control group for students scoring in the manipulable
range in “high” manipulation schools.

23

The key identifying assumption is that in the absence of test score manipulation (and conditional on
our baseline controls and school fixed effects), outcomes for students scoring between 60-69 would
have been identical in high and low manipulation schools. This assumption would be violated if
either students scoring between 60-69 at high and low manipulation schools are different in some
unobservable way that is correlated with future outcomes, or if high and low manipulation schools
differ in the way they educate students scoring between 60-69. For example, our approach would
be invalid if high manipulation schools also spend more (or less) time educating students expected
to score near a proficiency cutoff. Thus, this across-school strategy relies on much stronger identification assumptions than our difference-in-differences specification that also utilizes across-time
variation from the Regents grading reforms. Nevertheless, placebo estimates on baseline characteristics and predicted outcomes broadly support our cross-sectional approach as long as school fixed
effects are included (see Appendix Table 9).
Table 6 presents results from our secondary empirical strategy, where we use only across-school
variation in in-range manipulation to examine outcomes for students entering high school between
2003-2004 and 2005-2006, for whom we observe both diploma type and college enrollment. We
instrument for scoring 65 or above using the interaction of school in-range manipulation and scoring
between 60-69. First stage results (Columns 2-3) show that a 10 percentage point increase in schoollevel manipulation increases the probability of scoring 65 or above by 4.0 (se=2.3) percentage points.
In our preferred specification with school fixed effects, we find that having a score inflated to fall
just above the 65 point proficiency cutoff increases the probability of graduating from high school by
a statistically insignificant 4.6 percentage points (se=3.1). We show in Appendix Table 10 that the
probability of graduating with a Regents diploma, the lowest diploma type available to students in
our preferred difference-in-differences specification, increases by 50.2 (se=10.2) percentage points.
In contrast, the probability of graduating with a local or Advanced Regents diploma decreases
by 37.4 (se=6.7) and 8.3 (se=7.0) percentage points, respectively. Taken together with our above
difference-in-differences estimates, these results suggest that having a score inflated to fall just above
the 65 point proficiency cutoff increases the probability of receiving the diploma type associated
with that cutoff, while decreasing the probability of receiving either more or less prestigious degrees.
Results on advanced course taking also largely follow our difference-in-differences estimates, with
manipulation decreasing the probability that a student passes an advanced science or math exam
(see Panels B-C of Appendix Table 10).
We also find that having a score manipulated decreases the probability of enrolling in a two-year
college by 6.7 (se=3.9) percentage points, but has little impact on the probability of enrolling in a
four-year college. Unfortunately, we do not observe college graduation for these cohorts, but results
for the number of years in college largely follow our enrollment results.
C. Implications
Our estimates from this section suggest that test score manipulation had economically important
long-run effects on students. In light of the differential benefits of manipulation documented in
24

Section III.B, our long-run estimates suggest that test score manipulation also had important
distributional effects. To quantify these effects, we multiply the the two-stage least squares estimate
of the impact of manipulation from Table 4 by the subgroup-specific total manipulation estimates
from Figures 2 and 3.
These back-of-the-envelope calculations suggest that test score manipulation significantly affected relative performance measures in New York City. For example, we estimate that the blackwhite gap in graduation rates would have increased from 15.6 percentage points to 16.3 percentage
points in the absence of test score manipulation, while the graduation gap between high- and
low-achieving students would have increased from 25.0 percentage points to 25.8 percentage points.
Our results also have important implications for aggregate graduation rates in New York. Our
point estimates suggest that the fraction of students in our sample graduating from high school
would have decreased from 76.6 percent to 75.3 percent without test score manipulation. The
high school graduation rate is higher in our sample compared to the district as a whole (65.2
percent) because we drop students in special education, students in non-traditional high schools,
and students without at least one core Regents score.
While we document important impacts of manipulation on educational attainment, data limitations prevent us from measuring impacts on labor market outcomes. A number of studies estimate
significant positive returns to a high school diploma (e.g., Jaeger and Page 1996, Ou 2010, Papay,
Willett, and Murnane 2011) and to additional years of schooling around the dropout age (e.g.,
Angrist and Krueger 1991, Oreopoulos 2007, Brunello et al. 2009). A recent study also finds
positive returns to passing the Baccalaureate high school exit exam in France using a regression
discontinuity design (Canaan and Mouganie 2015). Conversely, Clark and Martorell (2014) find
negligible returns to passing “last chance” high school exit exams in the state of Texas, and Pischke
and Von Wachter (2008) find zero returns to additional compulsory schooling in Germany. Our
educational attainment effects should be interpreted with this broader body of work in mind.

V. Exploring Potential Explanations for Manipulation
We have shown that test score manipulation was widespread among schools in New York and
that the practice had important, inequitable impacts on students’ long-run outcomes. Test score
manipulation appears to have been facilitated by both a formal policy to re-score math and science
exams with scores just below proficiency cutoffs and the decentralized, school-based scoring of
exams. In this question, we explore three additional reasons why the system-wide manipulation of
Regents exams might have occurred before the grading reforms implemented in 2011.
Test-Based Accountability: There is a large literature documenting how schools may engage in
various undesirable behaviors in response to formal test-based accountability systems (e.g., Figlio
and Getzler 2002, Cullen and Reback 2002, Jacob 2005, Neal and Schanzenbach 2010, Neal 2013).
It is therefore natural to ask whether the implementation of NCLB in the school year 2002-2003
and implementation of New York City’s accountability system in 2007-2008, both based heavily
25

on Regents exams, may have driven school staff to manipulate student exam results. Panel A of
Figure 6 explores this hypothesis by plotting the distribution of core exams taken between 2001 and
2002, before the implementation of either school accountability system, and exams taken between
2008 and 2010, after the implementation of both accountability systems. Manipulation was clearly
prevalent well before the rise of school accountability, with an estimated 60.7 percent (se=0.79) of
in-range exams manipulated before the implementation of these accountability systems, compared
to the 44.6 percent (se=0.33) in the years after the implementation of these systems.28
To provide additional evidence on this issue, we take advantage of the fact that different schools
face more or less pressure to meet the accountability standards during our sample period. Panel B
of Figure 6 plots distribution of core exams for schools that did and did not make Adequate Yearly
Progress (AYP) in the previous year under the NCLB accountability system, and Panel C of Figure
6 presents results for schools receiving an A or B grade compared to schools receiving a D or F in
the previous year under the New York City accountability system. Consistent with our results from
Panel A, we find no evidence that test score manipulation varied significantly with pressure from
test-based accountability. Schools not meeting AYP manipulate 44.6 percent (se=0.26) of in-range
exams, compared to 45.3 percent (se=0.69) for schools meeting AYP. Similarly, schools receiving a
D or F from the NYC accountability system manipulate 44.2 percent (se=0.48) of in-range exams,
compared to 43.0 percent (se=0.41) for schools receiving an A or B. Thus, we find no evidence
that test-based school accountability systems are primary drivers of the manipulation documented
above.29
Teacher Incentives: A closely related explanation for the system-wide manipulation of Regents
exams is that teachers may benefit directly from high test scores even in the absence of accountability concerns. To test whether manipulation is sensitive to teacher incentives in this way, Panel D of
Figure 6 plots the distribution of core Regents exam scores for schools participating in a randomized experiment that explicitly linked Regents scores to teacher pay for the 2007-2008 to 2009-2010
school years (Fryer 2013).30 We find that control schools manipulated 44.7 percent (se=0.4) of
in-range exams taken during the experiment, which is higher than our estimate of 41.2 percent
(se=0.3) manipulated in treated schools. These results further suggest that manipulation is not
driven by formal teacher incentives, at least not as implemented in New York City during this time
period.
28

Results are similar if we exclude the math core exams that changed from Sequential Math 1 to Math A over this
time period. Results are also similar if we exclude both the math and science core exams that required teachers to
re-score exams close to the proficiency cutoffs.
29
Dee et al. (2011) further examine the importance of school accountability using tests taken by 8th grade students.
These are typically advanced students who wish to begin fulfilling their high school graduation requirements early.
While the tests are still high stakes for students, they play no role in school accountability metrics for middle schools.
Consistent with our results from Figure 6, we find that Regents scores are also manipulated for 8th grade students.
30
The experiment paid treated schools up to $3,000 for every union-represented staff member if the school met the
annual performance target set by the DOE. The performance target for high schools depended on student attendance,
credit accumulation, Regents exam pass rates in the core subjects, and graduation rates. Fryer (2013) finds no effect
of the teacher incentive program on teacher absences or and student attendance, behavior, or achievement. See Fryer
(2013) for additional details.

26

High School Graduation: A final explanation we consider is that teachers manipulate simply to
permit students to graduate from high school, even if it is with the lowest diploma type available to
them. To see whether manipulation is driven mainly by a desire just to get students over the bar
for high school graduation, we examine the distribution of scores for optional tests that students
take to gain greater distinction on their diploma. Appendix Figure 7 plots frequency distributions
for exams on exams in Chemistry, Physics and Math B (an advanced math exam). On all three
exams we see clear patterns consistent with manipulation, particularly at the 65 cutoff, which
does not support the idea that the goal of manipulation is mainly geared towards meeting basic
graduation requirements. Using information from only the 65 point cutoff, we estimate that 3.4
percent (se=0.05) of these elective Regents exams were manipulated in total, and that 37.4 percent
(se=0.3) were manipulated among those with scores within the range just below the cutoff. The
latter is only a few percentage points less than the amount of in-range manipulation for core Regents
exams.
In sum, these estimates suggest that manipulation was unrelated to the incentives created
by school accountability systems, formal teacher incentive pay programs, or concerns about high
school graduation. Instead, it seems that the manipulation of test scores may have simply been a
widespread “cultural norm” among New York high schools, in which students were often spared
any sanctions involved with failing exams, including retaking the test or being ineligible for a more
advanced high school diploma. It is of course possible that a more specific cause of the manipulation
may be uncovered, but, perhaps due to limitations in our data, we are unable to do so. For example,
we do not have information on the specific administrators and teachers responsible for grading each
exam. Perhaps with this information, one might be able to identify specific individuals whose
behavior drives this practice.

VI. Conclusion
In this paper, we show that the design and decentralized, school-based scoring of New York’s highstakes Regents Examinations led to the systematic manipulation of student test scores just below
important performance cutoffs. We find that approximately 40 percent of student test scores near
the performance cutoffs are manipulated. Exploiting a series of reforms that sharply reduced test
score manipulation, we find that manipulating the test score of a student who would have failed
the test by a small margin has a substantial impact on his or her probability of graduating from
high school, raising it by approximately 21.9 percentage points or about 27.4 percent. We also find
evidence consistent with the manipulation being driven by teachers’ desire to help their students
receive these benefits of passing an exam, not the recent creation of school accountability systems
or formal teacher incentive programs.
Our findings suggest that test score manipulation had important effects on the relative performance of students across and within New York public schools. Our estimates imply, for example,
that the black-white gap in graduation rates would have increased from 15.6 percentage points to
16.3 percentage points in the absence of test score manipulation, while the overall graduation rate
27

would have decreased from 76.6 percent to 75.3 percent without test score manipulation.
An important limitation of our analysis is that we are only able to estimate the effect of eliminating manipulation in partial equilibrium. There may also be important general equilibrium effects of
test score manipulation that we are unable to measure using our empirical strategy. For example,
it is possible that widespread manipulation may change the way schools teach students expected
to score near proficiency cutoffs. It is also possible that test score manipulation can change the
signaling value of course grades or a high school diploma. Estimating these impacts remains an
important area for future research.

28

References
[1] Angrist, Joshua, and Alan Krueger. 1991. “Does Compulsory Schooling Attendance Affect
Schooling and Earnings?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 106(4): 979-1014.
[2] Angrist, Joshua, Erich Battistin, and Daniela Vuri. 2014. “In a Small Moment: Class Size and
Moral Hazard in the Mezzogiorno.” NBER Working Paper 20173.
[3] Beadie, Nancy. 1999. “From Student Markets to Credential Markets: The Creation of the
Regents Examination System in New York State, 1864-1890.” History of Education Quarterly,
39(1): 1-30.
[4] Brunello, Giorgio, Margherita Fort, and Guglielmo Weber. 2009. “Changes in Compulsory
Schooling, Education and the Distribution of Wages in Europe.” The Economic Journal,
119(536): 516-539.
[5] Burgess, Simon and Ellen Greaves. 2013. “Test Scores, Subjective Assessment and Stereotyping
of Ethnic Minorities.” Journal of Labor Economics, 31(3): 535-576.
[6] Canaan, Serena, and Mouganie, Pierre. 2015. “Returns to Education Quality for Low-Skilled
Students: Evidence from a Discontinuity.” Unpublished Working Paper.
[7] Chetty, Raj, John Friedman, Tore Olsen, and Luigi Pistaferri. 2011. “Adjustment Costs,
Firm Responses, and Micro vs. Macro Labor Supply Elasticities: Evidence from Danish Tax
Records.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(2): 749-804.
[8] Chudowsky, Naomi, Nancy Kober, Keith Gayler, and Madlene Hamilton. 2002. “State High
School Exit Exams: A Baseline Report.” Center on Education Policy, Washington DC.
[9] Clark, Damon, and Paco Martorell. 2014. “The Signaling Value of a High School Diploma.”
Journal of Political Economy, 122(2): 282-318.
[10] Cullen, Julie and Randall Reback. 2002. “Tinkering Toward Accolades: School Gaming under
a Performance Accountability System.” NBER Working Paper No. 12286.
[11] Dee, Thomas, Brian Jacob, Justin McCrary, and Jonah Rockoff. 2011. “Rules and Discretion
in the Evaluation of Students and Schools: The Case of the New York Regents Examinations.”
Mimeo.
[12] Diamond, Rebecca and Petra Persson. 2016. “The Long Term Consequences of Grade Inflation.” Unpublished Working Paper.
[13] DiNapoli, Thomas. 2009. “Oversight of Scoring Practices on Regents Examinations.” Office of
the New York State Comptroller. Report 2008-S-151.

29

[14] Ebenstein, Avraham, Victor Lavy, and Sefi Roth. “The Long Run Economic Consequences of
High-Stakes Examinations: Evidence from Transitory Variation in Pollution.” Forthcoming in
American Economic Journal: Applied.
[15] Figlio, David and Lawrence Getzler. 2002. “Accountability, Ability and Disability: Gaming
the System?” NBER Working Paper No. 9307.
[16] Fryer, Roland. 2013. “Teacher Incentives and Student Achievement: Evidence from New York
City Public Schools.” Journal of Labor Economics, 31(2): 373-427.
[17] Hanna, Rema, and Leigh Linden. 2012. “Discrimination in Grading.” American Economic
Journal: Economic Policy, 4(4): 146-168.
[18] Hinnerich, Bjorn, Erik Hoglin and Magnus Johannesson. 2011. “Are Boys Discriminated in
Swedish High School?” Economics of Education Review. 30(4): 682-690.
[19] Jacob, Brian A. 2005. “Accountability, Incentives and Behavior: Evidence from School Reform
in Chicago.” Journal of Public Economics, 89(5-6): 761-769.
[20] Jacob, Brian A. and Steven Levitt. 2003. “Rotten Apples: An Investigation of the Prevalence
and Predictors of Teacher Cheating.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(3): 843-877.
[21] Jacob, Brian A. and Jesse Rothstein. “The Measurement of Student Ability in Modern Assessment Systems.” Forthcoming in Journal of Economic Perspectives.
[22] Jaeger, David A., and Marianne E. Page. 1996. “Degrees Matter: New Evidence on Sheepskin
Effects in the Returns to Education.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 77(4): 733-739.
[23] Kleven, Henrik and Mazhar Waseem. 2013. “Using Notches to Uncover Optimization Frictions and Structural Elasticities: Theory and Evidence from Pakistan.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 128(2): 669-723.
[24] Lavy, Victor. 2008. “Do Gender Stereotypes Reduce Girls’ or Boys’ Human Capital Outcomes?
Evidence from a Natural Experiment.” Journal of Public Economics, 92: 2083-2105.
[25] Lavy, Victor. 2009. “Performance Pay and Teachers’ Effort, Productivity, and Grading Ethics.”
American Economic Review, 99(5): 1979-2011.
[26] Lavy, Victor and Edith Sand. 2015. “On the Origins of Gender Human Capital Gaps: Short
and Long Term Consequences of Teachers’ Stereotypical Biases.” NBER Working Paper No.
20909.
[27] Neal, Derek and Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach. 2010. “Left Behind by Design: Proficiency
Counts and Test-Based Accountability.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 92(2): 263-283.
[28] Neal, Derek. 2013. “The Consequences of Using One Assessment System to Pursue Two Objectives.” NBER Working Paper 19214.
30

[29] New York State Education Department. 2008. History of Elementary, Middle, Secondary &
Continuing Education. http://www.regents.nysed.gov/about/history-emsc.html, last updated
November 25, 2008, accessed January 29, 2011.
[30] New York State Education Department. 2009. Information Booklet for Scoring the Regents
Examination in English. Albany, NY.
[31] New York State Education Department. 2010. General Education & Diploma Requirement,
Commencement Level (Grades 9-12). Office of Elementary, Middle, Secondary, and Continuing
Education. Albany, NY.
[32] New York State United Teachers. 2010. “NYS Education Department Approved Alternatives
to Regents Examinations.” Research and Education Services, 10-02.
[33] Oreopoulos, Philip. 2007. “Do Dropouts Drop Out Too Soon? Wealth, Health, and Happiness
from Compulsory Schooling.” Journal of Public Economics, 91 (11-12), 2213-2229.
[34] Ou, Dongshu. 2010. “To Leave or Not to Leave? A Regression Discontinuity Analysis of
the Impact of Failing the High School Exit exam.” Economics of Education Review, 29(2):
171-186.
[35] Papay, John P., John B. Willett, and Richard J. Murnane. 2011. “Extending the RegressionDiscontinuity Approach to Multiple Assignment Variables.” Journal of Econometrics, 161(2):
203-207.
[36] Persson, Petra. 2015. “Social Insurance and the Marriage Market.” Institute for Evaluation of
Labour Market and Education Policy, Working Paper Series No. 2015:6.
[37] Pischke, Jorn-Steffen, and Till Von Wachter. 2008. “Zero Returns to Compulsory Schooling
in Germany: Evidence and Interpretation.” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 90(3):
592-598.
[38] Rockoff, Jonah and Lesley Turner. 2010. “Short Run Impacts of Accountability on School
Quality.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2(4): 119-147.
[39] Saez, Emmanuel. 2010. “Do Taxpayers Bunch at Kink Points?” American Economic Journal:
Economic Policy, 2(3): 180-212.

31

.08

Figure 1
Test Score Distributions for Core Regents Exams, 2004-2010

.06

Total Manipulation = 5.81 (0.04)

.04
0

.02

Fraction

In-Range Manipulation = 44.53 (0.26)

5

15

25

35

45

55

65

75

85

95

Regents Exam Score
Notes: This figure shows the test score distribution around the 55 and 65 score cutoffs for New York City high school
test takers between 2004-2010. Core exams include English Language Arts, Global History, U.S. History, Math
A/Integrated Algebra, and Living Environment. We include the first test in each subject for each student in our
sample. Each point shows the fraction of test takers in a score bin with solid points indicating a manipulable score.
The dotted line beneath the empirical distribution is a subject specific sixth-degree polynomial fitted to the empirical
distribution excluding the manipulable scores near each cutoff. Total manipulation is the fraction of test takers with
manipulated scores. In-range manipulation is the fraction of test takers with manipulated scores normalized by the
average height of the counterfactual distribution to the left of each cutoff. Standard errors are calculated using the
parametric bootstrap procedure described in the text. See the data appendix for additional details on the sample
and variable definitions.

32

Figure 2
Results by School Characteristics, 2004-2010
(b) High vs. Low Free Lunch Enrollment
.08

.08

(a) High vs. Low Black/Hispanic Enrollment
Low Fraction Black/Hispanic
________________________

High Fraction Black/Hispanic
________________________
.04

Total = 7.02 (0.04)
In-Range = 43.83 (0.22)

High
Fraction Free Lunch
________________________
Total = 6.64 (0.04)
In-Range = 43.31 (0.21)

0

0

.02

.02

.04

Low
Fraction Free Lunch
________________________
Total = 4.99 (0.05)
In-Range = 46.45 (0.39)

.06

.06

Total = 4.56 (0.05)
In-Range = 45.73 (0.40)

5

15

25

35

45

55

Low Fraction Black/Hispanic

65

75

85

95

5

High Fraction Black/Hispanic

15

25

35

45

Low Fraction Free Lunch

55

65

75

85

95

High Fraction Free Lunch

High
8th Test Scores
___________________
Total = 4.29 (0.05)
In-Range = 42.85 (0.35)

Low
8th Test Scores
___________________
Total = 7.37 (0.04)
In-Range = 45.47 (0.24)

0

.02

.04

.06

.08

(c) Low vs. High 8th Test Scores

5

15

25

35

45

High 8th Test Scores

55

65

75

85

95

Low 8th Test Scores

Notes: These figures show the test score distribution for core Regents exams around the 55 and 65 score cutoffs for
New York City high school test takers between 2004-2010. Panel (a) considers exams taken in schools in the lowest
and highest quartiles of the fraction of black/Hispanic students. Panel (b) considers exams taken in schools in the
lowest and highest quartiles of the fraction of free lunch students. Panel (c) considers exams taken in schools in the
lowest and highest quartiles of average 8th grade test scores. See the Figure 1 notes for additional details on the
sample and empirical specification.

33

Figure 3
Results by Student Characteristics, 2004-2010
.08

(b) White/Asian vs. Black/Hispanic

Female
_______
Total = 5.89 (0.05)
In-Range = 44.60 (0.25)

White/Asian
___________
Total = 3.75 (0.06)
In-Range = 48.11 (0.62)

.06
.04

Male
_____
Total = 5.74 (0.04)
In-Range = 44.42 (0.24)

Black/Hispanic
______________
Total = 6.70 (0.04)
In-Range = 43.69 (0.22)

0

0

.02

.02

.04

.06

.08

(a) Female vs. Male

5

15

25

35

45

55

Female

65

75

85

95

5

35

45

55

65

75

85

95

85

95

Black/Hispanic

.08

(d) Low vs. High 8th Test Scores
High
8th Test Scores
___________________
Total = 4.37 (0.05)
In-Range = 44.93 (0.35)

.06

Full
Price Lunch
_______________
Total = 5.35 (0.05)
In-Range = 44.90 (0.32)

.06

.08

25

White/Asian

(c) Full Price vs. Free Lunch

Low
8th Test Scores
___________________
Total = 8.01 (0.06)
In-Range = 44.08 (0.27)

.02

.04

Free
Lunch
___________
Total = 6.20 (0.05)
In-Range = 44.32 (0.26)

0

0

.02

.04

15

Male

5

15

25

35

45

55

65

Full Price Lunch

75

85

95

5

Free Lunch

15

25

35

45

High 8th Test Scores

55

65

75

Low 8th Test Scores

.08

(e) Good vs. Poor Behavior
Good Behavior
_____________

Poor
Behavior
_____________
Total = 6.84 (0.04)
In-Range = 42.31 (0.24)

0

.02

.04

.06

Total = 5.53 (0.05)
In-Range = 45.55 (0.29)

5

15

25

35

45

Good Behavior

55

65

75

85

95

Poor Behavior

Notes: These figures show the test score distribution for core Regents exams around the 55 and 65 score cutoffs
for New York City high school test takers between 2004-2010. Panel (a) considers exams taken by female and male
students. Panel (b) considers exams taken by white/Asian and black/Hispanic students. Panel (c) considers exams
taken by full price and free or reduced price lunch students. Panel (d) considers exams taken by students in the lower
and upper quartiles of the 8th grade test score distribution. Panel (e) considers exams taken by students with both
fewer than 20 absences and no disciplinary incidents and students with either more than 20 absences or a disciplinary
incident. See the Figure 1 notes for additional details on the sample and empirical specification.

34

Figure 4
Test Score Distributions Before and After Grading Reforms, 2010-2013
.08

(b) No Re-Scoring and Decentralized Grading in All Schools

Pilot
School
___________
Total = 4.99 (0.05)
In-Range = 72.90 (0.99)

35

Fraction
45

55

65

75

85

95

5

15

25

Non-Pilot School

35

45

55

Pilot School

65

75

85

95

Non-Pilot School

.08

(d) No Re-Scoring and Centralized Grading in All Schools
Pilot
School
___________
Total = -0.07 (0.05)
In-Range = -0.38 (0.54)

.06

Pilot
School
___________
Total = -0.12 (0.04)
In-Range = -0.83 (0.55)

.06

.08

.04

.06

25

(c) No Re-Scoring in All and Pilot of Centralized Grading

Non-Pilot
School
________________
Total = 0.26 (0.04)
In-Range = 2.16 (0.32)

.02

Fraction

Non-Pilot
School
________________
Total = 1.02 (0.04)
In-Range = 12.78 (0.49)

0

0

.02

.04

Non-Pilot
School
________________
Total = 1.01 (0.03)
In-Range = 13.10 (0.39)

.02

15

Pilot School

Fraction

Pilot
School
___________
Total = 1.17 (0.04)
In-Range = 17.24 (0.78)

0

0

5

.04

.04

Non-Pilot
School
________________
Total = 5.05 (0.04)
In-Range = 63.25 (0.54)

.02

Fraction

.06

.08

(a) Re-Scoring and Decentralized Grading in All Schools

5

15

25

35

45

Pilot School

55

65

75

85

95

5

Non-Pilot School

15

25

35

45

Pilot School

55

65

75

85

95

Non-Pilot School

Notes: These figures show the test score distribution around the 65 score cutoff for New York City high school test
takers between 2010-2013 in June. Included core exams include English Language Arts, Global History, U.S. History,
Integrated Algebra, and Living Environment. Panel (a) considers exams taken in 2010 when re-scoring was allowed
and grading was decentralized in both pilot and non-pilot schools. Panel (b) considers exams taken in 2011 when
re-scoring was not allowed and grading was decentralized in both pilot and non-pilot schools. Panel (c) considers
exams taken in 2012 when re-scoring was not allowed and grading was centralized in pilot schools but decentralized
in the non-pilot schools. Panel (d) considers exams taken in 2013 when re-scoring was not allowed and grading was
centralized in both pilot and non-pilot schools. See the Figure 1 notes for additional details on the sample and
empirical specification.

35

Figure 5
Regents Grading Reforms and Student Outcomes
(b) Retake Exam in First Calendar Year

.15
.1
.05
-.05

0

Reduced Form Coefficient

-.05
-.1
-.15
-.2

Reduced Form Coefficient

0

.2

.05

(a) Score 65+ on First Administration

2004

2006

2008

2010

2012

2014

2004

2006

Exam Year

2008

2010

2012

2014

2012

2014

Exam Year

0
-.1

-.05

Reduced Form Coefficient

-.05
-.1
-.15
-.2

Reduced Form Coefficient

0

.05

(d) Graduate High School

.05

(c) Score 65+ in First Calendar Year

2004

2006

2008

2010

2012

2014

2004

Exam Year

2006

2008

2010

Exam Year

Notes: These figures plot the reduced form impact of the Regents grading reforms on high school graduation. The
sample includes students entering high school between 2003-2004 and 2010-2011 and taking core Regents exams
between 2004-2013. We report reduced form results using the interaction of taking the test in the indicated year and
scoring between 60-69. We control for an indicator for scoring between 0-59 in 2011-2013, 10-point scale score effects,
and exam by year-of-test effects. See the Table 4 notes for additional details.

36

Figure 6
Results by School Accountability Pressure, 2004-2010
.08

(b) NCLB Adequate Yearly Progress

Before School Accountability
_________________________
Total = 7.45 (0.10)
In-Range = 60.69 (0.79)

.06

Met
AYP
________
Total = 4.16 (0.07)
In-Range = 45.33 (0.69)

0

0

.02

.04

After
School Accountability
________________________
Total = 5.66 (0.07)
In-Range = 44.59 (0.33)

.02

.04

Did Not Meet AYP
________________
Total = 6.42 (0.04)
In-Range = 44.59 (0.26)

.06

.08

(a) Before and After School Accountability

5

15

25

35

45

55

Before School Accountability

65

75

85

95

5

35

45

55

65

75

85

95

Met AYP

.08

(d) Teacher Incentive Pay Experiment

Grade
of D or F
______________
Total = 7.04 (0.11)
In-Range = 44.16 (0.48)

No
Incentive Pay
________________
Total = 7.06 (0.08)
In-Range = 44.66 (0.39)

.06

.06

.08

25

Did Not Meet AYP

(c) NYC Accountability Grade

.04

Grade
of A or B
______________
Total = 4.47 (0.06)
In-Range = 43.01 (0.41)

Incentive
Pay
_____________
Total = 6.63 (0.07)
In-Range = 41.20 (0.33)

0

0

.02

.02

.04

15

After School Accountability

5

15

25

35

45

Grade of D or F

55

65

75

85

95

5

Grade of A or B

15

25

35

45

No Incentive Pay

55

65

75

85

95

Incentive Pay

Notes: These figures show the test score distribution around the 55 and 65 score cutoffs for New York City high
school test takers. Panel (a) plots non-math core exams taken in 2000-2001 before the implementation of NCLB and
the NYC Accountability System and in 2008-2010 after the implementation of both accountability systems. Panel
(b) plots all core exams for schools that in the previous year did not make AYP under NCLB and schools that did
make AYP under NCLB for 2004-2010. Panel (c) plots all core exams for schools that in the previous year received a
NYC accountability grade of A or B and schools that received a NYC accountability grade of D or F for 2008-2010.
Panel (d) plots all core exams for schools in the control and treatment groups of an experiment that paid teachers
for passing Regents scores for 2008-2010. See the Figure 1 notes for additional details on the empirical specification
and the data appendix for additional details on the sample and variable definitions.

37

Table 1
Summary Statistics

Characteristics:
Male
White
Asian
Black
Hispanic
Free Lunch
8th Grade Test Scores

Full
Sample
(1)
0.477
0.145
0.165
0.331
0.353
0.552
0.225

All Exams
0-49
(2)
0.525
0.055
0.061
0.414
0.461
0.601
-0.714

1+ Exam
50-69
(3)
0.477
0.096
0.103
0.387
0.407
0.589
-0.106

All Exams
70-100
(4)
0.467
0.243
0.285
0.223
0.243
0.483
0.906

Core Regents Performance:
Comprehensive English
Living Environment
Math A
Int. Algebra
U.S. History
Global History

69.417
69.622
69.830
66.052
72.496
67.814

29.892
38.831
40.453
40.830
32.995
32.560

63.109
63.215
65.038
61.947
65.201
60.166

85.255
82.725
84.520
79.990
88.994
86.376

High School Graduation:
High School Graduate
Local Diploma
Regents Diploma
Advanced Regents Diploma

0.730
0.261
0.270
0.168

0.150
0.116
0.009
0.001

0.685
0.370
0.255
0.039

0.910
0.101
0.352
0.432

0.502
1.208
0.188
0.311
0.372
0.898
514,679

0.133
0.242
0.095
0.152
0.051
0.091
36,692

0.437
0.907
0.235
0.383
0.260
0.524
295,301

0.690
1.929
0.125
0.216
0.631
1.714
182,686

College Enrollment:
Any College
Years College
Any Two-Year College
Years Two-Year College
Any Four-Year College
Years Four-Year College
Students

Notes: This table reports summary statistics for students in New York City taking a core Regents exam between 20042010. High school diploma and college enrollment records are only available for cohorts entering high school before
2004-2005. Enrollment, test score, and high school graduation information comes from Department of Education
records. College enrollment information comes from the National Student Clearinghouse. Column 1 reports mean
values for the full estimation sample. Column 2 reports mean values for students with all Regents score less than 50.
Column 3 reports mean values for students with at least one Regents score between 50 and 69. Column 4 reports
mean values for students with all Regents scores 70 or above. See the data appendix for additional details on the
sample construction and variable definitions.

38

39

10,153
3.703

10,153
3.703

0.014∗
(0.007)
−0.020∗∗∗
(0.004)
10,153
3.703

Total Manipulation
(2)
(3)
(4)
0.018∗∗
(0.008)
−0.004
(0.007)
−0.015∗∗∗
(0.004)
10,153
3.703
10,153
46.906

(5)
0.228∗∗∗
(0.077)

10,153
46.906

0.125
(0.084)
−0.132∗∗∗
(0.046)
10,153
46.906

In-Range Manipulation
(6)
(7)
(8)
0.178∗
(0.095)
−0.019
(0.080)
−0.076
(0.054)
10,153
46.906

Notes: This table reports OLS estimates of school manipulation on school characteristics. School-level manipulation is estimated using all New York
City high school test takers between 2004-2010. All specifications above use the number of exams in range of manipulation at each school as weights.
See the data appendix for additional details on the sample construction and variable definitions.

Observations
Dep. Variable Mean

8th Test Score Percentile

Percent Free Lunch

Percent Black/Hispanic

(1)
0.028∗∗∗
(0.006)

Table 2
School Manipulation and School Characteristics

Table 3
Student Subsample Results

Panel A: Gender
Female
Male
Difference

Panel B: Ethnicity
White/Asian

Total Manipulation
True
Synthetic
Subgroup Subgroup
(1)
(2)
5.89
5.74
(0.05)
(0.02)
5.74
5.84
(0.04)
(0.03)
0.15
−0.10
(0.06)
(0.05)

In-Range Manipulation
True
Synthetic
Subgroup
Subgroup
(3)
(4)
44.60
44.01
(0.25)
(0.16)
44.42
44.85
(0.24)
(0.18)
0.18
−0.84
(0.42)
(0.34)

3.75
(0.06)
6.70
(0.04)
−2.95
(0.06)

4.32
(0.03)
6.45
(0.01)
−2.13
(0.05)

48.11
(0.62)
43.69
(0.22)
4.42
(0.63)

45.90
(0.31)
43.92
(0.08)
1.98
(0.39)

5.35
(0.05)
6.20
(0.05)
−0.85
(0.07)

5.42
(0.02)
6.10
(0.02)
−0.68
(0.04)

44.90
(0.32)
44.32
(0.26)
0.59
(0.43)

45.19
(0.19)
43.88
(0.13)
1.31
(0.32)

4.37
(0.05)
8.01
(0.06)
−3.64
(0.08)

5.18
(0.02)
6.80
(0.03)
−1.62
(0.05)

44.93
(0.35)
44.08
(0.27)
0.84
(0.43)

44.42
(0.16)
44.38
(0.20)
0.04
(0.36)

Panel E: Behavior and Attendance
Good Attendance/Behavior
5.53
(0.05)
Poor Attendance/Behavior
6.84
(0.04)
Difference
−1.31
(0.06)

5.57
(0.01)
6.56
(0.05)
−0.99
(0.06)

45.55
(0.29)
42.31
(0.24)
3.25
(0.38)

44.48
(0.10)
44.30
(0.31)
0.18
(0.41)

Black/Hispanic
Difference

Panel C: Free Lunch Eligibility
Full Price Lunch
Free Lunch
Difference

Panel D: 8th Test Scores
Above Median 8th Scores
Below Median 8th Scores
Difference

Notes: This table reports subsample estimates of test score manipulation by student characteristics. Columns 1 and 3
report results using actual student characteristics. Columns 2 and 4 report results with randomly assigned synthetic
student characteristics. We hold the the fraction of students with each characteristic constant within each school
when creating synthetic subgroups. See the text for additional details.

40

Table 4
Effect of Test Score Manipulation on High School Graduation

Graduate High School
Observations
Dep. Variable Mean
Student Controls
Year x Score Trends
School Fixed Effects

First Stage
(1)
(2)
−0.158∗∗∗ −0.159∗∗∗
(0.007)
(0.007)
1,696,873 1,696,873
0.712
0.712
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes

Reduced Form
(3)
(4)
−0.032∗∗∗ −0.035∗∗∗
(0.004)
(0.004)
1,696,873 1,696,873
0.798
0.798
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes

2SLS
(5)
(6)
0.204∗∗∗
0.219∗∗∗
(0.029)
(0.029)
1,696,873 1,696,873
0.798
0.798
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes

Notes: This table reports estimates of test score manipulation on student outcomes. The sample includes students
entering high school between 2003-2004 and 2010-2011 and taking core Regents exams between 2004-2013. Columns
1-2 report first stage results from a regression of an indicator for scoring 65+ on the first administration on the
interaction of taking the test between 2011-2013 and scoring between 60-69. Columns 3-4 report reduced form results
using the interaction of taking the test between 2011-2013 and scoring between 60-69. Columns 5-6 report two-stage
least squares results using the interaction of taking the test between 2011-2013 and scoring between 60-69 as an
instrument for scoring 65+ on the first administration. All specifications include the baseline characteristics from
Table 1, an indicator for scoring between 0-59 in 2011-2013, 10-point scale score effects interacted with year-of-test,
and exam by year-of-test effects. Standard errors are clustered at both the student and school level. See the data
appendix for additional details on the sample construction and variable definitions.

41

42

Black/
White/
Hispanic
Asian
(3)
(4)
0.205∗∗∗ 0.189∗∗∗
(0.028)
(0.052)
1,130,205 549,830
0.754
0.889
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Free
Full Price
Lunch
Lunch
(5)
(6)
0.227∗∗∗
0.183∗∗∗
(0.030)
(0.052)
1,022,187
674,504
0.797
0.798
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Low
High
8th Score 8th Score
(7)
(8)
0.116∗∗∗
0.175∗∗∗
(0.033)
(0.044)
644,048
755,658
0.674
0.917
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Notes: This table reports two-stage least squares estimates of the effect of test score manipulation by student subgroup. The sample includes students
entering high school between 2003-2004 and 2010-2011 and taking core Regents exams between 2004-2013. We use the interaction of taking the test
between 2011-2013 and scoring between 60-69 as an instrument for scoring 65+ on the first administration. All specifications include the baseline
characteristics from Table 1, an indicator for scoring between 0-59 in 2011-2013, 10-point scale score effects interacted with year-of-test, and exam by
year-of-test effects. Standard errors are clustered at both the student and school level. See the data appendix for additional details on the sample
construction and variable definitions.

Observations
Dep. Variable Mean
Student Controls
Year x Score Trends
School Fixed Effects

Graduate High School

Male
Female
(1)
(2)
0.193∗∗∗ 0.244∗∗∗
(0.037)
(0.034)
799,273
897,587
0.768
0.824
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Table 5
High School Graduation Effects by Student Subgroup

43

0.505
(0.500)
0.189
(0.392)
0.350
(0.477)
587,116
–
–
–

0.399∗∗∗ 0.400∗∗∗
(0.023)
(0.023)
0.399∗∗∗ 0.400∗∗∗
(0.023)
(0.023)
0.399∗∗∗ 0.400∗∗∗
(0.023)
(0.023)
587,116
587,116
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes

First Stage
(2)
(3)
0.399∗∗∗ 0.400∗∗∗
(0.023)
(0.023)

−0.018
(0.017)
−0.020
(0.016)
−0.001
(0.015)
587,116
Yes
Yes
No

−0.020
(0.014)
−0.027∗
(0.016)
0.003
(0.013)
587,116
Yes
Yes
Yes

Reduced Form
(4)
(5)
0.028∗∗
0.018
(0.012)
(0.013)

−0.044
(0.042)
−0.050
(0.040)
−0.001
(0.038)
587,116
Yes
Yes
No

−0.049
(0.036)
−0.067∗
(0.039)
0.006
(0.032)
587,116
Yes
Yes
Yes

2SLS
(6)
(7)
0.070∗∗
0.046
(0.030)
(0.031)

Notes: This table reports estimates of test score manipulation on student outcomes that use across-school variation in manipulation. The sample includes
students entering high school between 2003-2004 and 2005-2006 and taking core Regents exams between 2004-2010. Columns 2-3 reports first stage results
from a regression of an indicator for scoring 65+ on the first administration on the interaction of school in-range manipulation and scoring between
60-69. Columns 4-5 reports reduced form results using the interaction of school in-range manipulation and scoring between 60-69. Columns 6-7 reports
two-stage least squares results using the interaction of school in-range manipulation and scoring between 60-69 as an instrument for scoring 65+ on the
first administration. All specifications include the baseline characteristics from Table 1, an indicator for scoring between 0-59 in 2011-2013, 10-point
scale score effects interacted with year-of-test, and exam by year-of-test effects. Standard errors are clustered at both the student and school level. See
the data appendix for additional details on the sample construction and variable definitions.

Observations
Student Controls
Year x Score Trends
School Fixed Effects

Any Four-Year College

Any Two-Year College

Panel B: College Enrollment
Any College

Panel A: High School Graduation
Graduate High School

Sample
Mean
(1)
0.756
(0.430)

Table 6
Effect of Test Score Manipulation on Student Outcomes using Across-School Variation

Appendix Figure 1
Results by Subject, 2004-2010

.06
.04

Fraction

Total = 6.84 (0.01)
In-Range = 60.07 (0.59)

.02

.04

.06

Total = 4.93 (0.02)
In-Range = 47.76 (0.54)

0

0

.02

Fraction

.08

(b) Global History, 2004-2010

.08

(a) English Language Arts, 2004-2010

5

15

25

35

45

55

65

75

85

95

5

15

25

Regents Exam Score

65

75

85

95

.08

.08

.06

Total = 7.04 (0.15)
In-Range = 36.65 (0.41)

.02

.04

Fraction

.06
.04
0

0

.02

Fraction

55

(d) Living Environment, 2004-2010

Total = 6.49 (0.02)
In-Range = 57.57 (0.76)

5

15

25

35

45

55

65

75

85

95

5

15

25

Regents Exam Score

35

45

55

65

75

85

95

Regents Exam Score

.08

(f) Integrated Algebra, 2008-2010

.08

(e) Math A, 2004-2008

Total = 3.98 (0.24)
In-Range = 30.65 (1.07)

0

0

.02

.02

.04

Fraction

.06

Total = 4.56 (0.14)
In-Range = 23.99 (0.49)

.04

.06

45

Regents Exam Score

(c) U.S. History, 2004-2010

Fraction

35

5

15

25

35

45

55

65

75

85

95

5

Regents Exam Score

15

25

35

45

55

65

75

85

95

Regents Exam Score

Notes: These figures show the test score distribution around the 55 and 65 score cutoffs for New York City high
school test takers between 2004-2010. We include the first test in each subject for each student in our sample. Each
point shows the fraction of test takers in a score bin with solid points indicating a manipulable score. The dotted line
beneath the empirical distribution is a subject specific sixth-degree polynomial fitted to the empirical distribution
excluding the manipulable scores near each cutoff. Total manipulation is the fraction of test takers with manipulated
scores. In-range manipulation is the fraction of test takers with manipulated scores normalized by the average height
of the counterfactual distribution to the left of each cutoff. Standard errors are calculated using the parametric
bootstrap procedure described in the text. See the data appendix for additional details on the sample and variable
definitions.

44

Fraction

.08

.06

.04

.02

0

.08

.06

.04

25

5

45

55

65

Regents Exam Score

35

75

15

25

35

45

55

65

75

(e) 2008 Core Exams

15

Total = 4.78 (0.09)
In-Range = 38.38 (0.38)

5

Total = 5.93 (0.07)
In-Range = 42.87 (0.54)

(a) 2004 Core Exams

85

85

95

95

25

5

45

55

65

Regents Exam Score

35

75

15

25

35

45

55

65

75

(f) 2009 Core Exams

15

Total = 5.47 (0.13)
In-Range = 45.79 (0.62)

5

Total = 6.58 (0.06)
In-Range = 47.81 (0.38)

(b) 2005 Core Exams

85

85

95

95

Regents Exam Score

5

45

55

65

Regents Exam Score

35

75

15

25

45

55

65

Regents Exam Score

35

75

85

85

95

95

Fraction

5

15

25

45

55

65

Regents Exam Score

35

Total = 6.49 (0.08)
In-Range = 47.00 (0.48)

75

(d) 2007 Core Exams

85

95

Notes: These figures show the test score distribution around the 55 and 65 score cutoffs for New York City high school test takers between 2004-2010. We
include the first test in each subject for each student in our sample. Each point shows the fraction of test takers in a score bin with solid points indicating
a manipulable score. The dotted line beneath the empirical distribution is a subject specific sixth-degree polynomial fitted to the empirical distribution
excluding the manipulable scores near each cutoff. Total manipulation is the fraction of test takers with manipulated scores. In-range manipulation is
the fraction of test takers with manipulated scores normalized by the average height of the counterfactual distribution to the left of each cutoff. Standard
errors are calculated using the parametric bootstrap procedure described in the text. See the data appendix for additional details on the sample and
variable definitions.

Regents Exam Score

25

(g) 2010 Core Exams

15

Total = 5.08 (0.07)
In-Range = 43.67 (0.52)

5

Total = 6.36 (0.09)
In-Range = 45.44 (0.46)

(c) 2006 Core Exams

Appendix Figure 2
Results by Year

.02

0

Fraction

.08
.06
.04
.02
0
.08
.06
.02
0

.04

Fraction
Fraction

.08
.06
.04

.08
.06
.04
.02
0

.02
0
.08
.06
.04

Fraction
Fraction
.02
0

45

Appendix Figure 3
Test Score Distributions for Centrally Graded Exams in Grades 3-8

.04

Fraction
.02
0

0

.02

Fraction

.04

.06

(b) Math

.06

(a) English Language Arts

-40

-30

-20

-10

0

10

20

30

40

-40

English Language Arts Score

-30

-20

-10

0

10

20

30

40

Math Score

Notes: These figures show the test score distribution around the proficiency score cutoff for New York City grade 3-8
test takers between 2004-2010. Each point shows the fraction of test takers in a score bin. See the data appendix for
additional details on the variable definitions.

46

Appendix Figure 4
Distribution of School Manipulation Estimates, 2004-2010
(b) In-Range Manipulation

.1

Fraction of Exams

.05

.15
.1

0

0

.05

Fraction of Exams

.15

(a) Total Manipulation

-5

0

5

10

15

-50

Total Manipulation

0

50

100

150

In-Range Manipulation

Notes: These figures show the distribution of school x exam x cutoff manipulation estimates for core Regents exams
around the 55 and 65 score cutoffs for New York City high school test takers between 2004-2010. Panel (a) is total
manipulation estimates. Panel (b) is in-range manipulation estimates. See the text for additional details on the
sample and empirical specification.

47

.08

.06

.04

.02

0

.08

.06

.04

.02

0

.08

.06

25

35

55

65

75

Non-Pilot School

25

35

45

Pilot School

55

65

75

Non-Pilot School

85

85

Total = 5.67 (0.02)
In-Range = 85.51 (1.54)

Non-Pilot School
________________

45

Total = 6.36 (0.02)
In-Range = 111.83 (2.24)

Pilot School
___________

55

65

75

85

(a) 2010 Global History

15

Total = 4.13 (0.08)
In-Range = 31.40 (0.36)

Non-Pilot School
________________

Total = 4.25 (0.14)
In-Range = 31.67 (0.63)

5

45

Pilot School

(a) 2010 Int. Algebra

15

Pilot School
___________

5

Total = 6.20 (0.14)
In-Range = 56.06 (0.40)

Non-Pilot School
________________

Total = 5.00 (0.17)
In-Range = 49.26 (0.64)

Pilot School
___________

(a) 2010 Living Env.

95

95

95

25

35

55

65

75

25

35

45

Pilot School

55

75

Non-Pilot School

65

85

85

Non-Pilot School

Total = 1.10 (0.01)
In-Range = 15.11 (0.16)

Non-Pilot School
________________

Total = 1.26 (0.01)
In-Range = 20.69 (0.30)

Pilot School
___________

45

55

65

75

85

(b) 2011 Global History

15

Total = 1.36 (0.11)
In-Range = 10.68 (0.77)

Non-Pilot School
________________

Total = 1.69 (0.13)
In-Range = 13.02 (0.83)

5

45

Pilot School

(b) 2011 Int. Algebra

15

Pilot School
___________

5

Total = 1.28 (0.08)
In-Range = 15.90 (0.75)

Non-Pilot School
________________

Total = 0.83 (0.10)
In-Range = 11.26 (1.10)

Pilot School
___________

(b) 2011 Living Env.

95

95

95

25

35

25

35

45

Pilot School

5

15

25

35

Pilot School

Non-Pilot School

5

15

25

35
Pilot School

Non-Pilot School

15

25

45
Pilot School

35

Total = 0.99 (0.01)
In-Range = 15.88 (0.20)

Non-Pilot School
________________

Total = 0.44 (0.01)
In-Range = 8.13 (0.31)

Pilot School
___________

5

55

65

75

Non-Pilot School

55

65

75
Non-Pilot School

85

85

55

65

75

85

(c) 2012 Global History

15

Total = 1.87 (0.11)
In-Range = 14.07 (0.68)

Non-Pilot School
________________

Total = -0.53 (0.14)
In-Range = -4.10 (1.13)

5

45

Pilot School

(c) 2012 Int. Algebra

15

Pilot School
___________

5

Total = 0.96 (0.12)
In-Range = 10.38 (1.09)

Non-Pilot School
________________

Total = -0.16 (0.14)
In-Range = -2.00 (1.69)

Pilot School
___________

(c) 2012 Living Env.

95

95

95

Non-Pilot School

25

35

25

35

45
Pilot School

15

25

45
Pilot School

35

Total = -0.12 (0.01)
In-Range = -1.88 (0.15)

Non-Pilot School
________________

Total = 0.16 (0.02)
In-Range = 2.84 (0.31)

Pilot School
___________

5

55

65

75

55

75

Non-Pilot School

65

85

85

Non-Pilot School

55

75

85
Non-Pilot School

65

(d) 2013 Global History

15

Total = 0.67 (0.17)
In-Range = 5.22 (1.23)

Non-Pilot School
________________

Total = -0.12 (0.14)
In-Range = -0.97 (1.13)

5

45
Pilot School

(d) 2013 Int. Algebra

15

Pilot School
___________

5

Total = 0.43 (0.11)
In-Range = 3.92 (0.94)

Non-Pilot School
________________

Pilot School
___________
Total = -0.53 (0.17)
In-Range = -5.85 (2.03)

(d) 2013 Living Env.

Appendix Figure 5
Test Score Distributions Before and After Grading Reforms by Subject, 2010-2013

.02

0

.04

.08
.06
.04
.02
0
.08
.06
.04
.02
0
.08
.06
.02
0

.04

.08
.06
.04
.02
0
.08
.06
.04
.02
0
.08
.06
.02
0

.04

.08
.06
.04
.02
0
.08
.06
.04
.02
0
.08
.06
.04
.02
0

48

95

95

95

.08

.06

.04

.02

0

.08

.06

25

35

55

65

75

Non-Pilot School

85

25

35

45

Pilot School

55

65

75

Non-Pilot School

85

95

95

25

35

15

25

35

Total = -0.18 (0.12)
In-Range = -3.70 (2.33)

Non-Pilot School
________________

Total = 0.40 (0.14)
In-Range = 10.26 (4.34)

5

45

Pilot School

55

65

75

Non-Pilot School

85

45

55

65

75

85

(b) 2011 Comp. English

15

Pilot School
___________

5

Total = 1.12 (0.01)
In-Range = 20.12 (0.34)

Non-Pilot School
________________

Total = 1.44 (0.02)
In-Range = 26.36 (0.81)

Pilot School
___________

(b) 2011 U.S. History

95

95

25

35
Pilot School

15

25

35

Total = 0.24 (0.15)
In-Range = 4.01 (2.61)

Non-Pilot School
________________

Total = -0.76 (0.16)
In-Range = -12.69 (2.24)

5

55

65

75

Non-Pilot School

85

45

55

65

75

85

(c) 2012 Comp. English

15

Pilot School
___________

5

Total = 0.89 (0.02)
In-Range = 16.28 (0.41)

Non-Pilot School
________________

45

(c) 2012 U.S. History
Pilot School
___________
Total = 0.06 (0.02)
In-Range = 1.04 (0.36)

95

95

Pilot School

Non-Pilot School

Pilot School

Non-Pilot School

25

35

Pilot School

15

25

45
Pilot School

35

Total = 0.45 (0.08)
In-Range = 4.49 (0.80)

Non-Pilot School
________________

Total = 0.11 (0.08)
In-Range = 1.09 (0.79)

5

55

65

75
Non-Pilot School

85

55

75

85
Non-Pilot School

65

(d) 2013 Comp. English

15

Pilot School
___________

5

Total = 0.02 (0.02)
In-Range = 0.29 (0.35)

Non-Pilot School
________________

45

(d) 2013 U.S. History
Pilot School
___________
Total = 0.06 (0.03)
In-Range = 1.17 (0.52)

95

95

Notes: These figures show the test score distribution around the 65 score cutoff for New York City high school test takers between 2010-2013 in June.
Included core exams include English Language Arts, Global History, U.S. History, Integrated Algebra, and Living Environment. Panel (a) considers
exams taken in 2010 when re-scoring was allowed and grading was decentralized in both pilot and non-pilot schools. Panel (b) considers exams taken in
2011 when re-scoring was not allowed and grading was decentralized in both pilot and non-pilot schools. Panel (c) considers exams taken in 2012 when
re-scoring was not allowed and grading was centralized in pilot schools but decentralized in the non-pilot schools. Panel (d) considers exams taken in
2013 when re-scoring was not allowed and grading was centralized in both pilot and non-pilot schools. See the Figure 5 notes for additional details.

15

Total = 3.17 (0.03)
In-Range = 59.36 (1.72)

Non-Pilot School
________________

Total = 3.43 (0.04)
In-Range = 65.15 (2.85)

5

45

Pilot School

(a) 2010 Comp. English

15

Pilot School
___________

5

Total = 5.11 (0.02)
In-Range = 78.99 (1.29)

Non-Pilot School
________________

Total = 4.99 (0.03)
In-Range = 95.29 (3.13)

Pilot School
___________

(a) 2010 U.S. History

Appendix Figure 5 Continued
Test Score Distributions Before and After Grading Reforms by Subject, 2010-2013
.08
.06
.04
.02
0
.08
.06
.02
0

.04

.08
.06
.04
.02
0
.08
.06
.02
0

.04

.08
.06
.04
.02
0
.08
.06
.04
.02
0

.04

.02

0

49

Appendix Figure 6
Regents Grading Reforms and Student Outcomes in Raw Data
(b) Retake Exam in First Calendar Year

.3

Fraction

.2

.8

0

.6

.1

.7

Fraction

.9

.4

1

.5

(a) Score 65+ on First Administration

2006

2008

2010

2012

2014

2006

2008

Year
Scored 60-69

2012

2014

Year
Scored 70-100

Scored 60-69

Scored 70-100

.9
.8
.7
.6

.6

.7

.8

Fraction

.9

1

(d) Graduate High School

1

(c) Score 65+ in First Calendar Year

Fraction

2010

2006

2008

2010

2012

2014

2006

2008

Year
Scored 60-69

2010

2012

2014

Year
Scored 70-100

Scored 60-69

Scored 70-100

Notes: These figures plot student outcomes before and after the elimination of Regents re-scoring in 2011 and the
de-centralization of Regents scoring in 2012 and 2013. The sample includes students taking Comprehensive English
or U.S. History in 11th grade between 2004-2013. We stack outcomes for students taking both exams.

50

.08

Appendix Figure 7
Results for Elective Regents Exams, 2004-2010

.06

Total Manipulation = 3.40 (0.05)

.04
0

.02

Fraction

In-Range Manipulation = 37.38 (0.27)

5

15

25

35

45

55

65

75

85

95

Elective Exam Score
Notes: This figure shows the test score distribution around the 65 score cutoff for New York City high school test
takers between 2004-2010. Included elective exams include Chemistry, Math B, and Physics. We include the first
test in each subject for each student in our sample. Each point shows the fraction of test takers in a score bin with
solid points indicating a manipulable score. The dotted line beneath the empirical distribution is a subject specific
sixth-degree polynomial fitted to the empirical distribution excluding the manipulable scores near the cutoff. Total
manipulation is the fraction of test takers with manipulated scores. In-range manipulation is the fraction of test
takers with manipulated scores normalized by the average height of the counterfactual distribution to the left of the
cutoff. Standard errors are calculated using the parametric bootstrap procedure described in the text. See the data
appendix for additional details on the sample and variable definitions.

51

52

Available only to
Disabled Students

Local Diploma
55+ in 5 core subjects
65+ in 2 core subjects,
55+ in 3 core subjects
65+ in 3 core subjects,
55+ in 2 core subjects
65+ in 4 core subjects,
55+ in 1 core subjects
65+ in 5 core subjects

Regents Diploma

65+ in 5 core subjects;
65+ in Adv. Math
Sequence, 1 Physical
Science, 1 Language

65+ in 5 core subjects;
65+ in 1 Adv. Math,
1 Physical Science,
1 Language

Advanced Regents Diploma

Notes: The five core Regents-Examination subjects are English, Mathematics, Science, U.S. History and Government, Global History and Geography.
Students who have 10 credits of Career and Technical Education (CTE) or Arts classes are exempt from the Language requirement of the Advanced
Regents Diploma.

Fall 2008-present

Fall 2007

Fall 2006

Fall 2005

Year of 9th Grade Entry
Fall 2001-2004

Appendix Table 1
Regents Exam Requirements by Diploma Type and Cohort

Appendix Table 2
Estimates by Test Subject x Year x Month

January 2004:
Total Manipulation
In-Range Manipulation

June 2004:
Total Manipulation
In-Range Manipulation

January 2005:
Total Manipulation
In-Range Manipulation

June 2005:
Total Manipulation
In-Range Manipulation

January 2006:
Total Manipulation
In-Range Manipulation

June 2006:
Total Manipulation
In-Range Manipulation

January 2007:
Total Manipulation
In-Range Manipulation

June 2007:
Total Manipulation
In-Range Manipulation

Comp.
English
(1)
5.23
(0.02)
52.77
(0.65)
20330

Living
Env.
(2)

6.34
(0.02)
60.44
(0.71)
26686

7.62
(0.20)
35.64
(0.53)
41878

5.41
(0.01)
51.60
(0.59)
23870
7.58
(0.01)
72.36
(0.83)
24066

6.42
(0.18)
32.75
(0.52)
43587

Global
History
(5)

5.89
(0.01)
52.10
(0.72)
38107

6.05
(0.01)
52.82
(0.49)
48935

4.99
(0.14)
26.19
(0.47)
31914

6.73
(0.02)
59.17
(0.81)
35419

7.38
(0.01)
64.28
(0.59)
47461

6.75
(0.02)
60.71
(0.84)
36808

7.76
(0.01)
68.05
(0.64)
47148

7.03
(0.02)
63.10
(0.89)
37699

7.36
(0.01)
65.00
(0.61)
44552

3.63
(0.14)
19.07
(0.53)
28211
6.91
(0.18)
35.39
(0.49)
41356

5.76
(0.02)
54.91
(0.64)
29954
6.02
(0.02)
57.45
(0.67)
22404

6.01
(0.14)
31.51
(0.42)
31168

U.S.
History
(4)

4.73
(0.12)
28.57
(0.43)
24483

4.28
(0.02)
42.71
(0.52)
27822
5.95
(0.01)
58.00
(0.69)
24483

Math A
(3)
6.02
(0.14)
31.49
(0.41)
22777

4.71
(0.16)
22.18
(0.54)
28272
4.82
(0.14)
25.21
(0.47)
27695

6.51
(0.18)
33.21
(0.52)
40941

January 2008:

53

3.40
(0.16)
16.00
(0.60)
27254

Int.
Algebra
(6)

Total Manipulation
In-Range Manipulation

June 2008:
Total Manipulation
In-Range Manipulation

January 2009:
Total Manipulation
In-Range Manipulation

June 2009:
Total Manipulation
In-Range Manipulation

January 2010:
Total Manipulation
In-Range Manipulation

June 2010:
Total Manipulation
In-Range Manipulation

3.24
(0.02)
32.32
(0.39)
27930
4.02
(0.02)
40.10
(0.49)
23617

3.60
(0.12)
21.91
(0.49)
26362
5.55
(0.12)
36.27
(0.40)
42081

3.17
(0.16)
14.99
(0.61)
18048

5.65
(0.02)
50.49
(0.70)
38293

6.33
(0.01)
56.33
(0.54)
44954

3.91
(0.01)
38.14
(0.45)
27548
4.15
(0.01)
40.45
(0.48)
23695

5.15
(0.19)
39.83
(0.71)
10491
7.83
(0.18)
39.96
(0.44)
41259

7.51
(0.01)
65.42
(0.89)
39469

6.52
(0.01)
57.09
(0.54)
43283

3.70
(0.02)
35.32
(0.41)
27098
3.72
(0.02)
35.51
(0.41)
22772

2.54
(0.19)
19.59
(1.11)
34186

3.97
(0.20)
30.46
(0.89)
39511
3.80
(0.13)
38.92
(0.56)
13955

8.50
(0.18)
43.53
(0.40)
41473

5.84
(0.02)
51.90
(0.73)
37435

6.46
(0.01)
56.71
(0.53)
42705

4.00
(0.20)
30.51
(0.89)
34131

Notes: This table reports manipulation around the 55 and 65 score cutoffs for New York City high school test takers
between 2004-2010. Total manipulation is the fraction of test takers with manipulated scores. In-range manipulation is
the fraction of test takers with manipulated scores normalized by the average height of the counterfactual distribution
to the left of each cutoff. Standard errors are calculated using the parametric bootstrap procedure described in the
text. See the Figure 1 notes for additional details on the empirical specification and the data appendix for additional
details on the sample and variable definitions.

54

Appendix Table 3
Comparison of Pilot and Non-Pilot High Schools

Characteristics:
Male
White
Asian
Black
Hispanic
Free Lunch
8th Grade Test Scores

Pilot
Schools
(1)
0.484
0.197
0.206
0.276
0.315
0.651
0.326

Core Regents Performance:
Comprehensive English 76.890
Living Environment
74.932
Int. Algebra
68.795
U.S. History
77.513
Global History
72.184
Students
54,852

Non-Pilot
Schools
(2)
0.466
0.107
0.204
0.302
0.383
0.699
0.291

75.215
74.567
69.484
76.542
70.781
73,416

Difference
(3)
0.018
0.090∗∗
0.003
−0.026
−0.068∗
−0.048
0.036

1.675
0.365
−0.689
0.971
1.403

Notes: This table reports summary statistics for students in New York City taking a core Regents exam in 2010-2011.
Column 1 reports mean values for students enrolled in a school that is in the distributed scoring pilot program.
Column 2 reports mean values for students not enrolled in a school that is in the distributed scoring pilot program.
Column 3 reports the difference in means with standard errors clustered at the school level. See the data appendix
for additional details on the sample construction and variable definitions.

55

Appendix Table 4
Difference-in-Differences Results by Subject

Graduate High School
Observations
Dep. Variable Mean
Student Controls
Year x Score Trends
School Fixed Effects

Living
Math A/
Env.
Algebra
(1)
(2)
0.394∗∗∗
0.197∗∗
(0.077)
(0.086)
308,100
373,432
0.814
0.746
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Global
U.S.
History
English
History
(3)
(4)
(5)
0.195∗∗∗ 0.252∗∗∗ 0.263∗∗∗
(0.028)
(0.072)
(0.046)
338,926
379,097
297,318
0.794
0.804
0.842
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Notes: This table reports two-stage least squares estimates of the effect of test score manipulation by subject. The
sample includes students entering high school between 2003-2004 and 2010-2011 and taking core Regents exams
between 2004-2013. We use the interaction of taking the test between 2011-2013 and scoring between 60-69 as an
instrument for scoring 65+ on the first administration. All specifications include the baseline characteristics from
Table 1, an indicator for scoring between 0-59 in 2011-2013, 10-point scale score effects, cohort effects, year-of-test
effects, and school effects. Standard errors are clustered at both the student and school level. See the data appendix
for additional details on the sample construction and variable definitions.

56

Appendix Table 5
Robustness of Difference-in-Differences Results

Graduate High School
Observations
Dep. Variable Mean
Year-Specific Interaction
Pilot School Interaction

2SLS
(1)
(2)
0.191∗∗∗
0.178∗∗∗
(0.026)
(0.025)
1,696,873 1,696,873
0.798
0.798
Yes
Yes
No
Yes

Notes: This table reports two-stage least squares estimates of the effect of test score manipulation using different
instrumental variables for scoring 65+ on the first administration. The sample includes students entering high school
between 2003-2004 and 2010-2011 and taking core Regents exams between 2004-2013. Column 1 uses the interactions
of scoring between 60-69 and year-specific indicators for taking the test between 2011-2013 as instruments. Column
2 uses the interactions of scoring between 60-69 and year-specific indicators for taking the test between 2011-2013
and an indicator for attending a school in the distributed grading pilot program as instruments. All specifications
include the baseline characteristics from Table 1, an indicator for scoring between 0-59 in 2011-2013, 10-point scale
score effects, cohort effects, year-of-test effects, and school effects. Standard errors are clustered at both the student
and school level. See the data appendix for additional details on the sample construction and variable definitions.

57

Appendix Table 6
Difference-in-Differences Placebo Estimates

Panel A: Characteristics
Male
White
Asian
Black
Hispanic
Free Lunch
8th Grade Test Scores

Panel B: Predicted Outcomes
Predicted Graduation
Observations
Student Controls
Year x Score Trends
School Fixed Effects

Sample
Mean
(1)
0.471
(0.499)
0.145
(0.352)
0.180
(0.384)
0.316
(0.465)
0.352
(0.478)
0.602
(0.489)
0.271
(0.819)

Reduced Form
(2)
(3)
0.003
0.003
(0.006)
(0.005)
0.005
0.001
(0.005)
(0.003)
0.002
0.002
(0.005)
(0.004)
−0.004
0.003
(0.008)
(0.004)
−0.002
−0.003
(0.007)
(0.004)
0.018∗∗
0.015∗∗
(0.008)
(0.007)
0.058∗∗∗
0.053∗∗∗
(0.008)
(0.007)

0.798
(0.118)
1,696,873
–
–
–

0.009∗∗∗
0.008∗∗∗
(0.001)
(0.001)
1,696,873 1,696,873
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes

Notes: This table reports placebo estimates of test score manipulation on student characteristics. The sample
includes students entering high school between 2003-2004 and 2010-2011 and taking core Regents exams between
2004-2013. Columns 2-3 report reduced form results using the interaction of taking the test between 2011-2013 and
scoring between 60-69. All specifications include an indicator for scoring between 0-59 in 2011-2013, 10-point scale
score effects interacted with year-of-test, and exam by year-of-test effects. Standard errors are clustered at both
the student and school level. See the data appendix for additional details on the sample construction and variable
definitions.

58

59

0.617
(0.486)
0.219
(0.414)

−0.158∗∗∗ −0.159∗∗∗
(0.007)
(0.007)
−0.158∗∗∗ −0.159∗∗∗
(0.007)
(0.007)
1,696,873 1,696,873
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes

−0.158∗∗∗ −0.159∗∗∗
(0.007)
(0.007)
−0.158∗∗∗ −0.159∗∗∗
(0.007)
(0.007)

First Stage
(2)
(3)
−0.158∗∗∗ −0.159∗∗∗
(0.007)
(0.007)
−0.158∗∗∗ −0.159∗∗∗
(0.007)
(0.007)

0.012∗
(0.007)
0.006
(0.008)
1,696,873
Yes
Yes
No

0.009∗
(0.006)
0.004
(0.007)
1,696,873
Yes
Yes
Yes

−0.052∗∗∗ −0.054∗∗∗
(0.010)
(0.009)
0.018∗∗
0.017∗∗
(0.009)
(0.008)

Reduced Form
(4)
(5)
−0.090∗∗∗ −0.085∗∗∗
(0.006)
(0.006)
−0.064∗∗∗ −0.065∗∗∗
(0.005)
(0.005)

−0.079∗
(0.044)
−0.036
(0.050)
1,696,873
Yes
Yes
No

−0.057∗
(0.031)
−0.024
(0.045)
1,696,873
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.327∗∗∗
0.338∗∗∗
(0.058)
(0.053)
−0.114∗∗ −0.110∗∗
(0.057)
(0.052)

2SLS
(6)
(7)
0.565∗∗∗
0.536∗∗∗
(0.041)
(0.040)
0.405∗∗∗
0.408∗∗∗
(0.036)
(0.036)

Notes: This table reports estimates of test score manipulation on additional attainment outcomes. The sample includes students
entering high school between 2003-2004 and 2010-2011 and taking core Regents exams between 2004-2013. Columns 2-3 report first
stage results from a regression of an indicator for scoring 65+ on the first administration on the interaction of taking the test between
2011-2013 and scoring between 60-69. Columns 4-5 report reduced form results using the interaction of taking the test between 20112013 and scoring between 60-69. Columns 6-7 report two-stage least squares results using the interaction of taking the test between
2011-2013 and scoring between 60-69 as an instrument for scoring 65+ on the first administration. All specifications include the
baseline characteristics from Table 1, an indicator for scoring between 0-59 in 2011-2013, 10-point scale score effects interacted with
year-of-test, and exam by year-of-test effects. Standard errors are clustered at both the student and school level. See the data appendix
for additional details on the sample construction and variable definitions.

Panel C: Advanced Science and Math Exams
Pass Physical Science Exam
0.488
(0.500)
Pass Advanced Math Sequence
0.257
(0.437)
1,696,873
Observations
Student Controls
–
Year x Score Trends
–
School Fixed Effects
–

Adv. Regents Requirements Met

Panel B: Diploma Requirements
Regents Requirements Met

Highest Enrolled Grade

Panel A: Attainment Measures
Years Enrolled in High School

Sample
Mean
(1)
4.095
(0.579)
11.838
(0.530)

Appendix Table 7
Difference-in-Differences Results for Additional Outcomes

Appendix Table 8
Difference-in-Differences Results by Subject for Additional Outcomes

Panel A: Attainment Measures
Highest Enrolled Grade
Years Enrolled in High School

Panel B: Diploma Requirements
Regents Requirements Met
Adv. Regents Requirements Met

Living
Env.
(1)
0.707∗∗∗
(0.105)
0.969∗∗∗
(0.117)

Math A/
Global
Algebra
History
(2)
(3)
0.904∗∗∗ 0.336∗∗∗
(0.166)
(0.033)
1.869∗∗∗ 0.284∗∗∗
(0.247)
(0.036)

U.S.
English
History
(4)
(5)
0.410∗∗∗
0.187∗∗∗
(0.077)
(0.040)
0.248∗∗∗ −0.016
(0.089)
(0.056)

1.337∗∗∗
0.749∗∗∗ 0.402∗∗∗
0.304∗∗∗
0.164∗∗
(0.186)
(0.216)
(0.043)
(0.100)
(0.069)
−0.424∗∗∗ −0.891∗∗∗ 0.049
−0.125
−0.018
(0.151)
(0.184)
(0.050)
(0.081)
(0.058)

Panel C: Advanced Science and Math Exams
Pass Physical Science Exam
−0.133
(0.093)
Pass Advanced Math Sequence
−0.241∗∗
(0.113)
Observations
308,100
Dep. Variable Mean
0.814
Student Controls
Yes
Year x Score Trends
Yes
School Fixed Effects
Yes

−0.292∗∗
0.066∗
(0.128)
(0.038)
−0.798∗∗∗ 0.091∗
(0.177)
(0.048)
373,432
338,926
0.746
0.794
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

−0.059
(0.067)
0.009
(0.070)
379,097
0.804
Yes
Yes
Yes

−0.051
(0.044)
0.068
(0.045)
297,318
0.842
Yes
Yes
Yes

Notes: This table reports two-stage least squares estimates of the effect of test score manipulation by subject. The
sample includes students entering high school between 2003-2004 and 2010-2011 and taking core Regents exams
between 2004-2013. We use the interaction of taking the test between 2011-2013 and scoring between 60-69 as an
instrument for scoring 65+ on the first administration. All specifications include the baseline characteristics from
Table 1, an indicator for scoring between 0-59 in 2011-2013, 10-point scale score effects, cohort effects, year-of-test
effects, and school effects. Standard errors are clustered at both the student and school level. See the data appendix
for additional details on the sample construction and variable definitions.

60

Appendix Table 9
Placebo Estimates using Across-School Variation

Panel A: Characteristics
Male
White
Asian
Black
Hispanic
Free Lunch
8th Grade Test Scores

Panel B: Predicted Outcomes
High School Graduation
Any College
Any Two-Year College
Any Four-Year College
Observations
Student Controls
Year x Score Trends
School Fixed Effects

Sample
Mean
(1)
0.467
(0.499)
0.136
(0.343)
0.142
(0.349)
0.349
(0.477)
0.364
(0.481)
0.529
(0.499)
0.156
(0.712)

Reduced Form
(2)
(3)
−0.0601∗∗ −0.0220
(0.0253)
(0.0176)
0.0559
0.0445∗∗∗
(0.0405)
(0.0171)
−0.0108
0.0002
(0.0337)
(0.1149)
0.0078
−0.0336∗
(0.0303)
(0.0191)
−0.0509∗∗ −0.0093
(0.0258)
(0.1579)
−0.0303
−0.0097
(0.0324)
(0.0162)
0.0563
−0.0099
(0.0567)
(0.0318)

0.756
(0.120)
0.505
(0.112)
0.189
(0.035)
0.350
(0.143)
587,116
–
–
–

0.0113
(0.0104)
0.0132
(0.0108)
−0.0011
(0.0024)
0.0154
(0.0130)
587,116
Yes
Yes
No

−0.0004
(0.0056)
0.0008
(0.0052)
0.0006
(0.0014)
0.0004
(0.0065)
587,116
Yes
Yes
Yes

Notes: This table reports placebo estimates that use across-school variation in manipulation. The sample includes
students entering high school between 2003-2004 and 2005-2006 and taking core Regents exams between 2004-2010.
Columns 2-3 report reduced form results using the interaction of school in-range manipulation and scoring between
60-69. All specifications include the baseline characteristics from Table 1, an indicator for scoring between 0-59
in 2011-2013, 10-point scale score effects interacted with year-of-test, and exam by year-of-test effects. Standard
errors are clustered at both the student and school level. See the data appendix for additional details on the sample
construction and variable definitions.

61

62
0.399∗∗∗
(0.023)
0.399∗∗∗
(0.023)
587,116
Yes
Yes
No

0.400∗∗∗
(0.023)
0.400∗∗∗
(0.023)
587,116
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.400∗∗∗
(0.023)
0.400∗∗∗
(0.023)

0.400∗∗∗
(0.023)
0.400∗∗∗
(0.023)
0.400∗∗∗
(0.023)

0.028
(0.025)
−0.016
(0.033)
587,116
Yes
Yes
No

0.189∗∗∗
(0.035)
−0.017
(0.032)

−0.165∗∗∗
(0.030)
0.196∗∗∗
(0.050)
−0.003
(0.037)

Reduced
(4)
0.013
(0.018)
0.046∗∗∗
(0.016)

−0.020
(0.025)
−0.028
(0.027)
587,116
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.180∗∗∗
(0.028)
−0.032
(0.027)

−0.149∗∗∗
(0.029)
0.201∗∗∗
(0.046)
−0.033
(0.029)

Form
(5)
0.011
(0.019)
0.036∗∗
(0.017)

0.071
(0.063)
−0.039
(0.082)
587,116
Yes
Yes
No

0.474∗∗∗
(0.083)
−0.043
(0.080)

−0.414∗∗∗
(0.071)
0.492∗∗∗
(0.113)
−0.008
(0.094)

−0.050
(0.063)
−0.069
(0.066)
587,116
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.451∗∗∗
(0.066)
−0.081
(0.066)

−0.374∗∗∗
(0.067)
0.502∗∗∗
(0.102)
−0.083
(0.070)

2SLS
(6)
(7)
0.033
0.026
(0.045)
(0.047)
0.116∗∗∗
0.091∗∗
(0.040)
(0.044)

Notes: This table reports estimates of test score manipulation on student outcomes that use across-school variation in manipulation. The sample includes
students entering high school between 2003-2004 and 2005-2006 and taking core Regents exams between 2004-2010. Column 2 reports first stage results
from a regression of an indicator for scoring 65+ on the first administration on the interaction of school in-range manipulation and scoring between
60-69. Column 3 reports reduced form results using the interaction of school in-range manipulation and scoring between 60-69. Column 4 reports
two-stage least squares results using the interaction of school in-range manipulation and scoring between 60-69 as an instrument for scoring 65+ on the
first administration. All specifications include the baseline characteristics from Table 1, an indicator for scoring between 0-59 in 2011-2013, 10-point
scale score effects interacted with year-of-test, and exam by year-of-test effects. Standard errors are clustered at both the student and school level. See
the data appendix for additional details on the sample construction and variable definitions.

Adv. Regents Requirements Met

Panel D: Advanced Science and Math Exams
Pass Physical Science Exam
0.428
(0.495)
Pass Advanced Math Sequence
0.197
(0.398)
587,116
Observations
Student Controls
–
Year x Score Trends
–
School Fixed Effects
–

0.399∗∗∗
(0.023)
0.399∗∗∗
(0.023)
0.399∗∗∗
(0.023)

0.399∗∗∗
(0.023)
0.399∗∗∗
(0.023)

0.265
(0.442)
0.329
(0.470)
0.161
(0.368)

First Stage
(2)
(3)
0.399∗∗∗ 0.400∗∗∗
(0.023)
(0.023)
0.399∗∗∗ 0.400∗∗∗
(0.023)
(0.023)

0.504
(0.500)
0.169
(0.375)

Panel C: Diploma Requirements
Regents Requirements Met

Advanced Regents Diploma

Regents Diploma

Panel B: Diploma Type
Local Diploma

Highest Enrolled Grade

Panel A: Attainment Measures
Years Enrolled in High School

Sample
Mean
(1)
4.045
(0.691)
11.764
(0.631)

Appendix Table 10
Across-School Results for Additional Outcomes

Appendix A: Data Appendix
[NOT FOR PUBLICATION]

This appendix contains all of the relevant information on the cleaning and coding of the variables
used in our analysis.
A. Data Sources
Regents Scores: The NYCDOE Regents test score data are organized at the student-by-test administration level. Each record includes a unique student identifier, the date of the test, and test
outcome. These data are available for all NYC Regents test takers from the 1998-1999 to 2012-2013
school years.
Enrollment Files: The NYCDOE enrollment data are organized at the student-by-year level.
Each record includes a unique student identifier and information on student race, gender, free
and reduced-price lunch eligibility, school, and grade. These data are available for all NYC K-12
public school students from the 2003-2004 to 2012-2013 school years.
State Test Scores: The NYCDOE state test score data are organized at the student-by-year or
student-by-test administration level. The data include scale scores and proficiency scores for all
tested students in grades three through eight. When using state test scores as a control, we
standardize scores to have a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one in the test-year.
Graduation Files: The NYCDOE graduation files are organized at the student level. For cohorts
entering high school between 1998-1999 and 2004-2005, the graduation data include information
on the receipt of local, Regents, and advanced Regents diplomas. For cohorts entering high school
between 2005-2006 to the present, the data do not include diploma specific information in each
year. We therefore measure high school graduation using an indicator for receiving any of the three
diploma types offered by New York City in the four years from high school entry. GED diplomas
and diplomas awarded after four years are not included in our graduation measure.
National Student Clearinghouse Files: National Student Clearinghouse (NSC) files at the student
level are available for cohorts in the graduation files entering high school between 1998-1999 and
2004-2005. The NSC is a non-profit organization that maintains enrollment information for 92 percent of colleges nationwide. The NSC data contain information on enrollment spells for all covered
colleges that a student attended, though not grades or course work. The NYCDOE graduation files
were matched to the NSC database by NSC employees using each student’s full name, date of birth,
and high school graduation date. Students who are not matched to the NSC database are assumed
to have never attended college, including the approximately four percent of requested records that
were blocked by the student or student’s school. See Dobbie and Fryer (2013) for additional details.

63

NCLB Adequate Yearly Progress: Data on Adequate Yearly Progress come from the New York
State Education Department’s Information and Reporting Services. These data are available from
2004-2011.
NYC School Grades: Data on school grades come from the NYCDOE’s School Report Cards. These
data are available from 2008-2012.
Regents Raw-to-Scale Score Conversion Charts: Raw-to-scale-score conversion charts for all Regents exams were downloaded from www.jmap.org and www.nysedregents.org. We use the raw-toscale-score conversion charts to mark impossible scale scores, and to define which scale scores are
manipulable. Specifically, we define a score as manipulable if it is within 2 raw points (or 1 essay
point) above the proficiency threshold. To the left of each proficiency cutoff, we define a scale score
as manipulable if it is between 50-54 or 60-64.
B. Sample Restrictions
We make the following restrictions to the final dataset used to produce our main results documenting
manipulation:
1. We only include “core” Regents exams taken after 2003-2004. Exams taken before 2003-2004
cannot be reliably linked to student demographics. The core Regents exams during this time
period include: Integrated Algebra (from 2008 onwards), Mathematics A (from 2003-2008),
Living Environment, Comprehensive English, US History and Global History. These exams
make up approximately 75 percent of all exams taken during our sample period. Occasionally
we extend our analysis to include the following “elective” Regents exams: Math B, Chemistry,
and Physics. We do not consider foreign language exams due, in part, to the lack of score
conversion charts for these years. We also do not consider Sequential Math exams, which are
taken before 2003. We also focus on exams taken in the regular test period. This restriction
drops all core exams taken in August and the Living Environment, U.S. History, and Global
History exams taken in January. We also drop all elective exams taken in January and August.
However, the patterns we describe in the paper also appear in the these test administrations.
Following this first set of sample restrictions, we have 2,472,197 exams in our primary window
of 2003-2004 to 2009-2010.
2. Second, we drop observations with scale scores that are not possible scores for that given
exam. This sample restriction leaves us with 2,455,423 remaining exams.
3. Third, we only consider a student’s first exam in each subject to avoid any mechanical bunching around the performance thresholds due to re-taking behavior. This sample restriction
leaves us with 1,977,915 remaining exams.
4. Fourth, we drop students who who are enrolled in a non-high schools, special education
schools, and schools with extremely low enrollments. This sample restriction leaves us with
64

1,821,458 remaining exams.
5. Fifth, we drop all exams originating from schools where more than five percent of core exam
scores contain reporting errors. This is to eliminate schools with systematic mis-grading.
This sample restriction leaves us with 1,728,551 remaining exams.
6. Finally, we drop special education students who are held to different accountability standards
during our sample period (see Appendix Table 1). This sample restriction leaves us with
1,630,284 remaining exams.
C. Adjustments to Raw Frequency Counts
We create the frequency counts of each exam using the following four step process:
1. First, we collapse the test-year-month-student level data to the test-year-month-scaled score
level, gathering how many students in a given test-year-month achieve each scaled score.
2. Second, we divide this frequency of students-per-score by the number of raw scores that map
to a given scaled score in order to counter the mechanical overrepresentation of these scaled
scores. We make one further adjustment for Integrated Algebra and Math A exams that show
regular spikes in the frequency of raw scores between 20-48 due to the way multiple choice
items are scored. We adjust for these mechanical spikes in the distribution by taking the
average of adjacent even and odd scores between 20-48 for these subjects.
3. Third, we collapse the adjusted test-year-month-scaled score level data to either the testscaled score or just scaled score level using frequency weights.
4. Finally, we express these adjusted frequency counts as the adjusted fraction of all test takers
in the sample to facilitate the interpretation of the estimates.
D. Misc. Data Cleaning
Test Administration Dates: We make two changes to the date of test administration variable. First,
we assume that any Math A exams taken in 2009 must have been taken in January even if the data
file indicates a June administration, as the Math A exam was last administered in January of 2009.
Second, we assume that any test scores reported between January and May could not have been
taken in June. We therefore assume a January administration in the same year for these exams.
Finally, we drop any exams with corrupted or missing date information that can not be inferred.
Duplicates Scores: A handful of observations indicate two Regents scores for the same student on
the same date. For these observations, we use the max score. Results are identical using the min
or mean score instead.

65

