                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       PREFERENCE FOR THE WORKPLACE, HUMAN CAPITAL, AND GENDER

                                      Matthew Wiswall
                                        Basit Zafar

                                     Working Paper 22173
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w22173


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    April 2016




Ellen Fu provided excellent research assistance. We would like to thank Joe Altonji for feedback
on the survey design, and participants at Harvard, NY Fed Micro Working Lunch, Princeton, the
2015 Econometric Society World Congress, and the 2016 AEFP meetings for valuable
comments. The views expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, the National Bureau of Economic Research, or the Federal Reserve
System as a whole.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Matthew Wiswall and Basit Zafar. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Preference for the Workplace, Human Capital, and Gender
Matthew Wiswall and Basit Zafar
NBER Working Paper No. 22173
April 2016
JEL No. J16,J24

                                            ABSTRACT

In this paper, we use a hypothetical choice methodology to robustly estimate preferences for
workplace attributes and quantify how much these preferences influence pre-labor market human
capital investments. Undergraduate students are presented with sets of job offers that vary in their
attributes (such as earnings and job hours flexibility) and asked to state their probabilistic choices.
We show that this method robustly identifies preferences for various job attributes, free from
omitted variable bias and free from considering the equilibrium matching of workers to jobs.
While there is substantial heterogeneity in preferences, we find that women on average have a
higher willingness to pay for jobs with greater work flexibility (lower hours, and part-time option
availability) and job stability (lower risk of job loss), and men have a higher willingness to pay
for jobs with higher earnings growth. Using a follow-up survey several years after the
experiment, we find a systematic relationship between the respondents' job preferences as
revealed during college and the actual workplace characteristics of the jobs these individuals are
currently working at after college.

In the second part of the paper, we relate these job attribute preferences to major choice. Using
data on students' perceptions about the demand side of the labor market--beliefs about expected
attributes of jobs students anticipate being offered if they were to complete particular majors--we
find that students perceive jobs offered to Humanities majors to have fewer hours, more work-
time flexibility, and higher stability than jobs offered to Economics/Business majors. These job
attributes are found to play a role in major choice, with women exhibiting greater sensitivity to
non-pecuniary job attributes in major choice.


Matthew Wiswall
Arizona State University
W.P. Carey School of Business
P.O. Box 879801
Tempe, AZ 85287
and NBER
matt.wiswall@gmail.com

Basit Zafar
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
basit.zafar@ny.frb.org
1       Introduction
Economists have long recognized that job and occupational choices are not solely determined
by expected earnings.1 While simple models based on earnings maximization abound (see
for example the classic Roy (1951) model), and are quite useful in some applications, it is
also clear that individuals have a rich set of preferences for various aspects of jobs beyond
expected earnings, including earnings and dismissal risk, and various non-pecuniary aspects
such as work hours flexibility and enjoyment of workplace activities. We would expect then
that these preferences for various job attributes affect not only job choices, as individuals
choose jobs not solely to maximize expected earnings, but also human capital investments,
as individuals alter their human capital investment in anticipation of particular future job
choices.
    However, empirically isolating the role of worker-side preferences for job attributes is
difficult. One reason is that the equilibrium allocation of workers to jobs reflects not only
the workers’ preferences but the structure of the labor market and firm demands for workers.
If one assumes the labor market is perfectly competitive with jobs of all types offered to
all workers, then the equilibrium job choices and wages observed directly identify individ-
ual preferences–this is the classical model of compensating differentials (Rosen, 1984). If
however firms have preferences for some types of workers and offer jobs only to a subset
of workers with preferred characteristics (employment discrimination of some form), then
the observed job choices do not reflect worker preferences only. Various kinds of labor mar-
ket frictions which prevent workers from matching with their most preferred job types also
break the direct connection between observed job choices and worker preferences. Even
when the labor market is perfectly competitive, a second empirical challenge is that because
jobs likely vary in many unobserved (to the researcher) characteristics, there exists a familiar
omitted variable or selection bias problem in identifying worker preferences from realized
job choices. If the observed characteristics in realized choice data are correlated with the un-
observed characteristics, then our estimates of the importance of the observed characteristics
in workers’ job choices are biased.
    To address these empirical challenges, this paper presents a new methodology for es-

    1
      Adam Smith writes “The five following are the principal circumstances which, so far as I have been
able to observe, make up for a small pecuniary gain in some employments, and counterbalance a great one in
others: first, the agreeableness or disagreeableness of the employments themselves; secondly, the easiness and
cheapness, or the difficulty and expense of learning them; thirdly, the constancy or inconstancy of employment
in them; fourthly, the small or great trust which must be reposed in those who exercise them; and, fifthly, the
probability or improbability of success in them." (Wealth of Nations, 1776, Book 1, Chapter 10).

                                                      1
timating individual preferences for workplace attributes prior to labor market entry. We
collect data on job attribute preferences through a survey in which we present undergraduate
students with a series of hypothetical job choice scenarios and elicit their expected future
choices across the jobs. The hypothetical job scenarios were constructed to offer students a
realistic menu of potential jobs varying in expected earnings and other characteristics such
as future earnings growth, dismissal probability, and work hours flexibility. The students’
stated preferences for these jobs allows us to construct a “pure" measure of individual pref-
erences – at the time of the survey – for various job characteristics and estimate, in a simple
and robust way, the distribution of their preferences for job attributes. In this way, our data
isolates the preference for workplace attributes, free from considering the equilibrium job
allocation mechanism, preferences of employers, and omitted variable bias problems.2 And,
because our data collection in essence conducts a kind of “experiment" at the individual stu-
dent level, the panel data generated by our design allows us to estimate the distribution of
preferences allowing for unrestricted forms of preference heterogeneity. We combine this
data on job attribute preferences with rich data on students’ educational choices and expec-
tations, including data on how students believe potential college majors relate to the jobs
which would be available to them, and test whether the job preferences young adults hold in
college in fact affect their human capital investments during college.
    In our sample of high ability students, we estimate important willingness-to-pay (WTP)
for pecuniary and non-pecuniary aspects of jobs and considerable heterogeneity in their pref-
erences for workplace attributes. We find that students have preferences reflecting, on aver-
age, a dis-taste for higher job dismissal potential, and a taste for workplace hours flexibility.
We estimate that on average students are willing to give up 2.8% of annual earnings for a

    2
      Our hypothetical choice methodology is a kind of “stated choice" analysis which shares some relationship
to “conjoint analysis" and “contingent valuation" methods, used in fields including marketing and environmen-
tal and natural resource economics. Typically these methods are used to identify preferences for new, as yet
unavailable, consumer products or for public goods like environmental quality, for which realized choices and
markets do not exist. For examples in marketing and consumer choice, see Green and Srinivasan (1978), Beggs,
Cardell, and Hausman (1981), Louviere and Woodworth (1983), Manski and Salomon (1987), and Ben-Akiva
and Morikawa (1990). For examples, in environmental and resource economics see Smith (2004), Kling, Pha-
neuf, Zhao (2012), Carson (2012), and Hausman (2012). More recently Blass, Lach, and Manski (2010),
Delavande and Manski (2015), Ameriks et al. (2015), and Fuster and Zafar (2015) have used this hypothetical
choice methodology to analyze preferences for electricity reliability, political candidates, nursing home care
and asset allocation, and housing demand, respectively. Like these previous studies, we exploit the possibilities
that hypothetical data can provide rich variation in product characteristics, allowing for identification of pref-
erences under weak assumptions about the form of preference heterogeneity. However, our primary motivation
for collecting hypothetical choice data is not because markets and realized choices do not exist, as is the issue
in identifying preferences for new products or public goods, but to resolve problems of endogeneity of realized
job choices.

                                                        2
job with a percentage point lower probability of job dismissal. The largest average WTP es-
timate is for the availability of a part-time hours option. Individuals, on average, are willing
to give up 5.1% of their salary to have a job which offers the option of working part-time
hours rather than a job which does not offer this option. When dividing our sample by gen-
der, we find that women have a higher average preference for workplace hours flexibility,
with an implied willingness-to-pay of 7.3% compared to 1% for men. Women also have a
higher WTP for more secure jobs- they are willing to give up 4% of their salary for a percent-
age point lower probability of job dismissal (versus a 0.6% WTP for males). On the other
hand, men have a higher WTP for jobs with higher earnings growth: they are willing to give
up 3.4% of annual earnings for a job with a percentage point higher earnings growth (the
corresponding estimate for women is a statistically insignificant 0.6%). There is, however,
substantial heterogeneity in preferences for workplace attributes, even within gender. In ad-
dition, the skewness of the estimated preference distributions is significantly different from
zero for most attributes, suggesting that parametric distributional assumptions that impose
symmetry in preferences are not supported in the data.
    A natural question is whether preferences recovered from hypothetical choices data relate
to actual occupational outcomes. Using data on reported job characteristics for a subset of
our respondents who are employed roughly four years after our original data collection,
reveals a strong and systematic relationship between estimated preferences and later actual
workplace characteristics. Students with strong preferences for flexible hours, dis-taste for
hours, and other non-pecuniary aspects of jobs were found to be later more likely to be
working at jobs with those same preferred characteristics. Note that while these realized
job characteristics do not solely reflect preferences, our finding of a correlation between
pre-labor market job preferences and later actual job characteristics suggests some added
credibility of our research design.
    Our finding of substantial differences in willingness-to-pay for job amenities between
men and women is consistent with prior work noting that the gender segregation of occu-
pations and jobs is such that women are more likely to be found in jobs offering greater
workplace flexibility (Goldin and Katz, 2011; Flabbi and Moro, 2012; Goldin, 2014). How-
ever, the observation that women tend to work in certain job types may not reveal women’s
preferences alone, but may also be affected by firm-side demands for specific workers and
discrimination or be driven by some other job attributes that are unobserved in our datasets
(Blau and Kahn, 2006). Our innovation is to quantify the willingness-to-pay for job attributes
using a flexible and robust methodology. Our finding of a substantial and gender-specific


                                               3
preference for job attributes such as work hours flexibility, even among college students, in-
dicates that these types of preferences form even before entry into the labor market. These
distinct preferences by gender suggest that part of the gender gap in earnings we observe is
a compensating differential in which women are willing to give up higher earnings to obtain
other job attributes.
    In the second part of the paper, we test whether the job preferences young adults hold
in college in fact affect their human capital investments during college. We collect beliefs
about expected attributes of jobs students anticipate being offered if they were to complete
particular majors. Importantly, these beliefs are elicited for not only the student’s chosen
major, but also the counterfactual majors. Following previous work on using expectations
data to understand choices, we argue that perceptions or beliefs at the time of choice, whether
accurate or biased in some way, are key as these beliefs are the basis of decision making.
    We find that students believe that completing a major in the Humanities would lead to
being offered jobs with fewer work hours, greater work hours flexibility, lower job dismissal
probability, and lower earnings uncertainty than if they were to complete majors in Eco-
nomics/Business. Students believe that the jobs they would be offered if they completed
a major in Economics/Business would, on the other hand, offer higher salaries and greater
earnings growth.
    In order to quantify the importance of job attributes to major choice, we estimate a sim-
ple model of major choice where students receive utility from major-specific characteristics
(such as perceived ability in those majors), job attributes conditional on major, and tastes.3
We compute “marginal effects" to gauge the importance of job attributes in major choice,
whereby we vary each job attribute keeping the other job- and major- specific attributes fixed
at their average values. We find that job attributes have a sizable impact on major choice.
For example, increasing the job firing probability from 1% to 10% reduces the probability
of majoring in the associated major by between 2% and 5%. To put this change in perspec-
tive, an increase of 10% in average earnings leads to a 6%-18% increase in the likelihood
of majoring in that field for females (and of 15%-33% for males). Thus, for females, this
change is equivalent to nearly a third of the effect on major choice of increasing earnings by

    3
      Prior research on college major choice examines the role of earnings expectations, ability perceptions, col-
lege costs, and tastes, but does not examine other job attributes. For examples of recent work, see Arcidiacono,
2004; Beffy, Fougere, and Maurel, 2012; Arcidiacono, Hotz, and Kang, 2012; Zafar, 2013; Stinebrickner and
Stinebrickner, 2014a; Gemici and Wiswall, 2014; Wiswall and Zafar, 2015; Altonji, Arcidiacono, and Maurel,
2015. Arcidiacono et al. (2015), using expectations data from male undergraduate students about earnings in
different major-occupation pairs, find evidence for complementarities in preferences between different majors
and occupations, where occupations include Health, Business, Government, and Education.

                                                        4
10%. We find qualitatively similar impacts for the importance of other job attributes, such as
work hours. In general, we find that females’ major choices are more responsive to changes
in non-pecuniary job attributes (relative to changes in earnings) than males, suggestive of
their greater sensitivity to non-monetary aspects of the choice in human capital investment
decisions. By linking job preferences directly to human capital investments, we contribute to
our limited understanding of how career/workplace preferences shape educational choices.4
    The paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we briefly provide some context
for our analysis by using nationally representative surveys for the US on currently employed
individuals to describe the distribution of realized job characteristics by past college major
choice. Section 3 describes our data collection. Section 4 details the model of job choice, and
shows how hypothetical data can solve important identification issues with realized choice
data. Section 5 provides the empirical estimates of job preferences. Section 6 describes data
on students’ beliefs about the types of jobs (along various dimensions) they believe would
be offered to them conditional on college major, while section 7 quantifies the importance of
job attributes for college major choice. Finally, Section 8 concludes.


2       Background: Job Choices and Human Capital Invest-
        ments in the United States
To set the stage for the analysis of our hypothetical choice scenario data, we first briefly
describe the distribution of college majors, jobs, and associated job characteristics. To do so,
we use two large sample representative datasets for the United States, the January 2010- De-
cember 2012 monthly Current Population Survey (CPS) and the 2013 American Community
Survey (ACS).
    Table 1 shows that the gender distribution across work sectors differs (Appendix A pro-
vides details on how variables in this table were constructed). While nearly two-thirds of
women workers are in Health or Education, less than 40% of male workers are employed in
these sectors. Business, the field most likely to be chosen by males, ranks third likeliest for
females. These sectors differ substantially in their labor market returns: column (3) of Table
1 shows that average annual earnings of full-time workers are the lowest for Education, and
highest for Science and Business. But these sectors differ along other dimensions as well:
more than a quarter of the workers in Health and Education are employed part-time, possibly
    4
      Our findings are consistent with the finding in Arcidiancono et al. (2015) that non-monetary considera-
tions related to future occupations are an important consideration in choosing a college major.

                                                     5
suggesting the amiability of these sectors to work hours flexibility. Job stability, as measured
by the likelihood of being fired, is lowest in Government and Education, and highest in
Business. Jobs in these sectors also differ in the skills that they demand of their workers. So
what explains the propensity of men and women to work in different sectors–is it differences
in preferences for workplace attributes, differences in tastes for occupations/industries, or
differences in skills? Or is it a result of the labor market structure, firm labor demand, or
discrimination by employers? This is something extremely challenging to answer with ob-
servational data.
    We next turn to Table 2 to document the link between field of study and associated job
characteristics.5 The table is based on the 2013 ACS, restricting the sample to 25-40 year olds
with more than a high school education (at least some college). The first two columns show
that while nearly a third of women have a Bachelor’s degree in Humanities, only about a fifth
of men do. And, while 12% of males have a Bachelor’s in Engineering, the corresponding
proportion for females is only 3%. We can reject the equality of the distribution of major
choices by gender.
    Column (3) of Table 2 shows that these majors differ significantly in their average earn-
ings (as reflected by the F-test for the joint equality of means in the last row of the table). En-
gineering – the field which females are least likely to be present in – has the highest average
earnings, while Humanities – the most popular Bachelor’s field for females – has the low-
est average earnings among the four Bachelor’s fields. These majors, however, differ along
other dimensions too. Columns (4) and (5) show that work hours flexibility is the highest
for jobs associated with Humanities: 38.6% of all Humanities graduates are part-time work-
ers, versus 21.7% of Engineering bachelor’s graduates. Among the four Bachelor’s fields,
average hours per week for full-time workers are also the lowest in Humanities. The last
three columns of the table show that job stability and earnings growth also vary significantly
across the fields of study.
    With observational data, the challenge in identifying the determinants of field of study
should then be clear. Females, for example, may be more likely to choose Humanities majors
for any number of reasons: because they have a lower preference for earnings, they value
the associated job attributes more, they have perceived or actual differences in abilities to
complete coursework in this subject, or they have differences in “tastes" for studying hu-
manities subjects, relative to other fields. In addition, the observed patterns of jobs we see
in the data are equilibrium outcomes, and we cannot ascertain from this data alone whether
    5
    Altonji, Kahn, and Speer (2015) provide a more detailed discussion of the relationships between college
majors and labor market outcomes.

                                                    6
these outcomes are due to worker demand or due to the supply of certain jobs–for example,
part-time work may either be a voluntary or involuntary decision.
    Our experimental approach, which we describe next, attempts to overcome these identi-
fication challenges.


3       Data
This section describes the administration of the data collection, the form of the hypothetical
choice scenarios, and the sample we use for the estimation.


3.1     Administration
Our data is from an original survey instrument administered to New York University (NYU)
undergraduate students over a 2-week period, during May 2012. NYU is a large, selective,
private university located in New York City. The students were recruited from the email
list used by the Center for Experimental Social Sciences (CESS) at NYU. Students were
informed that the study consisted of some simple economic experiments and a survey about
educational and career choices. Upon agreeing to participate, students could sign up for a
90-minute session, which was held in the CESS Computer Lab located on the main NYU
campus.6
     The data for this paper was collected through a computer-based survey (constructed using
the SurveyMonkey software). The survey took approximately 30 minutes to complete, and
consisted of several parts. Many of the questions had built-in logical checks (e.g., percent
chances of an exhaustive set of events such as majors had to sum to 100). Students were
compensated $10 as a show-up fee, and $20 for successfully completing the survey.


3.2     Data Collection Instrument
In addition to questions about demographics, family background, and educational experi-
ences, the main survey instrument consisted of two parts. The first part collected data on
students’ preferences for job attributes using hypothetical job choices, while the second col-
lected data on consequential life activities that would plausibly be key determinants of col-

    6
     During the same session, and immediately prior to completing the survey, students also took part in some
economic experiments. Students also earned additional income through participation in the experiments. See
Ernesto, Wiswall, and Zafar (forthcoming) for information on this data collection.

                                                     7
lege major choice, such as attributes of jobs associated with each major and measures of the
student’s perception of her ability to complete the coursework for each major. We describe
the hypothetical job choice data in detail next, and leave the description of major-specific
data to the second part of the paper where we relate the job attribute preferences to college
major choices.
    Our hypothetical job choice data were collected by presenting students with a total of 16
job scenarios. Each scenario consisted of 3 different potential jobs. We exogenously varied
different aspects of the job with the intention of creating realistic variation in job attributes.
The first 8 hypothetical job scenarios were introduced as follows:

          In each of the 8 scenarios below, you will be shown hypothetical jobs offers.
      Each job offer is characterized by:
          Annual earnings when working full-time
          Annual percentage increase in earnings from age 30 onwards until retire-
      ment
          Full-time work hours per week
          Work flexibility (whether part time work is an option); part time work is work
      where you only work at most half as many hours as full-time work and for half
      of the full-time salary
          These jobs are otherwise identical in all other aspects.
          Look forward to when you are 30 years old. You have been offered each of
      these jobs, and now have to decide which one to choose.
          In each scenario, you will be asked for the percent chance (or chances out of
      100) of choosing each of the alternatives. The chance of each alternative should
      be a number between 0 and 100 and the chances given to the three alternatives
      should add up to 100.

    Each scenario consisted of three jobs, with each job being characterized by four at-
tributes. The notable point that was highlighted was that these jobs were identical in all
other aspects. The last 8 scenarios were introduced in a similar way, except that the job offer
was now characterized by a different set of attributes: annual earnings when working full-
time; probability of being fired over a one year period; amount of additional annual bonus
pay based on relative performance the respondent may qualify for (in addition to base pay);
proportion of males in the firm in similar job positions.
    Following the approach of Blass et al. (2010), we asked respondents to provide a choice
probability instead of a discrete choice (that is, a zero or 1). This allows respondents to ex-

                                                8
press uncertainty about their future behavior. It also allows individuals to rank their choices,
providing more information than if we asked only about the most preferred job.
     Besides earnings, the scenarios focus on six different job attributes. We chose to not
vary these six dimensions all at once since the cognitive load to process such information
could have been overwhelming. We focus on these dimensions based on findings from prior
literature, and the fact that there is considerable variation along these dimensions across
occupations as well as majors (Tables 1 and 2). Earnings and earnings growth were included
since they have been found to be a factor in career/education choice (see Wiswall and Zafar,
2015, and references therein). Work hours and work flexibility are included since they tend
to be associated with the remuneration structure in jobs and the associated gender gap in
earnings (Flabbi and Moro, 2012; Goldin, 2014). We recognize that workplace flexibility
is a multidimensional concept: for example, the number of hours to be worked matters but
perhaps also the particular hours (Goldin, 2014). We varied two hours-related attributes:
number of hours and the availability of a part-time option, since these are easy to vary in a
meaningful fashion. Job stability, as proxied by the likelihood of being fired from the job,
is included because of the importance of risk and uncertainty to job choices (Dillon, 2015)
and gender differences in risk preferences (Croson and Gneezy, 2009). Finally, relative
performance compensation and proportion of males are meant to capture the competitiveness
of the job environment, preferences for which have been found to differ by gender (Niederle
and Vesterlund, 2007; Flory, Leibbrandt and List, 2015; Reuben, Wiswall, and Zafar, 2015).7
     To keep the scenarios realistic, the job attributes shown to respondents in the scenarios
were based on the actual joint distribution of job characteristics in the Current Population
Survey (except for the bonus pay variable, since data were not available for that dimension).
In addition, no scenario included a job that was clearly dominant or dominated along all
dimensions. We also made a conscious effort to keep the variation in job attributes within
each scenario relatively "local", so that the claim that the jobs were otherwise identical was
credible; for example, two jobs offering $50,000 and $90,000, respectively, with little vari-
ation along the specified dimensions are unlikely to be identical. At the same time, we had
substantial variation in the job attributes across the scenarios. This ensures that we are not
recovering preferences in a local region only.
     While the job characteristics we provide are certainly not exhaustive of all possible job
characteristics, and are purposely kept limited so as not to “overload" the respondents with
too many job features, the key feature of the hypothetical experimental setting is that we
    7
     Lordan and Pischke (2015) find a strong relationship between female job satisfaction and the proportion
of males in that occupation.

                                                     9
instruct respondents that the jobs differ only in the finite number of job characteristics we
provide, and are otherwise identical. There is no additional information provided that the
respondent could use to believe otherwise.8


3.3     Sample Description
A total of 257 students participated in the study. We drop 10 respondents for whom we
have missing data for the relevant section of the survey. Sample characteristics are shown
in Table 3. 35 percent of the sample (86 respondents) is male, 29 percent is white and 51
percent is Asian. The mean age of the respondents is 21.5, with 11 percent of respondents
freshmen, 11 percent sophomores, 37 percent juniors, and the remaining seniors or higher.
The average grade point average of our sample is 3.5 (on a 4.0 scale), and students have an
average Scholastic Aptitude Test (SAT) math score of 696, and a verbal score of 674 (with a
maximum score of 800). These correspond to the 93rd percentile of the US national popula-
tion score distributions. Therefore, as expected, our sample represents a high ability group
of college students. Parents’ characteristics of the students also suggest that they are over-
represented among high socioeconomic groups. The last panel of the table shows that 48
percent of the students have a major in the Humanities and Social Sciences category, 31 per-
cent have a major in Business and Economics, while the remaining have a major in Natural
Sciences and Math (16%), and Engineering (5%). The gender composition of our sample
compares favorably with that of the NYU undergraduate population: males constituted 33%
of the graduating class of 2010 at NYU, and 34.8 percent of our sample.
    Columns (2) and (3) of Table 3 report the characteristics by gender. That last column
of the table reports the p-value of tests of equality of the statistics by gender. We see that
male and female respondents are similar in all dimensions, except two. One, male students
in our sample have a significantly higher average SAT Math score than females, of about
33 SAT points. Second, the two genders choose very different college majors. Nearly half
– 49 percent – of males report majoring in Business/Economics, with 30 percent majoring
in Humanities and Social Sciences, and 12 percent in Natural Sciences/Math. On the other
hand, 57 percent of the females report majoring in Humanities and Social Sciences, followed
    8
      This distinguishes our design from “audit" based studies in which employers are presented resumes which
are otherwise identical except for the one chosen attribute (say the gender of applicant). The criticism of audit
studies is that even if you make two groups (say men and women) identical on observables, employers might
have very different distributions in mind about unobservables for the two groups, biasing the inference (for
an analysis of this issue, see Neumark, Burn, and Button, 2015). In our case, students are instructed that
the hypothetical jobs are identical in all other ways. Students may have different preferences for these job
attributes, but we can identify this heterogeneity flexibly using our rich panel data.

                                                      10
by about 22 percent majoring in Business/Economics, and 18 percent majoring in Natural
Sciences/Math. That is, female students are almost twice as likely as males to major in
the Humanities (the field, which we show below, is perceived to have the lowest average
earnings among college graduates), and only half as likely as males to major in the highest
earnings major category, Economics/Business. The gender-specific major distributions are
statistically different (p-value 0:001, using a Chi-square test for equality of distributions).
These substantial gender gaps in major choice mirror the national patterns from the ACS
data (Table 2).


4     Model and Identification Analysis
In this section, we present a simple attribute-based job choice model and discuss identifica-
tion of the model using two types of data: i) standard realized job choices (as observed after
job choices are made), and ii) stated probabilistic job choices (as observed in our job hypo-
thetical experimental data). We show that under weak conditions the job hypotheticals data
identifies the distribution of job preferences, while standard realized job choice data does
not. Later, we present the model of college major choice and our framework for analyzing
the relationship between these choices and job preferences.


4.1    A Canonical Random Utility Model of Job Choice
Jobs are indexed by j, and there is a finite set of jobs j = 1; : : : ; J. Each job is characterized
by a vector of K attributes Xj = [Xj1 ; : : : ; XjK ]. These job attributes include earnings as
well as various non-pecuniary attributes, such as job dismissal probabilities and work hours
flexibility. We explicitly allow for the possibility that individuals are not necessarily pure
income or consumption maximizers, and may value many other outcomes associated with
their job choice.
    Let Uij 2 R be individual i’s utility from job j. The utility from job j is

                                         Uij = ui (Xj ) +    ij :                                    (1)

ui (X) 2 R is the preferences of individual i over the vector of characteristics X. ij 2 R is
the additional job-specific preference component for job j reflecting all remaining attributes
of the job which affect utility, if any. Let i be the vector of these components for individual
i, i = i1 ; : : : ; iJ . After observing the attributes X1 ; : : : ; XJ for all jobs and i , individual i


                                                   11
chooses the one job with the highest utility: i chooses job j if Uij > Uij 0 for all j 0 6= j.
    Population preferences for jobs is the collection of ui preferences over the job attributes
X and the job-specific components i . The joint distribution of preferences in the population
is given by F (ui ; i ). This distribution determines the fraction of individuals choosing each
job, qj 2 [0; 1]:
                                 Z
                          qj =       1fUij > Uij 0 for all j 0 6= j gdF (ui ; i );                     (2)


4.2     Identification using Realized Choice Data
Almost without exception, empirical research on job choice consists of analyzing data on
actual or realized job choices, which provides the one best job chosen by each individual.9
Using this realized job choice data, we compute the fraction of the sample choosing each
job qj . In order to analyze the potential advantages of hypothetical data, we first detail the
identification using realized choice data.
    A common model of realized choice data assumes i1 ; : : : ; iJ are i.i.d. Type I extreme
value, and independent of all of the ui (X1 ); : : : ; ui (XJ ) terms. Under these assumptions, we
can write the population fractions as
                                        Z
                                                 exp(ui (Xj ))
                                 qj =       PJ                           dG(ui ):                      (3)
                                              j 0 =1   exp(ui (Xj 0 ))
G(ui ) is the distribution of preferences over attributes ui in the population. (3) is the mixed
multinomial logit model of McFadden and Train (2000). They show that the distributional
assumption on the i terms that yield the logit form is without loss of generality as this
model can arbitrarily closely approximate a broad class of random utility models. For ease
of exposition, we consider a linear model of utility given by ui (X) = X 0 i . We next discuss
the two main concerns in using realized choice data.

4.2.1   Omitted Variable Bias

One key concern in using realized job choices is that the dataset of job characteristics which
the researcher has at hand is not complete in the sense that there are omitted unobserved


    9
      We confine attention to cross-sectional data. Panel data on repeated job choices over an individual’s
life-cycle may provide more identifying power but at the cost of requiring additional assumptions about the
evolution of model features (e.g., preferences) as individuals age.

                                                         12
job characteristics which are potentially correlated with the included observed character-
istics. Divide the vector of job characteristics X into observed X(obsv) and unobserved
characteristics X(unob), X = [X(obsv); X(unob)]. Similarly divide the vector of prefer-
ence parameters i = [ i (obsv); i (unob)]. The log odds of job j relative to job j 0 , using (3),
is then:


              qj
        ln(        ) = (Xj (obsv)     Xj 0 (obsv)) i (obsv) + (Xj (unob)      Xj 0 (unob)) i (unob)
              qj 0

                                 qj
                           ln(        ) = (Xj (obsv)   Xj 0 (obsv)) i (obsv) +   j:
                                 qj 0
     The omitted variable bias problem is the generic one found in a variety of contexts. For
example, if the researcher’s dataset includes only current salaries, but not any of the non-
pecuniary benefits of the job, we would expect that the estimate for preferences for salaries
will be biased. The theory of compensating differentials (Rosen, 1984) predicts a close con-
nection among various job characteristics – a tradeoff between salary and non-pecuniary
benefits – and therefore would suggest important omitted variable bias in estimates of job
preferences using realized data. The omitted variable bias issue could also arise more subtly
from the selection/matching mechanism to jobs, reflecting employer preferences over poten-
tial job candidates. If the labor market equilibrium is such that employers only offer a limited
set of jobs to candidates, then the realized jobs they hold do not reflect their preferences only.
Taste discrimination by employers, by which employers prefer not to hire workers of certain
groups (women, minorities. e.g.), is one example (Becker, 1957). In the presence of an im-
portant demand side aspect to job choice, one would not want to interpret the equilibrium
allocation of jobs as reflecting only worker preferences.10 As we detail below, our hypo-
thetical data avoids this because it experimentally manipulates the characteristics offered to
individuals, thereby allowing a “pure" measure of preferences, free from considering the
equilibrium job allocation mechanism, preferences of employers, or any omitted unobserved
job characteristics.




   10
     We can represent demand side restrictions in jobs offered in the omitted variable framework by consider-
ing some unobservable job characteristic X(unob), such that X(unob) ! 1 if a job is not offered.

                                                       13
4.2.2   Limited Distributional Flexibility

In addition to the omitted variable bias issue, the nature of the realized choice data limits the
flexibility one can allow in the distribution of population preferences G(ui ). The nature of
realized choice data is that the data only represents what the individuals consider their most
preferred job, not their preference ranking over all alternatives. Because of this limitation,
a restricted parametric form for population preferences is required for point identification.
For example, one might restrict G(ui ) to assume all individuals have the same preferences
across jobs: ui = u for all i and G(ui ) is degenerate. Another possibility is to assume G(ui )
is distributed Normal and then identification is of the mean and covariance elements. These
type of parametric assumptions might bias the inference about the population distribution of
preferences and distort predictions about the distribution of the demand for certain job char-
acteristics. As we detail below, the hypothetical job choice data provides panel data for each
individual in the sample, thereby allowing flexible and robust identification of population
preferences.


4.3     Model of Hypothetical Job Choices
We next consider a framework for analyzing hypothetical job choice data, connecting the
canonical model of realized job choice specified above in (1) with the hypothetical job choice
data we collect. Our hypothetical data is asked prior to a job choice (while students are in
school). We observe each individual’s beliefs about the probability they would take each
future job offered within the scenario (and not simply the individual’s one chosen (realized)
job). To analyze this type of data, we require a model of hypothetical future jobs. Our model
of hypothetical job choices presumes individuals are rational decision makers who anticipate
the job choice structure as laid out in the canonical model of job choice (1). To allow for
the possibility of uncertainty about future job choices, we assume that the realizations of
 i1 ; : : : ; iJ job-specific utility terms are not known at the time we elicit individual beliefs.

Individual i then faces a choice among J hypothetical jobs with characteristics X1 ; : : : ; XJ .
Each individual expresses their probability of taking a given job j as
                                 Z
                         pij =       1fUij > Uij 0 for all j 0 6= j gdHi ( i );                (4)

where Hi ( i ) is individual i’s belief about the distribution of i1 ; : : : ; iJ elements. As in
Blass et al. (2010), the ij has an interpretation as resolvable uncertainty, uncertainty at the
time of our data collection but uncertainty that the individual knows will be resolved (i.e.,

                                                   14
known or realized) prior to making the job choice.11
     It should be noted that the preferences for workplace attributes elicited in our data col-
lection are potentially specific to the time at which the survey is collected (during the college
years in our case). Preferences for job attributes may change as individuals age, and may be
different when the students in our sample were younger (say prior to college) and different
still when they actually enter the labor market and make job choices. With this caveat in
mind, we can still use our research strategy to understand job preferences at a point in time
and study how these preferences relate to important human capital investments, which are
being made contemporaneously.12


4.4     Identification using Hypothetical Choice Data
We previously analyzed identification of preferences using realized job choice data and dis-
cussed two key shortcomings: realized choice data potentially suffers from omitted variable
bias and limits the flexibility one can allow in the distribution of population preferences.
Hypothetical choice data can overcome these shortcomings.
    First, because we can experimentally manipulate the hypothetical choice scenarios we
provide individuals, we avoid bias from the correlation of observed and unobserved job
characteristics from which realized choice data suffers. Rather than use naturally occurring
variation in realized job choices–which are the result of many unobserved job characteris-
tics and an unknown labor market equilibrium mechanism, as discussed above–we present
individuals with an artificial set of job choices. While the job characteristics we provide are
certainly not exhaustive of all possible job characteristics, and are purposely kept limited
so as not to “overload" the respondents with too many job features, the key feature of the
hypothetical experimental setting is that we instruct respondents that the jobs differ only in
the finite number of job characteristics we provide, and are otherwise identical. There is no
additional information provided that the respondent could use to believe otherwise. Under
this particular design then, our hypothetical data is free from omitted variable bias.
    The second advantage of the hypothetical data is that hypothetical data provides a kind

   11
       An alternative model is that agents have uncertainty about preferences over attributes, that is the utility
function ui ( ) is uncertain. For example, an individual may be uncertain about the number of children she may
have at a future date, and the number of young children at home may affect her preference for workplace hours
flexibility (an element of the Xj vector). We explore this later by relating preferences for job characteristics as
revealed in our hypothetical data with a rich set of beliefs about future outcomes (e.g., individual beliefs about
future own fertility and marriage).
    12
       See Stinebrickner and Stinebrickner (2014a; 2014b) for evidence on the dynamics in beliefs formation
among college students.

                                                       15
of panel data on preferences which, under fairly weak assumptions, identifies the full prefer-
ence rankings over job attributes. Notice the key distinction between (4) and (2). Observed
job choices qj provide limited information on the job preferences and allow only parametric
identification of the population distribution of preferences. With realized choices some para-
metric assumption on the joint distribution of preferences for job attributes must be imposed.
With job hypotheticals data, on the other hand, we observe for each individual i multiple
subjective job probabilities pi1 ; : : : ; piJ .13 The job hypotheticals provide a type of panel data
allowing less restricted forms of identification, allowing identification of the ui (X) prefer-
ences without a parametric restriction on the population distribution of preferences.
     The limited assumption for non-parametric identification preferences is that the i1 ; : : : ; iJ
job specific terms are i.i.d. and independent of the job attributes X1 ; : : : ; XJ . This is implied
by the experimental design: respondents are instructed that the jobs vary only in the listed
characteristics, and are otherwise identical. Under this assumption then the hypothetical data
pi1 ; : : : ; piJ identifies the preference ranking for individual i over all jobs J in the choice set:
for any two jobs, the characteristics vector Xj is preferred to that of Xj 0 if the probability
of choosing that job is higher than that for job j 0 , pij > pij 0 . Non-parametric identification
of preferences over all X characteristics then follows from a sufficient number of choice
scenarios so that the number of hypothetical job probabilities for each individual is sufficient
given the dimensionality of the preference function ui . That is, we need to have enough job
scenarios to allow us to separately identify preferences for each element of the X character-
istic vector. In the estimation, we use this identification result constructively and estimate
preferences for each sample observation one-by-one. We then use the sample distribution of
preferences as the sample estimator of the population distribution of preferences. Details on
estimation are provided below.


5        Estimates of Preferences for Job Characteristics

5.1      Variation in Choice Probabilities
Identification relies, in part, on variation in probabilities that respondents assign to the vari-
ous jobs in the hypothetical scenarios. We next present some evidence on this, which should
allow the reader to become familiar with the sources of identifying variation. The top panel
of Table 4 shows two examples from the data sample using the first set of hypothetical sce-
    13
     In order not to “overload" respondents with a very large set of choices, we break the different jobs into
multiple scenarios, in which for each there are only 3 jobs to choose from. See the data description section.


                                                     16
narios. Recall that each of these 8 scenarios included 3 different job offers, which differed
according to the characteristics shown in the table. The last two columns of the table show
the mean probability assigned by each gender to the jobs.
    Turning to the first example, we see that, for males, Job 3 is the most preferred job in our
sample (receiving the highest average probability of choosing this job), where Job 3 is the
job without part-time availability and the highest earnings growth. For females, on the other
hand, this job received the lowest average probability. Women assigned the highest proba-
bility, on average, to Job 2, the job with a part-time option and an intermediate number of
work hours per week and intermediate earnings. In this example, the distribution of choices
differs significantly by gender. The gender-specific distributions of average probabilities do
not differ in the second example.
    Panel B of Table 4 shows two examples from the second set of hypothetical scenarios,
which vary a different set of attributes. In the first example, the distribution of average
probabilities again differs by gender. For females, Job 1 receives the highest probability on
average (37 percent). Job 1 is the job with the lowest probability of being fired, and the
lowest proportion of men as colleagues. Male respondents, on the other hand, assign the
highest average probability to Job 3, the job with the highest earnings and proportion of
men, but with a high likelihood of being fired.
    Another notable aspect of Table 4 is the large standard deviation in elicited choice proba-
bilities, reflective of substantial heterogeneity in choices, even within gender. Figure 1 shows
the histogram of elicited percent chance responses for Job 1, pooled across the 16 hypothet-
ical scenarios. Several things are of note. First, responses tend to be multiples of 10 or 5,
a common feature of probabilistic belief data (Manski, 2004), reflecting a likely rounding
bias; this is something that we return to below. Second, while there is pooling at multiples of
5, there is little evidence of excessive heaping at the standard focal responses of 0, 50, and
100. The most prevalent response is 20 percent, but even that receives a response frequency
of only 0.11. Third, most respondents (87.5 percent) report values in the interior (that is, not
zero or 1), reflecting a belief that there is some chance they might choose each of the jobs.
This underscores the importance of eliciting probabilistic data, rather than simply the most
preferred option, as respondents are able to provide meaningful probabilistic preferences for
the full set of choices, revealing rankings of choices.




                                              17
5.2    Empirical Model of Job Preferences
Next, we discuss our empirical model of job preferences, which we estimate using our hypo-
thetical data. Our estimator here follows the identification analysis we laid out above. For the
job preferences over attributes, we use the form ui (X) = X 0 i , where i = [ i1 ; : : : ; iK ] is
a K dimensional vector which reflects the individual i’s preferences for each of the K job
characteristics. The X vector of job characteristics is described below and we consider sev-
eral different functional forms. We assume beliefs about future job utility Hi ( ) in equation
(4) are i.i.d. Type I extreme value for all individuals. The probability of choosing each job
is then

                                                exp(Xj0 i )
                                   pij = PJ                             ;                     (5)
                                               j 0 =1   exp(Xj0 0 i )
where it is important to note that the probabilities assigned to each job j are individual i
specific. While we maintain a particular assumption about the distribution of probabilistic
beliefs, we place no parametric restrictions on the distribution of preferences, represented
by the vector i . Our goal is to estimate the population distribution of preferences i . We
maintain a maximum degree of flexibility by estimating the preference vector i separately
for each sample member, and do not impose any “global" distributional assumptions about
the population distribution of preferences (e.g. that preferences i N ( ; )).
    Applying the log-odds transformation to equation (5) yields the linear model:

                                         pij
                                   ln(         ) = (Xj       Xj 0 )0 i :
                                         pij 0
 i has the interpretation of the marginal change in the log odds for some level difference in
the X characteristics of the job. Given the difficulty of interpreting the i preference parame-
ters directly, we also present results in which we compute individual level willingness-to-pay
statistics.


5.3    Measurement Error
One potential issue in using hypothetical data for estimating preferences is that individuals
may report their preferences with error. Given that these preferences have no objective coun-
terpart (we cannot ascertain the “accuracy" of a self reported preference), we cannot point
to definitive evidence on the extent of measurement error. The most apparent potential mea-
surement issue is that individuals report rounded versions of their underlying preferences

                                                   18
(rounded to units of 5 or 10 percent). To guard against the potential of rounding bias or other
sources of measurement error, we follow Blass et al. (2010) in introducing measurement er-
ror to the model and in flexibly estimating the model using a least absolute deviations (LAD)
estimator.
    We assume that the actual reports of job choice probabilities in our data, denoted p~ij ,
measure the “true" probabilities pij with error. The measurement error takes a linear in logs
form such that the reported log-odds take the following form:

                                       p~ij
                                ln(          ) = (Xj    Xj 0 )   i   + !ij ;                  (6)
                                      p~ij 0
where !ij is the measurement error. We assume that the !i1 ; : : : ; !iJ are i.i.d. and have
median zero, conditional on the X1 ; : : : ; XJ observed job characteristics. Given these mea-
surement error assumptions, we have the following median restriction:

                                       p~ij
                            M ln(            )jXj ; Xj 0 = (Xj          Xj 0 ) i ;            (7)
                                      p~ij 0
where M [ ] is the median operator. This median restriction forms the basis for our estima-
tor. Our measurement error assumptions are limited compared to commonly imposed fully
parametric models which assume a full distribution for the measurement error process. In
contrast, our assumption is that the measurement errors are only median unbiased.


5.4    Estimation
We estimate the K dimensional vector i by Least Absolute Deviation (LAD) for each stu-
dent i separately. In our data, each student makes choices across 16 scenarios, assigning
probabilities to 3 possible jobs in each scenario. Equation (7) therefore is estimated for each
respondent using 16 x 2 = 32 unique observations. Variation in the job attributes (X 0 s),
which is manipulated exogenously by us, and variation in respondents’ choice probabilities
allows us to identify the parameter vector i . From the full set of estimates of 1 ; : : : ; N for
our size N sample we estimate population statistics, such as mean preferences, E( i ). We
conduct inference on the population statistics using block or cluster bootstrap by re-sampling
(with replacement) the entire set of job hypothetical probabilities for each student. The block
bootstrap preserves the dependence structure within each respondent’s block of responses.
    As discussed in the study design section, we varied 4 job attributes at a time in each
scenario. For estimation, we combine all of these scenarios and assume the dimensions that
were not varied in a given scenario were assumed by the respondent to be held constant,

                                                   19
as we instructed. As mentioned earlier, we instruct respondents that the jobs differ only in
the finite number of job characteristics we provide, and are otherwise identical. There is no
additional information here that the respondent could use to believe otherwise. The vector of
job attributes is as follows: X = {log age 30 earnings; probability of being fired; bonus as a
proportion of earnings; proportion of males in similar positions; annual increase in earnings;
hours per week of work; availability of part-time}.14 We also include job number dummies
in equation (7) to allow for the possibility that the ordering of the jobs presented could affect
job preferences, although there is no prior reason to suspect this given our experimental
design.15


5.5     Job Preference Estimates
We first discuss the sign and statistical significance level of the i estimates. Because of the
difficulty of interpreting the magnitude of these estimates, below we also present results in
which we convert the parameter estimates into an individual-level willingness-to-pay mea-
sure.
    The first column of Table 5 shows the average estimate for each job characteristic (av-
eraged across all individual-level estimates). The standard errors in parentheses are derived
from a block bootstrap procedure. We see that the average estimates have the expected signs.
With the exception of the probability of being fired and work hours per week, all other esti-
mates are positive, as expected. The positive estimates indicate that individuals prefer jobs
with these characteristics: individuals prefer higher salaries and work-time flexibility, and
dislike jobs with a higher probability of being fired and high numbers of work hours. The
only estimate that is not statistically or economically significant is the proportion of males
at the job, indicating that we cannot reject that, on average, individuals are indifferent to the
gender composition of the workplace. Turning to the average estimates by gender, reported
in columns (2) and (3) of Table 5, we see similar qualitative patterns in terms of magnitudes.
We return to the differences in magnitudes of the preferences by gender below, and also
provide a willingness-to-pay interpretation.
    An advantage of our approach is that we can identify the i vector without a parametric
restriction on the population distribution of preferences. This allows us to flexibly estimate
the distribution of population preferences. Table 6 shows various statistics of the estimated

   14
       We also estimate the model with the utility specified as linear in earnings (instead of log earnings). Results
are qualitatively similar.
    15
       This is related to the possibility of “session effects" in laboratory experiments. See Frechette (2012).

                                                        20
distribution of preferences. For brevity, the table does not present the bootstrap standard
errors, but the precision of the estimates, derived from the bootstrap procedure, is denoted
by asterisks.
    There is substantial heterogeneity in preferences within gender. Take, for example, the
probability of being fired. The median and 25th percentile of the individual-specific esti-
mates is negative, indicating a distaste for a higher likelihood of job dismissal, and is statis-
tically different from zero for both males and females. The 75th percentile is negative for
both genders, but only statistically significant for females, indicative of a greater distaste for
job instability among female respondents. Underscoring the heterogeneity in preferences,
we see that the standard deviation of the estimates of preferences, for all job characteristics,
are sizable and statistically different from zero. Notably, we also see that the skewness of the
estimates is sizable and statistically different from zero in all cases (except for proportion of
males at jobs). This indicates that we can reject that the individual parameter estimates are
symmetric around the mean, and that the assumption that the parameter estimates are dis-
tributed Normal, as is commonly assumed when estimating heterogeneous preferences using
standard revealed choice data, is not supported in this sample.


5.6     Willingness-to-Pay (WTP)
The parameter estimates in Table 5 are difficult to interpret given the necessarily non-linear
nature of the model. To ease interpretation, we next present willingness-to-pay (WTP) es-
timates, by translating the differences of utility levels into earnings that would make the
student indifferent between giving up earnings and experiencing the outcome considered.

5.6.1   Computing Willingness-to-Pay

Willingness-to-pay (WTP) to experience job attribute Xk is constructed as follows. Consider
a change in the level of attribute Xk from value Xk = xk to Xk = xk + , with > 0. Xk
is “bad" attribute (e.g., probability of job dismissal). Given our linear utility function, we
can write an indifference condition in terms of earnings Y as

                 xk   ik   +   i1   ln(Y ) =   ik (xk   +    )+   i1   ln(Y + WTPik ( ))

where Y is the level of earnings, one of the job attributes included in every job scenario.
WTPik ( ) > 0 is individual i’s willingness to pay to avoid increasing the “bad" attribute k
by . Solving, WTP is given by

                                                        21
                                                         ik
                             WTPik ( ) = [exp                       1]   Y:                           (8)
                                                        i1

WTP for individual i depends on her preference for the attribute ik versus her preference
for earnings i1 . Given that we allow for a log form to utility in earnings (allowing for
diminishing marginal utility in earnings and implicitly consumption), willingness-to-pay for
an individual also depends on the level of earnings.

5.6.2   Average Willingness-to-Pay by Gender

Table 7 shows the average WTP estimates for changing each of the job characteristics by
one unit (for the probabilistic outcomes, this is increasing the likelihood by 1 percentage
point; for hours per week, increasing it by an hour; for part-time availability, this is going
from a job with no part-time option to one which does).16 The first three columns of the
table present the estimates in dollars, using the average annual earnings across all scenarios,
which in this case is $75,854.17 (and of course does not vary across respondents). The last
three columns show the estimates as a proportion of the average earnings. We focus on the
latter here.
     We see, for example, that increasing the likelihood of being fired by 1 percentage point,
that is, Xk = xk + 1, would yield an average WTP of 2.8% for the full sample. That is, for
students to remain indifferent, students on average would have to be compensated by 2.8% of
annual earnings if job stability were to be decreased. The gender-specific averages, reported
in the last two columns of Table 7, paint a very interesting picture. Women, on average, have
to be compensated by 4% of average earnings for a unit increase in the likelihood of being
fired (with the estimate being statistically significant at the 1% level), and this WTP is sta-
tistically different from the much smaller male average of 0.60% (which is indistinguishable
from zero).
     The average WTP estimate for the availability of the part-time option is sizable. Indi-
viduals, on average, would have to be compensated by -5.1% of their annual salary (that is,
they are willing to give up 5.1%) when going from a job with no part-time option to one that
does. The estimate is driven by the female respondents in the sample, for whom the average
WTP is -7.3%, versus -1.0% for males (with the male estimate not being statistically differ-
ent from zero). The much higher average preference among women for the part-time option

   16
     The WTP is computed for each individual, using the individual-specific i estimates. The table reports
the mean WTP across respondents, with bootstrap standard errors in parentheses.

                                                   22
is statistically significant from zero and statistically different from the male average, at the 5
percent level.
     Looking at the other estimates, we see that the average WTP for annual earnings growth
is statistically precise for males, who are willing to give up 3.4% of average annual earnings
for a 1 percentage point increase in earnings growth; the female coefficient is also negative
but indistinguishable from zero (though not statistically different from the male estimate).
We see that women have a stronger distaste for the number of hours of work, with the av-
erage WTP indicating that they need to be compensated by 1.3% of annual earnings for an
increase of 1 hour in the work week; the male estimate is not precise (but we cannot reject
the two gender-specific averages being equal). Both genders are willing to give up 0.8-1.7%
of annual earnings for a percentage point increase in bonus compensation (in addition to
base salary).17 Finally, the average WTP for proportion of men at jobs is economically and
statistically insignificant.18

5.6.3    Heterogeneity in Willingness-to-Pay

Table 7 reports the average WTPs only. As seen in Table 6, there is substantial heterogeneity
in preferences for workplace characteristics, and overlap in the male and female distributions
of preferences.
    The job scenarios provided to respondents are incomplete scenarios, that is, respondents
are given only a subset of the information about themselves they would have in actual choice
settings. Differences in estimated preferences then may reflect true underlying heterogene-
ity in preferences, or may be driven in part by differences in how students think about the
unspecified dimensions when answering these questions. For example, our finding that male
respondents on average have a higher WTP for earnings growth may be a result of males
assigning a higher value to earnings growth over the lifecycle, or females expecting a shorter
tenure at the jobs than men. Likewise, an individual may be uncertain about the number of
   17
       That the WTP for a percentage point increase in bonus is greater than 1 in magnitude for females is
surprising, since it implies that women are on average willing to give up more in base salary to gain a smaller
increase in bonus compensation. This is driven by a few outliers. In fact, we cannot reject that the mean WTP
for women is different from either -1 (that is, a one-to-one substitution between base pay and bonus pay), or
from the mean of -0.8 for male respondents.
    18
       The utility from jobs, specified in equation (1), is linear and separable in outcomes. We also estimate
a variant of this model which allows for interactions between certain job attributes. The value of part-time
flexibility to an individual may depend on the number of work hours at the job. Likewise, the desirability of
performance-based bonus may depend on the gender composition of the workplace or job stability. To allow
for this possibility, we include interactions of these terms in equation (1). The WTP estimates that we obtain
(which are evaluated at the average value of these attributes) are qualitatively similar. These estimates are
available from the authors upon request.

                                                     23
children she may have at a future date, and the number of young children at home may affect
her preference for workplace flexibility. Similarly cognitive biases such as the exponential
growth bias (Stango and Zinman, 2009) may lead certain respondents to underestimate the
implications of a given earnings growth rate for earnings over the lifecycle. It is important
to note that these cross-sectional differences in processing of information or in perceptions
regarding the unspecified dimensions have implications for understanding the heterogene-
ity in the estimated preferences; the process of preference estimation itself is not biased by
this heterogeneity since the estimation uses the panel of choices to produce estimates for
each individual separately. We next investigate how the WTPs are associated with various
individual-level characteristics.19
    Table 8 shows the average WTP for these attributes (expressed as a percentage of av-
erage earnings) for various sub-samples. Parents’ income and race seem to be the only
demographic variables that are systematically related to the heterogeneity in WTP. We see
that students from households with below sample median income (in our sample, $87,500)
are more sensitive to workplace characteristics: their average WTP for job stability (proba-
bility of being fired), work hours, and part-time availability is significantly larger than that
of their counterparts.20 Nonwhite students are also more sensitive to certain workplace char-
acteristics, in particular those related to work flexibility (work hours per week and part-time
availability).
    Notably, student ability (as measured by SAT scores) is not systematically related to the
average WTPs, as would have been the case if differences in preferences were driven by
differences in respondent ability to comprehend the scenarios. We see some evidence of
sorting into majors based on job preferences: students who assign a likelihood of 50 percent
or less to majoring in Economics/Business (71% of the sample), on average, value job flex-
ibility (part-time availability and work hours) and job stability more than their counterparts;
however, only the difference in WTP for part-time availability is statistically different.
    We also examine whether preferences for workplace characteristics differ by the stu-
dent’s expected future household composition (whether they expect to be married and their

   19
       An alternative is to make the scenario more complete by specifying the job conditional on a number of
characteristics, such as tenure at the job and the individual’s household structure (number of children, etc.).
There is a trade-off– by making the situation more specific and stylized, the scenario may become unrealistic
from the individual’s perspective.
    20
       To the extent that the student’s wealth is increasing in their parent’s income, one would expect a lower
willingness to pay for non-pecuniary aspects of a job for lower-income students (as the marginal utility of labor
earnings is higher for low-wealth households). We see the opposite pattern here. One hypothesis consistent
with our empirical finding is that students with lower-income parents expect less parental support (to provide
childcare, for example) and therefore have a higher willingness-to-pay for job hours flexibility.

                                                      24
expected number of children) and labor supply. Notably, the likelihood of being married by
age 30 and the expected number of children by age 30 – data that we collect directly from
respondents – are not significant correlates of the willingness to pay; that is the case even
when we look within gender. Respondents who assign a higher likelihood (80 percent or
more) to working full-time at age 30, on average, value earnings growth at the job more (and
part-time availability less) than their counterparts: for example, they are willing to give up
2.7% of age 30 earnings for a percentage point increase in earnings growth versus an average
of 1.4% for their counterparts (these differences are not statistically significant).
    To understand the extent to which these individual-level correlates drive the underlying
heterogeneity in WTP, we conduct multivariate linear regressions of the WTP onto these
covariates (results available from the authors upon request). The R-squared of these re-
gressions indicate that at most 10% of the variation in the WTP can be explained by these
individual correlates. Even after including these controls, the gender difference in the WTP
for part-time availability and probability of being fired continues to be significant. WTP for
non-pecuniary job attributes, while quantitatively meaningful and displaying a distinct gen-
der difference, is not well explained by standard demographic variables (other than gender).
Overall, this suggests that these types of preferences are difficult to “control for" by simply
conditioning on these types of variables. In addition, the fact that observables explain a small
part of the variation in the WTPs indicates that the heterogeneity in preferences is largely a
result of true underlying variation in preferences, and not driven by differences across indi-
viduals in how they answer and perceive these hypothetical scenarios. In the next section,
using data on actual workplace characteristics for a subset of our respondents, we present
further evidence on this.


5.7     Estimated Preferences and Actual Workplace Characteristics
Do the pre-labor market preferences we estimate relate to the actual characteristics of jobs
these students actually end up working in?21 While being able to document a systematic
relationship can provide some credibility to our methodology, on the other hand, a failure to
find a systematic relationship between the two would not necessarily invalidate our method
since students’ preferences for jobs may change over time, or labor market frictions may
prevent workers from matching with jobs that they prefer.
   21
      Answering this question most directly would require both revealed choice data that is free of any con-
founds and stated choice data– data that are usually not available. However, the little evidence that exists shows
a close correspondence between preferences recovered from the two approaches (see Hainmuleller, Hangartner,
and Yamamoto, 2015).

                                                       25
     We are able to shed light on this issue through a recent follow-up survey of a subset of
our respondents conducted in 2016, about 4 years after the original data collection and when
respondents were on average aged 25. Of the 247 respondents who took the survey and
answered the hypothetical questions, 115 had also participated in an earlier survey conducted
by us in 2010 (data that we have analyzed in Wiswall and Zafar, 2015a,b) and given consent
for future surveys. In January 2016, we invited these 115 respondents to participate in a
short 15-minute online survey about their current labor market status. 70 of the eligible 115
respondents (~61%) completed the follow-up survey.22
     The follow-up survey collected information about respondents’ workplace characteris-
tics (for those currently working). Of the 70 respondents, 59 were working (either full-time,
part-time, or self-employed) at the time of the follow-up survey, with the remainder enrolled
in school. Appendix Table A2 shows the earnings and various other workplace character-
istics for the overall sample, as well as for male and female workers, separately. Earnings,
conditional on working full-time, are higher for males (by nearly $70,000). Bonus, hours
of work, likelihood of being fired, fraction of male employees, and typical annual growth in
earnings are all higher for our male respondents (though not all of the differences are statis-
tically significant). The last row of the table shows that females’ workplaces are more likely
to have a part-time or flexible work option.
     Are these systematic gender differences in actual workplace characteristics consistent
with our estimates of job preferences elicited several years prior, before labor market en-
try? To investigate this, we regress characteristics of each respondent’s current job onto
our individual-specific estimate of their past WTP for that attribute. WTP is defined as the
amount the individual needs to be compensated by for a unit change in a given characteristic,
with a higher WTP reflecting a lower taste (or greater distaste) for that outcome. Therefore,
we expect a negative relationship between WTP and the job characteristic. Estimates are
presented in Table 9. Directionally, all six estimates are negative, with four significant at the
10% level or higher. A joint test that all coefficients are zero can be rejected (the p-value of
this joint test is less than 0.001).
     To interpret the magnitude of the estimated coefficients in Table 9, we also report "effect
sizes" in the table. The effect size gives us the estimated change in the dependent variable

   22
      Respondents were initially contacted through the email addresses. Those with inactive email addresses
were then approached through LinkedIn. Respondents received a link to the survey that was programmed in
SurveyMonkey, and were compensated for completing the survey.
   As shown in Appendix Table A1, there is little evidence of selection on observables (reported in 2012) in
terms of who participates in the follow-up survey. Based on a joint F-test, we cannot reject that the covariates
are jointly zero (p-value = .332).

                                                      26
(that is, the actual workplace attribute) for a one standard deviation change in the WTP for
that workplace characteristic. For example, we see that a one standard deviation increase in
the WTP (that is, higher distaste) for work hours translates into an estimated decrease of 4.1
in hours worked. Given that the standard deviation of hours worked is 14.8 in the sample, this
is a sizable impact. Likewise, a one standard deviation increase in the WTP (that is, lower
taste) for availability of flexible work options is associated with a 0.15 percentage point
decline in the actual availability of these options in the workplace (on a base of 0.61). The
effect sizes for bonus percentage and proportion of male are also economically meaningful.
    Overall, these results strongly indicate that our estimated preferences capture true under-
lying heterogeneity that is also reflected in actual job outcomes several years later. We view
these results as a joint validation of our methodology, data quality, and empirical specifica-
tion. Our finding that estimated WTPs predict respondents’ actual workplace choices is all
the more remarkable given that the hypothetical scenarios were fielded to respondents when
they were still in college. This suggests that individuals have well-developed preferences for
workplace characteristics even before they enter the workforce. We next investigate whether
these workplace preferences impact major choice.


6    Perceptions of Future Employment Opportunities
The preceding section used a robust hypothetical choice methodology to estimate individual-
level preferences for various job attributes. In particular, the estimates reveal important het-
erogeneity in preferences, with a substantial mass of individuals having a large willingness-
to-pay in foregone earnings for non-pecuniary characteristics such as a low probability of
job dismissal and work-time flexibility. We next turn to understanding how students believe
their human capital investment – choice of college major – will affect the availability of
being offered jobs with these attributes. To the extent that students believe that jobs with
various attributes (earnings, dismissal probability, work-time flexibility, etc.) would be of-
fered to them at rates irrespective of which major they complete, then the preferences for job
attributes would have no relevance to major choice.
    Our survey collected data from respondents on their perceptions of characteristics of the
jobs that would likely be offered to them if they were to complete each type of major. An
important characteristic of our dataset is that we gather students’ beliefs about workplace
characteristics (such as likelihood of being fired and earnings) for a set of different majors,
and not just for the one major they intend to complete. Because of time constraints, we ag-


                                              27
gregated the various college majors to 5 groups: 1) Business and Economics, 2) Engineering
and Computer Science, 3) Humanities and Other Social Sciences, 4) Natural Sciences and
Math, and 5) Never Graduate/Drop Out.23
    Descriptive statistics for these job attributes questions are shown in Table 10. The top
and bottom panels show the statistics for the male and female respondents, respectively. The
questions on perceived job attributes instructed the respondents to think ahead about the
future labor market when they are 30 years old and take into account any advanced degrees
(beyond their undergraduate major) they might complete.


6.1     Earnings Beliefs
We start with student beliefs about the future earnings they would receive after completing
each major. Age 30 earnings beliefs were elicited as follows: "If you received a Bachelor’s
degree in each of the following major categories and you were working FULL TIME when
you are 30 years old, what do you believe is the average amount that you would earn per
year?". The second column of Table 10 shows that both genders expect average earnings to
be the highest in Economics/Business, followed by Engineering, and then Natural Sciences.
Humanities are expected to have the lowest average earnings among the graduating majors,
with the average earnings expected to be less than two-thirds of the average conditional
on graduating in Economics. The mean beliefs reported by males are significantly higher
than those reported for females for each of the five fields, indicating that women on average
anticipate a gender gap in earnings. The large standard deviations, however, indicate there is
considerable heterogeneity in beliefs.
    We also elicited perceptions about earnings growth.24 Column (3) shows the perceived
earnings growth at the jobs. While there is no clear trend, we reject the null that the perceived
average growth is the same across the five majors (as shown by the p-value of the F-test in
the last row of each panel).




   23
      We provided the respondents a link where they could see a detailed listing of college majors (taken from
various NYU sources), which described how each of the NYU college majors maps into our aggregate major
categories.
   24
      Perceived earnings growth is derived from the age 30 and age 45 full-time expected earnings, assuming a
constant growth rate.

                                                     28
6.2    Non-Pecuniary Characteristics Beliefs
We also elicited the students beliefs about the perceived non-pecuniary characteristics of
the jobs they would be offered if they completed various majors. Columns (4) and (5) of
Table 10 describe two measures of the perceived “competitiveness" of the jobs. Similar to
the earnings question above, respondents were asked: (1) the probability of being fired and
(2) bonus pay based on relative performance, as percent of annual base pay, for jobs offers
they expect to receive at age 30 conditional on college major. We see that, among graduating
majors, both male and female students expect jobs in Economics/Business to generally be
the most “competitive"- it is the major category with the highest perceived average ratio
of bonus pay and probability of being fired. Engineering jobs are, on average, perceived
to be closer to those in Economics/Business, along the dimension of bonus pay. Jobs in
Humanities are perceived to be the least competitive according to the ratio of bonus pay,
while jobs in Natural Sciences are considered to have the lowest probability of being fired.
Column (6) reports beliefs about the fraction of male employees; both males and females
expect the proportion of males to be highest at jobs in Economics/Business and Engineering,
and lowest at jobs in Humanities.
    Turning to perceptions of workplace flexibility, columns (7)-(8) of Table 10 show that,
among graduating majors, jobs in Humanities are on average perceived to have the lowest
hours and highest workplace flexibility (that is, part-time availability), by both male and
female respondents. Economics/Business is perceived to be the most demanding in terms of
work hours and lack of work flexibility, followed by Engineering. Jobs in Natural Science are
perceived to be in between. The difference in perceived employment opportunities by major
choice is large. For example, on average, women perceive that the likelihood they would be
offered a job with a part-time work hours possibility is nearly 45 percent if they graduate with
a Humanities degree, but only about 29 percent if they graduate with an Economics/Business
degree.
    There is also substantial heterogeneity in these beliefs as reflected by the large standard
deviations. Figure 2 shows the distribution of female respondents’ beliefs regarding the
likelihood of part-time availability in jobs conditional on graduating in Humanities and in
Economics/Business. We see there is substantial variation in beliefs across individuals, as
well as across majors. In addition, the belief distribution conditional on Humanities first or-
der stochastically dominates the distribution conditional on Economics. For example, nearly
60 percent of the female students assign a probability of more than 40% to the likelihood of
part-time availability at jobs available conditional on graduating in Humanities. On the other


                                              29
hand, less than a quarter of students assign a probability of more than 40% to this outcome
in the case of jobs in Economics.
    The patterns in Table 10 show clearly that both males and females perceive that they will
be offered very different jobs conditional on their college major choice. For each attribute
in the table, we reject the equality of mean beliefs being the same across majors, for the
two genders. Comparing the two panels, we see that male and female respondents generally
have similar relative beliefs regarding the attributes conditional on major, but the levels are
quite different in several cases. For example, females assign a higher probability of being
fired and a higher likelihood of part-time availability for all majors, compared to their male
counterparts.


6.3     “Accuracy" of Perceptions
One might wonder about the accuracy of these expectations about future job offers. We
cannot speak to that directly because, by construction, these outcomes would be realized
only in the future and, importantly, would be observed only for the chosen major. We have,
however, provided strongly suggestive evidence from a follow-up survey of our respondents
(discussed above), which shows that current job characteristics are correlated with elicited
job preferences prior to labor market entry. In addition, a comparison of students’ percep-
tions in Table 10 with realizations of current workers (in Table 2) indicates that, on average,
the students’ relative ranking of majors in terms of perceived workplace characteristics, par-
ticularly job hours, earnings, and work flexibility are consistent with the realized job data
from the ACS, suggesting that these beliefs are in some sense reasonable.25




   25
      A comparison of students’ expected job attributes conditional on college major with those of current
college-graduate workers may not be very informative for several reasons: (1) our sample consists of high
ability students at a selective private university, and the ACS sample may not be the correct reference group;
(2) students may have private information about themselves that may justify having perceptions that differ
from current realizations; or (3) the distribution of realizations may not be stationary, and so future outcomes
may differ from past realizations. It is important to note that it is the expected job attributes, as perceived
by the respondent at the time of choosing a college major, which matter in the choice decision. Whether
these perceptions are biased is then not directly relevant from the perspective of understanding the decision.
Systematic biases in expectations do, however, imply a policy case for information interventions, something
that is not the subject of the current study (interested readers should look at Wiswall and Zafar, 2015, and
references therein).

                                                      30
6.4    Potential Sources of Different Workplace Attributes Perceptions
A natural question that arises is where do the differences in perceptions of job offers con-
ditional on major come from. One plausible explanation is that students perceive a close
connection between majors and particular industries and occupations. Given that industries
and occupations seem to differ significantly in their workplace characteristics (as shown in
Table 1), this would then result in different perceptions of job attributes conditional on ma-
jor. In a separate set of questions, we also asked our respondents: "What do you believe is
the percent chance that you would be working in the following [Science/Technology; Health;
Business; Government/Non-profit; Education] at age 30 if you received a Bachelor’s degree
in each of the following?".
    Appendix Table A3 shows the mean belief of working in each sector conditional on
major, by gender. Several findings are of note. One, the perceived probability of entering
the different sectors varies substantially by college major (the p-values reported in the last
row of the table reject the equality of the average likelihood of being in a given sector across
the majors). Second, certain majors seem to be more closely tied to certain sectors: for
example, the perceived probability of working in Business (Science) exceeds 50 percent,
conditional on graduating in Economics (Engineering). Third, it is certainly not the case
that there is a one-to-one mapping of majors to sectors. None of the majors are concentrated
in one or two sectors. The mean probability exceeds 5 percent for all sectors, for each of
the majors. Fourth, there is little systematic difference by gender in the perceived mapping
of majors to sectors. Arcidiacono et al. (2015), in their survey of Duke undergraduate
students, find similar patterns regarding the perceived mapping of majors to occupations.
And, finally, there is substantial dispersion across students in the perceived mapping, as
reflected by the large standard deviations. Thus, it seems that the different mapping of majors
to workplace characteristics that we documented in Table 10 is driven, at least in part, by
students’ perceived link between majors and sector of work.


7     Job Preferences and Major Choice
The preceding sections used a robust hypothetical choice methodology to estimate individual-
level preferences for various job attributes and analyzed data on student perceptions of the
likelihood of being offered jobs with these characteristics given their major choice. This sec-
tion relates these preferences and perceptions to human capital investments, and quantifies
the importance of job characteristics to college major choices.

                                              31
    First, to set the stage for this analysis, we describe the anticipated major choices re-
ported by our sample. Given our sample consisted of currently enrolled students, we asked
the students to provide their beliefs they would complete a degree in 1 of the 5 major cat-
egories. The first column of Table 10 shows the response to the question: "What do you
believe is the percent chance (or chances out of 100) that you would either graduate from
NYU with a PRIMARY major in the following major categories or that you would never
graduate/dropout (i.e., you will never receive a Bachelor’s degree from NYU or any other
university)?" The most likely major for males is Economics/Business (43 percent), followed
by Humanities/Social Sciences (29 percent). For females, on the other hand, the most likely
major is Humanities/Social Sciences (53 percent), followed by Economics (23 percent). The
probability of not graduating is less than 3 percent for both genders. The average probabil-
ities assigned to the majors differ significantly by gender for all majors expect Engineering
and Natural Sciences.
    We next decompose the choice of major into various factors, including potential job char-
acteristics associated with each major. First, in order to gauge the importance of job attributes
to major choice, we estimate a model of major choice incorporating our flexible estimates
of preferences for job attributes, and use this estimated model to quantify the importance of
each job attribute.
    The estimation details for the major choice model are provided in Appendix B. Here, for
the sake of brevity, we comment on only its main features. We start with a simple framework
in which we suppose that utility for student i from major m consists of several factors given
by:

                                         0              0
                                  Vim = Xim      i   + Zim +   im ;                               (9)

where Xim are the job characteristics associated with each major, Zim is a vector of major-
specific characteristics perceived by student i (including major-specific perceptions of ability
and perceived hours of study needed to obtain a GPA of 4.0 in that major), and a major-
specific constant. im captures the remaining unobservable attributes of each major.
      The student-specific preference for each job attribute is given by the vector i = [ i1 ; : : : ;   iK ].

  i , the preference for job characteristics as it relates to the utility from each major, is poten-

tially distinct from the preferences for job characteristics in the job choice problem, given
by i (in equation 5). Job characteristics, such as earnings at the job, may be quite important
when choosing among different job offers, but might have a more limited value to choos-
ing majors, relative to other major characteristics given by Zim and im . To allow for this


                                                 32
possibility, for each job characteristic k, we specify that each ik is proportional to the ik
up to some free parameter : ik = ik . indicates the importance of job attributes to
major choice, relative to other determinants of college major as given by Zim and im , and
can reflect standard discounting given that the utility from working at jobs occurs later in life
than utility derived from taking courses while in school.
     Table 11 presents the LAD estimates of equation (9) using the hypothetical data to es-
timate the job preference vector i for each student, and a robust cluster bootstrap over all
estimation steps for inference (see Appendix B for estimation details). The estimate of is
positive and precise, indicating that the preferences of students over job attributes and the
major-specific beliefs about the distribution of job attributes has a statistically significant re-
lationship with major choices. Estimates on the ability measures are negative, as one would
expect (note that higher rank is a lower ability rank with our measures). The major-specific
dummy terms are all negative, indicative of negative median tastes for the non-Humanities
majors: all else equal, students prefer to major in Humanities.
     Given the non-linear nature of the model, it is difficult to assess the importance of job
attributes in major choice from the estimated coefficients alone. To quantify the effects, we
use standard methods to evaluate “marginal effects" in non-linear models. The marginal
effect of a job attribute in major choice is computed, while keeping the other job and major-
specific attributes and preferences fixed at their sample average values.
     Table 12 presents the marginal effects for specific changes in job attributes, for each
major, and separately by gender (in the two panels of the table). Column (1), for example,
shows that increasing the probability from 1% to 10% of being fired from jobs associated
with a major decreases the likelihood of majoring in that major by between 2.2%-4.9%
for males, and by between 1.9 and 5.7% for females. Part-time availability increases the
probability of completing a major from between 0.5 to 1.5 percent, on average. Column (3)
shows that increasing weekly work hours from 30 to 50 reduces the likelihood of majoring in
the associated major by between 3.5%-7.7% for males, and by 1.5-4.2% for females. Bonus
pay and earnings growth both have sizable marginal effects. The last column of Table 12
shows the percent change in the major probability for a 10% increase in age 30 earnings.
     A comparison of the effects in the first three columns with those in the last column for
earnings gives a sense of the relative importance of non-pecuniary job attributes in major
choice. We see that, for females, the effects for job hours and probability of being fired are
nearly a third of the effects for earnings. For males, the relative impacts are smaller (though
still sizable). Overall, this indicates that, at the margin, job attributes do matter in major


                                                33
choice, and that they are particularly relevant for women’s choices.


8    Conclusion
The contribution of this paper is two-fold. First, using a novel hypothetical job choice frame-
work which experimentally varies different dimensions of the workplace, we are able to ro-
bustly estimate individual preferences for workplace attributes. Second, these workplace
preferences, combined with unique data on students’ perceptions of the characteristics of
jobs which would be offered to them conditional on their major choice, allow us to investi-
gate the role of anticipated future job characteristics – particularly the non-pecuniary aspects
of these jobs – in choice of major, a key human capital investment decision.
    We document substantial heterogeneity in willingness-to-pay for job amenities both within
and across genders. On average, females have a stronger taste for workplace flexibility (as
proxied by work hours and part-time availability) and job stability. Males, on average, have a
greater willingness to pay for jobs with higher earnings growth. Our results suggest that part
of the gender gap in earnings we observe is a compensating differential in which women are
willing to give up higher earnings to obtain other job attributes. Because students perceive
systematic differences in attributes of job offers conditional on college major, and because
job attributes other than earnings are also valued, we find that job preferences matter in col-
lege major choice. Women, in particular, are found to be more sensitive to non-pecuniary
job aspects in major choice than men.
    On the methodological front, we argue that we are able to produce estimates of individual
preferences for various job characteristics, that are unbiased and free from considering the
equilibrium job allocation mechanism, the preference of employers, and the concern that jobs
may differ along unobservable dimensions (see Blau and Kahn, 2006). In addition, given
that we have multiple revealed choices for each participating student, we can use the panel
structure of the data to construct a preference vector over the attributes student-by-student.
The richness of the experimental data allows us to estimate the distribution of preferences
while imposing minimal assumptions on the parametric distribution of preferences.
    Importantly, for a subset of the sample for whom we collect data on actual workplace
characteristics (nearly four years after the survey), we find a robust systematic relationship
between estimated preferences and self-reported actual characteristics. Individuals who are
found to be more (less) desiring of specific workplace characteristics in our hypothetical job
choice framework are found to in fact be working in jobs that are better (worse) in that dimen-


                                              34
sion. The predictive power of the estimated preferences at the individual level strengthens
the credibility of our approach, and makes a case for employing this methodology in other
settings to understand decision-making.
    In terms of future avenues of research, while we find substantial variation in workplace
preferences in our particular sample of high-ability students enrolled at a selective private
US college, it is not clear how this heterogeneity compares to that in the broader population.
It would clearly be useful to follow our design and collect similar data in other settings.
At a more fundamental level, the sources of the systematic gender differences in workplace
preferences that we document are unclear. For example, they may be a consequence of social
factors including anticipated discrimination (Altonji and Blank, 1999). Research that sheds
light on the underlying channels would be immensely valuable.
    Finally, given that prior literature on educational choice finds that the residual unob-
served taste component is the dominant factor (Arcidiacono, 2004; Beffy et al., 2001; Gemici
and Wiswall, 2014; Wiswall and Zafar, 2015), our approach can be viewed as trying to get
into the black box of tastes by directly incorporating certain non-pecuniary dimensions into
choice models. We believe the approach in this paper illustrates the potential of using such
methods to understand the determinants of human capital and occupational choice and the
underlying causes of the gender gap.




                                             35
References
 [1] Altonji, Joseph, and Rebecca Blank. 1999. Race and Gender in the Labor Market. In
     Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume 3c, eds. Orley Ashenfelter and David Card,
     3144-3259. Elsevier Science.

 [2] Altonji, Joseph, Peter Arcidiancono, and Arnaud Maurel. 2015. The Analysis of Field
     Choice in College and Graduate School: Determinants and Wage Effects. Handbook of
     the Economics of Education Volume 5, Chapter 7.

 [3] Altonji, Joseph, Lisa Kahn, and Jamin Speer. 2015. Cashier or Consultant? Entry Labor
     Market Conditions, Field of Study, and Career Success. Journal of Labor Economics,
     Forthcoming.

 [4] Ameriks, John, Joseph Briggs, Andrew Caplin, Matthew Shapiro, and Christopher
     Tonetti. 2015. Long-term Care Utility and Late in Life Saving. Working Paper.

 [5] Arcidiacono, Peter, Joseph Hotz, and Songman Kang. 2012. Modeling College Ma-
     jor Choices using Elicited Measures of Expectations and Counterfactuals. Journal of
     Econometrics, 166(1): 3-16.

 [6] Arcidiacono, Peter, Joseph Hotz, Arnaud Maurel, and Teresa Romano. 2015. Recover-
     ing Ex Ante Returns and Preferences for Occupations Using Subjective Expectations
     Data. Working Paper.

 [7] Becker, Gary. 1957 [1971].The Economics of Discrimination. Chicago: University of
     Chicago Press.

 [8] Beffy, M., D. Fougere, and A. Maurel. 2012. “Choosing the Field of Study in Post-
     Secondary Education: Do Expected Earnings Matter?” The Review of Economics and
     Statistics, 94(1): 334–347.

 [9] Beggs, S., S. Cardell, and J. Hausman. 1981. Assessing the Potential Demand for Elec-
     tric Cars. Journal of Econometrics, 16(1): 1-19.

[10] Ben-Akiva, M. and T. Morikawa. 1990. Estimation of Switching Models from Revealed
     Preferences and Stated Intentions. Transportation Research A, 24A, 485-495.




                                           36
[11] Bertrand, Marianne, Claudia Goldin, and Lawrence Katz. 2010. Dynamics of the gen-
     der gap for young professionals in the financial and corporate sectors. American Eco-
     nomic Journal: Applied Economics, 2: 228-255.

[12] Blass, Asher, Saul Lach, and Charles Manski. 2010. Using Elicited Choice Probabili-
     ties to Estimate Random Utility Models: Preferences for Electricity Reliability. Inter-
     national Economic Review, 51(2): 421-440.

[13] Blau, Francine, and Lawrence Kahn. 2006. The US Gender Pay Gap in the 1990s:
     Slowing Convergence. Industrial and Labor Relations Review. 60(1):45-66.

[14] Blau, Francine, and Lawrence Kahn. 2012. The sources of the gender pay gap. In
     Grusky, David and Tamar Kricheli-Katz,editors, The New Gilded Age: The Critical
     Inequality Debates of our Time, pages 843-860. Stanford University Press, Stanford,
     CA.

[15] Carson, Richard T. 2012. "Contingent Valuation: A Practical Alternative When Prices
     Aren’t Available." Journal of Economic Perspectives, 26(4): 27-42.

[16] Croson, Rachel, and Uri Gneezy. 2009. Gender Differences in Preferences. Journal of
     Economic Literature, 47(2): 448–74.

[17] Delavande, Adeline, and Charles Manski. 2015. Using Elicited Choice Probabilities in
     Hypothetical Elections to Study Decisions to Vote. Electoral Studies, 38, 28–37.

[18] Dillon, Eleanor. 2015. Risk and Return Tradeoffs in Lifetime Earnings. Working Paper.

[19] Flabbi, Luca, and Andrea Moro. 2012. The effect of job flexibility on female labor mar-
     ket outcomes: Estimates from a search and bargaining model. Journal of Econometrics,
     168: 81-95.

[20] Flory, Jeffrey, Andreas Leibbrandt, and John A. List. 2015. Do Competitive Work-
     places Deter Female Workers? A Large-Scale Natural Field Experiment on Job Entry
     Decisions. Review of Economic Studies, 82 (1): 122-155.

[21] Fréchette, Guillaume. 2012. Session-Effects in the Laboratory. Experimental Eco-
     nomics, 15(3): 485-498.




                                            37
[22] Fuster, Andreas, and Basit Zafar. 2015. The Sensitivity of Housing Demand to Financ-
     ing Conditions: Evidence from a Survey. Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff
     Report no. 702.

[23] Gemici, Ahu, and Matthew Wiswall. 2014. "Evolution of Gender Differences in Post-
     Secondary Human Capital Investments: College Majors at the Intensive Margin." In-
     ternational Economic Review, 55 (1): 23-56.

[24] Goldin, Claudia. 2014. A Grand Gender Convergence: Its Last Chapter. American Eco-
     nomic Review, 104(4): 1091-1119.

[25] Goldin, Claudia, and Lawrence Katz. 2011. The Cost of Workplace Flexibility for
     High-Powered Professionals. The Annals of the American Academy of Political and
     Social Science, 638(1):45-67.

[26] Goldin Claudia, and Lawrence Katz. Forthcoming. "A Most Egalitarian Profession:
     Pharmacy and the Evolution of a Family-Friendly Occupation," Journal of Labor Eco-
     nomics, forthcoming.

[27] Green, Paule E., and V. Srinivasan. 1978. Conjoint Analysis in Consumer Research:
     Issues and Outlook. Journal of Consumer Research, 5 (2) (Sep., 1978): 103-123

[28] Hainmueller, Jens, Dominik Hangartner, and Teppei Yamamoto. 2015. Validating vi-
     gnette and conjoint survey experiments against real-world behavior. Proceedings of the
     National Academy of Sciences, 112(8): 2395-2400.

[29] Hausman, Jerry. 2012. Contingent Valuation: From Dubious to Hopeless. Journal of
     Economic Perspectives, 26(4): 43-56.

[30] Kerry Smith, V. 2006. Fifty Years of Contingent Valuation. In A. Alberini and J.R.
     Kahn (eds), Handbook on Contingent Valuation, Cheltenham, UK and Northampton,
     MA, USA: Edward Elgar, pp. 7–65.

[31] Kling, Catherine L., Daniel J. Phaneuf, and Jinhua Zhao. 2012. From Exxon to BP: Has
     Some Number Become Better Than No Number? Journal of Economic Perspectives,
     26(4): 3-26.

[32] Lordan, Grace, and Jorn-Steffen Pischke. 2015. Does Rosie Like Riveting? Male and
     Female Occupational Choices. Working Paper.

                                            38
[33] Louviere, Jordan, and George Woodworth. 1983. Design and Analysis of Simulated
     Consumer Choice or Allocation Experiments: An Approach Based on Aggregate Data.
     Journal of Marketing Research, 20(4): 350-367.

[34] Manski, Charles, and Ilan Salomon. 1987. The demand for teleshopping. An applica-
     tion of discrete choice models. Regional Science and Urban Economics, 17(1):109-121.

[35] Manski, Charles. 2004. Measuring Expectations. Econometrica, 72(5): 1329-1376.

[36] McFadden, Daniel, and Kenneth Train. 2000. Mixed MNL Models for Discrete Re-
     sponse. Journal of Applied Econometrics, Vol. 15(5): 447-470.

[37] Neumark, David, Ian Burn, and Patrick Button. 2015. Is It Harder for Older Workers
     to Find Jobs? New and Improved Evidence from a Field Experiment. NBER Working
     Paper.

[38] Niederle, Muriel, and Lise Vesterlund. 2007. Do Women Shy away from Competition?
     Do Men Compete too Much? Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(3): 1067-1101.

[39] Reuben, Ernesto, Matthew Wiswall, and Basit Zafar. Forthcoming. Preferences and
     Biases in Educational Choices and Labor Market Expectations: Shrinking the Black
     Box of Gender. Economic Journal, forthcoming.

[40] Rosen, Sherwin. 1986. The theory of equalizing differences," Handbook of Labor Eco-
     nomics, Vol. 1, pp. 641692.

[41] Roy, A. D. 1951. Some Thoughts on the Distribution of Earnings. Oxford Economic
     Papers, New Series, 3(2): 135-146.

[42] Siow, Aloysius.1984. Occupational Choice under Uncertainty. Quarterly Journal of
     Economics, 52(3), 631–45.

[43] Stango, Victor, and Jon Zinman. 2009. Exponential Growth Bias and Household Fi-
     nance. Journal of Finance 64(6), 2807-2849.

[44] Stinebrickner, Ralph and Todd Stinebrickner. 2014a. A Major in Science? Initial Be-
     liefs and Final Outcomes for College Major and Dropout. The Review of Economic
     Studies. 81(1): 426-472.




                                           39
[45] Stinebrickner, Todd R. and Ralph Stinebrickner. 2014b. Academic Performance and
     College Dropout: Using Longitudinal Expectations Data to Estimate a Learning Model.
     Journal of Labor Economic, 32(3), 601-644.

[46] Wiswall, Matthew, and Basit Zafar. 2015a. Determinants of College Major Choice:
     Identification Using an Information Experiment. Review of Economic Studies. 82(2):
     791-824.

[47] Wiswall, Matthew, and Basit Zafar. 2015b. How do College Students Respond to Public
     Information about Earnings? Journal of Human Capital, 9(2): 117-169.

[48] Zafar, Basit. 2013. College Major Choice and the Gender Gap. Journal of Human Re-
     sources, 48(3): 545-595.




                                          40
Appendix A: Summary for Table 1 variables
Table 1 was generated using data from the Current Population Survey (CPS). Statistics re-
garding job attributes of each sector were computed using pooled monthly samples from
January 2010 to December 2012.
    We classified job occupations in the CPS into our five groups of focus, Science, Health,
Business, Government, and Education. Our sector category definitions are the following:
            Science: Architectural, engineering, and related services; Computer systems de-
sign and related services; Scientific research and development services; Administration of
economic programs and space research.
            Health: Offices of physicians; Offices of dentists; Offices of chiropractors; Offices
of optometrists; Offices of other health practitioners; Outpatient care centers; Home health
care services; Other health care services; Hospitals; Nursing care facilities; Residential care
facilities, without nursing. These occupations are grouped in the CPS as “Health Care and
Social Assistance”.
            Business: Banking and related activities; Savings institutions, including credit
unions; Non-depository credit and related activities; Securities, commodities, funds, trusts,
and other financial investments; Insurance carriers and related activities; Real estate; Ac-
counting, tax preparation, bookkeeping, and payroll services; Management, scientific, and
technical consulting services; Advertising and related services; Management of companies
and enterprises.
            Government: Executive offices and legislative bodies; Other general government
and support; Justice, public order, and safety activities; Administration of human resource
programs; Administration of environmental quality and housing programs; National security
and international affairs. These occupations are grouped in the CPS as “Public Administra-
tion”
            Education: Elementary and secondary schools; Colleges and universities, includ-
ing junior colleges; Business, technical, and trade schools and training; Other schools, in-
struction, and educational services. These occupations are grouped in the CPS as “Educa-
tional Services”.
    To construct our job attributes of interest, we restricted the 2010-2012 CPS sample to
those with at least a Bachelor’s degree, and between the ages of 25 and 60. The sample
consists of 385,201 individuals. When computing the statistics, we used the CPS sampling
weights.
            Prop. of Part-time workers: We define a worker to be full-time if he/she was

                                               41
“employed full time”, “full time for economic reason”, or “full time for non-economic rea-
son”. The percent of people working part time within each industry is obtained by dividing
the total number of part time people by the total number of employed workers in that indus-
try. We calculate the percent of part-time workers for each month, and report the average
over the 36 months.
           Yearly firing rate: To construct the yearly probability of being fired in each sector,
we computed the monthly probability of being fired. We first flagged all workers who are
laid off in a given month but have been unemployed for less than one month. Their sum
is divided by the total number of (part and full time) employed workers at the beginning
of that month, giving us an estimate of the monthly probability of being fired. The yearly
probability was then computed by multiplying the monthly probability by 12. We compute
this yearly probability for each of the 36 monthly surveys and report the average.

    When constructing the following variables, we further restricted the CPS sample to those
employed and working full-time.
           Hours/week worked: We used the number of hours actually worked in the last
week (as opposed to the number of hours usually worked) – this was available for all workers
who were employed in the last week. We chose to drop the top and bottom 1%. We calculate
this for each survey month, and report the average over the 36 months.
           Annual earnings: The nominal annual earnings were calculated from the weekly
earnings variable. This variable included overtime pay, tips and commissions, and before
taxes or other deductions. We dropped the bottom 1% of weekly earnings. We also dropped
observations where the reported weekly earnings were less than the number of hours they
actually worked in the past week times the federal minimum wage ($7.25/hour). Weekly
earnings are multiplied by 52 to get the annual earnings. We compute this for each survey
month, and report the average over the 36 months.
           Annual % raise in earnings: This is constructed by computing the percent in-
crease in annual average earnings in a given industry from 2010 and 2011, as well as from
2011 and 2012. The raise of each sector is the average for the two years.
           Proportion of male workers: For each survey month, we calculated the propor-
tion of full-time workers employed in each sector who are male. We compute this for each
survey month, and report the average over the 36 months.




                                               42
Appendix B: Major Choice Model Estimation Details
This Appendix provides details for the estimation of the major choice model.
    Utility for student i from major m is given by:

                                         0              0
                                  Vim = Xim      i   + Zim +   im ;                              (10)

where Zim is a vector of other major-specific characteristics perceived by student i, including
a major-specific constant. This vector consists of student i’s perceived major-specific ability
(on a 1-100 scale, where 1 is the highest ability) and hours of study required to attain a GPA
of 4.0. According to the two measures, both males and females consider Engineering the
most difficult, and Humanities the least difficult major category. Economics/Business and
Natural Sciences fare somewhere between the two. These two measures are summarized in
the last two columns of Table 10.
        im captures the remaining unobservable attributes of each major, unobservable to the

econometrician but observable to the student. We restrict the choice set to graduating majors,
that is, m = {Economics/Business; Engineering; Humanities: Natural Sciences/Math}, since
beliefs about study hours do not apply to the not graduate major.
      The student-specific preference for each job attribute is given by the vector i = [ i1 ; : : : ;   iK ].

  i , the preference for job characteristics as it relates to the utility from each major, is poten-

tially distinct from the preferences for job characteristics in the job choice problem, given
by i (in equation 5). Job characteristics, such as earnings at the job, may be quite important
when choosing among different job offers, but might have a more limited value to choosing
majors, relative to other major characteristics given by Zim and im . To allow for this possi-
bility, for each job characteristic k, we specify that each ik is proportional to the ik up to
some free parameter :
                                              ik = ik :


  indicates the importance of job attributes to major choice, relative to other determinants of
college major as given by Zim and im We expect           0, indicating that job characteristics
have weakly the same direction of relationship with major choice as with utility specifically
about jobs. Given that there are two choice problems here, one for job choice directly and
one for college major, plays the role of providing the mapping between the two levels of
utility, which in general need not have the same scale. In particular, can reflect standard
discounting given that the utility from working at jobs occurs later in life than utility derived

                                                 43
from taking courses while in school.
   Under the assumption that the random terms i1 ; : : : ; iM in equation (10) are indepen-
dent and identically distributed Type 1 extreme value across individuals and majors m, the
probability that student i chooses major m is:
                                                 0       0
                                           exp(Xim i + Zim )
                             qim =        P          0        0
                                                                  ):                          (11)
                                               exp(Xim 0 i + Zim0
                                     m0 =f1;::;M g

As before, once we apply the log-odds transformation, we have:

                          qim
                    ln(        ) = (Xim      Xim0 )   i   + (Zim   Zim0 ) + !im ;             (12)
                          qim0
where !im is the error due to rounding. We continue to assume that the !i1 ; : : : ; !iM are i.i.d.
and have median zero, conditional on X and Z.
    Estimation of the major preferences proceeds in two steps. In the first step, using equa-
tion (7), we estimate the job characteristic preference vector i for each individual. Call
the estimate ^i . We then create an individual- and major- specific scalar of weighted job
characteristics for each major m:

                                                   0 ^
                                            Bim = Xim i:                                      (13)

    The second step of the estimator is as before, where we use the LAD estimator. However,
in this case, we use a pooled estimator over the whole sample and estimate and the vector
  .

                             qim
                   M ln(          ) j X = (Bim            Bim0 ) + (Zim   Zim0 )0 :           (14)
                             qim0
As with the job preferences estimation, we use a cluster bootstrap for inference.
    Table 11 presents the LAD estimates of equation (14). The estimate of is positive and
precise, indicating that the preferences of students over job attributes and the major-specific
beliefs about the distribution of job attributes has a statistically significant relationship with
major choices. Estimates on the ability measures are negative, as one would expect (note
that higher rank is a lower ability rank with our measures). The major-specific dummy terms
are all negative, indicative of negative median tastes for the non-Humanities majors.
    Given the non-linear nature of the model, it is difficult to assess the importance of job
attributes in major choice. To quantify the effects, we use standard methods to evaluate
“marginal effects" in non-linear models. The marginal effect of job attribute xj in major

                                                     44
choice is computed by varying the value of that job attribute, while keeping the other job and
major-specific attributes and preferences fixed at their sample average values. The likelihood
of majoring in m, for a given value of Xk = xk and evaluated at the sample mean for the
other attributes and preferences, is given as:

                                         exp(xk   k+ X 0 km + Zm
                                                               0 )
           qm (xk ) =                                      P                    ;          (15)
                        exp(xk   k   + X 0 km      0 )+
                                                + Zm               0
                                                              exp(Xm 0
                                                                          0
                                                                       + Zm 0 )
                                                         m0 ==m

where k is the sample average preference for attribute k, X 0 km is the vector of job attributes
excluding k (at the sample mean for each of the attributes in major m), and Zm 0 is the average

major-specific beliefs for m. The effect for a given attribute is then obtained by computing
(15) at two distinct values of that attribute. For example, we estimate the "marginal effect"
for job firing probability by varying it from 1% to 10% (keeping the preference parameters
and other job and major-specific beliefs at the sample average), and computing the percent
change in the predicted probability of majoring in that major. Note that the marginal effect
for a given variable may vary by major since the averages for perceived job attributes and
ability measures are major-specific.
    Marginal effects are computed for: a change from 1% to 10% in the probability of be-
ing fired; no part-time availability to part-time availability; change in work hours from 30
hrs/week to 50 hrs/week; a change from 1% to 10% in bonus as percentage of base pay; a
change from 1% to 10% in earnings growth; a change from 30% male colleagues to 70%,
and; a change of 10% in age 30 earnings. Gender-specific sample averages are used for the
other beliefs/preferences.




                                                  45
Figure 1: Choice probabilities for Job 1 (pooled across hypothetical
                             scenarios)




                                     46
Figure 2: Female respondents’ beliefs about part-time availability in jobs




                                   47
                                      Table 1: Job Attributes by Sector, based on the CPS
                         % of            % of        Annual        Hrs/wk Prop. of Yearly                Prop.       Annual %
                        males          females      earnings         for     part-time firing            male         raise in
                      working ina     working in for full-time full-time workers          rate          workersb     earnings
                          (1)            (2)            (3)          (4)        (5)        (6)            (7)           (8)
      Science             19.4            6.0           82743         44.21         0.16      3.67%      70.1%         2.06
                                                       (35993)        (7.17)       (0.03)     (1.68)     (1.08)
      Health              15.9            28.9          67876         43.76         0.27      3.85%      28.7%         1.17
                                                       (35751)        (7.82)       (0.01)     (0.82)     (0.53)
      Business            28.7            17.4          77071         44.97         0.20      4.06%      54.6%         0.25
                                                       (39020)        (7.78)       (0.02)     (1.34)     (0.79)




48
      Government          13.2            8.4           67530         43.31         0.16      1.46%      53.5%         1.85
                                                       (32299)        (6.86)       (0.05)     (0.94)     (0.65)
      Education           22.8            39.3          60588         43.94         0.30      1.87%      29.8%         0.53
                                                       (29156)        (7.42)       (7.42)     (3.00)     (0.36)
      p-valuec            0.000          0.000          0.000          0.000       0.000      0.000       0.000       0.000
     Tables reports means. Standard deviations reported in parentheses.
     Statistics are based on the 2010-2012 CPS monthly data. Sample restricted to those with at least a Bachelor’s
     degree, between ages 25-60. See Appendix A for details on variable construction.
     Variables in columns 3, 4, 7 and 8 are based on full-time workers.
     a
       Proportion of all male workers who are employed in each industry (columns sum to 100).
     b
       Males as a proportion of all full-time workers in that sector.
     c
       F-test of equality of means/proportions across the industry categories.
                                          Table 2: Workplace Attributes by Major
                                       Shares         Annual      Hrs/wk       %             UE      % Not   Ann %
                                  Males Female       Earnings       for     Part time       Rateb   Employed Raisec
                                                   for full-time full-time workersa
                                   (1)       (2)        (3)         (4)        (5)           (6)        (7)         (8)
      Bachelor’s (or more) in:
                     Business     13.0      10.3        77377         45.5        27.0       4.3       8.4          3.9
                                                       (68733)        (8.0)
                   Engineering    11.7       3.2        83142         45.0        21.7       3.5       6.0          4.5
                                                       (54295)        (7.8)
                    Humanities    19.6      30.5        59306         44.4        38.6       3.9       10.1         4.0
                                                       (49355)        (7.8)




49
                Natural Science    6.5       9.5        72889         45.0        34.3       2.3       8.6          5.2
                                                       (59494)        (9.4)
      Some Colleged               49.2      46.5        42565         43.5        43.8       7.3       13.8         3.3
                                                       (26863)        (7.9)
      F-teste                       0        0            0             0           0         0         0           0
     Table shows statistics from the 2013 American Community Survey (ACS), restricting the sample to
     25-40 year olds with at least some college education. Sample size is 376,113 respondents.
     Means (standard devs.) shown for annual earnings and hrs/week for full-time workers.
     a
       Proportion of Part-time workers from pool of those currently employed.
     b
       Unemployment rate is number not employed and currently looking for a job, divided by sum of unemployed and
     employed respondents.
     c
       Calculated by linearly regressing log earnings on age for that major group.
     d
       Individuals with 1-4 years of college (and no bachelor’s degree), or some college.
     e
       p-value of F-test of equality of means across majors (rows).
                         Table 3: Sample Statistics
                                     All    Males       Females     p-value
                                     (1)      (2)         (3)         (4)
  Number of respondents               247        86        161
  School Year:
                       Freshmen 10.9% 9.3%               11.8%       0.549
                     Sophomore 10.9% 11.6%               10.6%       0.798
                          Junior 36.4% 32.6%             38.5%       0.355
                  Senior or more 41.7% 46.5%             39.1%       0.262
  Age                                21.49     21.69      21.37      0.103
                                     (1.5)     (1.8)      (1.2)
  Race:
                       White 29.2% 33.7%                 26.7%       0.248
                       Asian 50.6% 51.1%                 50.3%       0.898
           Non-Asian Minority 17.8% 14.0%                19.9%       0.247
  Parent’s Characteristics:
     Parents’ Income ($1000s)         137       141       135        0.731
                                     (121)     (126)     (118)
          Mother B.A. or More        67.6%     74.4%     64.0%       0.095

            Father B.A. or More      69.6%     72.1%     68.3%       0.539

  Ability Measures:
              SAT Math Score         696.0     717.7      684.3      0.006
                                      (88)      (72)       (94)
              SAT Verbal Score       674.0     677.0      672.5      0.704
                                      (84)      (78)       (88)
                             GPA       3.5       3.5        3.5      0.938
                                     (0.32)    (0.33)     (0.32)
  Intended/Current Major
          Economics/Business 31.2% 48.8%                 21.7%       0.000
                  Engineering 4.9%   8.1%                 3.1%       0.080
  Humanities and Soc Sciences 47.8% 30.2%                57.1%       0.000
        Natural Sciences/Math 16.2% 12.8%                18.0%       0.289
For the continuous outcomes, means are reported in the first cell, and standard
deviations are reported in parentheses.
P-value reported for a pairwise test of equality of means (proportions) between
males and females, based on a Wilcoxon rank-sum (Chi square) test.




                                      50
                                                      Table 4: Example Choice Scenarios
                                                                                                               Probability assigned by:
      Panel A       Earnings per year      Annual percentage         Average work        Work flexibility:      Males          Females
                       at age 30 if       increase in earnings      hours per week       Part-time work
                    working full time       from age 30 on            for full-time        available?
      Example 1
      Job 1              $96,000                   3%                     52                    Yes          31.93 [30]      31.46 [30]
                                                                                                              (22.48)          (21.36)
      Job 2              $95,000                   2%                     45                    Yes          31.16 [30]    39.34*** [40]
                                                                                                              (23.71)          (22.71)
      Job 3              $89,000                   4%                     42                    No           36.91 [30]     29.20** [25]
                                                                                                              (24.71)          (22.57)
      Example 2
      Job 1              $76,000                   4%                     50                    Yes          19.38 [20]      20.65 [20]
                                                                                                              (19.34)         (15.23)
      Job 2              $81,000                   3%                     44                    Yes          49.47 [50]      49.45 [50]
                                                                                                              (26.63)         (22.08)
      Job 3              $88,000                   2%                     49                    No           31.15 [25]      29.91 [25]
                                                                                                              (25.36)         (21.98)




51
      Panel B       Earnings per year        Probability of        Amount of bonus       Proportion of         Males          Females
                       at age 30 if            being fired         based on relative     men in the firm
                    working full time         from the job        performance (% of        in similar
                                            in the next year      full time earnings)      positions
      Example 1
      Job 1              $87,000                   1%                $4,350 (5%)               49%            30.34 [30]   36.68* [30]
                                                                                                               (22.48)       (24.33)
      Job 2              $84,000                   6%               $10,920 (13%)              67%            26.86 [30]    30.27 [30]
                                                                                                               (23.71)       (21.36)
      Job 3              $95,000                   5%                $4,750 (5%)               69%           42.80 [31.5] 33.05*** [30]
                                                                                                               (24.71)       (20.83)
      Example 2
      Job 1              $61,000                   1%               $6,710 (11%)               41%           25.48 [20]     26.80 [20]
                                                                                                               (26.57)        (23.20)
      Job 2              $65,000                   5%               $7,800 (12%)               71%           12.14 [9.5]   15.53** [10]
                                                                                                               (12.98)        (11.81)
      Job 3              $67,000                   2%               $10,050 (15%)              60%           62.38 [60]     57.67 [60]
                                                                                                               (31.55)        (27.19)
     Means [median] (standard deviations) reported in the last two columns.
     Pairwise t-tests conducted for equality of means by gender. Significance denoted on the female column
     by asterisks: *p<0.10, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01.
                 Table 5: Estimates of Job Choice Model
                                       Overalla    Males            Females
                                          (1)       (2)               (3)
 Age 30 log earnings                       15.40***   22.86***     11.42***
                                            (1.65)     (3.88)       (1.43)
 Probability of being fired                -0.38***    -0.39***     -0.37***
                                             (0.04)      (0.10)       (0.04)
 Bonus, as a prop. of earnings             0.28***     0.38***      0.22***
                                            (0.03)      (0.05)       (0.03)
 Prop of males in similar positions          0.00       -0.01        0.005
                                            (0.00)      (0.01)       (0.01)
 % increase in annual earnings             0.55***     1.09***       0.27**
                                            (0.10)      (0.22)       (0.10)
 Hours per week of work                    -0.15***    -0.21***     -0.12***
                                             (0.02)      (0.05)       (0.02)
 Part-time option available                0.79***     0.86***      0.76***
                                            (0.11)      (0.22)       (0.12)
 Observations                                247          86           161
Table reports the average of the parameter estimates across the relevant sample.
Asterisks denote estimates are statistically different from zero based on
bootstrap standard errors. ***, **, * denote significance at the 1%, 5%,
and 10% levels, respectively.




                                      52
                          Table 6: Heterogeneity in Job Preferences
                                                    Overalla      Males                 Females
                                                       (1)          (2)                   (3)
 Age 30 log earnings                     Median        7.37***        9.33***          6.72***
                                         25th pct.      2.68***        2.91*           2.58***
                                         75th pct.     16.18***       29.65***       13.61***+
                                         Std. dev      26.67***       36.42***     18.20***+ + +
                                         Skewness      2.12***        1.37***         2.35***+
 Probability of being fired              Median         -0.17***      -0.15***         -0.20***
                                         25th pct.      -0.42***      -0.39***         -0.44***
                                         75th pct.       -0.04**        -0.01          -0.05***
                                         Std. dev       0.68***       0.85***        0.56***+ +
                                         Skewness       -2.02***      -1.49***        -2.59***+
 Bonus, as a prop. of earnings           Median         0.12***       0.16***          0.11***
                                         25th pct.      0.03***        0.04**           0.03**
                                         75th pct.      0.31***       0.71***        0.24***+++
                                         Std. dev       0.42***       0.50***        0.35***+++
                                         Skewness       1.88***       1.02***        2.71***+++
 Prop of males in similar positions      Median    -0.003***           -0.009          -0.002**
                                         25th pct. -0.024***         -0.037***       -0.016***++
                                         75th pct. 0.017***           0.011**           0.02***
                                         Std. dev  0.066***           0.07***          0.062***
                                         Skewness    0.591             0.382             0.837
 % increase in annual earnings           Median         0.19***       0.39***         0.13***++
                                         25th pct.       -0.07*        0.001          -0.11***+
                                         75th pct.      0.69***       1.75***          0.55***+
                                         Std. dev       1.61***       2.05***        1.21***+++
                                         Skewness       1.58***       1.20***             1.12
 Hours per week of work                  Median         -0.07***      -0.09***         -0.06***
                                         25th pct.      -0.19***      -0.26***        -0.16***+
                                         75th pct.       -0.02*         -0.01           -0.02**
                                         Std. dev       0.33***       0.43***         0.26***++
                                         Skewness       -1.89***      -1.50***           -1.76
 Part-time option available              Median         0.47***       0.43***           0.48***
                                         25th pct.       -0.01         -0.14              0.02
                                         75th pct.      1.12***       1.39***           1.02***
                                         Std. dev       1.70***       2.01***           1.49***
                                         Skewness       1.66***       1.41***           1.73***
 Observations                                              247            86              161
Asterisks denote estimates are statistically different from zero based on bootstrap standard
errors. ***, **, * denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
+++, ++, + on the female column denote estimates for males and females are statistically
different from each other at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.




                                                53
                                              Table 7: Willingness to Pay (WTP) Estimates
                                                       WTP(dollars)                        WTP (as % of average earnings)
                                           Overall       Male            Female           Overall    Male         Female
                                            (1)            (2)             (3)              (4)       (5)           (6)
      Prob. of being fired               2147.40***        467.79       3044.58***+++          2.83%***         0.62%      4.01%***+++
                                          (525.46)        (670.29)         (715.28)             (0.69%)        (0.88%)        (0.94%)
      Bonus as percent of earnings      -1069.78***       -645.92*        -1296.19***          -1.41%***       -0.85%*       -1.71%***
                                          (258.47)        (368.77)          (345.77)             (0.34%)       (0.49%)         (0.46%)
      Prop. of men at jobs                  43.20           63.74             32.24               0.06%         0.08%           0.04%




54
                                           (38.31)         (46.81)           (53.93)             (0.05%)       (0.06%)         (0.07%)
      Annual % raise in earnings          -1186.28       -2564.93**         -449.86              -1.56%       -3.38%**         -0.59%
                                          (773.44)        (1226.42)         (957.85)             (1.02%)       (1.62%)         (1.26%)
      Hours per week of work             854.65***         594.70          993.50***           1.13%***         0.78%         1.31%***
                                          (235.25)        (416.17)          (267.19)            (0.31%)        (0.55%)         (0.35%)
      Part-time option availablea       -3892.01***        -829.94      -5527.65***++          -5.13%***        -1.09%      -7.29%***++
                                          (1024.91)       (1822.82)        (1221.72)            (1.35%)        (2.40%)         (1.61%)
     Table reports mean WTP (amount of earnings an individual needs to be compensated for a unit change in the job attribute).
     a
       WTP for moving from a job without a part-time option to one that has it.
     Bootstrap standard errors in parentheses. ***, **, * denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
     T-tests conducted for differences in means by gender. +++, ++, + denote estimates differ at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
                                                  Table 8: Correlates of Heterogeneity in WTP
                                                           Prob of       Bonus as       Prop. Annual                 Hrs/wk          Part-time
      Characteristics                                    being Fired % of Salary of Males % Raise                    of work         available
      Gender                       Male                        0.60           -0.85*          0.08     -3.41**          0.76            -1.01
                                                             (0.88)           (0.49)        (0.06)      (1.62)        (0.55)           (2.40)
                                   Female                 4.04***+++        -1.72***          0.04       -0.57       1.33***        -7.33***+
                                                             (0.94)           (0.46)        (0.07)      (1.26)        (0.35)           (1.61)
      SAT Scorea                   Above Median             2.86***         -1.61***         -0.02       -1.00       1.58***          -4.56**
                                                             (0.91)           (0.26)        (0.05)      (1.03)        (0.37)           (1.92)
                                   Below Median             2.81***           -1.22*          0.14       -2.15         0.66          -5.72***
                                                             (1.06)           (0.65)        (0.09)      (1.74)        (0.47)           (1.93)
      Race                         White                      1.638         -0.96***        0.17**     -4.47**         -0.01            -2.68
                                                             (1.09)           (0.36)        (0.09)      (2.02)        (0.65)           (2.37)
                                   Nonwhite                 3.32***         -1.60***        0.01+      -0.38++     1.60***+++        -6.13***
                                                             (0.88)           (0.46)        (0.06)      (1.15)        (0.33)           (1.60)
      Parents’ incomeb             Above Median               1.33          -1.56***          0.04      -2.59*         0.64            -2.69
                                                             (0.89)           (0.35)        (0.06)      (1.49)        (0.47)           (1.79)
                                   Below Median            4.27***++         -1.28**          0.08       -0.59      1.60***+        -7.45***+
                                                             (1.05)           (0.60)        (0.08)      (1.43)        (0.39)           (2.02)
      Likelihood of marriagec      Above Median             2.82***         -1.86***          0.00      -0.37*       1.29***         -4.70***
                                                             (1.04)           (0.49)        (0.08)      (1.29)        (0.51)           (2.26)
                                   Below Median             2.85***          -1.03**          0.11      -2.61*       0.99***         -5.50***
                                                             (0.92)           (0.50)        (0.07)      (1.54)        (0.36)           (1.60)
      Expected fertilityd          Above Median              2.81**           -0.97*          0.04       -0.81        1.10**          -4.75**
                                                             (1.12)           (0.56)        (0.09)      (1.73)        (0.55)           (2.17)
                                   Below Median             2.86***         -1.87***          0.07     -2.31**       1.17***         -5.50***




55
                                                             (0.82)           (0.40)        (0.05)      (1.13)        (0.29)           (1.67)
      School year                  Senior or older            1.75          -1.68***        0.20**       -2.13          0.81          -5.22**
                                                             (1.09)           (0.49)        (0.09)      (1.62)        (0.66)           (2.03)
                                   Junior or younger        3.62***          -1.23**       -0.05++       -1.16       1.36***         -5.06***
                                                             (0.91)           (0.48)        (0.05)      (1.34)        (0.25)           (1.80)
      Prob. of full-time worke     >80%                      2.47**         -1.86***        0.048        -2.72         1.06*          -3.26**
                                                             (1.03)           (0.43)        (0.06)      (1.98)        (0.64)           (1.62)
                                      80%                   2.90***         -1.33***         0.058       -1.35       1.14***         -5.48***
                                                             (0.80)           (0.39)        (0.06)      (1.14)        (0.35)           (1.57)
      Economics Probabilityf       >50%                     2.35***         -1.77***          0.03       -1.98       0.687**           -1.82
                                                             (0.89)           (0.64)        (0.06)      (1.53)        (0.31)           (2.61)
                                      50%                   3.04***         -1.27***         0.067       -1.39       1.31***       -6.48***++
                                                             (0.91)           (0.41)        (0.07)      (1.31)        (0.42)           (1.57)
     Table reports the mean WTP for each group. Bootstrap standard errors are in parentheses. ***,**,* denote significance at the 1%,
     5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
     A t-test is conducted for whether means differ within each group (males versus females; below median SAT score versus above
     median, etc.) Significance denoted by plus signs shown on the means of the second row within each sub-group. +++,++,+
     denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
     a
       SAT score is the combined Math and Verbal sections. The sample median is 1400.
     b
       The sample median for parents’ annual income is $87500.
     c
       Students report the probability of being married by age 30, conditional on major. This is the probability weighted by the major
     choice probabilities. The sample median is 60%.
     d
       Students report the expected number of children by age 30, conditional on major. This is the probability weighted by the major
     choice probabilities. The sample median is 0.91 children.
     e
       Students report the likelihood of working full-time at age 30, conditional on major. This is the probability weighted by the major
     choice probabilities. It exceeds 80% for 32 percent of the sample.
     f
       Students’ reported likelihood of majoring in economics (on a 0-100 scale). It exceeds 50 for 29 percent of the sample.
                      Table 9: Job Characteristics and Estimated WTP
                         Prob. of     Bonus        Prop. of Earnings            Hours       Flex Work
                           Fired    Percentage      Males     Growth            Worked        Option
 Willingness to Paya       -0.070       -1.01***      -7.32**       -0.016      -1.70**      -0.009**
                          (0.206)        (0.368)       (3.05)      (0.091)       (0.78)       (0.004)
 Constant                10.70***        3.64**      52.60***      7.32***     46.37***      0.556***
                           (2.09)         (1.77)       (2.94)       (1.75)       (2.03)       (0.066)
 Effect Sizeb              -0.658        -4.354        -6.894       -0.319       -4.089       -0.147
 p-valuec                                                    0.000
 Mean of dep var            10.4           5.8          50.9         7.3         44.6           0.61
 Std dv of dep var         (14.72)       (12.79)       (22.79)    (13.34)       (14.76)       (.4919)
 R-squared                   .002          .16          .092       .0001         .077           .090
 Observations                 59            59           59          59           59             59
OLS estimates presented. Dependent var is the actual job characteristic in that column.
Std devs reported in parentheses. ***, **, * denote sig. at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
a
  The estimated WTP of the respondent based on the hypothetical job choice scenarios.
b
  The predicted change in the dependent variable for a one std dev. change in the WTP.
c
  p-value of a test that the six estimates on the WTP (in the first row) are jointly zero.




                                                56
                                           Table 10:   Perceived Job Attributes, Condtional on Major
                           Prob of       Annual         Annual Prob of Bonus Prop of Hrs/                    Likelihood of     Ability    Hrs/wk
                           majoring       age 30       % inc in    being     as % of males week                Part-time       ranka      of study
                                         earnings      earnings    fired      Salary at jobs work             availability                 timeb
                              (1)           (2)           (3)       (4)        (5)      (6)      (7)              (8)             (9)       (10)
      Male respondents
      Econ/Business           43.4       135267           1.5        13.1       46.2       60.8      55.5         24.0           32.0          22.7
                             (45.2)      (77501)         (4.2)      (16.4)     (54.1)     (15.8)    (13.2)       (23.3)         (28.2)        (16.1)
      Engineering              8.4       102174           1.4         7.0       19.2       60.7      48.5         26.7           42.5          27.8
                             (21.3)      (43046)         (3.5)       (7.2)     (22.0)     (19.3)     (9.5)       (22.9)         (29.7)        (17.5)
      Humanities              28.9        67802           1.4         8.9       13.0       42.5      44.0         36.5           25.4          19.2
                             (39.5)      (20290)         (3.2)       (9.1)     (26.7)     (14.2)     (9.9)       (25.8)         (23.7)        (16.3)
      Natural Sciences        16.5        85790           1.5         6.4       14.2       53.7      47.6         29.0           39.5          27.7
                             (31.1)      (34264)         (3.6)       (6.8)     (19.3)     (17.5)    (10.2)       (24.1)         (29.1)        (17.9)
      No Degree                2.8        42518           2.5        18.9        9.9       50.5      46.0         48.4           31.5           -
                              (9.1)      (17739)         (4.3)      (18.8)     (23.9)     (16.0)    (11.5)       (32.5)         (40.3)
      F-testc                0.000         0.000        0.000       0.000      0.000      0.000     0.000         0.000         0.000         0.000
      Female respondents




57
      Economics        23.3***          100469***         1.2       19.1**      39.4      61.4       52.5         28.6         46.7***         24.8
                        (36.6)            (53496)        (3.0)      (17.9)     (50.7)    (16.1)     (17.0)       (20.7)         (26.8)        (12.4)
      Engineering         5.7             92247*          1.1      14.8***      26.3     65.6**      47.8       32.6**         53.6***         29.3
                        (17.0)            (37364)        (3.8)      (16.1)     (38.9)    (18.4)     (12.3)       (21.5)         (29.7)        (16.5)
      Humanities       52.6***           60595***         1.4      18.2***      15.4      40.8       42.8       44.8***         31.1*          19.3
                        (43.0)            (18767)        (2.4)      (16.8)     (24.1)    (14.1)     (11.0)       (21.7)         (25.7)        (10.2)
      Natural Sciences   17.2            75710**          1.5      14.0***      19.4      55.0       46.4        35.8**          44.7          28.1
                        (32.3)            (29787)        (2.8)      (14.8)     (30.5)    (17.7)     (12.5)       (21.9)         (28.3)        (14.0)
      No Degree          1.3*            33362***         2.1      34.8***       7.2      47.5       45.9         55.3           38.3           -
                         (3.6)            (12746)        (2.8)      (27.9)     (13.9)    (18.5)     (11.9)       (31.0)         (40.6)
      F-test                 0.000         0.000        0.000       0.000      0.000      0.000     0.000         0.000         0.000         0.000
     Table reports the mean belief regarding the characteristic of the job conditional on the major (row), as perceived by male (top panel)
     and female respondents. Standard deviations in parentheses.
      T-test conducted for whether means differ by gender. Significance denoted by asterisks shown on the female means. ***, **, * denote
     significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
     a
       Answer to: Think about the other individuals (at NYU and other universities) who will graduate in each of these categories or never
     graduate/drop out. On a ranking scale of 1-100 (where 1 is the HIGHEST rank), where do you think you would rank
      in terms of ability when compared to all individuals in that category?
     b
       Answer to: How many hours per week do you think you would need to spend studying in each of the following majors in
     order to achieve an average GPA in that major of 4.0?
     c
       F-test of equality of means across majors.
Table 11: LAD Estimates of Major Choice
   LAD estimates
   Job attributes               0.018**
                                (0.007)
   Ability rank               -0.064***
                                (0.006)
   Study time                   -0.009
                                (0.025)
   Economics Dummy              -0.583
                                (0.435)
   Engineering Dummy          -1.155***
                                (0.363)
   Natural Sci Dummy           -0.816**
                                (0.381)
   Total Observations             741
   Number of Individuals          247
  Bootstrap standard errors in parentheses.
  ***, **, * denote significance at the 1%,
  5%, and 10% levels, respectively.




                     58
                  Table 12: Marginal Contribution of Job Attributes in Major Choice
                      Fired Part-time Hoursc Bonusa Earnings Prop Earningse
                     Prob.a Availableb                        Growtha Malesd
                       (1)       (2)        (3)       (4)        (5)       (6)      (7)
      Panel A: Males
      Economics -3.7%               1.2%        -5.8%      4.5%        11.5%       -0.9%        25.6%
      Engineering -4.9%             1.5%        -7.7%      5.4%        15.0%       -1.1%        33.4%
      Humanities -2.2%              0.7%        -3.5%      2.6%         7.0%       -0.5%        15.5%
      Natural Sci -4.7%             1.5%        -7.4%      5.2%        14.5%       -1.1%        32.2%




59
      Panel B: Females
      Economics -5.0%               1.2%        -3.7%      2.9%        3.0%        0.5%         15.7%
      Engineering -5.7%             1.3%        -4.2%      3.2%        3.4%        0.6%         17.7%
      Humanities -1.9%              0.5%        -1.5%      1.2%        1.2%        0.2%          6.3%
      Natural Sci -5.3%             1.2%        -3.8%      2.9%        3.2%        0.5%         16.4%
     Table shows the percent change in the probability of majoring in a given major
     ("marginal effect") for a given change in the job attribute (column variable).
     a
       Marginal effect for a change from 1% to 10% in that variable (probability of
     being fired; bonus as percent of base salary; earnings growth).
     b
       Marginal effect for a change from no part-time availability to part-time availability.
     c
       Marginal effect for a change from 30 work hrs/week to 50 work hrs/week.
     d
       Marginal effect for a change from 30% male peers to 70% male peers.
     e
       Marginal effect for a 10% change in age 30 earnings.
        Table A1: Selection into Follow-up Survey
         Dep Var: Participate in the Follow-up
                                           (1)
          Male                                -0.119
                                              (0.103)
          White                                0.070
                                              (0.128)
          Asian                               -0.127
                                              (0.137)
          Age                                 -0.013
                                              (0.019)
          School Year: Senior or More          0.156
                                              (0.095)
          Parents’ Income ($1000s)           0.0008*
                                             (0.0005)
          Mother B.A. or More                 -0.101
                                              (0.124)
          Father B.A. or More                  0.034
                                              (0.123)
          SAT Verbal Score                    0.0002
                                             (0.0007)
          SAT Math Score                     -0.0001
                                             (0.0007)
          GPA                                 -0.078
                                              (0.107)
          Economics/Business                   0.205
                                              (0.126)
          Engineering                          0.081
                                              (0.247)
          Natural Sciences                    0.215*
                                              (0.127)
          Constant                              1.04
                                              (0.626)
          F-test (p-value)a                   0.332
          Mean of Dep. Var.                    .609
          R-squared                            .138
          Number of Observations               115
OLS estimates presented. Std devs reported in parentheses.
***, **, * denote sig. at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
a
  P-value reported for a joint F-test of sig. of all covariates.




                              60
                    Table A2: Current Job Characteristics
                                        Overall Male               Female   p-valuea
                                          (1)       (2)              (3)       (4)
 Number of Observations                    70       21               49
 Labor Force status (%):
                    Employed, full-time         64.3%    57.1%     67.3%
                    Employed, part-time         12.9%    19.0%     10.2%
                         Self-employed           7.1%    14.3%      4.1%
              Not employed (in school)          15.7%    9.5%      18.4%
 Characteristics for employed
 Log Income j full-time employed                 11.2      11.8     11.1     0.001
                                                (0.66)    (0.94)   (0.39)
 Bonus (as % of salary)                           5.8      10.9      3.4     0.034
                                                (12.8)    (19.1)    (7.5)
 Hours of work/week                              44.6      47.9     43.1     0.245
                                                (14.8)    (19.3)   (12.0)
 Fired Probability (over next 12 months)         10.4      13.3      9.1     0.311
                                                (14.7)    (17.9)   (13.0)
 Fraction of male employees                      50.9      59.5     46.8     0.044
                                                (22.8)    (22.9)   (21.9)
 Annual % increase in earnings                    7.3       8.1      7.0     0.775
                                                (13.3)     (7.1)   (15.5)
 Parttime or Flex work available (%)              61        47       68      0.143
Mean (standard deviations) reported for continuous variables.
a
  p-value of test of equality of means by gender.




                                           61
                                       Table A3: Perceived Mapping of Majors to Work Sector
                               Science              Health            Business         Government                      Education
                           Males Females Males Females Males Females Males Females                                   Males Females
                           (1a)      (1b)      (2a)       (2b)    (3a)      (3b)      (4a)    (4b)                   (5a)     (5b)
      Economics             14.30      12.76       9.00      11.67      59.14      54.45       11.03     13.72*       6.52         7.40
                             [10]       [10]        [5]       [5]        [60]       [60]        [10]       [10]        [5]          [5]
                           (14.95)    (14.82)    (12.32)    (16.08)    (24.46)    (23.85)     (11.38)    (10.73)     (8.43)       (7.29)
      Engineering           55.27      56.37      9.31      12.15*      18.79 13.06***          8.64      10.28      7.99          8.15
                             [60]       [60]      [10]        [10]       [20]    [10]            [5]       [10]       [5]           [5]
                           (24.99)    (22.58)    (9.12)     (13.80)    (15.80) (12.38)         (9.61)     (9.39)    (10.28)       (8.44)
      Humanities            13.69      12.94      18.21      17.83      20.33     14.92**      23.78      26.49      24.00         27.82
                             [10]       [10]       [15]       [15]       [20]       [10]        [20]       [20]       [20]          [25]
                           (14.06)    (15.03)    (19.10)    (17.48)    (19.48)    (14.96)     (16.43)    (18.99)    (19.47)       (19.88)




62
      Natural Sciences      38.76      38.84      22.44      25.66      16.17 11.16***          8.85       9.24      13.78         15.11
                             [35]       [40]       [20]       [20]       [10]    [10]            [7]        [5]       [10]          [10]
                           (18.85)    (21.96)    (18.26)    (20.45)    (16.07) (11.53)         (9.23)     (9.79)    (11.73)       (14.63)
      No Degree             12.97      11.98      13.73    18.26**      29.71     23.01**      30.10      28.62      13.49        18.13**
                             [10]       [10]      [12.5]     [20]        [20]       [20]        [20]       [20]       [10]          [20]
                           (13.48)    (11.34)    (12.28)   (16.01)     (22.67)    (20.29)     (22.65)    (22.50)    (14.62)       (18.01)
      F-testa              0.000       0.000      0.000      0.000      0.000      0.000       0.000      0.000      0.000         0.000
     Table reports the mean belief of working in the given sector (column) conditional on the major (row), as perceived by male
     and female respondents. Standard deviations in parentheses.
     T-test conducted for whether means differ by gender. Significance denoted by asterisks shown on the female means. ***, **,
     * denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
     a
       F-test of equality of means across majors, in each industry.
