                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    DOES TRADE LIBERALIZATION WITH CHINA INFLUENCE U.S. ELECTIONS?

                                            Yi Che
                                             Yi Lu
                                        Justin R. Pierce
                                        Peter K. Schott
                                         Zhigang Tao

                                      Working Paper 22178
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22178


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    April 2016




We thank participants at the 2015 NBER China meeting for helpful comments. Any opinions and
conclusions expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views
of the Board of Governors, its research staff, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w22178.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

Â© 2016 by Yi Che, Yi Lu, Justin R. Pierce, Peter K. Schott, and Zhigang Tao. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including Â© notice, is given to the source.
Does Trade Liberalization with China Influence U.S. Elections?
Yi Che, Yi Lu, Justin R. Pierce, Peter K. Schott, and Zhigang Tao
NBER Working Paper No. 22178
April 2016
JEL No. D72,F13,F16

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper examines the impact of trade liberalization on U.S. Congressional elections. We find
that U.S. counties subject to greater competition from China via a change in U.S. trade policy
exhibit relative increases in turnout, the share of votes cast for Democrats and the probability that
the county is represented by a Democrat. We find that these changes are consistent with
Democrats in office during the period examined being more likely than Republicans to support
legislation limiting import competition or favoring economic assistance.


Yi Che                                                          Peter K. Schott
Antai College of Economics and Management                       Yale School of Management
Shanghai Jiao Tong University                                   135 Prospect Street
535 Fahuazhen Road                                              New Haven, CT 06520-8200
Shanghai, 200052                                                and NBER
P.R. CHINA                                                      peter.schott@yale.edu
tccheyi@sjtu.edu.cn
                                                                Zhigang Tao
Yi Lu                                                           University of Hong Kong
1 Arts Link Singapore 117570                                    ztao@hku.hk
ecsluyi@nus.edu.sg

Justin R. Pierce
Federal Reserve Board
20th and C Street NW
Washington, DC 20551
justin.r.pierce@frb.gov
1 Introduction
International trade has long been a contentious issue in U.S. elections.                   During the
2000s, the U.S. trade decit with China emerged as a focus of particular attention,
and recent research establishes a link between growing U.S. imports from China and
the sharp loss of U.S. manufacturing jobs after the year 2000. Autor et al. (2013), for
example, nd that 25 to 50 percent of the manufacturing job loss in the United States
between 2000 and 2007 is due to rising Chinese imports, while Pierce and Schott (2016)
show that this relationship is associated with a change in U.S. trade policy  the U.S.
granting of permanent normal trade relations (PNTR) to China  which eliminated
the threat of substantial tari increases on Chinese imports. This heightened exposure
to Chinese import competition may aect voters' preferences through several channels,
including employment, wages, prots and goods prices.
    This paper examines the impact of increased exposure to competition from China on
elections for the U.S. House of Representatives as well as the legislative activity of those
elected to Congress. In the rst part of our analysis, we show that U.S. counties with
greater exposure to the change in U.S. trade policy exhibit larger increases in turnout
as well as the share of votes cast for Democrats and the probability that a Democrat
represents the county. The second part of our analysis documents a rationale for this
change in voting behavior by showing that Congressional Democrats are, in fact, more
likely to support policies that place restrictions on imports and that provide economic
assistance that might mitigate the impact of import competition.
    Our measure of exposure to increased competition from China arises from the U.S.
granting of PNTR to China in October 2000. Prior to this change in U.S. trade policy,
U.S. imports from China faced the risk, each year, that taris on a subset of products
would rise from the low NTR tari rates oered to WTO members to the substantially
higher non-NTR rates set in the Smoot-Hawley Tari Act of 1930.                      These potential
tari increases created a disincentive for U.S. rms to take advantage of production
in China and for Chinese rms to expand into the U.S. market. By eliminating the
possibility of these future tari increases, PNTR removed these disincentives.
    We examine voting in elections for the U.S. House of Representatives because House
members serve two-year terms and are expected to maintain close personal contact with
constituents. As a result, House members may be more responsive to the demands of
                                                                                                 1
voters than elected ocials with longer terms such as Senators or Presidents.                        We
examine voting at the        county   rather than Congressional district level in order to track
changes   within   constant geographic areas over time. That approach is not possible at
the district level because the borders of Congressional districts change substantially
during the period we examine (1992 to 2010) as a result of redistricting after the 2000

   1 Karol (2012) nds that Senators and Presidents are more likely to support policies (like free trade)
that are in the long-run interests of the country as a whole, even if they run counter to the short-
run passions of voters.   Conconi et al.   (2014) show that Senators are more likely to support trade
liberalization than Representatives, but that the result does not hold for Senators facing elections
within the next two years.




                                                    2
Census. County borders, by contrast, are stable over this period. One potential ad-
ditional benet of focusing on counties is that they are smaller than Congressional
districts in terms of both area and population, allowing us to capture greater variation
in both exposure to Chinese import competition and residents' demographic charac-
teristics.
    Our dierence-in-dierences empirical strategy examines whether counties more
exposed to the change in U.S. policy (rst dierence) experience dierential changes
in voting for Democrats after the policy is implemented (second dierence).          Across
specications that are either unweighted or weighted by counties' initial population,
coecient estimates suggest that moving a county from the 25th to the 75th percentile
in terms of exposure to the change in U.S. trade policy is associated with a 1 to 2
percentage point increase in the share of votes cast for Democrats, representing a 3 to
4 percent increase relative to the across-county average share of votes for Democrats
in the 2000 Congressional election, the closest Congressional election to the change in
U.S. trade policy.   Coecient estimates from similar specications indicate that the
probability of a switch in representation for a county from a Republican to a Democrat
Representative increases by 2 to 3 percentage points.
    We allow for the potential inuence of spillovers from nearby areas by controlling
for changes in exposure to China experienced by neighboring counties that are part of
the same labor market. Results from these specications are qualitatively similar to
the baseline specications but somewhat larger in magnitude: moving a county from
the 25th to the 75th percentile in terms of both own exposure to the policy change and
neighboring counties' exposure is associated with a 4.4 percent increase in the share of
votes won by the Democrat relative to the average share of votes won by Democrats
in the year 2000 election, versus 3.7 percent in the baseline specication.
    We also document other related evidence supportive of a role for PNTR in U.S. elec-
tion outcomes. First, we nd that the increase in the share of votes cast for Democrats
associated with PNTR is also present for Presidential and Gubernatorial elections,
indicating eects for electoral contests besides the U.S. House of Representatives. Sec-
ond, we nd that counties more exposed to PNTR's trade liberalization exhibit larger
increases in voter turnout after the policy change, relating to the political science liter-
ature on the eect of economic conditions on voter turnout (e.g. Schlozman and Verba
1979).
    The second part of our analysis examines Representatives' Congressional votes on
legislation during the 1990s and 2000s using a regression discontinuity identication
strategy that compares the voting of Democrats and Republicans who win oce by
small margins.   The analysis indicates that Democrats during this period are more
likely to take positions that restrict trade and that oer economic assistance that may
benet those adversely aected by trade, providing a rationale for the change in voting
documented in the rst part of the paper. We nd that the tendency for Democrats
to support such legislation is stronger after implementation of PNTR.
    Together, the results in the rst and second parts of the paper suggest that voters
who perceive themselves as being disadvantaged by trade are more likely to vote for


                                             3
politicians that might restrict imports. An interesting topic for future research is the
extent to which PNTR contributes to the strong performance of candidates proposing
to restrict trade or alter trade agreements among both Republicans and Democrats
during the 2016 Presidential primaries.
   This paper relates to literatures on voting in both political science and economics,
and also complements the large literature examining the impact of international trade
                        2
on worker outcomes.         A closely related paper in the voting literature is Feigenbaum
and Hall (2015), which examines the eect of Congressional-district-level economic
shocks from Chinese imports  using the approach in Autor, Dorn and Hanson (2013)
 on the roll-call behavior of legislators and electoral outcomes. They nd that legisla-
tors from districts experiencing larger increases in Chinese import competition become
more protectionist in their voting on trade-related bills, and that incumbents are able
to insulate themselves from electoral competition via this voting behavior.                Another
closely related paper is Jensen, Quinn and Weymouth (2016), which nds that votes
for presidential candidates' incumbent parties rise with expanding U.S. exports and
fall with rising U.S. imports.
   Using data from German labor markets, Dippel, Gold and Heblich (2015) nd that
higher imports from Eastern Europe and China are associated with an increase in the
                                      3
share of votes for far right parties.      And in research examining the relationship between
immigration and elections, Mayda, Peri and Steingress (2016) nd that the share of
votes cast for Republicans in U.S. elections responds to the level of immigration, with
the eect varying based on the share of naturalized migrants and non-citizen migrants
in the population.
   This paper also relates to a literature that examines the role of trade on legisla-
tors' voting activity. Conconi et al. (2012) examine the impact of district-level trade
competition on Representatives' votes to grant U.S. Presidents Fast Track Authority
vis a vis   the negotiation of trade agreements, and Conconi et al. (2015) examine the
role of skilled labor abundance in Representatives' votes on trade and immigration
bills. Blonigen and Figlio (1998) nd that legislators' votes for bills related to trade
protection are positively associated with direct foreign investment.
   We proceed as follows. Section 2 provides an overview of the growth of U.S.-China
trade.   Section 3 describes our data sources.         Sections 4 and 5 present our empirical
results. Section 6 concludes.
   2 A substantial body of research documents a negative relationship between import competition
and U.S. manufacturing employment, e.g., Freeman and Katz (1991), Revenga (1992), Sachs and
Shatz (1994) and Bernard et al.   (2006).   More recently, a series of papers link Chinese imports to
employment outcomes in the United States and other developed or developing countries, e.g., Autor
et al. (2013), Bloom et al. (2015), Ebenstein et al. (2014), Groizard, Ranjan and Rodriguez-Lopez
(2012), Mion and Zhu (2013) and Utar and Torres Ruiz (2013). Increasingly active areas of research
examine links between international trade and health (McManus and Schaur 2015a,b and Pierce and
Schott 2016), crime (Dix-Carneiro et al.    2015 and Che and Xu 2015), and the provision of public
goods, (Feler and Senses 2015 and Che and Xu 2015).
   3 Scheve and Slaughter (2001) show that individuals' trade policy preferences are aected by skill
level and homeownership status.




                                                  4
2 China's Growth as a U.S. Trade Partner
In the past thirty-ve years China jumped from being an insignicant contributor to
world GDP to the world's second-largest economy and largest trading state. In 2007
it became the United States' largest source of imports, accounting for 17 percent of all
imports versus just 3 percent in 1990. As illustrated in Figure 1, U.S. imports from
China accelerated after China's receipt of PNTR in 2000. U.S. exports to China also
grew substantially over this period, but less rapidly, with the result that by 2007 the
United States trade decit with China exceeded $250 billion U.S. dollars, or 1.7 percent
of GDP, up from 0.3 percent of GDP in 1990.
   As illustrated in Figure 2, the United States' growing imports from China coincide
with a sharp, 18 percent decline in U.S. manufacturing employment from 2001 to 2007,
with more than 80 percent of the decline occurring between 2001 and 2004.                   Pierce
and Schott (2016) show that this decline was steeper in industries more exposed to the
U.S. granting of permanent normal trade relations to China, while Autor et al. (2013)
show that commuting zones with industrial structures more similar to U.S. imports
from China experienced greater declines in manufacturing employment. Beyond man-
ufacturing employment, Pierce and Schott (2015) show that counties more exposed to
PNTR experience both relatively higher levels of unemployment and lower levels of
labor force participation during the 2000s. Related adjustment costs for workers who
switch industries or occupations as a result of these trends, and which might be inu-
ential in driving voting preferences, are highlighted in Artuc et al. (2010), Ebenstein
et al. (2014), Acemoglu et al. (2013) and Caliendo et al. (2015).
   Growth in the U.S. trade decit with China has motivated U.S. legislators at var-
ious levels of government to propose restricting imports from China. As discussed in
Pierce and Schott (2016), Congress demonstrated substantial resistance to the renewal
of normal trade relations for China during the 1990s.             Then, after the extension of
PNTR and China's entry into the WTO in 2001, Senators Charles Schumer and Lind-
sey Graham repeatedly introduced legislation in the U.S. Senate to impose taris on
U.S. imports from China based on allegations that China manipulates its exchange rate
relative to the U.S. dollar (Lichtblau 2011).        Calls for such action generally increase
during elections. Indeed, in a move the New York Times referred to as election year
politics over a loss of American jobs (Sanger and Chan 2010), the House of Repre-
sentatives in 2010 granted President Obama expanded authority to impose taris on
a wide range of Chinese goods. The 2012 Presidential election and the lead-up to the
2016 election have also featured sharp dialogue relating to trade with China from both
                                 4
Republicans and Democrats.

   4 For example, Donald Trump has called for a 45 percent tari on U.S. imports from China
(Haberman 2016) and Bernie Sanders proposes Reversing trade policies like NAFTA, CAFTA
and PNTR with China that have driven down wages and caused the loss of millions of jobs
(www.berniesanders.com/issues/income-and-wealth-inequality/). Recent media coverage has focused
on the role of these trade positions in support for Trump and Sanders, e.g. Stromberg (2016). For
additional examples, see Brower and Lerer (2012) for the 2012 election, and Collinson (2015) for the




                                                 5
3 Data
This section describes the data used to measure election outcomes, exposure to compe-
tition from China, and other trade-related variables that may aect election outcomes.



3.1     Election Results and Demographics

Data on county-level election outcomes from 1992 to 2010 are from              Dave Leip's Atlas
of U.S. Presidential Elections.     5
                                        These data track the number of votes received by
Democratic and Republican candidates for Congress in each county in each election
                                                       6
year, as well as the number of registered voters.
    Figure 3 reports the distribution of the Democrat vote share across counties over
the sample period. As indicated in the gure, the average county experienced a decline
in Democrat vote share during the 1990s and early 2000s, followed by a rebound in
2006 and 2008, and then a decline in 2010. The mean Democrat vote share in the 2000
Congressional election is 40 percent, with a standard deviation of 23 percentage points.
    We match the voting data to county-level demographic data from the 1990 Decen-
nial Census that have been found to be important correlates of voting behavior in the
                                                             7
political science and economics literatures on voting.           These data are summarized in
Table 1.



3.2     Counties' Exposure to PNTR

We make use of the structure of the U.S. tari schedule to dene a measure of each
industry's  and in turn, each county's  exposure to PNTR. The tari schedule has
two basic sets of taris:     NTR taris,     which average 4 percent across industries and
are applied to goods imported from other members of the World Trade Organization
(WTO); and      non-NTR taris, which were set by the Smoot-Hawley Tari Act of 1930
and are typically substantially higher than the corresponding NTR rates, averaging 37
percent across industries. While imports from non-market economies, such as China,
generally are subject to the higher non-NTR rates, U.S. tari law allows the President
to grant such countries access to NTR rates on an annually renewable basis, subject
to approval by Congress.

2016 election cycle.
   5 For details on data collection, see www.uselectionatlas.org.
   6 County boundaries are substantially more stable than those of Congressional districts, whose
borders change after each decennial census During our sample period, there are only three changes:
South Boston, VA (county code 51780) joined Halifax County (51083) on July 1, 1995; Dade County,
FL (12025) was renamed as Miami-Dade FL (12086) on November 13, 1997; and Skagway-Yakutat-
Angoon, AK (2231) was changed to Skagway-Hoonah-Angoon Census Area, AK (2232) on September
22, 1992, and then to Hoonah-Angoon Census Area, AK on June 20, 2007. In each case, we aggregate
the noted counties for the entire sample period.
   7 See, for example, Baldwin and Magee (2000), Gilbert and Oladi (2012), Kriner and Reeves (2012),
Wright (2012) and Conconi et al. (2012).




                                                   6
    U.S. Presidents granted China such a waiver every year starting in 1980, but annual
re-approval of the waiver became politically contentious following the Chinese govern-
ment's crackdown on the Tiananmen Square protests in 1989. Re-approval remained
controversial throughout the 1990s, especially during other ashpoints in U.S.-China
relations including China's transfer of missile technology to Pakistan in 1993 and the
Taiwan Straits Missile Crisis in 1996. Importantly, if annual renewal of the waiver had
failed, U.S. taris on imports from China generally would have risen substantially from
the temporary NTR level to the much higher non-NTR rates.
    The possibility of tari increases each year served as a disincentive for rms con-
                                              8
sidering engaging in U.S.-China trade.             Pierce and Schott (2016) provide anecdotes
indicating that this threat both discouraged U.S. rms from making investments in
China and suppressed investments by Chinese rms considering exporting to the United
States, thereby reducing import competition for U.S. producers.
    PNTR, which was passed by Congress in October 2000 and took eect upon China's
entry to the WTO in December 2001, permanently locked in U.S. taris on imports
                                                                                  9
from China at the low NTR rates, eliminating these disincentives.                     As documented
in Pierce and Schott (2016), the industries and products most aected by the policy
change experienced larger declines in U.S. manufacturing employment, as well as larger
increases in imports from China  including related-party imports  and larger increases
                                                                             10
in exports to the United States by foreign-owned rms in China.
    We compute counties' exposure to PNTR in two steps. The rst step is to calcu-
late exposure for U.S. industries. We follow Pierce and Schott (2016) in dening the
industry-level impact of PNTR as the increase in U.S. taris on Chinese goods that
would have occurred in the event of a failed annual renewal of China's NTR status
prior to PNTR,


                           N T R Gapj = N on N T R Ratej âˆ’ N T R Ratej .                           (1)


We refer to this dierence as the NTR gap, and compute it for each four-digit SIC
industry     j   using   ad valorem equivalent    tari rates provided by Feenstra et al (2002)
for 1999, the year before passage of PNTR. As illustrated in Figure 4, NTR gaps vary
widely across industries, with a mean and standard deviation of 33 and 15 percentage
points, respectively. As noted in Pierce and Schott (2016), 79 percent of the variation
in the NTR gap across industries is due to non-NTR rates, set 70 years prior to passage

   8 Intuition for these incentives can be derived, in part, from the literature on investment under
uncertainty (e.g., Pindyck 1993 and Bloom, Bond and Van Reenen 2007), which demonstrates that
rms are more likely to undertake irreversible investments as the ambiguity surrounding their expected
prot decreases. Handley (2014) introduces these insights to rms' decisions to export.
   9 The passage of PNTR followed the bilateral agreement in 1999 between the U.S. and China
regarding China's eventual entry into the WTO.
  10 Feng, Li and Swenson (2016) discuss the eect of PNTR on entry and exit patterns of Chinese
exporters, as well as changes in export product characteristics; Heise et al. (2015) describe the eect
of PNTR on the structure of supply chains; and Handley and Limao (2014) discuss its implications
for trade.




                                                    7
of PNTR. This feature of non-NTR rates eectively rules out reverse causality that
would arise if   non-NTR rates        were set to protect industries with declining employment
or surging imports. Furthermore, to the extent that           NTR rates were raised to protect
industries with declining employment prior to              PNTR, these higher NTR rates would
result in   lower   NTR gaps, biasing our results away from nding an eect of PNTR.
                                                                                                         11

    We compute U.S. counties' exposure to PNTR as the employment-share weighted
average NTR gap across the sectors in which they are active,

                                         X  Ljcb           
                            N T R Gapc =  j       N T R Gapj ,                                          (2)
                                             Lcb
where   Ljcb   is the base-year   b   employment of SIC industry      j   in county   c   and   Lcb   is the
overall employment in county          c   in base year   b.12
    County-industry-year employment data are from the U.S. Census Bureau's County
Business Patterns (CBP). We use             b = 1990     for the base year to mitigate a potential
relationship between counties' industrial structure and the year 2000 change in U.S.
trade policy.       Given that services comprise a large share of employment, the distri-
bution ofcounty -level N T R Gapc is shifted leftwards relative to the distribution of
manufacturing and other industries for which the N T R Gapj is dened: the mean and
standard deviation of the county-level NTR gap are 7.3 and 6.5 percentage points, as
displayed visually in Figure 5. The dierence between the 25th and 75th percentiles is
8.3 (=10.6-2.3) percentage points.
    We also compute counties' exposure to PNTR via the average NTR gap of sur-
rounding counties in the same commuting zone, a geographic area roughly analogous
                             13
to a local labor market.          The correlation of own- and commuting-zone NTR gaps
across counties, 0.58, is displayed visually in Figure 6.



3.3     Other Controls for Exposure to Import Competition

Our analysis includes controls for counties' average NTR rate and their exposure to the
phasing out of textile and clothing quotas under the global Multi-Fiber Arrangement
(Khandelwal et al. 2013).
    We compute counties' exposure to U.S. import taris and the MFA phase-outs as
the employment-share weighted average of their tari rates and exposure to MFA, i.e.,
as in equation 2.       Following Brambilla et al.          (2009) and Pierce and Schott (2016),

  11 Cross-industry variation in the NTR rate explains less than 1 percent of variation in the NTR
gap.
  12 NTR gaps can only be calculated for products subject to import taris, such as manufacturing,
agriculture and mining products. NTR gaps for services, which are not subject to import taris are,
by denition, zero.
  13 We use the U.S. Census Bureau denition of commuting zones as of 1990 and the concordance of
counties to commuting zones provided by Autor et al. (2013). The 3113 counties in our sample are
distributed across 741 commuting zones, with the number of counties per commuting zone ranging
from 1 to 19 (the Washington DC area).




                                                    8
we measure the extent to which industry quotas were binding under the MFA as the
import-weighted average ll rate of the textile and clothing products that were under
quota in that industry, where ll rates are dened as the actual imports divided by
allowable imports under the the quota. Industries with higher average ll rates faced
more binding quotas and are therefore more exposed to the end of the MFA. Products
not covered by the MFA have a ll rate of zero.




4 Trade Liberalization with China and Voting in U.S.
  Congressional Elections
This section explores the link between the U.S. granting of PNTR to China in 2000
and outcomes of U.S. Congressional elections.



4.1        Identication Strategy

Our baseline estimation examines the link between the share of votes cast for the
Democratic candidate for the U.S. House of Representatives in county           c in even election
year   t   from 1992 to 2010, a period that straddles the year 2000 change in U.S. trade
policy. We use a dierence-in-dierences (DID) specication that asks whether counties
with higher NTR gaps (rst dierence) experience dierential changes in voting after
the change in U.S. trade policy (second dierence),




                       Dem V otect = Î¸P ost P N T Rt Ã— N T R Gapc                            (3)

                                     +P ost P N T Rt Ã— X0c Î³ + X0ct Î²
                                     +Î´c + Î´t + Î± + Îµct ,

The dependent variable is the percent of votes received by the Democrat in county            c in
year t. The rst term on the right-hand side is the DID term of interest, an interaction
of a post-PNTR (i.e.,     t > 2000)   indicator with the (time-invariant) county-level NTR
gap, as dened in the preceding section.
   Xc      represents a vector of initial period county demographic attributes taken from
the 1990 Census that are found to be important in the economics and political sci-
ence literatures on voting.       These attributes are median household income, share of
population achieving higher education, the share of non-white population, the share
of veterans and the share of voters over 65. Including interactions of these attributes
with the     P ost P N T Rt   indicator allows the relationship between these demographic
characteristics and voting outcomes to dier before and after passage of PNTR.               Xct
represents a matrix of time-varying policy attributes including the average U.S. import
tari rate associated with each county's mix of industries as well as the county's expo-
sure to the phasing out of the MFA.       Î´c   and   Î´t   represent county and year xed eects.




                                                 9
One advantage of this DID identication strategy is its ability to net out character-
istics of counties that are time-invariant, while also controlling for aggregate shocks
that aect all counties identically in a particular year, such as whether the election
                                                                             14
occurs during a presidential versus non-presidential election year.               We consider both
unweighted regressions (Tables 2 to 4), which are representative of the relationship for
the average county, and regressions for which observations are weighted by counties'
initial population (Table 5), making them representative of the average individual.
    Figure 7 plots the average Democrat vote share (left panel) and probability of Demo-
crat victory (right panel) for two groups of counties: those with own- and surrounding-
county NTR gaps above, versus below, the median of these gaps across all counties. The
vertical line in each gure represents the year in which PNTR was passed. As indicated
in the gures, the Democrat vote share and probability of Democratic representation
tend to be higher for high NTR gap counties in both the pre- and post-PNTR peri-
ods. Importantly, in each case, trends in outcomes prior to the change in U.S. policy
are similar, consistent with the parallel trends assumption inherent in dierence-in-
dierences analysis.     Among those counties with both NTR gaps above the median,
there is movement towards relatively higher Democrat vote shares in 2002 and 2008
and higher probability of Democrat victory in 2008. Estimation of Equation 3 exam-
ines the extent to which there is a statistically signicant shift toward higher Democrat
vote shares and a higher probability of Democratic victory for more exposed counties
in the post-PNTR period.



4.2     Exposure to PNTR and Elections for the U.S. House of
        Representatives

The rst three columns of Table 2 summarize the results of estimating equation (3) via
OLS for 1992 to 2010. Robust standard errors adjusted for clustering at the county
level are reported below each estimate. As indicated in the rst column of the table, we
nd no relationship between PNTR and voting for Democrats in a simple specication
that includes only the DID term of interest and the xed eects. The results in columns
two and three, by contrast, indicate a positive and statistically signicant coecient for
the DID term once the time-invariant and time-varying county attributes found to be
important in the voting literature are added. The point estimate in the third column,
0.18, implies that a county moving from the 25th to the 75th percentile NTR gap (from
2.3 to 10.6 percent) is associated with a 1.5 percentage point increase in the share of
votes won by the Democratic candidate, or 3.7 percent of the average 40 percent share
of the vote for Democrats in the 2000 Congressional election (as displayed in the nal
                    15
row of the table).

  14 One disadvantage is that the long sample period renders it susceptible to biased standard errors
associated with serial correlation (Bertrand, Duo and Mullainathan 2003).
  15 Note that the 40 percent share of votes cast for Democrats in the 2000 House of Representatives
elections is an average across counties. Overall, the Democratic candidate received 46,595,202 votes
(46.8 percent of total) in the 2000 House of Representatives elections, while the Republican candidate



                                                 10
    Columns four through six of Table 2 examine the relationship between PNTR and
three other election outcomes: an indicator variable for whether the Democrat wins
the county, an indicator for whether the election results in a switch to a Democrat
representing the county, and an indicator for whether the election results in a switch
                                                  16
to a Republican representing the county.               For the latter two regressions the sample
is restricted to observations in which the prior oce holder was a Republican, or
Democrat, respectively.
    As indicated in the table, we nd a positive and statistically signicant relationship
between exposure to PNTR and the probability of both Democrat victory and a switch
to a Democratic Representative. By contrast, we nd a statistically signicant decline
in the probability of a switch to a Republican Representative. The point estimate for
Democrat victory in column four, 0.2282, indicates that a county moving from the
25th to the 75th percentile NTR gap is associated with a 1.9 percentage point increase
in the probability of victory, or 5.4 percent of the probability of victory in the year
2000. Similar exercises indicate an estimated increase in the probability of switching
to Democrat of 1.9 percentage points, and an estimated decrease in the probability of
switching to a Republican of -2.2 percentage points. These estimated changes represent
approximately 27 and -17 percent of the average probabilities of such switches occurring
in the year 2000 (7 and 13 percent, respectively).
    Estimates for the remaining covariates included in the regression suggest that voters
with a college degree and at least some graduate education are more likely to support
Democrats after 2000, while those over 65 are less likely to do so.
    The nal column of Table 2 examines the relationship between exposure to PNTR
and voter turnout, dened as the number of people voting in the election divided by the
                                 17
number of registered voters.          As indicated in the table, we nd that higher exposure
to PNTR is associated with a statistically and economically signicant increase in
voter turnout.     The point estimate for the DID term, 0.14, suggests that a county
moving from the 25th to the 75th percentile in terms of exposure is associated with a
1.18 percentage point increase in turnout, or 1.8 percent of the average turnout across
counties in the year 2000 (65 percent).
    To the extent that the median voter is injured by increased import competition in
the more heavily-aected counties, this result is in line with a political science literature
arguing that economic adversity can increase voter turnout (e.g. Schlozman and Verba
1979). This result diers from Dippel, Gold and Heblich's (2015) nding that higher
imports have no relationship with election turnout in Germany. The dierence may
stem, in part, from U.S. voters directing votes toward a major party in response to trade

received 46,738,619 votes (47.0 percent of total) and candidates from other parties received 6,125,773
votes (6.2 percent of total). See Federal Election Commission (2001).
  16 Because counties are reallocated to Congressional districts over time, we emphasize that this
analysis does not directly examine victories in House elections, but rather examines the probability
that a Representative from a particular party represents a county.
  17 Turnout data are missing from    Dave Leip's Atlas of U.S. Presidential Elections for 1992, 1994,
1998 and 2008.




                                                  11
competition, whereas Dippel, Gold and Heblich (2015) show that import competition
in Germany is associated with an increase in votes for far-right parties.



4.3    Exposure to PNTR via Neighboring Counties Within Com-
       muting Zones

In this section we examine whether voters in one county might be inuenced by eco-
nomic conditions in neighboring counties that are part of the same labor market. The
specication we consider is similar to that considered in the previous section but it
is augmented with an additional dierence-in-dierences term, an interaction of the
post-PNTR indicator variable with the average NTR gap across other counties in the
same commuting zone (z).
   As illustrated in Table 3, the estimated coecients for both own and external
commuting zone NTR gaps are positive for all ve outcome variables: the Democrat
vote share, the probability of Democrat victory, the probability of a switch towards
a Democrat or away from a Republican, and turnout. Though estimates for the two
DID terms are not individually signicant, they are jointly signicant in all cases, as
indicated by the F-test p-values reported in the third-to-last row of the table.
   In terms of economic signicance, the coecient estimates in the rst column sug-
gest that a county moving from the 25th to the 75th percentile NTR gap (from 2.3 to
10.6 percent) is associated with a 1.8 percentage point increase in the share of votes
won by the Democrat candidate, representing 4.4 percent of the average 40 percent
share of the vote for Democrats in the year 2000. Point estimates in the third column
indicate that moving a county from the 25th to the 75th percentile NTR gap boosts the
probability or Democrat victory by 6.3 percent compared to the average probability
of victory across counties in the year 2000. For switching to a Democrat, switching to
a Republican and turnout, the comparable percentages are 28, -32 and 1.25 percent,
respectively.    These magnitudes are all somewhat larger than those reported in the
baseline results indicating that counties' voting outcomes are also aected by spillovers
from neighboring counties in the same labor market.



4.4    Exposure to PNTR and the Democrat Vote Share for Other
       Oces

In this section we examine the relationship between PNTR and the Democrat vote
share for three other oces: Presidential, Senatorial and gubernatorial. Presidential
and gubernatorial elections occur every four years, but unlike Presidential elections,
the latter do not all occur in the same year for all states. Senatorial elections occur
every six years, with approximately one third of Senators up for election in any given
election year.
   Results are reported in Table 5. We nd positive and statistically signicant re-
lationships between the change in U.S. trade policy and the share of votes won by



                                           12
Democrats in both Presidential and gubernatorial elections. The DID point estimates
for President and governor suggest that moving a county from the 25th to the 75th
percentile in terms of exposure to PNTR is associated with increases in the Democrat
vote share of 0.4 and 1.2 percentage points, or 1 and 2.5 percent of the average share
of votes won by Democrats for these oces across counties in the year 2000. We also
nd a positive relationship between PNTR and the share of votes won by Democrats in
Senatorial elections, but this relationship is not statistically signicant at conventional
levels. The observed eects on Presidential and gubernatorial outcomes provide further
evidence consistent with the role of PNTR's trade liberalization on elections.



4.5    Weighting Counties by Population

The coecient estimates reported in the previous three sections are based on un-
weighted regressions, and therefore are representative of the relationship between PNTR
and voting behavior for the average county. In this section we consider the eect of
weighting by initial (1990) population, which provides estimates representative of the
average individual.
   As indicated in Table 2, we continue to nd positive and statistically signicant re-
lationships between PNTR and the share of votes won by Democrats, the likelihood of
a switch to a Democrat Representative and turnout. We no longer nd statistically sig-
nicant relationships between counties' exposure to the change in U.S. trade policy and
the likelihood of either Democrat victory or a switch to a Republican Representative.
   The point estimates in the rst, third and fth columns indicate that moving a
county from the 25th to the 75th percentile NTR gap increases the Democrat vote
share, the probability of a switch to a Democrat Representative and turnout by 2.8,
18.9 and 3.3 percent relative to their levels in the year 2000. The rst two of these
magnitudes are somewhat lower than those implied by the estimates in Table 3 (3.7
and 27, respectively), while the estimated eect for turnout is higher (1.8 in Table 3).




5 Party Aliation and Legislator Voting Behavior
The previous section establishes that voters in counties facing larger increases in compe-
tition from China are more likely to vote for Democratic candidates. One explanation
for this result is that workers displaced by Chinese imports sought to elect ocials
that would either protect U.S. workers from international trade or soften the eect
of this competition by promoting economic assistance programs. This section investi-
gates whether Congressional Democrats in the U.S. House of Representatives during
the 1990s and 2000s were more likely to vote for legislation along these lines. We use
a regression discontinuity approach to examine whether Republicans' and Democrats'
votes dier on trade-related and economic assistance-related bills. We begin by dis-
cussing the classication of bills as being either for or against free trade or economic
assistance and then describe our identication strategy before presenting the results.



                                            13
5.1     Classication of Trade and Economic Assistance Bills
                                                                 rd
House members' votes from 1993 to 2011 (from the start of the 103   to part of the
   th
112 Congresses) are obtained from the website www.govtrack.us. Data on the set
of bills considered by the House during this period are from the Rohde/PIPC House
Roll Call Database, maintained and generously provided by David Rohde of Duke
University.    We adopt Rohde's classications of bills related to trade and economic
assistance programs, and then classify bills as pro- versus anti-free trade and pro-
versus anti- economic assistance using ranking data from the National Journal.             We
describe each of these steps in turn.


5.1.1      Trade Bills

The Rohde/PIPC House Roll Call Database assigns each bill a code summarizing its
         18
content.      We follow Rohde in considering bills to be trade-related if they fall into the
following categories: Japanese trade (540), Federal trade commission (542), un-
fair trading practices (543), export controls (544), compensation to U.S. business
and workers (545), Export-Import Bank (546), tari negotiations (547), import
quotas-taris (548), and miscellaneous (549). We classify trade-related bills as pro-
versus anti-free trade based on the National Journal's rankings of the economic liberal-
                              19
ness of the bills' sponsors.      A ranking of   r(0, 100) indicates that the sponsor is more
liberal in their voting than     r   percent of House members. Bills whose primary spon-
sor's ranking exceeds 50 are coded as anti-free-trade. The remaining bills are coded as
pro-free-trade. One drawback of this approach is its reliance on a ranking system based
exclusively on a principle component analysis of members' votes on economic issues.
A major benet of the approach, in addition to its simplicity, is the independence of
the rankings. We note that the results discussed below are also robust to the authors'
qualitative classication of bills as either pro- or anti-free trade.


5.1.2      Economic Assistance Bills

We consider bills to be related to economic assistance if they fall into the following
categories of the Rohde database: jobs (code 810 of the database), welfare bene-
ts/social services (code 811), job training (code 816), nutrition programs (code
831), family assistance (code 832), homeless (code 835), unemployment assistance
(code 962), and minimum wage (code 966). As above, we use the National Journal
rankings to classify bills as pro- versus anti- economic assistance according to whether
the bills' sponsors' economic liberalness rankings are above or below 50.

  18 The complete list of codes can be found at http://sites.duke.edu/pipc/data/.
  19 Further detail on these rankings is available at http://www.nationaljournal.com/2013-vote-
ratings/how-the-vote-ratings-are-calculated-20140206.




                                                  14
5.2        Identication Strategy

We examine the relationship between House members' votes on trade and economic
assistance bills and their party aliation using the following specication,

                                                                            0
                           ydh = Î± + Î²Democratdh + Xdh Î¸ + Î´s + Î´h + Îµdh ,                                                 (4)


where      d   and   h   denote Congressional districts and the particular two-year Congress
                                                  20
during which Representatives serve.                    The dependent variable                   ydh   represents the share
of anti-free trade or pro-economic assistance bills supported by a particular represen-
tative during a particular Congress. The dummy variable                               Democratdh takes the value
1   if the Representative is a Democrat and zero                            otherwise. Xdh represents a matrix of
district-Congress attributes, including the demographic characteristics of the district
                                                                       21
and personal attributes of the Representative.                              Î´s   and   Î´h   represent state and Congress
xed eects, and         Îµdh   is the error term. As noted in the introduction, Congressional dis-
trict boundaries change substantially over the sample period as a result of redistricting.
We are therefore unable to include district xed eects in equation 4.
     In this specication, identication of                   Î²    requires that Representatives' party al-
iation be uncorrelated with the error term.                                 As there may be several reasons why
this assumption is violated, we follow Lee (2008) in identifying the causal eect of
                                                                                                                            22
party aliation on voting behavior using a regression discontinuity (RD) approach.
Specically, we make use of the principle that the probability of a Democrat winning
a congressional election disproportionately increases at the point where they receive a
larger share of votes than the Republican competitor.
     Formally, dene the assignment variable


                      M argindh â‰¡ V oteShareDemocratic
                                            dh         âˆ’ V oteSharesRepublican
                                                                    dh

as the dierence in voting share between the Democratic and Republican candidates in
the Congressional district           d    for election to Congress                h.    As illustrated in Figure 8, the
probability of a Democratic candidate winning an election conditional on the margin
of victory has a discontinuity at the cuto                       0.   That is, this probability is substantially
                                                                                                                            23
near 1 for values of           m   just above zero compared with values of                          m   just below zero.
Hahn et al. (2001) show that when                   E [Îµdh |M argindh = m]                    is continuous in      m   at the

    20 For example,   h = 110   represents the 110th Congress, which met from January 3, 2007 to January
3, 2009.
    21 Data on House members' age, gender, party aliation and other characteristics used in the second
part of our analysis are obtained from Wikipedia.
    22 Lee et. al (2004) uses RD to investigate the eect of party aliation on legislators' right-vs-left
voting scores.
    23 Note that there are cases in which a third party won the election even though the
Democratic      candidate      received   more   (less)   votes         than     the   Republican     party.   As   a   result,
Pr [Democraticd,t = 1|M argind,t = m] 6= 1             when   m > 0.




                                                              15
cuto   0, Î²   in equation (4) can be identied as


                  limmâ†“0 E [ydh |M argindh = m] âˆ’ limmâ†‘0 E [ydh |M argindh = m]
Î²Ì‚RD =                                                                             .
          limmâ†“0 E [Democrat|M argindh = m] âˆ’ limmâ†‘0 E [Democratdh |M argindh = m]
                                                                                                         (5)
   Lee and Lemieux (2010) show that              Î²Ì‚RD   is essentially an instrumental variable esti-
mator. Specically, the rst stage of the instrumental variable estimation is


                     Democratdh = Î³I {M argindh â‰¥ 0} + g (M argindh ) + Âµdh ,

while the second stage is


                            ydh = Î± + Î²Democratdh + f (M argindh ) + Îµdh ,
where I {.} is an indicator function that takes a value of 1 if the argument in brackets is
true and 0 if it is false, and where g(.) and f (.) are exible functions of the assignment
variable that control for the direct eect of the strength of the Democratic versus
Republican parties on the outcome variable                 ydh .   Lee and Lemieux (2010) suggest
both nonparametric and parametric approaches to estimate                       Î²Ì‚RD .   We pursue both
approaches, with details provided in Section B of the online appendix.
   The identifying assumption of our RD estimation  that                        E [Îµdh |M argindh = m]
is continuous in       m    at the cuto   0    implies that the election outcome at the cuto
point is determined by random factors, i.e., no party or candidate can fully manipulate
                24
the election.         To provide quantitative support for this assumption, we perform two
checks suggested by Lee and Lemieux (2010). First, if there were full manipulation at
the cuto point        0,   the distribution of district characteristics on the two sides of the
cuto point would be dierent, and a mixture of district-level discontinuous densities
would imply that the aggregate distribution of assignment variable is discontinuous
at the cuto point.           We check the density distribution of the assignment variable
using the method developed by McCrary (2008). As shown in Figure A.1 of the online
appendix, we do not nd any discontinuity in the density distribution of the assignment
variable at the cuto point        0, and hence fail to reject the hypothesis that our identifying
assumption is satised.
   The second check directly examines pre-determined characteristics between Con-
gressional districts in the neighborhood of the cuto point.                    If there were full ma-
nipulation at the cuto, districts on the margin would not be balanced and these

 24 Using RD to investigate the incumbent advantage, Lee (2008) argues:

           It is plausible that the exact vote count in large elections, while inuenced by political
        actors in a non-random way, is also partially determined by chance beyond any actor's
        control. Even on the day of an election, there is inherent uncertainty about the precise
        and nal vote count. In light of this uncertainty, the local independence result predicts
        that the districts where a party's candidate just barely won an electionand hence
        barely became the incumbentare likely to be comparable in all other ways to districts
        where the party's candidate just barely lost the election.




                                                     16
pre-determined district characteristics would show discontinuities in their distribution
at the cuto point. Figures A.2 to A.10, reported in the appendix reveal that none
of the distributions of district attributes used in our analysis exhibit discontinuities at
the cuto   0,   indicating that our hypothesis of a valid RD setting cannot be rejected.



5.3     Results

We start with a visual presentation of the relationship between Democrats' margin of
victory,   M argindh , and the districts' subsequent votes for trade and economic assis-
tance bills,  ydh , across the 103rd (January 1993 through January 1995) to the 112th
(January 2011 to January 2013) Congresses. Figures 9 and 10 show that the share of
districts' pro-free trade votes drops discontinuously at the cuto point       M argindh = 0,
while their share of pro-economic assistance votes rises discontinuously at this cut o.
Given that the chance of winning the election jumps discontinuously at the same point
(see Figure 8), these outcomes reveal that Democratic Representatives during this pe-
riod were more likely to take anti-free trade positions and pro-economic assistance
positions than their Republican colleagues.            Our regression analysis estimates these
dierences where the margin of Democrat victory equals zero.
   Formal estimation results for the eect of party aliation on districts' voting for
                                                Î²Ì‚ RD , are reported in Tables 6 and 7.
pro-free trade and pro-economic assistance bills,
The rst column of each table reports results using OLS, while columns two and three
report results for the non-parametric and parametric RD estimations, respectively.
As noted in the tables, estimates are negative and statistically signicant in all three
columns for pro-free trade bills, and positive and statistically signicant in all three
columns for pro-economic assistance bills, consistent with Figures 9 and 10. The results
in Tables 6 and 7 are also robust to variation in the bandwidth of our nonparametric
                                                                    25
estimation as well as alternative polynomial expansions.
   In terms of economic signicance, the 2SLS coecient estimates reported in the
third column of each table indicate that a Democratic aliation is associated with a
16 percent reduction in the share of votes for pro-free trade legislation and a 27 percent
increase in the share of votes for pro-economic assistance bills, relative to Republican
aliation. These results therefore provide a rationale for the voting results reported
in Section 4.
   Moreover, comparison of legislators' votes over time indicates even sharper dier-
ences between parties after the change in U.S. trade policy. Table 8 compares results
for the nal specications reported in Tables 6 and 7 for the pre- versus post-PNTR
time periods.      As indicated in the table, we nd that for both types of legislation,
Democrats are less likely to support pro-free trade and more likely to support pro-
economic assistance legislation in Congresses after 2000 versus before.

  25 See Section B of the online appendix for further discussion.




                                                  17
6 Conclusion
This paper examines the eect of increased import competition from China on U.S.
political outcomes. Our primary measure of exposure to competition from China comes
from the U.S. granting of Permanent Normal Trade Relations to China, and we examine
its eect in a dierences-in-dierences specication.
   We nd that U.S. counties more exposed to increased competition from China
experience increases in the share of votes cast for Democrats in Congressional elections,
along with increases in the probability that a Democrat represents a county and the
probability of a county switching from a Republican to a Democrat Representative.
The results are also economically signicant  we nd that moving a county from the
25th to the 75th percentile of exposure to China increases the Democrat vote share in
Congressional elections by 1.5 percentage points, or a 3.7 percent increase relative to the
average share of votes won by Democrats in the 2000 Congressional election. Moreover,
we nd that the eect of the increase in import competition on voting is slightly larger
once we account for the exposure of other counties in the same labor market, and
that increased import competition is associated with higher voter turnout and a higher
share of votes cast for Democrats in Presidential and gubernatorial elections.
   The second half of our analysis investigates potential links between these voting
outcomes and the policy choices of legislators in Congress. We use a regression discon-
tinuity approach to examine dierences between Democrats' and Republicans' voting
on bills related to trade and economic assistance programs. We nd that Democrats
are more likely to support policies that limit import competition and that provide
economic assistance that may benet workers adversely aected by trade competition,
providing an explanation for the voting behavior documented in the rst part of our
paper.
   Our results suggest that voters who perceive themselves as being disadvantaged
by trade are more likely to vote for politicians that might restrict imports or promote
economic assistance. A potentially fruitful avenue for further research is to investigate a
link between PNTR and the success of Republican and Democrat candidates proposing
to alter trade agreements during the 2016 Presidential primaries.




References
 [1] Acemoglu, Daron, David Autor, David Dorn, Gordon H. Hanson, and Brendan
    Price. 2013. Import Competition and the Great US Employment Sag of the 2000s.
    Working Paper.


 [2] Artuc, Erhan, Shubham Chaudhuri, and John McLaren. 2010. Trade Shocks and
    Labor Adjustment: A Structural Empirical Approach. American Economic Re-
    view, 100(3): 1008-45.




                                            18
 [3] Autor, David H., David Dorn, and Gordon H. Hanson. 2013. The China Syndrome:
    Local Labor Market Eects of Import Competition in the United States.             American
    Economic Review, 103(6):    2121-2168.


 [4] Baldwin, Robert E. and Christopher S. Magee. 2000. Is Trade Policy for Sale?
    Congressional Voting on Recent Trade Bills.           Public Choice, 105:   79-101.


 [5] Bernard, Andrew B., J. Bradford Jensen, and Peter K. Schott. 2006. Survival of
    the Best Fit: Exposure to Low-Wage Countries and the (Uneven) Growth of US
    Manufacturing Plants. Journal of International Economics 68(1): 219-237.


 [6] Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duo and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2004. How Much
    Should We Trust Dierences-in-Dierences Estimates? The Quarterly Journal of
    Economics, MIT Press, vol. 119(1), pages 249-275, February.


 [7] Bloom, Nick, Stephen Bond and John Van Reenen. 2007. Uncertainty and Invest-
    ment Dynamics. Review of Economic Studies 74: 391-415.


 [8] Blonigen, Bruce A. and David N. Figlio. 1998. Voting for Protection: Does Direct
    Foreign Investment Inuence Legislative Behavior?            American Economic Review,
    88(4): 1002-1014.


 [9] Brambilla, Irene, Amit K. Khandelwal and Peter K. Schott. 2009. China's Expe-
    rience Under the Multiber Arrangement (MFA) and the Agreement on Textiles
    and Clothing (ATC). In China's Growing Roll in World Trade, edited by Robert
    Feenstra and Shang-Jin Wei. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Forthcoming.


[10] Brower,      Kate   Anderson     and     Lisa    Lerer.      2012.     China-Bashing       as
    Campaign       Rhetoric   Binds    Obama         to     Romney.       Bloomberg       Business
    http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2012-06-04/china-bashing-binds-
    obama-to-romney-with-trade-imbalance-as-foil.


[11] Caliendo, Lorenzo, Maximiliano Dvorkin, and Fernando Parro. 2015. The Impact
    of Trade on Labor Market Dynamics. NBER Working Paper No. 21149.


[12] Che, Yi and Xu, Xun. 2015. The China Syndrome in US: Import Competition,
    Crime, and Government Transfer. Mimeo, University of Munich.


[13] Collinson,    Stephen.   2015.    2016      Candidates        Take     Aim     at     China.
    http://www.cnn.com/2015/08/28/politics/rubio-walker-clinton-china-policy/


[14] Conconi, Paola, Giovanni Facchini, and Maurizio Zanardi. 2014. Policymakers'
    Horizon and Trade Reforms:        The Protectionist Eect of Elections.           Journal of
    International Economics, 94:    102-118.




                                            19
[15] Conconi, Paola, Giovanni Facchini, and Maurizio Zanardi. 2012. Fast-Track Au-
    thority and International Trade Negotiations.   American Economic Journal: Eco-
    nomic Policy, 4(3):   146-189.


[16] Conconi, Paola, Giovanni Facchini, Max F. Steinhardt and Maurizio Zanardi.
    2015. The Political Economy of Trade and Migration:      Evidence form the U.S.
    Congress. Working Paper.


[17] Dippel, Christian, Robert Gold and Stephan Heblich. 2015. Globalization and its
    (Dis-)Content: Trade Shocks and Voting Behavior. Mimeo, UCLA.


[18] Dix-Carneiro, Rafael, Rodrigo R. Soares and Gabriel Ulyssea. 2015. Local Labor
    Market Conditions and Crime: Evidence from the Brazilian Trade Liberalization.
    Mimeo.


[19] Ebenstein, Avraham, Ann Harrison, Margaret McMillan, and Shannon Phillips.
    2014. Estimating the Impact of Trade and Oshoring on American Workers using
    the Current Population Surveys. Review of Economics and Statistics, 96(4): 581-
    595.


[20] Federal Election Commission. 2001. Federal Elections 2000. Available online at
    http://www.fec.gov/pubrec/fe2000/preface.htm.


[21] Feenstra, Robert C., John Romalis and Peter K. Schott. 2002. U.S. Imports,
    Exports and Tari Data, 1989-2001. NBER Working Paper 9387.


[22] Feler, Leo and Mine Z. Senses. 2015. Trade Shocks and the Provision of Local
    Public Goods. Unpublished.


[23] Feigenbaum, James J. and Andrew B. Hall. 2015. How Legislators Respond to
    Localized Economic Shocks: Evidence from Chinese Import Competition. Journal
    of Politics, forthcoming.


[24] Feng, Ling, Zhiyuan Li and Deborah L. Swenson. Trade Policy Uncertainty and
    Exports: Evidence from China's WTO Accession. NBER Working Paper 21985.


[25] Freeman, R., Katz, L., 1991. Industrial Wage and Employment Determination in
    an Open Economy, in Immigration, Trade and Labor Market, edited by John M.
    Abowd and Richard B. Freeman. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.


[26] Gilbert, John and Reza Oladi. 2012. Net Campaign Contributions, Agricultural
    Interests, and Votes on Liberalizing Trade with China.   Public Choice,   150: 745-
    769.


[27] Groizard, Jose L., Priya Ranjan and Jose Antonio Rodriguez-Lopez. 2012. Input
    Trade Flows. Unpublished.




                                        20
[28] Haberman,   Maggie.    Donald   Trump       Says   He   Favors   Big   Taris   on   Chi-
    nese   Imports.    Available   online   at    http://www.nytimes.com/politics/rst-
    draft/2016/01/07/donald-trump-says-he-favors-big-taris-on-chinese-
    exports/?_r=0.


[29] Hahn, Jinyong, Petra Todd, and Wilbert Van der Klaauw. 2001. Identication and
    Estimation of Treatment Eects with a Regression-Discontinuity Design. Econo-
    metrica, 69(1): 201-209.


[30] Handley, Kyle. 2014. Exporting Under Trade Policy Uncertainty:            Theory and
    Evidence. Journal of International Economics 94(1): 50-66.


[31] Handley, Kyle and Nuno Limao. 2014. Policy Uncertainty, Trade and Welfare:
    Evidence from the U.S. and China. Mimeo.


[32] Heise, Sebastian, Justin R. Pierce, Georg Schaur and Peter Schott. 2015. Trade
    Policy and the Structure of Supply Chains. Mimeo.


[33] Imbens, Guido and Karthik Kalyanaraman. 2012. Optimal Bandwidth Choice for
    the Regression Discontinuity Estimator. Review of Economic Studies, 79(3): 933-
    959.


[34] Jensen, J. Bradford, Dennis P. Quinn and Stephen Weymouth. 2016. Winners and
    Losers in International Trade: The Eects on U.S. Presidential Voting. NBER
    Working Paper 21899.


[35] Karol, David. 2012. Congress, the President and Trade Policy in the Obama Years.
    Working Paper, University of Maryland.


[36] Khandelwal, Amit K., Peter K. Schott and Shang-Jin Wei. 2013. Trade Liberal-
    ization and Embedded Institutional Reform: Evidence from Chinese Exporters.
    American Economic Review 103 (6): 2169-95.


[37] Kleibergen, Frank and Richard Paap. 2006. Generalized Reduced Rank Tests Us-
    ing the Singular Value Decomposition. Journal of Econometrics 133(1):97-126.


[38] Kriner, Douglas L. and Andrew Reeves. 2012. The Inuence of Federal Spending
    on Presidential Elections. American Political Science Review, 106(2), 348-366.


[39] Lee, David S., Enrico Moretti, and Matthew J. Butler. 2004. Do Voters Aect or
    Elect Policies? Evidence from the U.S. House. Quarterly Journal of Economics,
    119(3): 807-859.


[40] Lee, David S. 2008. Randomized Experiments from Non-random Selection in U.S.
    House Elections. Journal of Econometrics, 142: 675-697.




                                            21
[41] Lee, David S. and Thomas Lemieux. 2010. Regression Discontinuity Designs in
    Economics. Journal of Economic Literature, 48: 281-355.


[42] Lee, David S. and David Card. 2008. Regression Discontinuity Inference with
    Specication Error. Journal of Econometrics, 142(2): 655-674.


[43] Lichtblau, Eric. 2011. Senate Nears Approval of Measure to Punish China Over
    Currency Manipulation. New York Times October 6, 2011.


[44] Mayda, Anna Maria, Giovanni Peri and Walter Steingress. 2016. Immigration to
    the U.S.: A Problem for the Republicans or the Democrats?       NBER Working
    Paper 21941.


[45] McCrary, Justin. 2008. Manipulation of the Running Variable in the Regression
    Discontinuity Design: A Density Test. Journal of Econometrics, 142: 698-714.


[46] Mion, Giordano and Like Zhu. 2013. Import Competition From and Outsourcing
    to China: A Curse or a Blessing for Firms. Journal of International Economics
    89(1): 202-215.


[47] Pierce, Justin R. and Peter K. Schott. 2012. A Concordance Between U.S. Har-
    monized System Codes and SIC/NAICS Product Classes and Industries. Journal
    of Economic and Social Measurement 37(1-2): 61-96.


[48] Pierce, Justin R. and Peter K. Schott. 2016. The Surprisingly Swift Decline of
    U.S. Manufacturing Employment. American Economic Review. Forthcoming.


[49] Pierce, Justin R. and Peter K. Schott. 2015. Trade Liberalization and Mortality:
    Evidence from U.S. Counties. Mimeo.


[50] Pindyck, Robert S. 1993. Investments of Uncertain Cost. Journal of Financial
    Economics 34 (1): 53-76.


[51] Porter, Jack. 2003. Estimation in the Regression Discontinuity Model. Unpub-
    lished, Department of Economics, University of Wisconsin, Madison.


[52] Revenga, Ana L. 1992. Exporting Jobs?: The Impact of Import Competition on
    Employment and Wages in U.S. Manufacturing. Quarterly Journal of Economics,
    107(1): 255-284.


[53] Sachs, J.D., Shatz, H.J. 1994. Trade and Jobs in U.S. Manufacturing, Brookings
    Papers on Economic Activity 1994(1): 1-69.


[54] Sanger, David E. and Sewell Chan. 2010. Eye on China, House Votes for Greater
    Tari Powers. New York Times, September 29.


[55] Scheve, Kenneth F. and Matthew J. Slaughter. 2001. What Determines Trade-
    Policy Preferences? Journal of International Economics 54(2001): 267-292.


                                         22
[56] Schlozman, Kay Lehman and Sidney Verba. 1979. Injury to Insult: Unemploy-
    ment, Class and Political Response. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.


[57] Stromberg,    Stephen.   2016.   What    Should      Worry   Clinton   about   Sanders's
    Michigan      Win.   The   Washington         Post,   PostPartisan.     Available   online
    at https://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/post-partisan/wp/2016/03/09/what-
    should-worry-clinton-about-sanderss-michigan-win/.


[58] Utar, Hale and Luis B. Torres Ruiz. 2013. International Competition and Indus-
    trial Evolution: Evidence form the Impact of Chinese Competition on Mexican
    Maquiladoras. Journal of Development Economics 105: 267-287.


[59] Wright, John R. 2012. Unemployment and the Democratic Electoral Advantage.
    American Political Science Review, 106(4): 685-702.




                                              23
               Å½ÆµÅ¶ÆšÇ‡ÆšÆšÆŒÅÄÆµÆšÄž               KÄÆ       DÄžÄ‚Å¶        ^        DÅÅ¶       DÄ‚Ç†
               DÄžÄšÅÄ‚Å¶,Å½ÆµÆÄžÅšÅ½Å¯Äš/Å¶ÄÅ½ÅµÄž       Ï¯Ï­Ï¯Ï´       Ï¯Ï­Í˜Ï®Ï´      Ï´Í˜Ï²Ï¯      Ï­Ï­Í˜Ï®Ï­      Ï³Ï³Í˜Ï¯Ï±
               WÄžÆŒÄÄžÅ¶ÆšÄ‚ÄÅšÄžÅ¯Å½ÆŒ              Ï¯Ï­Ï¯Ï´       ÏµÍ˜Ï¬Ï¯       Ï°Í˜Ï®Ï®      Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï¬       Ï°Ï¬Í˜Ï¯Ï¬
               WÄžÆŒÄÄžÅ¶Æš'ÆŒÄ‚ÄšÆµÄ‚ÆšÄž              Ï¯Ï­Ï¯Ï´       Ï°Í˜Ï°Ï´       Ï®Í˜Ï³Ï°      Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï¬       Ï®ÏµÍ˜Ï³Ï¬
               WÄžÆŒÄÄžÅ¶ÆšEÅ½Å¶Í²tÅšÅÆšÄž             Ï¯Ï­Ï¯Ï´       Ï­Ï®Í˜Ï´Ï±     Ï­Ï±Í˜Ï´Ï±      Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï¬       ÏµÏ°Í˜ÏµÏ¬
               WÄžÆŒÄÄžÅ¶ÆšsÄžÆšÄžÆŒÄ‚Å¶               Ï¯Ï­Ï¯Ï´       Ï­Ï°Í˜Ï³Ïµ      Ï®Í˜Ï³Ï³      Ï°Í˜Ï®Ï¬       Ï®ÏµÍ˜Ï¬Ï¬
               WÄžÆŒÄÄžÅ¶ÆšÏ²Ï±Ð½                   Ï¯Ï­Ï¯Ï´       Ï­Ï°Í˜Ï´Ï²      Ï°Í˜Ï°Ï²      Ï¬Í˜Ï³Ï¬       Ï¯Ï³Í˜Ï³Ï¬
               EÅ½ÆšÄžÆÍ—dÄ‚ÄÅ¯ÄžÆÆµÅµÅµÄ‚ÆŒÅÇŒÄžÆÆšÅšÄžÄšÅÆÆšÆŒÅÄÆµÆšÅÅ½Å¶Å½Ä¨Ç€Ä‚ÆŒÅÅ½ÆµÆÄÅ½ÆµÅ¶ÆšÇ‡Ä‚ÆšÆšÆŒÅÄÆµÆšÄžÆÅÅ¶Ï­ÏµÏµÏ¬
               Ä‚ÄÄÅ½ÆŒÄšÅÅ¶ÅÆšÅ½ÆšÅšÄžÏ­ÏµÏµÏ¬ÄžÄÄžÅ¶Å¶ÅÄ‚Å¯ÄžÅ¶ÆÆµÆÍ˜



                                       Table 1: County Attributes in 1990




  sZ/>^                                  ÄžÅµÅ½Ç€Å½ÆšÄž       ÄžÅµÅ½Ç€Å½ÆšÄž        ÄžÅµÅ½Ç€Å½ÆšÄž         ÄžÅµtÅÅ¶         ^Ï®ÄžÅµ           ^Ï®ZÄžÆ‰        dÆµÆŒÅ¶Å½ÆµÆš


  WÅ½ÆÆšÇ†EdZ'Ä‚Æ‰Ä                                Í²Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï¯Ï²Ï³     Ï¬Í˜Ï­Ï¯Ï²Ï¯ÎŽÎŽÎŽ      Ï¬Í˜Ï­Ï´Ï¬Ï´ÎŽÎŽÎŽ        Ï¬Í˜Ï®Ï®Ï´Ï®ÎŽÎŽ      Ï¬Í˜Ï®Ï®Ï´Ï³ÎŽÎŽ        Í²Ï¬Í˜Ï®Ï²Ï²Ï´ÎŽ     Ï¬Í˜Ï­Ï°Ï°Ï°ÎŽÎŽÎŽ
                                                   Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï¯Ï³        Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï°Ï®Ï­         Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï°Ï²Ï´          Ï¬Í˜Ï­Ï¬Ï¯Ï´        Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï´ÏµÏ°          Ï¬Í˜Ï­Ï±Ï±Ïµ        Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï®Ï¬Ï¯
  WÅ½ÆÆšÇ†DÄžÄšÅÄ‚Å¶,,/ÅÅ¶Ï­ÏµÏµÏ¬Ä                                   Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï®Ï®Ï°           Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï®Ï¬Ï³       Í²Ï¬Í˜Ï®Ï¬Ï²Ï±ÎŽ       Í²Ï¬Í˜Ï­Ï­Ï¬Ï°     Ï¬Í˜Ï³Ï­Ï²Ï­ÎŽÎŽÎŽ      Í²Ï¬Í˜Ï¯Ï±Ï¬Ï­ÎŽÎŽÎŽ
                                                                Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï°Ï­Ï±           Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï°Ï­Ï²         Ï¬Í˜Ï­Ï¬Ï²Ï®         Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï´Ï¯        Ï¬Í˜Ï­Ï°Ï°Ï±          Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï­Ï´Ï±
  WÅ½ÆÆšÇ†WÄžÆŒÄÄžÅ¶ÆšÄ‚ÄÅšÄžÅ¯Å½ÆŒÆÅÅ¶Ï­ÏµÏµÏ¬Ä                         Ï¬Í˜Ï²Ï´Ï³Ï¯ÎŽÎŽÎŽ      Ï¬Í˜Ï²ÏµÏ¯Ï¯ÎŽÎŽÎŽ       Ï­Í˜ÏµÏ±Ï´Ï­ÎŽÎŽÎŽ        Ï¬Í˜Ï°Ï¬Ï²Ï¯ÎŽ     Í²Ï®Í˜Ï®Ï³Ï®ÏµÎŽÎŽÎŽ     Ï¬Í˜Ï²Ï¯Ï²Ï¬ÎŽÎŽÎŽ
                                                                Ï¬Í˜Ï¬ÏµÏ´Ïµ          Ï¬Í˜Ï¬ÏµÏµ          Ï¬Í˜Ï®Ï±Ï¯Ï±         Ï¬Í˜Ï®Ï®Ï­Ï²         Ï¬Í˜Ï¯Ï´Ï­Ï´        Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï°Ï±Ï¯
  WÅ½ÆÆšÇ†WÄžÆŒÄÄžÅ¶Æš'ÆŒÄ‚ÄšÆµÄ‚ÆšÄžÅÅ¶Ï­ÏµÏµÏ¬Ä                             Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï³Ï°Ï®           Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï³Ï­Ï³        Í²Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï­Ï´Ï­       Ï¬Í˜Ï²Ï­Ï±Ï³ÎŽ         Ï¬Í˜Ï¯Ï­Ï³Ï®     Í²Ï¬Í˜Ï¯Ï´Ï´ÏµÎŽÎŽÎŽ
                                                                Ï¬Í˜Ï­Ï®Ï´Ï®           Ï¬Í˜Ï­Ï®Ï´Ï¯         Ï¬Í˜Ï¯Ï®Ï¬Ï´        Ï¬Í˜Ï¯Ï¯Ï±Ï³         Ï¬Í˜Ï¯ÏµÏ²Ï®         Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï²Ï¬Ï²
  WÅ½ÆÆšÇ†WÄžÆŒÄÄžÅ¶ÆšEÅ½Å¶Í²tÅšÅÆšÄžÅÅ¶Ï­ÏµÏµÏ¬Ä                            Í²Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï­Ïµ           Í²Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï­Ï³Ï´        Í²Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï°Ïµ     Ï¬Í˜Ï­Ï®Ï¯Ï­ÎŽÎŽ         Í²Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï¯Ï¯Ï°     Í²Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï²Ï±Ï®ÎŽÎŽÎŽ
                                                                Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï®Ï­Ï®            Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï®Ï­Ï°        Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï°Ï¯Ï­       Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï±Ï°Ï®          Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï°Ï³Ï­         Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï¬Ï³Ï´
  WÅ½ÆÆšÇ†WÄžÆŒÄÄžÅ¶ÆšKÇ€ÄžÆŒÏ²Ï±ÅÅ¶Ï­ÏµÏµÏ¬Ä                           Í²Ï¬Í˜Ï­ÏµÏ®Ï¯ÎŽÎŽ         Í²Ï¬Í˜Ï­ÏµÏ¬ÏµÎŽÎŽ    Í²Ï¬Í˜Ï°Ï³Ï®Ï¯ÎŽÎŽÎŽ        Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï±Ï°Ï²     Ï¬Í˜Ï³Ï±Ï´Ï³ÎŽÎŽÎŽ      Í²Ï¬Í˜Ï­Ï­Ï³Ï¯ÎŽÎŽÎŽ
                                                                Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï³Ï°Ï³            Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï³Ï°Ï³        Ï¬Í˜Ï­Ï²Ï±Ï¯        Ï¬Í˜Ï­Ï®Ï¯Ï®        Ï¬Í˜Ï®Ï±Ï­Ï­          Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï®ÏµÏ²
  WÅ½ÆÆšÇ†WÄžÆŒÄÄžÅ¶ÆšsÄžÆšÄžÆŒÄ‚Å¶ÅÅ¶Ï­ÏµÏµÏ¬Ä                              Ï¬Í˜Ï¬ÏµÏ­Ï¯           Ï¬Í˜Ï¬ÏµÏ®Ï³        Í²Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï³Ï­Ï´       Í²Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï°Ï²Ï´        Í²Ï¬Í˜Ï­Ï­Ï²Ï¯     Ï¬Í˜Ï°Ï¯Ï±Ï³ÎŽÎŽÎŽ
                                                                Ï¬Í˜Ï¬ÏµÏ²Ï°           Ï¬Í˜Ï¬ÏµÏ²Ï¯         Ï¬Í˜Ï®Ï®Ï®Ï³        Ï¬Í˜Ï­Ï´Ï¯Ï´         Ï¬Í˜Ï¯Ï®Ï¬Ï°        Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï°Ï¯Ï±
  EdZÄÆš                                                                   Ï­Ï¯Ï°Í˜Ï¯ÏµÏ¬Ï­ÎŽÎŽ        Ï®Ï°Ï®Í˜Ï­Ï®Ï®Ï³     Í²Ï¯Ï²Ï±Í˜Ï´ÏµÏ³Ï®ÎŽ      Í²Ï®Ï¬Ï®Í˜Ï¯Ï¬Ï®Ï±     Ï´Ï°Í˜Ï²Ï´Ï¬Ï¬ÎŽÎŽ
                                                                              Ï²Ï°Í˜Ï¬Ï­Ï´Ï°        Ï­Ï±Ï³Í˜ÏµÏ¯Ï°Ï¯       Ï­Ï´Ï³Í˜Ï²Ï²Ï±Ï¯       Ï®ÏµÏ¯Í˜Ï°Ï³Ï¯Ï±       Ï¯Ï¯Í˜Ï²Ï¯Ï¬Ï®
  D&Ç†Æ‰Å½ÆÆµÆŒÄžÍ¾ÅšÅÅ¶Ä‚Í¿ÄÆš                                                        Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï´Ï®Ï¯        Ï­Í˜Ï­Ï´Ï³ÏµÎŽ       Í²Ï¬Í˜Ï­Ï®Ï²Ï®     Í²Ï¯Í˜Ï­Ï¯ÏµÏ¯ÎŽÎŽÎŽ         Ï¬Í˜Ï­Ï­Ï®Ïµ
                                                                                 Ï¬Í˜Ï®Ï±Ï´Ï²         Ï¬Í˜Ï²Ï´ÏµÏ±        Ï¬Í˜Ï²Ï²Ï´Ï´         Ï­Í˜Ï­Ï¬Ï®Ï´         Ï¬Í˜Ï­Ï¯Ï³Ï±
  D&Ç†Æ‰Å½ÆÆµÆŒÄžÍ¾ZKtÍ¿ÄÆš                                                          Í²Ï¬Í˜Ï®ÏµÏ°Ï®     Í²Ï¯Í˜Ï¬Ï²Ï¬Ï°ÎŽÎŽ        Ï¬Í˜Ï­Ï®Ï­Ïµ     Ï³Í˜Ï±Ï­Ï¯Ï²ÎŽÎŽÎŽ         Í²Ï¬Í˜Ï¯Ï¯Ï¬Ï®
                                                                                   Ï¬Í˜Ï±Ï´Ï°        Ï­Í˜Ï±Ï®Ï³Ï±        Ï­Í˜Ï°Ï²Ï°Ï²        Ï®Í˜Ï°Ï°ÏµÏ°           Ï¬Í˜Ï¯Ï¬Ï³


  KÄÆÄžÆŒÇ€Ä‚ÆšÅÅ½Å¶Æ                                   Ï¯Ï­Í•Ï­Ï¬Ï²         Ï¯Ï­Í•Ï­Ï¬Ï²           Ï¯Ï­Í•Ï­Ï¬Ï²         Ï¯Ï­Í•Ï­Ï¬Ï²        Ï­Ï²Í•Ï´ÏµÏ­         Ï­Ï­Í•Ï­Ï¬Ï±         Ï­ÏµÍ•Ï°Ï¬Ï¬
  ZÍ²ÆÆ‹ÆµÄ‚ÆŒÄžÄš                                      Ï¬Í˜Ï²Ï¯Ï®Ï­           Ï¬Í˜Ï²Ï¯Ï´          Ï¬Í˜Ï²Ï¯Ï´Ï­         Ï¬Í˜Ï±Ï³Ï²Ïµ        Ï¬Í˜Ï¯Ï³Ï³Ï´          Ï¬Í˜Ï°Ï²Ï°         Ï¬Í˜Ï´Ï¯Ï²Ï³
  ÆÆšÅÅµÄ‚ÆšÅÅ½Å¶                                        K>^            K>^              K>^           K>^           K>^            K>^             K>^
  WÄžÆŒÅÅ½Äš                                    Ï­ÏµÏµÏ®Í¾Ï®Í¿Ï®Ï¬Ï­Ï¬    Ï­ÏµÏµÏ®Í¾Ï®Í¿Ï®Ï¬Ï­Ï¬     Ï­ÏµÏµÏ®Í¾Ï®Í¿Ï®Ï¬Ï­Ï¬     Ï­ÏµÏµÏ®Í¾Ï®Í¿Ï®Ï¬Ï­Ï¬   Ï­ÏµÏµÏ®Í¾Ï®Í¿Ï®Ï¬Ï­Ï¬    Ï­ÏµÏµÏ®Í¾Ï®Í¿Ï®Ï¬Ï­Ï¬    Ï­ÏµÏµÏ®Í¾Ï®Í¿Ï®Ï¬Ï­Ï¬
  ÆŒÅ½Æ‰Æ                                            Å¶Å½Å¶Äž           Å¶Å½Å¶Äž            Å¶Å½Å¶Äž           Å¶Å½Å¶Äž     >Ä‚ÅtÅÅ¶       >Ä‚ÅZtÅÅ¶          Å¶Å½Å¶Äž
  &                                                 ÄÍ•Æš            ÄÍ•Æš              ÄÍ•Æš           ÄÍ•Æš            ÄÍ•Æš            ÄÍ•Æš            ÄÍ•Æš
  Å¯ÆµÆÆšÄžÆŒÅÅ¶Å                                           Ä              Ä               Ä              Ä             Ä              Ä              Ä
  DÄžÄ‚Å¶ÄžÆ‰ÄžÅ¶ÄšÄžÅ¶ÆšsÄ‚ÆŒÅÄ‚ÄÅ¯ÄžÅÅ¶Ï®Ï¬Ï¬Ï¬                      Ï°Ï¬             Ï°Ï¬              Ï°Ï¬             Ï¯Ï±             Ï³             Ï­Ï¯             Ï²Ï±
  EÅ½ÆšÄžÆÍ—dÄ‚ÄÅ¯ÄžÆŒÄžÆ‰Å½ÆŒÆšÆÄšÅÄ¨Ä¨ÄžÆŒÄžÅ¶ÄÄžÍ²ÅÅ¶Í²ÄšÅÄ¨Ä¨ÄžÆŒÄžÅ¶ÄÄžÆÍ¾/Í¿K>^ÆŒÄžÅÆŒÄžÆÆÅÅ½Å¶ÆŒÄžÆÆµÅ¯ÆšÆÄ¨Å½ÆŒÄžÅµÅ½ÄÆŒÄ‚ÆšÇ€Å½ÆšÄžÆÅšÄ‚ÆŒÄžÅÅ¶ÄÅ½ÆµÅ¶ÆšÇ‡ÄÅÅ¶Ç‡ÄžÄ‚ÆŒÆšÄ‚ÆÇÄžÅ¯Å¯Ä‚ÆÄšÆµÅµÅµÇ‡
  Ç€Ä‚ÆŒÅÄ‚ÄÅ¯ÄžÆÄ¨Å½ÆŒÇÅšÄžÆšÅšÄžÆŒÆšÅšÄžÄžÅµÅ½ÄÆŒÄ‚ÆšÇÅÅ¶ÆÍ•ÇÅšÄžÆšÅšÄžÆŒÆšÅšÄžÆŒÄžÅÆÄ‚ÆÇÅÆšÄÅšÆšÅ½Ä‚ÄžÅµÅ½ÄÆŒÄ‚ÆšÍ•ÇÅšÄžÆšÅšÄžÆŒÆšÅšÄžÆŒÄžÅÆÄ‚ÆÇÅÆšÄÅšÆšÅ½Ä‚ZÄžÆ‰ÆµÄÅ¯ÅÄÄ‚Å¶Í•Ä‚Å¶ÄšÆšÆµÆŒÅ¶Å½ÆµÆšÍ˜
  ^Ä‚ÅµÆ‰Å¯ÄžÆ‰ÄžÆŒÅÅ½ÄšÅÆÄžÇ€ÄžÅ¶Ç‡ÄžÄ‚ÆŒÆÄ¨ÆŒÅ½ÅµÏ­ÏµÏµÏ®ÆšÅ½Ï®Ï¬Ï­Ï¬Í˜dÆµÆŒÅ¶Å½ÆµÆšÄšÄ‚ÆšÄ‚Ä‚ÆŒÄžÅµÅÆÆÅÅ¶ÅÄ¨Å½ÆŒÏ­ÏµÏµÏ®Í•Ï­ÏµÏµÏ°Í•Ï­ÏµÏµÏ´Ä‚Å¶ÄšÏ®Ï¬Ï¬Ï´Í˜dÅšÄžÄ¨ÅÆŒÆÆšÄÅ½Ç€Ä‚ÆŒÅÄ‚ÆšÄžÅÆÆšÅšÄž/ÆšÄžÆŒÅµÅ½Ä¨
  ÅÅ¶ÆšÄžÆŒÄžÆÆšÍ•Ä‚Å¶ÅÅ¶ÆšÄžÆŒÄ‚ÄÆšÅÅ½Å¶Å½Ä¨Ä‚Æ‰Å½ÆÆšÍ²WEdZÄšÆµÅµÅµÇ‡ÇÅÆšÅšÄÅ½ÆµÅ¶ÆšÅÄžÆÎ–ÇÄžÅÅÅšÆšÄžÄšÄ‚Ç€ÄžÆŒÄ‚ÅÄžEdZÅÄ‚Æ‰Í˜dÅšÄžÅ¶ÄžÇ†ÆšÆÅÇ†ÄÅ½Ç€Ä‚ÆŒÅÄ‚ÆšÄžÆÅÅ¶ÆšÄžÆŒÄ‚ÄÆšÄ‚Æ‰Å½ÆÆšÍ²WEdZÄšÆµÅµÅµÇ‡
  Ç€Ä‚ÆŒÅÄ‚ÄÅ¯ÄžÇÅÆšÅšÄÅ½ÆµÅ¶ÆšÇ‡ÄšÄžÅµÅ½ÅÆŒÄ‚Æ‰ÅšÅÄÄ‚ÆšÆšÆŒÅÄÆµÆšÄžÆÍ˜dÅšÄžÆŒÄžÅµÄ‚ÅÅ¶ÅÅ¶ÅÄÅ½Ç€Ä‚ÆŒÅÄ‚ÆšÄžÆÄ‚ÄÄÅ½ÆµÅ¶ÆšÄ¨Å½ÆŒÆšÅšÄžÇÄžÅÅÅšÆšÄžÄšÄ‚Ç€ÄžÆŒÄ‚ÅÄžÅÅµÆ‰Å½ÆŒÆšÆšÄ‚ÆŒÅÄ¨Ä¨ÅÅµÆ‰Å½ÆÄžÄšÅ½Å¶ÆšÅšÄž
  ÄÅ½ÆµÅ¶ÆšÇ‡Î–ÆÅÅ¶ÄšÆµÆÆšÆŒÅÄ‚Å¯ÆÆšÆŒÆµÄÆšÆµÆŒÄžÄ‚ÆÇÄžÅ¯Å¯Ä‚ÆÆšÅšÄžÄžÅ¯ÅÅµÅÅ¶Ä‚ÆšÅÅ½Å¶Å½Ä¨Æ‹ÆµÄ‚Å¶ÆšÅÆšÄ‚ÆšÅÇ€ÄžÆŒÄžÆÆšÆŒÅÄÆšÅÅ½Å¶ÆÅ½Å¶Ä‚Æ‰Æ‰Ä‚ÆŒÄžÅ¯Ä‚Å¶ÄšÄÅ¯Å½ÆšÅšÅÅ¶ÅÅÅµÆ‰Å½ÆŒÆšÆÄ¨ÆŒÅ½ÅµÅšÅÅ¶Ä‚Ä‚Å¶ÄšÆŒÄžÆÆšÅ½Ä¨
  ÇÅ½ÆŒÅ¯ÄšÍ¾ZKtÍ¿Í˜^ÆšÄ‚Å¶ÄšÄ‚ÆŒÄšÄžÆŒÆŒÅ½ÆŒÆÄ‚ÄšÅ©ÆµÆÆšÄžÄšÄ¨Å½ÆŒÄÅ¯ÆµÆÆšÄžÆŒÅÅ¶ÅÄ‚ÆšÆšÅšÄžÄÅ½ÆµÅ¶ÆšÇ‡Å¯ÄžÇ€ÄžÅ¯Ä‚ÆŒÄžÆŒÄžÆ‰Å½ÆŒÆšÄžÄšÄÄžÅ¯Å½ÇÄÅ½ÄžÄ¨Ä¨ÅÄÅÄžÅ¶ÆšÆÍ˜ÎŽÍ•ÎŽÎŽÄ‚Å¶ÄšÎŽÎŽÎŽÆÅÅÅ¶ÅÄ¨Ç‡ÆÆšÄ‚ÆšÅÆÆšÅÄÄ‚Å¯
  ÆÅÅÅ¶ÅÄ¨ÅÄÄ‚Å¶ÄÄžÄ‚ÆšÆšÅšÄžÏ­Ï¬Í•Ï±Ä‚Å¶ÄšÏ­Æ‰ÄžÆŒÄÄžÅ¶ÆšÅ¯ÄžÇ€ÄžÅ¯Í˜




Table 2: PNTR and County-Level Voting for Democrats (Baseline Results)




                                                                          24
            sZ/>^                                          ÄžÅµÅ½Ç€Å½ÆšÄž           ÄžÅµtÅÅ¶             ^Ï®ÄžÅµ              ^Ï®ZÄžÆ‰           dÆµÆŒÅ¶Å½ÆµÆš

            WÅ½ÆÆšÇ†EdZ'Ä‚Æ‰Ä                                     Ï¬Í˜Ï­Ï®ÏµÏ³ÎŽÎŽ              Ï¬Í˜Ï­Ï²Ï´Ï´         Ï¬Í˜Ï­ÏµÏ´Ï¬ÎŽ             Í²Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï®Ï´Ï´       Ï¬Í˜Ï­Ï¯Ï¯Ï¯ÎŽÎŽÎŽ
                                                                   Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï±Ï±Ï²             Ï¬Í˜Ï­Ï®Ï¯Ï°           Ï¬Í˜Ï­Ï­Ï­Ï±             Ï¬Í˜Ï­Ï³Ï­Ï¯           Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï®Ï¯Ï­
            WÅ½ÆÆšÇ†EdZ'Ä‚Æ‰ÄÇŒ                                     Ï¬Í˜Ï­Ï®Ï²ÏµÎŽ              Ï¬Í˜Ï­Ï°Ï³Ï²           Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï²Ï³Ï­        Í²Ï¬Í˜Ï³Ï¬ÏµÏ´ÎŽÎŽÎŽ            Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï®Ï³Ï±
                                                                   Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï²Ï±Ï²             Ï¬Í˜Ï­Ï°Ï´Ï±           Ï¬Í˜Ï­Ï®Ï­Ï­             Ï¬Í˜Ï®Ï­Ï´Ï°           Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï®Ï³Ï­
            WÅ½ÆÆšÇ†DÄžÄšÅÄ‚Å¶,,/ÅÅ¶Ï­ÏµÏµÏ¬Ä                            Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï­ÏµÏ´          Í²Ï¬Í˜Ï®Ï¬Ï³Ï±ÎŽ           Í²Ï¬Í˜Ï­Ï­Ï¬Ï®         Ï¬Í˜Ï³Ï¯Ï¬ÏµÎŽÎŽÎŽ       Í²Ï¬Í˜Ï¯Ï±Ï¬Ï±ÎŽÎŽÎŽ
                                                                   Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï°Ï­Ï³             Ï¬Í˜Ï­Ï¬Ï²Ï®           Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï´Ï¯Ï­             Ï¬Í˜Ï­Ï°Ï°Ï±           Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï­Ï´Ï±
            WÅ½ÆÆšÇ†WÄžÆŒÄÄžÅ¶ÆšÄ‚ÄÅšÄžÅ¯Å½ÆŒÆÅÅ¶Ï­ÏµÏµÏ¬Ä                 Ï¬Í˜Ï³Ï®Ï­Ï°ÎŽÎŽÎŽ          Ï­Í˜ÏµÏµÏ¬Ï´ÎŽÎŽÎŽ          Ï¬Í˜Ï°Ï®Ï¬Ï¯ÎŽ         Í²Ï®Í˜Ï°Ï­ÏµÏ¬ÎŽÎŽÎŽ        Ï¬Í˜Ï²Ï°Ï­Ï³ÎŽÎŽÎŽ
                                                                   Ï¬Í˜Ï¬ÏµÏµÏ°             Ï¬Í˜Ï®Ï±Ï²Ï­           Ï¬Í˜Ï®Ï®Ï®Ï²             Ï¬Í˜Ï¯Ï´Ï¯Ï´           Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï°Ï±Ï²
            WÅ½ÆÆšÇ†WÄžÆŒÄÄžÅ¶Æš'ÆŒÄ‚ÄšÆµÄ‚ÆšÄžÅÅ¶Ï­ÏµÏµÏ¬Ä                      Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï®ÏµÏ°            Í²Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï²Ï³Ï¯         Ï¬Í˜Ï±Ï´Ï´Ï±ÎŽ              Ï¬Í˜Ï±Ï¬Ï®Ï­      Í²Ï¬Í˜Ï¯ÏµÏ²Ï´ÎŽÎŽÎŽ
                                                                   Ï¬Í˜Ï­Ï®Ï´Ï³             Ï¬Í˜Ï¯Ï®Ï²Ï¯           Ï¬Í˜Ï¯Ï¯ÏµÏ±             Ï¬Í˜Ï¯ÏµÏ´Ï³            Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï²Ï­
            WÅ½ÆÆšÇ†WÄžÆŒÄÄžÅ¶ÆšEÅ½Å¶Í²tÅšÅÆšÄžÅÅ¶Ï­ÏµÏµÏ¬Ä                    Í²Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï­Ï´Ï²            Í²Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï°ÏµÏµ        Ï¬Í˜Ï­Ï®Ï¯Ï¬ÎŽÎŽ             Í²Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï®Ï­Ïµ      Í²Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï²Ï±Ï¯ÎŽÎŽÎŽ
                                                                   Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï®Ï­Ï°             Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï°Ï¯Ï­           Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï±Ï°Ï®              Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï°Ï³           Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï¬Ï³Ï´
            WÅ½ÆÆšÇ†WÄžÆŒÄÄžÅ¶ÆšKÇ€ÄžÆŒÏ²Ï±ÅÅ¶Ï­ÏµÏµÏ¬Ä                  Í²Ï¬Í˜Ï­ÏµÏ´Ï­ÎŽÎŽÎŽ         Í²Ï¬Í˜Ï°Ï´Ï¬Ï²ÎŽÎŽÎŽ            Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï±Ï®Ï°         Ï¬Í˜Ï´Ï°Ï³Ï´ÎŽÎŽÎŽ       Í²Ï¬Í˜Ï­Ï­Ï´ÏµÎŽÎŽÎŽ
                                                                   Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï³Ï°Ï´              Ï¬Í˜Ï­Ï²Ï±            Ï¬Í˜Ï­Ï®Ï¯             Ï¬Í˜Ï®Ï±Ï®Ï²           Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï®ÏµÏ²
            WÅ½ÆÆšÇ†WÄžÆŒÄÄžÅ¶ÆšsÄžÆšÄžÆŒÄ‚Å¶ÅÅ¶Ï­ÏµÏµÏ¬Ä                       Ï¬Í˜Ï­Ï¬Ï³Ï®            Í²Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï±Ï°Ïµ            Í²Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï°            Í²Ï¬Í˜Ï®Ï­Ï±Ïµ       Ï¬Í˜Ï°Ï¯Ï´Ï²ÎŽÎŽÎŽ
                                                                   Ï¬Í˜Ï¬ÏµÏ²Ï¯             Ï¬Í˜Ï®Ï®Ï®Ï³           Ï¬Í˜Ï­Ï´Ï¯Ïµ             Ï¬Í˜Ï¯Ï®Ï¬Ï­           Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï°Ï¯Ï²
            EdZÄÆš                                            Ï­Ï¯Ï¬Í˜Ï±Ï­Ï³Ï­ÎŽÎŽ           Ï®Ï¯Ï³Í˜Ï²Ï­Ï´Ï²      Í²Ï¯Ï²ÏµÍ˜Ï´Ï±Ï®Ï³ÎŽÎŽ          Í²Ï­ÏµÏ³Í˜Ï´Ï±ÏµÏ²        Ï´Ï¯Í˜Ï´Ï´Ï­Ï³ÎŽÎŽ
                                                                 Ï²Ï°Í˜Ï¬Ï¬ÏµÏ°           Ï­Ï±Ï³Í˜Ï³Ï³Ï´Ïµ         Ï­Ï´Ï³Í˜Ï±Ï³Ï¯Ï³           Ï®ÏµÏ­Í˜Ï²Ï¯Ï°Ï­          Ï¯Ï¯Í˜Ï²Ï¯ÏµÏ¯
            D&Ç†Æ‰Å½ÆÆµÆŒÄžÍ¾ÅšÅÅ¶Ä‚Í¿ÄÆš                                Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï³Ï¬Ï°           Ï­Í˜Ï­Ï³Ï°Ï­ÎŽ           Í²Ï¬Í˜Ï­Ï¯Ï­Ï³        Í²Ï¯Í˜Ï­Ï±Ï´Ï®ÎŽÎŽÎŽ            Ï¬Í˜Ï­Ï¬Ï´Ï²
                                                                    Ï¬Í˜Ï®Ï±Ïµ             Ï¬Í˜Ï²ÏµÏ¬Ï±           Ï¬Í˜Ï²Ï²ÏµÏ®             Ï­Í˜Ï¬ÏµÏ³Ï²           Ï¬Í˜Ï­Ï¯Ï³Ï²
            D&Ç†Æ‰Å½ÆÆµÆŒÄžÍ¾ZKtÍ¿ÄÆš                                 Í²Ï¬Í˜Ï®Ï²Ï±Ï³         Í²Ï¯Í˜Ï¬Ï®Ï³Ï¯ÎŽÎŽ             Ï¬Í˜Ï­Ï¯Ï±         Ï³Í˜Ï±Ï­Ï³ÏµÎŽÎŽÎŽ           Í²Ï¬Í˜Ï¯Ï®Ï¬Ï²
                                                                   Ï¬Í˜Ï±Ï´Ï±Ï²             Ï­Í˜Ï±Ï¯Ï¬Ï®           Ï­Í˜Ï°Ï²Ï±Ï³             Ï®Í˜Ï°Ï°Ï¯Ï­           Ï¬Í˜Ï¯Ï¬Ï³Ï­

            KÄÆÄžÆŒÇ€Ä‚ÆšÅÅ½Å¶Æ                                               Ï¯Ï­Í•Ï­Ï¬Ï²          Ï¯Ï­Í•Ï­Ï¬Ï²          Ï­Ï²Í•Ï´ÏµÏ­           Ï­Ï­Í•Ï­Ï¬Ï±            Ï­ÏµÍ•Ï°Ï¬Ï¬
            ZÍ²ÆÆ‹ÆµÄ‚ÆŒÄžÄš                                                    Ï¬Í˜Ï²Ï°            Ï¬Í˜Ï±Ï´            Ï¬Í˜Ï¯Ï´              Ï¬Í˜Ï°Ï²              Ï¬Í˜Ï´Ï°
            ÆÆšÅÅµÄ‚ÆšÅÅ½Å¶                                                    K>^             K>^             K>^              K>^               K>^
            WÄžÆŒÅÅ½Äš                                              Ï­ÏµÏµÏ®Í¾Ï®Í¿Ï®Ï¬Ï­Ï¬       Ï­ÏµÏµÏ®Í¾Ï®Í¿Ï®Ï¬Ï­Ï¬    Ï­ÏµÏµÏ®Í¾Ï®Í¿Ï®Ï¬Ï­Ï¬      Ï­ÏµÏµÏ®Í¾Ï®Í¿Ï®Ï¬Ï­Ï¬       Ï­ÏµÏµÏ®Í¾Ï®Í¿Ï®Ï¬Ï­Ï¬
            ÆŒÅ½Æ‰Æ                                                       Å¶Å½Å¶Äž            Å¶Å½Å¶Äž       >Ä‚ÅtÅÅ¶         >Ä‚ÅZtÅÅ¶         >Ä‚ÅZtÅÅ¶
            &Í²dÄžÆÆšÆ‰Í²Ç€Ä‚Å¯ÆµÄž                                               Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï¬            Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï±            Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï¯              Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï¬              Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï¬
            &                                                             ÄÍ•Æš             ÄÍ•Æš             ÄÍ•Æš               ÄÍ•Æš               ÄÍ•Æš
            Å¯ÆµÆÆšÄžÆŒÅÅ¶Å                                                       Ä               Ä               Ä                 Ä                 Ä
            DÄžÄ‚Å¶ÄžÆ‰ÄžÅ¶ÄšÄžÅ¶ÆšsÄ‚ÆŒÅÄ‚ÄÅ¯ÄžÅÅ¶Ï®Ï¬Ï¬Ï¬                                Ï°Ï¬              Ï¯Ï±                Ï³               Ï­Ï¯                Ï­Ï¯
            EÅ½ÆšÄžÆÍ—dÄ‚ÄÅ¯ÄžÆŒÄžÆ‰Å½ÆŒÆšÆÄšÅÄ¨Ä¨ÄžÆŒÄžÅ¶ÄÄžÍ²ÅÅ¶Í²ÄšÅÄ¨Ä¨ÄžÆŒÄžÅ¶ÄÄžÆÍ¾/Í¿K>^ÆŒÄžÅÆŒÄžÆÆÅÅ½Å¶ÆŒÄžÆÆµÅ¯ÆšÆÄ¨Å½ÆŒÄžÅµÅ½ÄÆŒÄ‚ÆšÇ€Å½ÆšÄžÆÅšÄ‚ÆŒÄžÅÅ¶ÄÅ½ÆµÅ¶ÆšÇ‡ÄÅÅ¶Ç‡ÄžÄ‚ÆŒÆšÄ‚ÆÇÄžÅ¯Å¯
            Ä‚ÆÄšÆµÅµÅµÇ‡Ç€Ä‚ÆŒÅÄ‚ÄÅ¯ÄžÆÄ¨Å½ÆŒÇÅšÄžÆšÅšÄžÆŒÆšÅšÄžÄžÅµÅ½ÄÆŒÄ‚ÆšÇÅÅ¶ÆÍ•ÇÅšÄžÆšÅšÄžÆŒÆšÅšÄžÆŒÄžÅÆÄ‚ÆÇÅÆšÄÅšÆšÅ½Ä‚ÄžÅµÅ½ÄÆŒÄ‚ÆšÍ•ÇÅšÄžÆšÅšÄžÆŒÆšÅšÄžÆŒÄžÅÆÄ‚ÆÇÅÆšÄÅšÆšÅ½Ä‚
            ZÄžÆ‰ÆµÄÅ¯ÅÄÄ‚Å¶Í•Ä‚Å¶ÄšÆšÆµÆŒÅ¶Å½ÆµÆšÍ˜^Ä‚ÅµÆ‰Å¯ÄžÆ‰ÄžÆŒÅÅ½ÄšÅÆÄžÇ€ÄžÅ¶Ç‡ÄžÄ‚ÆŒÆÄ¨ÆŒÅ½ÅµÏ­ÏµÏµÏ®ÆšÅ½Ï®Ï¬Ï­Ï¬Í˜dÆµÆŒÅ¶Å½ÆµÆšÄšÄ‚ÆšÄ‚Ä‚ÆŒÄžÅµÅÆÆÅÅ¶ÅÄ¨Å½ÆŒÏ­ÏµÏµÏ®Í•Ï­ÏµÏµÏ°Í•Ï­ÏµÏµÏ´Ä‚Å¶ÄšÏ®Ï¬Ï¬Ï´Í˜
            dÅšÄžÄ¨ÅÆŒÆÆšÄÅ½Ç€Ä‚ÆŒÅÄ‚ÆšÄžÅÆÆšÅšÄž/ÆšÄžÆŒÅµÅ½Ä¨ÅÅ¶ÆšÄžÆŒÄžÆÆšÍ•Ä‚Å¶ÅÅ¶ÆšÄžÆŒÄ‚ÄÆšÅÅ½Å¶Å½Ä¨Ä‚Æ‰Å½ÆÆšÍ²WEdZÄšÆµÅµÅµÇ‡ÇÅÆšÅšÄÅ½ÆµÅ¶ÆšÅÄžÆÎ–ÇÄžÅÅÅšÆšÄžÄšÄ‚Ç€ÄžÆŒÄ‚ÅÄžEdZÅÄ‚Æ‰Í˜
            dÅšÄžÅ¶ÄžÇ†ÆšÆÅÇ†ÄÅ½Ç€Ä‚ÆŒÅÄ‚ÆšÄžÆÅÅ¶ÆšÄžÆŒÄ‚ÄÆšÄ‚Æ‰Å½ÆÆšÍ²WEdZÄšÆµÅµÅµÇ‡Ç€Ä‚ÆŒÅÄ‚ÄÅ¯ÄžÇÅÆšÅšÄÅ½ÆµÅ¶ÆšÇ‡ÄšÄžÅµÅ½ÅÆŒÄ‚Æ‰ÅšÅÄÄ‚ÆšÆšÆŒÅÄÆµÆšÄžÆÍ˜dÅšÄžÆÄžÄÅ½Å¶ÄšÄÅ½Ç€Ä‚ÆŒÅÄ‚ÆšÄžÅÆÄ‚Å¶
            ÅÅ¶ÆšÄžÆŒÄ‚ÄÆšÅÅ½Å¶Å½Ä¨Æ‰Å½ÆÆšÍ²WEdZÄšÆµÅµÅµÇ‡ÇÅÆšÅšÆšÅšÄžÄ‚Ç€ÄžÆŒÄ‚ÅÄžEdZÅÄ‚Æ‰Ä¨Å½ÆŒÄ‚Å¯Å¯Å½ÆšÅšÄžÆŒÄÅ½ÆµÅ¶ÆšÅÄžÆÅÅ¶ÆšÅšÄžÄÅ½ÆµÅ¶ÆšÇ‡Î–ÆÄÅ½ÅµÅµÆµÆšÅÅ¶ÅÇŒÅ½Å¶ÄžÍ¾ÇŒÍ¿Í•Ä‚ÆÄšÄžÄ¨ÅÅ¶ÄžÄš
            ÄÇ‡ÆšÅšÄžhÍ˜^Í˜ÄžÅ¶ÆÆµÆÍ˜dÅšÄžÆŒÄžÅµÄ‚ÅÅ¶ÅÅ¶ÅÄÅ½Ç€Ä‚ÆŒÅÄ‚ÆšÄžÆÄ‚ÄÄÅ½ÆµÅ¶ÆšÄ¨Å½ÆŒÆšÅšÄžÇÄžÅÅÅšÆšÄžÄšÄ‚Ç€ÄžÆŒÄ‚ÅÄžÅÅµÆ‰Å½ÆŒÆšÆšÄ‚ÆŒÅÄ¨Ä¨ÅÅµÆ‰Å½ÆÄžÄšÅ½Å¶ÆšÅšÄžÄÅ½ÆµÅ¶ÆšÇ‡Î–ÆÅÅ¶ÄšÆµÆÆšÆŒÅÄ‚Å¯
            ÆÆšÆŒÆµÄÆšÆµÆŒÄžÄ‚ÆÇÄžÅ¯Å¯Ä‚ÆÆšÅšÄžÄžÅ¯ÅÅµÅÅ¶Ä‚ÆšÅÅ½Å¶Å½Ä¨Æ‹ÆµÄ‚Å¶ÆšÅÆšÄ‚ÆšÅÇ€ÄžÆŒÄžÆÆšÆŒÅÄÆšÅÅ½Å¶ÆÅ½Å¶Ä‚Æ‰Æ‰Ä‚ÆŒÄžÅ¯Ä‚Å¶ÄšÄÅ¯Å½ÆšÅšÅÅ¶ÅÅÅµÆ‰Å½ÆŒÆšÆÄ¨ÆŒÅ½ÅµÅšÅÅ¶Ä‚Ä‚Å¶ÄšÆŒÄžÆÆšÅ½Ä¨ÇÅ½ÆŒÅ¯Äš
            Í¾ZKtÍ¿Í˜^ÆšÄ‚Å¶ÄšÄ‚ÆŒÄšÄžÆŒÆŒÅ½ÆŒÆÄ‚ÄšÅ©ÆµÆÆšÄžÄšÄ¨Å½ÆŒÄÅ¯ÆµÆÆšÄžÆŒÅÅ¶ÅÄ‚ÆšÆšÅšÄžÄÅ½ÆµÅ¶ÆšÇ‡Å¯ÄžÇ€ÄžÅ¯Ä‚ÆŒÄžÆŒÄžÆ‰Å½ÆŒÆšÄžÄšÄÄžÅ¯Å½ÇÄÅ½ÄžÄ¨Ä¨ÅÄÅÄžÅ¶ÆšÆÍ˜ÎŽÍ•ÎŽÎŽÄ‚Å¶ÄšÎŽÎŽÎŽÆÅÅÅ¶ÅÄ¨Ç‡
            ÆÆšÄ‚ÆšÅÆÆšÅÄÄ‚Å¯ÆÅÅÅ¶ÅÄ¨ÅÄÄ‚Å¶ÄÄžÄ‚ÆšÆšÅšÄžÏ­Ï¬Í•Ï±Ä‚Å¶ÄšÏ­Æ‰ÄžÆŒÄÄžÅ¶ÆšÅ¯ÄžÇ€ÄžÅ¯Í˜



Table 3: PNTR and County-Level Voting for Democrats (Own- and Commuting Zone
Exposure)




                                                                            25
                                                                  ÄžÅµÅ½ÄÆŒÄ‚ÆšsÅ½ÆšÄž^ÅšÄ‚ÆŒÄž
         sZ/>^                                        WÆŒÄžÆÅÄšÄžÅ¶Æš         ^ÄžÅ¶Ä‚ÆšÅ½ÆŒ               'Å½Ç€ÄžÆŒÅ¶Å½ÆŒ

         WÅ½ÆÆšÇ†EdZ'Ä‚Æ‰Ä                                  Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï°Ï´Ï®ÎŽÎŽÎŽ               Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï¬Ï±          Ï¬Í˜Ï­Ï°Ï±ÏµÎŽÎŽÎŽ
                                                             Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï­Ï¯Ï³              Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï¯Ï®Ï³              Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï°Ï­Ï­
         WÅ½ÆÆšÇ†DÄžÄšÅÄ‚Å¶,,/ÅÅ¶Ï­ÏµÏµÏ¬Ä                      Ï¬Í˜Ï­Ï¯Ï­Ï´ÎŽÎŽÎŽ            Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï³Ï®Ï­ÎŽÎŽ         Í²Ï¬Í˜Ï­Ï­Ï­Ï±ÎŽÎŽÎŽ
                                                             Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï­Ï®Ï³              Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï¯Ï¬Ï­              Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï¯Ï³Ï®
         WÅ½ÆÆšÇ†WÄžÆŒÄÄžÅ¶ÆšÄ‚ÄÅšÄžÅ¯Å½ÆŒÆÅÅ¶Ï­ÏµÏµÏ¬Ä               Ï¬Í˜Ï³Ï®Ï¯Ï±ÎŽÎŽÎŽ           Ï¬Í˜Ï®Ï²Ï±Ï®ÎŽÎŽÎŽ             Í²Ï¬Í˜Ï­Ï¬Ï³Ï­
                                                             Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï¯Ï¬Ïµ              Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï³Ï¯Ï­               Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï´Ï±
         WÅ½ÆÆšÇ†WÄžÆŒÄÄžÅ¶Æš'ÆŒÄ‚ÄšÆµÄ‚ÆšÄžÅÅ¶Ï­ÏµÏµÏ¬Ä                   Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï°Ï­Ï²            Ï¬Í˜Ï®Ï¬Ï®Ï­ÎŽÎŽ          Ï¬Í˜Ï³ÏµÏ®Ï²ÎŽÎŽÎŽ
                                                             Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï°Ï­Ï¯              Ï¬Í˜Ï¬ÏµÏ´Ï­              Ï¬Í˜Ï­Ï­Ï²Ï³
         WÅ½ÆÆšÇ†WÄžÆŒÄÄžÅ¶ÆšEÅ½Å¶Í²tÅšÅÆšÄžÅÅ¶Ï­ÏµÏµÏ¬Ä               Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï°Ï²Ï°ÎŽÎŽÎŽ          Í²Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï²Ï­Ï´ÎŽÎŽÎŽ         Í²Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï²Ï±Ï³ÎŽÎŽÎŽ
                                                             Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï¬Ï±Ï­               Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï­Ï®              Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï­Ï±Ï´
         WÅ½ÆÆšÇ†WÄžÆŒÄÄžÅ¶ÆšKÇ€ÄžÆŒÏ²Ï±ÅÅ¶Ï­ÏµÏµÏ¬Ä                  Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï°Ï²Ï®ÎŽÎŽ              Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï±Ï­Ï¯         Í²Ï¬Í˜Ï®Ï¯Ï¬Ï²ÎŽÎŽÎŽ
                                                             Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï®Ï¬Ï¯              Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï°Ï³Ïµ              Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï±Ï³Ï¯
         WÅ½ÆÆšÇ†WÄžÆŒÄÄžÅ¶ÆšsÄžÆšÄžÆŒÄ‚Å¶ÅÅ¶Ï­ÏµÏµÏ¬Ä                 Ï¬Í˜Ï®Ï²Ï­Ï°ÎŽÎŽÎŽ           Ï¬Í˜Ï¯Ï¬Ï²Ï®ÎŽÎŽÎŽ           Ï¬Í˜Ï®Ï¬Ï­Ï¯ÎŽÎŽ
                                                             Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï®ÏµÏ±              Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï²ÏµÏ³              Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï´Ï­Ï­
         EdZÄÆš                                           Ï¯Ï´Í˜Ï±ÏµÏ¯Ï²ÎŽÎŽ             Ï®Ï¯Í˜Ï±Ï¬Ï­Ï±            Í²Ï®Ï²Í˜Ï¬Ï®Ï°Ï­
                                                            Ï­ÏµÍ˜Ï¬Ï¯Ï¬Ï­             Ï±Ï¬Í˜Ï±Ï´Ï¬Ï²             Ï²Ï¬Í˜Ï¯Ï²Ï¯Ï²
         D&Ç†Æ‰Å½ÆÆµÆŒÄžÍ¾ÅšÅÅ¶Ä‚Í¿ÄÆš                          Ï¬Í˜Ï¯Ï°Ï²ÏµÎŽÎŽÎŽ             Ï¬Í˜Ï¯ÏµÏ°Ï­ÎŽ          Í²Ï¬Í˜Ï²Ï²Ï®Ï¬ÎŽÎŽ
                                                             Ï¬Í˜Ï­Ï¬Ï­Ï±              Ï¬Í˜Ï®Ï­Ï´Ï®              Ï¬Í˜Ï®Ï³Ï³Ï±
         D&Ç†Æ‰Å½ÆÆµÆŒÄžÍ¾ZKtÍ¿ÄÆš                           Í²Ï­Í˜Ï°Ï²Ï°Ï¯ÎŽÎŽÎŽ           Í²Ï­Í˜Ï­Ï¬Ï¬Ï¬ÎŽÎŽ               Ï¬Í˜Ï³Ï´Ï¯
                                                             Ï¬Í˜Ï®Ï®Ï³Ï¯              Ï¬Í˜Ï°Ï´Ï´Ï²              Ï¬Í˜Ï²Ï­Ï²Ï²

         KÄÆÄžÆŒÇ€Ä‚ÆšÅÅ½Å¶Æ                                            Ï­Ï±Í•Ï±Ï±Ï´             Ï®Ï­Í•Ï­Ï®Ïµ           Ï­Ï¯Í•Ï±ÏµÏµ
         ZÍ²ÆÆ‹ÆµÄ‚ÆŒÄžÄš                                                Ï¬Í˜ÏµÏ¬Ï®             Ï¬Í˜Ï±ÏµÏ³Ï°           Ï¬Í˜Ï±Ï³Ï®Ï­
         ÆÆšÅÅµÄ‚ÆšÅÅ½Å¶                                                 K>^                K>^              K>^
         WÄžÆŒÅÅ½Äš                                           Ï­ÏµÏµÏ®Í¾Ï®Í¿Ï®Ï¬Ï­Ï¬         Ï­ÏµÏµÏ®Í¾Ï®Í¿Ï®Ï¬Ï­Ï¬       Ï­ÏµÏµÏ®Í¾Ï®Í¿Ï®Ï¬Ï­Ï¬
         ÆŒÅ½Æ‰Æ                                                    Å¶Å½Å¶Äž           >Ä‚ÅtÅÅ¶        >Ä‚ÅZtÅÅ¶
         &                                                          ÄÍ•Æš                ÄÍ•Æš              ÄÍ•Æš
         Å¯ÆµÆÆšÄžÆŒÅÅ¶Å                                                    Ä                  Ä                Ä
         DÄžÄ‚Å¶ÄžÆ‰ÄžÅ¶ÄšÄžÅ¶ÆšsÄ‚ÆŒÅÄ‚ÄÅ¯ÄžÅÅ¶Ï®Ï¬Ï¬Ï¬                             Ï°Ï¬                 Ï°Ï¯               Ï°Ïµ
         EÅ½ÆšÄžÆÍ—dÄ‚ÄÅ¯ÄžÆŒÄžÆ‰Å½ÆŒÆšÆÄšÅÄ¨Ä¨ÄžÆŒÄžÅ¶ÄÄžÍ²ÅÅ¶Í²ÄšÅÄ¨Ä¨ÄžÆŒÄžÅ¶ÄÄžÆÍ¾/Í¿K>^ÆŒÄžÅÆŒÄžÆÆÅÅ½Å¶ÆŒÄžÆÆµÅ¯ÆšÆÄ¨Å½ÆŒÄžÅµÅ½ÄÆŒÄ‚ÆšÇ€Å½ÆšÄž
         ÆÅšÄ‚ÆŒÄžÅÅ¶ÄÅ½ÆµÅ¶ÆšÇ‡ÄÅÅ¶Ç‡ÄžÄ‚ÆŒÆšÄ¨Å½ÆŒÆšÅšÄžÅ¶Å½ÆšÄžÄšÄžÅ¯ÄžÄÆšÅÅ½Å¶ÆÍ˜^Ä‚ÅµÆ‰Å¯ÄžÆ‰ÄžÆŒÅÅ½ÄšÅÆÄžÇ€ÄžÅ¶Ç‡ÄžÄ‚ÆŒÆÄ¨ÆŒÅ½ÅµÏ­ÏµÏµÏ®ÆšÅ½
         Ï®Ï¬Ï­Ï¬Í˜WÆŒÄžÆÅÄšÄžÅ¶ÆšÅÄ‚Å¯Ä‚Å¶ÄšÅÆµÄÄžÆŒÅ¶Ä‚ÆšÅ½ÆŒÅÄ‚Å¯ÄžÅ¯ÄžÄÆšÅÅ½Å¶ÆÅ½ÄÄÆµÆŒÄžÇ€ÄžÆŒÇ‡Ä¨Å½ÆµÆŒÇ‡ÄžÄ‚ÆŒÆÍ•ÄÆµÆšÆšÅšÄžÅ¯Ä‚ÆšÆšÄžÆŒÄšÅ½Å¶Å½Æš
         Å½ÄÄÆµÆŒÅ½Å¶ÆšÅšÄžÆÄ‚ÅµÄžÇ‡ÄžÄ‚ÆŒÄ¨Å½ÆŒÄ‚Å¯Å¯ÆÆšÄ‚ÆšÄžÆÍ˜^ÄžÅ¶Ä‚ÆšÅ½ÆŒÅÄ‚Å¯ÄžÅ¯ÄžÄÆšÅÅ½Å¶ÆÅ½ÄÄÆµÆŒÄžÇ€ÄžÆŒÇ‡ÆÅÇ†Ç‡ÄžÄ‚ÆŒÆÍ•ÇÅÆšÅš
         Ä‚Æ‰Æ‰ÆŒÅ½Ç†ÅÅµÄ‚ÆšÄžÅ¯Ç‡Å½Å¶ÄžÍ²ÆšÅšÅÆŒÄšÅ½Ä¨ÆÄžÅ¶Ä‚ÆšÅ½ÆŒÆÆµÆ‰Ä¨Å½ÆŒÄžÅ¯ÄžÄÆšÅÅ½Å¶ÅÅ¶Ä‚Å¶Ç‡ÅÅÇ€ÄžÅ¶ÄžÅ¯ÄžÄÆšÅÅ½Å¶Ç‡ÄžÄ‚ÆŒÍ˜dÅšÄžÄ¨ÅÆŒÆÆš
         ÄÅ½Ç€Ä‚ÆŒÅÄ‚ÆšÄžÅÆÆšÅšÄž/ÆšÄžÆŒÅµÅ½Ä¨ÅÅ¶ÆšÄžÆŒÄžÆÆšÍ•Ä‚Å¶ÅÅ¶ÆšÄžÆŒÄ‚ÄÆšÅÅ½Å¶Å½Ä¨Ä‚Æ‰Å½ÆÆšÍ²WEdZÄšÆµÅµÅµÇ‡ÇÅÆšÅšÄÅ½ÆµÅ¶ÆšÅÄžÆÎ–
         ÇÄžÅÅÅšÆšÄžÄšÄ‚Ç€ÄžÆŒÄ‚ÅÄžEdZÅÄ‚Æ‰Í˜dÅšÄžÅ¶ÄžÇ†ÆšÆÅÇ†ÄÅ½Ç€Ä‚ÆŒÅÄ‚ÆšÄžÆÅÅ¶ÆšÄžÆŒÄ‚ÄÆšÄ‚Æ‰Å½ÆÆšÍ²WEdZÄšÆµÅµÅµÇ‡Ç€Ä‚ÆŒÅÄ‚ÄÅ¯ÄžÇÅÆšÅš
         ÄÅ½ÆµÅ¶ÆšÇ‡ÄšÄžÅµÅ½ÅÆŒÄ‚Æ‰ÅšÅÄÄ‚ÆšÆšÆŒÅÄÆµÆšÄžÆÍ˜dÅšÄžÆŒÄžÅµÄ‚ÅÅ¶ÅÅ¶ÅÄÅ½Ç€Ä‚ÆŒÅÄ‚ÆšÄžÆÄ‚ÄÄÅ½ÆµÅ¶ÆšÄ¨Å½ÆŒÆšÅšÄžÇÄžÅÅÅšÆšÄžÄšÄ‚Ç€ÄžÆŒÄ‚ÅÄž
         ÅÅµÆ‰Å½ÆŒÆšÆšÄ‚ÆŒÅÄ¨Ä¨ÅÅµÆ‰Å½ÆÄžÄšÅ½Å¶ÆšÅšÄžÄÅ½ÆµÅ¶ÆšÇ‡Î–ÆÅÅ¶ÄšÆµÆÆšÆŒÅÄ‚Å¯ÆÆšÆŒÆµÄÆšÆµÆŒÄžÄ‚ÆÇÄžÅ¯Å¯Ä‚ÆÆšÅšÄžÄžÅ¯ÅÅµÅÅ¶Ä‚ÆšÅÅ½Å¶Å½Ä¨
         Æ‹ÆµÄ‚Å¶ÆšÅÆšÄ‚ÆšÅÇ€ÄžÆŒÄžÆÆšÆŒÅÄÆšÅÅ½Å¶ÆÅ½Å¶Ä‚Æ‰Æ‰Ä‚ÆŒÄžÅ¯Ä‚Å¶ÄšÄÅ¯Å½ÆšÅšÅÅ¶ÅÅÅµÆ‰Å½ÆŒÆšÆÄ¨ÆŒÅ½ÅµÅšÅÅ¶Ä‚Ä‚Å¶ÄšÆŒÄžÆÆšÅ½Ä¨ÇÅ½ÆŒÅ¯ÄšÍ¾ZKtÍ¿Í˜
         ^ÆšÄ‚Å¶ÄšÄ‚ÆŒÄšÄžÆŒÆŒÅ½ÆŒÆÄ‚ÄšÅ©ÆµÆÆšÄžÄšÄ¨Å½ÆŒÄÅ¯ÆµÆÆšÄžÆŒÅÅ¶ÅÄ‚ÆšÆšÅšÄžÄÅ½ÆµÅ¶ÆšÇ‡Å¯ÄžÇ€ÄžÅ¯Ä‚ÆŒÄžÆŒÄžÆ‰Å½ÆŒÆšÄžÄšÄÄžÅ¯Å½ÇÄÅ½ÄžÄ¨Ä¨ÅÄÅÄžÅ¶ÆšÆÍ˜ÎŽÍ•
         ÎŽÎŽÄ‚Å¶ÄšÎŽÎŽÎŽÆÅÅÅ¶ÅÄ¨Ç‡ÆÆšÄ‚ÆšÅÆÆšÅÄÄ‚Å¯ÆÅÅÅ¶ÅÄ¨ÅÄÄ‚Å¶ÄÄžÄ‚ÆšÆšÅšÄžÏ­Ï¬Í•Ï±Ä‚Å¶ÄšÏ­Æ‰ÄžÆŒÄÄžÅ¶ÆšÅ¯ÄžÇ€ÄžÅ¯Í˜




Table 4: Exposure to PNTR and Democrat Votes for Other Oces




                                                        26
              sZ/>^                                  ÄžÅµÅ½Ç€Å½ÆšÄž       ÄžÅµtÅÅ¶          ^Ï®ÄžÅµ          ^Ï®ZÄžÆ‰       dÆµÆŒÅ¶Å½ÆµÆš


              WÅ½ÆÆšÇ†EdZ'Ä‚Æ‰Ä                              Ï¬Í˜Ï­Ï²Ï³Ï³ÎŽÎŽ         Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï´Ï´        Ï¬Í˜Ï¯Ï°Ï¯Ï¬ÎŽ        Ï¬Í˜Ï®Ï±Ï¯Ï®     Ï¬Í˜Ï®Ï²Ï­Ï¯ÎŽÎŽÎŽ
                                                             Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï²Ï²Ï¯        Ï¬Í˜Ï®Ï¬ÏµÏ­         Ï¬Í˜Ï­Ï´Ï°Ï°         Ï¬Í˜Ï®Ï²Ï²        Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï±Ï¯Ï®
              WÅ½ÆÆšÇ†DÄžÄšÅÄ‚Å¶,,/ÅÅ¶Ï­ÏµÏµÏ¬Ä                 Ï¬Í˜Ï®Ï°Ï°Ï­ÎŽÎŽÎŽ        Ï¬Í˜Ï¯Ï­Ï°Ï³        Í²Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï²Ï®Ï³        Ï¬Í˜Ï­Ï±ÏµÏ´    Í²Ï¬Í˜Ï­Ï¯ÏµÏµÎŽÎŽÎŽ
                                                             Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï°ÏµÏµ        Ï¬Í˜Ï®Ï­Ï­Ï°         Ï¬Í˜Ï­Ï³Ï¯Ïµ        Ï¬Í˜Ï­ÏµÏ³Ï­        Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï°Ï®Ï°
              WÅ½ÆÆšÇ†WÄžÆŒÄÄžÅ¶ÆšÄ‚ÄÅšÄžÅ¯Å½ÆŒÆÅÅ¶Ï­ÏµÏµÏ¬Ä              Ï¬Í˜Ï­ÏµÏ±        Ï¬Í˜Ï²Ï­Ï­Ïµ         Ï¬Í˜Ï°Ï¬Ï®Ï³       Í²Ï¬Í˜Ï³Ï³Ï°Ï´     Ï¬Í˜Ï¯Ï°Ï¯Ï®ÎŽÎŽÎŽ
                                                             Ï¬Í˜Ï­Ï¯Ï¯Ï³        Ï¬Í˜Ï²Ï®Ï´Ï³          Ï¬Í˜Ï±Ï±Ï²        Ï¬Í˜Ï±Ï³Ï¬Ï´        Ï¬Í˜Ï­Ï®Ï®Ï²
              WÅ½ÆÆšÇ†WÄžÆŒÄÄžÅ¶Æš'ÆŒÄ‚ÄšÆµÄ‚ÆšÄžÅÅ¶Ï­ÏµÏµÏ¬Ä             Ï¬Í˜Ï¯Ï³Ï³ÏµÎŽ         Ï­Í˜Ï®Ï­Ï¯       Ï­Í˜Ï²Ï³Ï®Ï¬ÎŽÎŽ       Í²Ï¬Í˜Ï®Ï´Ï²Ï°       Í²Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï³Ï®Ï­
                                                             Ï¬Í˜Ï­ÏµÏ³Ï²        Ï¬Í˜Ï³Ï°Ï¯Ï¯         Ï¬Í˜Ï²Ï±Ï²Ï´        Ï¬Í˜Ï±Ï´Ï²Ï´        Ï¬Í˜Ï­Ï±Ï°Ï®
              WÅ½ÆÆšÇ†WÄžÆŒÄÄžÅ¶ÆšEÅ½Å¶Í²tÅšÅÆšÄžÅÅ¶Ï­ÏµÏµÏ¬Ä          Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï´Ï°ÏµÎŽÎŽÎŽ        Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï²Ï±Ï´       Ï¬Í˜Ï¯Ï¬Ï¯Ï¬ÎŽÎŽ     Í²Ï¬Í˜Ï®Ï­Ï²Ï¬ÎŽÎŽ       Í²Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï¬Ï­Ï­
                                                             Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï®Ï¯Ï°        Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï²Ï´Ï®         Ï¬Í˜Ï­Ï®Ï¯Ïµ        Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï´Ï°Ï³        Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï®Ï°Ï³
              WÅ½ÆÆšÇ†WÄžÆŒÄÄžÅ¶ÆšKÇ€ÄžÆŒÏ²Ï±ÅÅ¶Ï­ÏµÏµÏ¬Ä            Ï¬Í˜Ï°Ï­Ï±Ï¬ÎŽÎŽÎŽ        Í²Ï¬Í˜Ï¬ÏµÏ¯Ï®        Ï¬Í˜Ï¯Ï®Ï³Ï®        Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï²Ï´Ï­       Í²Ï¬Í˜Ï­Ï®Ï®Ï®
                                                             Ï¬Í˜Ï­Ï®Ï­Ï²         Ï¬Í˜Ï¯Ï¯Ï­Ï¯        Ï¬Í˜Ï®ÏµÏ³Ï­        Ï¬Í˜Ï±Ï¬Ï­Ï°        Ï¬Í˜Ï­Ï­Ï´Ï³
              WÅ½ÆÆšÇ†WÄžÆŒÄÄžÅ¶ÆšsÄžÆšÄžÆŒÄ‚Å¶ÅÅ¶Ï­ÏµÏµÏ¬Ä              Í²Ï¬Í˜Ï­Ï°Ï´Ï­        Ï¬Í˜Ï¯Ï¯Ï±Ï³        Í²Ï¬Í˜Ï±Ï­Ï±Ï³     Í²Ï­Í˜Ï­Ï³Ï¬Ï­ÎŽÎŽ     Ï¬Í˜Ï°Ï´ÏµÏ®ÎŽÎŽÎŽ
                                                              Ï¬Í˜Ï­Ï²Ïµ        Ï¬Í˜Ï±Ï­Ï²Ï¯         Ï¬Í˜Ï±ÏµÏ³Ï±        Ï¬Í˜Ï±Ï´Ï®Ï³        Ï¬Í˜Ï­Ï²ÏµÏ®
              EdZÄÆš                                    Ï®Ï®Ï¬Í˜Ï´Ï¯Ï³Ï´ÎŽÎŽ       Ï¯Ï±Ï¬Í˜Ï³Ï®Ï²Ï³       Ï¯ÏµÏµÍ˜Ï³Ï°Ï¯Ï­     Í²Ï­Ï´Ï´Í˜Ï±Ï³Ï®Ï±       Ï¯Ï´Í˜Ï®Ï­Ï²Ï²
                                                           ÏµÏ²Í˜Ï²Ï±Ï²Ï®        Ï®Ï°Ï­Í˜Ï±Ï­Ïµ       Ï¯Ï³Ï´Í˜Ï²Ï±Ï´Ï´      Ï±Ï­Ï°Í˜Ï­Ï®Ï´Ï°        Ï³Ï­Í˜Ï°Ï¯Ïµ
              D&Ç†Æ‰Å½ÆÆµÆŒÄžÍ¾ÅšÅÅ¶Ä‚Í¿ÄÆš                        Ï¬Í˜Ï®Ï¬Ï³Ï°       Ï­Í˜Ï²Ï³Ï¬ÏµÎŽ        Í²Ï¬Í˜Ï¯Ï³Ï®Ï­    Í²Ï°Í˜Ï®Ï¬Ï´Ï¯ÎŽÎŽÎŽ       Í²Ï¬Í˜Ï­Ï³Ï²Ï±
                                                             Ï¬Í˜Ï®Ï´Ï±Ï±         Ï¬Í˜Ï´Ï´Ï®         Ï¬Í˜Ï³Ï²Ï¯Ï®        Ï­Í˜Ï±Ï®Ï±Ï´        Ï¬Í˜Ï®Ï¬ÏµÏ®
              D&Ç†Æ‰Å½ÆÆµÆŒÄžÍ¾ZKtÍ¿ÄÆš                         Í²Ï¬Í˜ÏµÏ­ÏµÏ´    Í²Ï±Í˜Ï¯Ï¯Ï³Ï³ÎŽÎŽÎŽ        Í²Ï¬Í˜Ï¯Ï³Ï­Ï±    Ï­Ï¬Í˜Ï±Ï­Ï­Ï±ÎŽÎŽÎŽ        Ï¬Í˜Ï­Ï±Ï°Ï³
                                                             Ï¬Í˜Ï²Ï°ÏµÏ´        Ï­Í˜ÏµÏ®Ï³Ï³         Ï­Í˜Ï²ÏµÏ®Ï±        Ï¯Í˜Ï¯Ï²Ï±Ï±        Ï¬Í˜Ï°Ï±Ï®Ï³


              KÄÆÄžÆŒÇ€Ä‚ÆšÅÅ½Å¶Æ                                   Ï¯Ï­Í•Ï­Ï¬Ï²        Ï¯Ï­Í•Ï­Ï¬Ï²         Ï­Ï²Í•Ï´ÏµÏ­        Ï­Ï­Í•Ï­Ï¬Ï±        Ï­ÏµÍ•Ï°Ï¬Ï¬
              ZÍ²ÆÆ‹ÆµÄ‚ÆŒÄžÄš                                      Ï¬Í˜Ï³Ï¯Ï³Ï¯        Ï¬Í˜Ï²Ï²ÏµÏ­          Ï¬Í˜Ï°Ï¯Ï²        Ï¬Í˜Ï±Ï­Ï´Ï±        Ï¬Í˜Ï´Ï±Ï°Ïµ
              ÆÆšÅÅµÄ‚ÆšÅÅ½Å¶                                        K>^           K>^           K>^            K>^           K>^
              WÄžÆŒÅÅ½Äš                                   Ï­ÏµÏµÏ®Í¾Ï®Í¿Ï®Ï¬Ï­Ï¬ Ï­ÏµÏµÏ®Í¾Ï®Í¿Ï®Ï¬Ï­Ï¬ Ï­ÏµÏµÏ®Í¾Ï®Í¿Ï®Ï¬Ï­Ï¬ Ï­ÏµÏµÏ®Í¾Ï®Í¿Ï®Ï¬Ï­Ï¬ Ï­ÏµÏµÏ®Í¾Ï®Í¿Ï®Ï¬Ï­Ï¬
              ÆŒÅ½Æ‰Æ                                           Å¶Å½Å¶Äž           Å¶Å½Å¶Äž      >Ä‚ÅtÅÅ¶     >Ä‚ÅZtÅÅ¶         Å¶Å½Å¶Äž
              &                                                 ÄÍ•Æš            ÄÍ•Æš           ÄÍ•Æš           ÄÍ•Æš           ÄÍ•Æš
              Å¯ÆµÆÆšÄžÆŒÅÅ¶Å                                           Ä             Ä             Ä              Ä             Ä
              tÄžÅÅÅšÆšÅÅ¶Å                                 WÅ½Æ‰ÆµÅ¯Ä‚ÆšÅÅ½Å¶     WÅ½Æ‰ÆµÅ¯Ä‚ÆšÅÅ½Å¶     WÅ½Æ‰ÆµÅ¯Ä‚ÆšÅÅ½Å¶    WÅ½Æ‰ÆµÅ¯Ä‚ÆšÅÅ½Å¶    WÅ½Æ‰ÆµÅ¯Ä‚ÆšÅÅ½Å¶
              DÄžÄ‚Å¶ÄžÆ‰ÄžÅ¶ÄšÄžÅ¶ÆšsÄ‚ÆŒÅÄ‚ÄÅ¯ÄžÅÅ¶Ï®Ï¬Ï¬Ï¬                    Ï°Ïµ           Ï±Ï­             Ï­Ï±               Ï´            Ï²Ï²
              EÅ½ÆšÄžÆÍ—dÄ‚ÄÅ¯ÄžÆŒÄžÆ‰Å½ÆŒÆšÆÄšÅÄ¨Ä¨ÄžÆŒÄžÅ¶ÄÄžÍ²ÅÅ¶Í²ÄšÅÄ¨Ä¨ÄžÆŒÄžÅ¶ÄÄžÆÍ¾/Í¿K>^ÆŒÄžÅÆŒÄžÆÆÅÅ½Å¶ÆŒÄžÆÆµÅ¯ÆšÆÄ¨Å½ÆŒÄžÅµÅ½ÄÆŒÄ‚ÆšÇ€Å½ÆšÄžÆÅšÄ‚ÆŒÄžÅÅ¶
              ÄÅ½ÆµÅ¶ÆšÇ‡ÄÅÅ¶Ç‡ÄžÄ‚ÆŒÆšÄ‚ÆÇÄžÅ¯Å¯Ä‚ÆÄšÆµÅµÅµÇ‡Ç€Ä‚ÆŒÅÄ‚ÄÅ¯ÄžÆÄ¨Å½ÆŒÇÅšÄžÆšÅšÄžÆŒÆšÅšÄžÄžÅµÅ½ÄÆŒÄ‚ÆšÇÅÅ¶ÆÍ•ÇÅšÄžÆšÅšÄžÆŒÆšÅšÄžÆŒÄžÅÆÄ‚ÆÇÅÆšÄÅš
              ÆšÅ½Ä‚ÄžÅµÅ½ÄÆŒÄ‚ÆšÍ•ÇÅšÄžÆšÅšÄžÆŒÆšÅšÄžÆŒÄžÅÆÄ‚ÆÇÅÆšÄÅšÆšÅ½Ä‚ZÄžÆ‰ÆµÄÅ¯ÅÄÄ‚Å¶Í•Ä‚Å¶ÄšÆšÆµÆŒÅ¶Å½ÆµÆšÍ˜^Ä‚ÅµÆ‰Å¯ÄžÆ‰ÄžÆŒÅÅ½ÄšÅÆÄžÇ€ÄžÅ¶Ç‡ÄžÄ‚ÆŒÆÄ¨ÆŒÅ½Åµ
              Ï­ÏµÏµÏ®ÆšÅ½Ï®Ï¬Ï­Ï¬Í˜dÆµÆŒÅ¶Å½ÆµÆšÄšÄ‚ÆšÄ‚Ä‚ÆŒÄžÅµÅÆÆÅÅ¶ÅÄ¨Å½ÆŒÏ­ÏµÏµÏ®Í•Ï­ÏµÏµÏ°Í•Ï­ÏµÏµÏ´Ä‚Å¶ÄšÏ®Ï¬Ï¬Ï´Í˜dÅšÄžÄ¨ÅÆŒÆÆšÄÅ½Ç€Ä‚ÆŒÅÄ‚ÆšÄžÅÆÆšÅšÄž/ÆšÄžÆŒÅµÅ½Ä¨
              ÅÅ¶ÆšÄžÆŒÄžÆÆšÍ•Ä‚Å¶ÅÅ¶ÆšÄžÆŒÄ‚ÄÆšÅÅ½Å¶Å½Ä¨Ä‚Æ‰Å½ÆÆšÍ²WEdZÄšÆµÅµÅµÇ‡ÇÅÆšÅšÄÅ½ÆµÅ¶ÆšÅÄžÆÎ–ÇÄžÅÅÅšÆšÄžÄšÄ‚Ç€ÄžÆŒÄ‚ÅÄžEdZÅÄ‚Æ‰Í˜dÅšÄžÅ¶ÄžÇ†ÆšÆÅÇ†
              ÄÅ½Ç€Ä‚ÆŒÅÄ‚ÆšÄžÆÅÅ¶ÆšÄžÆŒÄ‚ÄÆšÄ‚Æ‰Å½ÆÆšÍ²WEdZÄšÆµÅµÅµÇ‡Ç€Ä‚ÆŒÅÄ‚ÄÅ¯ÄžÇÅÆšÅšÄÅ½ÆµÅ¶ÆšÇ‡ÄšÄžÅµÅ½ÅÆŒÄ‚Æ‰ÅšÅÄÄ‚ÆšÆšÆŒÅÄÆµÆšÄžÆÍ˜dÅšÄžÆŒÄžÅµÄ‚ÅÅ¶ÅÅ¶Å
              ÄÅ½Ç€Ä‚ÆŒÅÄ‚ÆšÄžÆÄ‚ÄÄÅ½ÆµÅ¶ÆšÄ¨Å½ÆŒÆšÅšÄžÇÄžÅÅÅšÆšÄžÄšÄ‚Ç€ÄžÆŒÄ‚ÅÄžÅÅµÆ‰Å½ÆŒÆšÆšÄ‚ÆŒÅÄ¨Ä¨ÅÅµÆ‰Å½ÆÄžÄšÅ½Å¶ÆšÅšÄžÄÅ½ÆµÅ¶ÆšÇ‡Î–ÆÅÅ¶ÄšÆµÆÆšÆŒÅÄ‚Å¯ÆÆšÆŒÆµÄÆšÆµÆŒÄžÄ‚Æ
              ÇÄžÅ¯Å¯Ä‚ÆÆšÅšÄžÄžÅ¯ÅÅµÅÅ¶Ä‚ÆšÅÅ½Å¶Å½Ä¨Æ‹ÆµÄ‚Å¶ÆšÅÆšÄ‚ÆšÅÇ€ÄžÆŒÄžÆÆšÆŒÅÄÆšÅÅ½Å¶ÆÅ½Å¶Ä‚Æ‰Æ‰Ä‚ÆŒÄžÅ¯Ä‚Å¶ÄšÄÅ¯Å½ÆšÅšÅÅ¶ÅÅÅµÆ‰Å½ÆŒÆšÆÄ¨ÆŒÅ½ÅµÅšÅÅ¶Ä‚Ä‚Å¶ÄšÆŒÄžÆÆš
              Å½Ä¨ÇÅ½ÆŒÅ¯ÄšÍ¾ZKtÍ¿Í˜ZÄžÅÆŒÄžÆÆÅÅ½Å¶ÆÄ‚ÆŒÄžÇÄžÅÅÅšÆšÄžÄšÄÇ‡ÄÅ½ÆµÅ¶ÆšÇ‡Æ‰Å½Æ‰ÆµÅ¯Ä‚ÆšÅÅ½Å¶ÅÅ¶Ï­ÏµÏµÏ¬Í˜^ÆšÄ‚Å¶ÄšÄ‚ÆŒÄšÄžÆŒÆŒÅ½ÆŒÆÄ‚ÄšÅ©ÆµÆÆšÄžÄšÄ¨Å½ÆŒ
              ÄÅ¯ÆµÆÆšÄžÆŒÅÅ¶ÅÄ‚ÆšÆšÅšÄžÄÅ½ÆµÅ¶ÆšÇ‡Å¯ÄžÇ€ÄžÅ¯Ä‚ÆŒÄžÆŒÄžÆ‰Å½ÆŒÆšÄžÄšÄÄžÅ¯Å½ÇÄÅ½ÄžÄ¨Ä¨ÅÄÅÄžÅ¶ÆšÆÍ˜ÎŽÍ•ÎŽÎŽÄ‚Å¶ÄšÎŽÎŽÎŽÆÅÅÅ¶ÅÄ¨Ç‡ÆÆšÄ‚ÆšÅÆÆšÅÄÄ‚Å¯ÆÅÅÅ¶ÅÄ¨ÅÄÄ‚Å¶ÄÄž
              Ä‚ÆšÆšÅšÄžÏ­Ï¬Í•Ï±Ä‚Å¶ÄšÏ­Æ‰ÄžÆŒÄÄžÅ¶ÆšÅ¯ÄžÇ€ÄžÅ¯Í˜




Table 5: PNTR and County-Level Voting for Democrats (Weighted Regression)




                                                                   27
                                                                             WÆŒÅ½Í²dÆŒÄ‚ÄšÄžsÅ½ÆšÄž^ÅšÄ‚ÆŒÄž
                                                                Î€Ï­Î                     Î€Ï®Î                     Î€Ï¯Î
              ÄžÅµÅ½ÄÆŒÄ‚Æš                                     Í²Ï¬Í˜Ï­Ï³Ï¯ÎŽÎŽÎŽ                Í²Ï¬Í˜Ï­Ï³ÏµÎŽÎŽÎŽ               Í²Ï¬Í˜Ï­Ï°ÏµÎŽÎŽÎŽ
                                                               Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï¬Ï³                  Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï¯Ï¯                   Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï¯Ï¬
              KÄÆÄžÆŒÇ€Ä‚ÆšÅÅ½Å¶Æ                                     Ï°Í•Ï®ÏµÏ°                  Ï°Í•Ï®ÏµÏ²                   Ï°Í•Ï®ÏµÏ²
              ZÏ®                                               Ï¬Í˜Ï±Ïµ                      Í˜                     Ï¬Í˜Ï­Ï±
              Å½Ç€Ä‚ÆŒÅÄ‚ÆšÄžÆ                                        zÄžÆ                     EÅ½                      EÅ½
              &ÅÇ†ÄžÄšÄ¨Ä¨ÄžÄÆšÆ                             ^ÆšÄ‚ÆšÄžÍ•Å½Å¶ÅÆŒÄžÆÆ                  Í˜               ^ÆšÄ‚ÆšÄžÍ•Å½Å¶ÅÆŒÄžÆÆ
              Ä‚Å¶ÄšÇÅÄšÆšÅš                                          Í˜                    Ï­Ï¬Ï¬Ð¹                       Í˜
              ÆÆšÅÅµÄ‚ÆšÅÅ½Å¶dÄžÄÅšÅ¶ÅÆ‹ÆµÄž                            >ÅÅ¶ÄžÄ‚ÆŒ             EÅ½Å¶Í²WÄ‚ÆŒÄ‚ÅµÄžÆšÆŒÅÄ           WÅ½Å¯Ç‡Å¶Å½ÅµÅÄ‚Å¯Ï¯
              EÅ½ÆšÄžÆÍ—dÄ‚ÄÅ¯ÄžÆÆµÅµÅµÄ‚ÆŒÅÇŒÄžÆÆšÅšÄžÆŒÄžÆÆµÅ¯ÆšÆÅ½Ä¨ZÄžÆ‰ÆŒÄžÆÄžÅ¶ÆšÄ‚ÆšÅÇ€ÄžÍ²Ç‡ÄžÄ‚ÆŒÅ¯ÄžÇ€ÄžÅ¯ÆŒÄžÅÆŒÄžÆÆÅÅ½Å¶ÄšÅÆÄÅ½Å¶ÆšÅÅ¶ÆµÅÆšÇ‡ÆŒÄžÅÆŒÄžÆÆÅÅ½Å¶Æ
              Å½Ä¨ÆšÅšÄžÆÅšÄ‚ÆŒÄžÅ½Ä¨Æ‰ÆŒÅ½Í²ÆšÆŒÄ‚ÄšÄžÇ€Å½ÆšÄžÆÅ½Å¶Ä‚Å¶ÅÅ¶ÄšÅÄÄ‚ÆšÅ½ÆŒÄ¨Å½ÆŒÇÅšÄžÆšÅšÄžÆŒÆšÅšÄžÆŒÄžÆ‰ÆŒÄžÆÄžÅ¶ÆšÄ‚ÆšÅÇ€ÄžÅÆÄ‚ÄžÅµÅ½ÄÆŒÄ‚ÆšÍ˜
              Å½Ç€Ä‚ÆŒÅÄ‚ÆšÄžÆÅÅ¶ÄÅ¯ÆµÄšÄžÆšÅšÄžÄšÅÆÆšÆŒÅÄÆšÍ²Ç‡ÄžÄ‚ÆŒÅ¯ÄžÇ€ÄžÅ¯ÄšÄžÅµÅ½ÅÆŒÄ‚Æ‰ÅšÅÄÄ‚ÆšÆšÆŒÅÄÆµÆšÄžÆÄ‚Å¶ÄšZÄžÆ‰ÆŒÄžÆÄžÅ¶ÆšÄ‚ÆšÅÇ€ÄžÍ²Ç‡ÄžÄ‚ÆŒÅ¯ÄžÇ€ÄžÅ¯
              Ä‚ÆšÆšÆŒÅÄÆµÆšÄžÆÄšÄžÆÄÆŒÅÄÄžÄšÅÅ¶^ÄžÄÆšÅÅ½Å¶Ï±Å½Ä¨ÆšÅšÄžÆšÄžÇ†ÆšÍ˜ÆÆšÅÅµÄ‚ÆšÄžÆÄ¨Å½ÆŒÆšÅšÄžÆÄžÄÅ½Ç€Ä‚ÆŒÅÄ‚ÆšÄžÆÄ‚ÆŒÄžÆÆµÆ‰Æ‰ÆŒÄžÆÆÄžÄšÍ˜
              WÅ½Å¯Ç‡Å¶Å½ÅµÅÄ‚Å¯Ï¯ÆŒÄžÄ¨ÄžÆŒÆÆšÅ½ÅÅ¶ÄÅ¯ÆµÆÅÅ½Å¶Å½Ä¨ÆšÅšÅÆŒÄšÅ½ÆŒÄšÄžÆŒÆ‰Å½Å¯Ç‡Å¶Å½ÅµÅÄ‚Å¯ÆÄ‚ÆÅÅ¶ÆÆšÆŒÆµÅµÄžÅ¶ÆšÆÍ˜ZÅ½ÄÆµÆÆšÆÆšÄ‚Å¶ÄšÄ‚ÆŒÄšÄžÆŒÆŒÅ½ÆŒÆÄ‚ÆŒÄž
              ÆŒÄžÆ‰Å½ÆŒÆšÄžÄšÄÄžÅ¯Å½ÇÄÅ½ÄžÄ¨Ä¨ÅÄÅÄžÅ¶ÆšÆÍ˜ÎŽÍ•ÎŽÎŽÄ‚Å¶ÄšÎŽÎŽÎŽÆÅÅÅ¶ÅÄ¨Ç‡ÆÆšÄ‚ÆšÅÆÆšÅÄÄ‚Å¯ÆÅÅÅ¶ÅÄ¨ÅÄÄ‚Å¶ÄÄžÄ‚ÆšÆšÅšÄžÏ­Ï¬Í•Ï±Ä‚Å¶ÄšÏ­Æ‰ÄžÆŒÄÄžÅ¶Æš
              Å¯ÄžÇ€ÄžÅ¯Í˜


   Table 6: Eect of Democrat Aliation on Districts' Voting for Pro-Trade Bills




                                                                     WÆŒÅ½Í²ÄÅ½Å¶Å½ÅµÅÄÆÆÅÆÆšÄ‚Å¶ÄÄžsÅ½ÆšÄž^ÅšÄ‚ÆŒÄž
                                                               Î€Ï­Î                      Î€Ï®Î                     Î€Ï¯Î
              ÄžÅµÅ½ÄÆŒÄ‚Æš                                      Ï¬Í˜Ï°Ï¯Ï±ÎŽÎŽÎŽ                 Ï¬Í˜Ï¯Ï®Ï°ÎŽÎŽÎŽ               Ï¬Í˜Ï¯Ï®Ï±ÎŽÎŽÎŽ
                                                              Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï¬Ïµ                    Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï®Ï³                  Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï¯Ï±Ï´
              KÄÆÄžÆŒÇ€Ä‚ÆšÅÅ½Å¶Æ                                    Ï°Í•Ï®ÏµÏ®                    Ï°Í•Ï®ÏµÏ°                   Ï°Í•Ï®ÏµÏ°
              ZÏ®                                              Ï¬Í˜Ï²Ï­                       Í˜                     Ï¬Í˜Ï¯Ï²
              Å½Ç€Ä‚ÆŒÅÄ‚ÆšÄžÆ                                       zÄžÆ                      EÅ½                      EÅ½
              &ÅÇ†ÄžÄšÄ¨Ä¨ÄžÄÆšÆ                             ^ÆšÄ‚ÆšÄžÍ•Å½Å¶ÅÆŒÄžÆÆ                  Í˜               ^ÆšÄ‚ÆšÄžÍ•Å½Å¶ÅÆŒÄžÆÆ
              Ä‚Å¶ÄšÇÅÄšÆšÅš                                         Í˜                      Ï­Ï¬Ï¬Ð¹                      Í˜
              ÆÆšÅÅµÄ‚ÆšÅÅ½Å¶dÄžÄÅšÅ¶ÅÆ‹ÆµÄž                           >ÅÅ¶ÄžÄ‚ÆŒ              EÅ½Å¶Í²WÄ‚ÆŒÄ‚ÅµÄžÆšÆŒÅÄ           WÅ½Å¯Ç‡Å¶Å½ÅµÅÄ‚Å¯Ï¯
              EÅ½ÆšÄžÆÍ—dÄ‚ÄÅ¯ÄžÆÆµÅµÅµÄ‚ÆŒÅÇŒÄžÆÆšÅšÄžÆŒÄžÆÆµÅ¯ÆšÆÅ½Ä¨ZÄžÆ‰ÆŒÄžÆÄžÅ¶ÆšÄ‚ÆšÅÇ€ÄžÍ²Ç‡ÄžÄ‚ÆŒÅ¯ÄžÇ€ÄžÅ¯ÆŒÄžÅÆŒÄžÆÆÅÅ½Å¶ÄšÅÆÄÅ½Å¶ÆšÅÅ¶ÆµÅÆšÇ‡ÆŒÄžÅÆŒÄžÆÆÅÅ½Å¶Æ
              Å½Ä¨ÆšÅšÄžÆÅšÄ‚ÆŒÄžÅ½Ä¨Æ‰ÆŒÅ½Í²ÄžÄÅ½Å¶Å½ÅµÅÄÄ‚ÆÆÅÆÆšÄ‚Å¶ÄÄžÇ€Å½ÆšÄžÆÅ½Å¶Ä‚Å¶ÅÅ¶ÄšÅÄÄ‚ÆšÅ½ÆŒÄ¨Å½ÆŒÇÅšÄžÆšÅšÄžÆŒÆšÅšÄžÆŒÄžÆ‰ÆŒÄžÆÄžÅ¶ÆšÄ‚ÆšÅÇ€ÄžÅÆÄ‚
              ÄžÅµÅ½ÄÆŒÄ‚ÆšÍ˜Å½Ç€Ä‚ÆŒÅÄ‚ÆšÄžÆÅÅ¶ÄÅ¯ÆµÄšÄžÆšÅšÄžÄšÅÆÆšÆŒÅÄÆšÍ²Ç‡ÄžÄ‚ÆŒÅ¯ÄžÇ€ÄžÅ¯ÄšÄžÅµÅ½ÅÆŒÄ‚Æ‰ÅšÅÄÄ‚ÆšÆšÆŒÅÄÆµÆšÄžÆÄ‚Å¶ÄšZÄžÆ‰ÆŒÄžÆÄžÅ¶ÆšÄ‚ÆšÅÇ€ÄžÍ²Ç‡ÄžÄ‚ÆŒ
              Å¯ÄžÇ€ÄžÅ¯Ä‚ÆšÆšÆŒÅÄÆµÆšÄžÆÄšÄžÆÄÆŒÅÄÄžÄšÅÅ¶^ÄžÄÆšÅÅ½Å¶Ï±Å½Ä¨ÆšÅšÄžÆšÄžÇ†ÆšÍ˜ÆÆšÅÅµÄ‚ÆšÄžÆÄ¨Å½ÆŒÆšÅšÄžÆÄžÄÅ½Ç€Ä‚ÆŒÅÄ‚ÆšÄžÆÄ‚ÆŒÄžÆÆµÆ‰Æ‰ÆŒÄžÆÆÄžÄšÍ˜
              WÅ½Å¯Ç‡Å¶Å½ÅµÅÄ‚Å¯Ï¯ÆŒÄžÄ¨ÄžÆŒÆÆšÅ½ÅÅ¶ÄÅ¯ÆµÆÅÅ½Å¶Å½Ä¨ÆšÅšÅÆŒÄšÅ½ÆŒÄšÄžÆŒÆ‰Å½Å¯Ç‡Å¶Å½ÅµÅÄ‚Å¯ÆÄ‚ÆÅÅ¶ÆÆšÆŒÆµÅµÄžÅ¶ÆšÆÍ˜ZÅ½ÄÆµÆÆšÆÆšÄ‚Å¶ÄšÄ‚ÆŒÄšÄžÆŒÆŒÅ½ÆŒÆÄ‚ÆŒÄž
              ÆŒÄžÆ‰Å½ÆŒÆšÄžÄšÄÄžÅ¯Å½ÇÄÅ½ÄžÄ¨Ä¨ÅÄÅÄžÅ¶ÆšÆÍ˜ÎŽÍ•ÎŽÎŽÄ‚Å¶ÄšÎŽÎŽÎŽÆÅÅÅ¶ÅÄ¨Ç‡ÆÆšÄ‚ÆšÅÆÆšÅÄÄ‚Å¯ÆÅÅÅ¶ÅÄ¨ÅÄÄ‚Å¶ÄÄžÄ‚ÆšÆšÅšÄžÏ­Ï¬Í•Ï±Ä‚Å¶ÄšÏ­Æ‰ÄžÆŒÄÄžÅ¶Æš
              Å¯ÄžÇ€ÄžÅ¯Í˜


Table 7: Eect of Democrat Aliation on Districts' Voting for Pro-Economic Assis-
tance Bills



                                                         WÆŒÅ½Í²dÆŒÄ‚ÄšÄžsÅ½ÆšÄž^ÅšÄ‚ÆŒÄž              WÆŒÅ½Í²ÄÅ½Å¶Å½ÅµÅÄÆÆÅÆÆšÄ‚Å¶ÄÄžsÅ½ÆšÄž^ÅšÄ‚ÆŒÄž
                                                    Ï­ÏµÏµÏ®Í²Ï®Ï¬Ï¬Ï¬             Ï®Ï¬Ï¬Ï®Í²Ï®Ï¬Ï­Ï¬           Ï­ÏµÏµÏ®Í²Ï®Ï¬Ï¬Ï¬           Ï®Ï¬Ï¬Ï®Í²Ï®Ï¬Ï­Ï¬
              ÄžÅµÅ½ÄÆŒÄ‚Æš                                Í²Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï±Ï­              Í²Ï¬Í˜Ï¯Ï¬Ï°ÎŽÎŽÎŽ            Ï¬Í˜Ï®Ï³Ï³ÎŽÎŽÎŽ            Ï¬Í˜Ï¯ÏµÏ±ÎŽÎŽÎŽ
                                                      Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï¯Ï¯                 Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï±Ï¬                Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï°Ï±               Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï±Ï±
              KÄÆÄžÆŒÇ€Ä‚ÆšÅÅ½Å¶Æ                            Ï®Í•Ï­Ï¯Ï´                 Ï®Í•Ï­Ï±Ï´                Ï®Í•Ï­Ï¯Ï³               Ï®Í•Ï­Ï±Ï³
              ZÏ®                                       Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï±                  Ï¬Í˜Ï®Ï²                 Ï¬Í˜Ï­Ïµ                Ï¬Í˜Ï±Ï³
              Å½Ç€Ä‚ÆŒÅÄ‚ÆšÄžÆ                                EÅ½                    EÅ½                  EÅ½                   EÅ½
              &ÅÇ†ÄžÄšÄ¨Ä¨ÄžÄÆšÆ                      ^ÆšÄ‚ÆšÄžÍ•Å½Å¶ÅÆŒÄžÆÆ       ^ÆšÄ‚ÆšÄžÍ•Å½Å¶ÅÆŒÄžÆÆ     ^ÆšÄ‚ÆšÄžÍ•Å½Å¶ÅÆŒÄžÆÆ     ^ÆšÄ‚ÆšÄžÍ•Å½Å¶ÅÆŒÄžÆÆ
              Ä‚Å¶ÄšÇÅÄšÆšÅš                                  Í˜                     Í˜                    Í˜                   Í˜
              ÆÆšÅÅµÄ‚ÆšÅÅ½Å¶dÄžÄÅšÅ¶ÅÆ‹ÆµÄž                WÅ½Å¯Ç‡Å¶Å½ÅµÅÄ‚Å¯Ï¯          WÅ½Å¯Ç‡Å¶Å½ÅµÅÄ‚Å¯Ï¯        WÅ½Å¯Ç‡Å¶Å½ÅµÅÄ‚Å¯Ï¯        WÅ½Å¯Ç‡Å¶Å½ÅµÅÄ‚Å¯Ï¯
              EÅ½ÆšÄžÆÍ—dÄ‚ÄÅ¯ÄžÆÆµÅµÅµÄ‚ÆŒÅÇŒÄžÆÆšÅšÄžÆŒÄžÆÆµÅ¯ÆšÆÅ½Ä¨ZÄžÆ‰ÆŒÄžÆÄžÅ¶ÆšÄ‚ÆšÅÇ€ÄžÍ²Ç‡ÄžÄ‚ÆŒÍ²Å¯ÄžÇ€ÄžÅ¯Å¶Å½Å¶Í²Æ‰Ä‚ÆŒÄ‚ÅµÄžÆšÆŒÅÄÆŒÄžÅÆŒÄžÆÆÅÅ½Å¶ÄšÅÆÄÅ½Å¶ÆšÅÅ¶ÆµÅÆšÇ‡
              ÄžÆÆšÅÅµÄ‚ÆšÅÅ½Å¶ÆÅ½Ä¨ÆšÅšÄžÆÅšÄ‚ÆŒÄžÅ½Ä¨Æ‰ÆŒÅ½Í²ÆšÆŒÄ‚ÄšÄžÅ½ÆŒÆ‰ÆŒÅ½Í²ÄžÄÅ½Å¶Å½ÅµÅÄÄ‚ÆÆÅÆÆšÄ‚Å¶ÄÄžÇ€Å½ÆšÄžÆÅ½Å¶Ä‚Å¶ÅÅ¶ÄšÅÄÄ‚ÆšÅ½ÆŒÄ¨Å½ÆŒÇÅšÄžÆšÅšÄžÆŒÆšÅšÄž
              ÆŒÄžÆ‰ÆŒÄžÆÄžÅ¶ÆšÄ‚ÆšÅÇ€ÄžÅÆÄ‚ÄžÅµÅ½ÄÆŒÄ‚ÆšÍ˜Å½Ç€Ä‚ÆŒÅÄ‚ÆšÄžÆÅÅ¶ÄÅ¯ÆµÄšÄžÆšÅšÄžÄšÅÆÆšÆŒÅÄÆšÍ²Ç‡ÄžÄ‚ÆŒÍ²Å¯ÄžÇ€ÄžÅ¯ÄšÄžÅµÅ½ÅÆŒÄ‚Æ‰ÅšÅÄÄ‚ÆšÆšÆŒÅÄÆµÆšÄžÆÄ‚Å¶Äš
              ZÄžÆ‰ÆŒÄžÆÄžÅ¶ÆšÄ‚ÆšÅÇ€ÄžÍ²Ç‡ÄžÄ‚ÆŒÍ²Å¯ÄžÇ€ÄžÅ¯Ä‚ÆšÆšÆŒÅÄÆµÆšÄžÆÄšÄžÆÄÆŒÅÄÄžÄšÅÅ¶^ÄžÄÆšÅÅ½Å¶Ï±Å½Ä¨ÆšÅšÄžÆšÄžÇ†ÆšÍ¾Å¶Å½ÆšÄšÅÆÆ‰Å¯Ä‚Ç‡ÄžÄšÍ¿Í˜WÅ½Å¯Ç‡Å¶Å½ÅµÅÄ‚Å¯Ï¯ÆŒÄžÄ¨ÄžÆŒÆÆšÅ½
              ÅÅ¶ÄÅ¯ÆµÆÅÅ½Å¶Å½Ä¨ÆšÅšÅÆŒÄšÅ½ÆŒÄšÄžÆŒÆ‰Å½Å¯Ç‡Å¶Å½ÅµÅÄ‚Å¯ÆÄ‚ÆÅÅ¶ÆÆšÆŒÆµÅµÄžÅ¶ÆšÆÍ˜ZÅ½ÄÆµÆÆšÆÆšÄ‚Å¶ÄšÄ‚ÆŒÄšÄžÆŒÆŒÅ½ÆŒÆÄ‚ÆŒÄžÆŒÄžÆ‰Å½ÆŒÆšÄžÄšÄÄžÅ¯Å½ÇÄÅ½ÄžÄ¨Ä¨ÅÄÅÄžÅ¶ÆšÆÍ˜ÎŽÍ•ÎŽÎŽ
              Ä‚Å¶ÄšÎŽÎŽÎŽÆÅÅÅ¶ÅÄ¨Ç‡ÆÆšÄ‚ÆšÅÆÆšÅÄÄ‚Å¯ÆÅÅÅ¶ÅÄ¨ÅÄÄ‚Å¶ÄÄžÄ‚ÆšÆšÅšÄžÏ­Ï¬Í•Ï±Ä‚Å¶ÄšÏ­Æ‰ÄžÆŒÄÄžÅ¶ÆšÅ¯ÄžÇ€ÄžÅ¯Í˜




Table 8: Pro-Free Trade and Pro-Economic Assistance Voting Before and After PNTR



                                                                     28
                                    U.S. Imports from China vs Rest of World




               4
               3
       2001=1
          2    1
               0




                        1990              1995            2000        2005              2010

                                                      China        ROW
       Source: U.S. Census.




Figure 1: U.S. Imports from China and Rest of World (ROW)




                U.S. Manufacturing Employment and Unemployment Rate
                                                    1948 to 2010
            12 14 16 18 20




                                                                                          Percent
       Millions




                                                                                        8 10 12
                                                                                        6
                                                                                        4
                                                                                        2




                             1940        1960           1980       2000          2020
                                                        moyr

                                     Manufacturing Employment      Unemployment Rate
       Source: U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics.




    Figure 2: Post-War U.S. Manufacturing Employment




                                                       29
                                                   Democrat Vote Share
                                              Across U.S. Counties, 1992-2010




                100      80
   Percent of Votes Cast
        40      60
                20
                0




                              1992   1994   1996   1998   2000    2002   2004   2006   2008   2010
   Note: Stata-defined outliers are excluded.


  Notes: Figure summarizes the mean and inter-quartile range of the share of votes won
  by Democrats across U.S. counties in elections to the U.S. House of Representatives,
  by year. The mean, standard deviation, median and interquartile range for 2000, the
  election closest to the passage of PNTR, are 40, 23, 38 and 25 to 57 percent .




   Figure 3: Distribution of Democrat Vote Share




                                               Distribution of NTR Gap
                                              Across Six-Digit NAICS Industries
               .04
               .03
   Density
    .02        .01
               0




                               0              20             40                 60             80




Figure 4: Distribution of NTR Gap Across Industries




                                                          30
                                             Distribution of Industry- vs County-Level NTR Gaps




            .08
            .06
            .04
            .02
            0




                                     0                  20               40            60              80

                                                      Across NAICS Industries        Across Counties




 Figure 5: Distribution of NTR Gap Across Industries and Counties




                                                    County vs Commuting Zone NTR Gap
                                               Dashed Line Represents Median NTR Gap Across Counties
                       50
           Communting Zone NTR Gap
           10    20    0 30     40




                                         0               10               20           30              40
                                                                    County NTR Gap


         EÅ½ÆšÄžÆÍ—&ÅÅÆµÆŒÄžÄÅ½ÅµÆ‰Ä‚ÆŒÄžÆÄÅ½ÆµÅ¶ÆšÅÄžÆÎ–EdZÅÄ‚Æ‰ÆšÅ½ÆšÅšÄžÄ‚Ç€ÄžÆŒÄ‚ÅÄžEdZÅÄ‚Æ‰Å½Ä¨ÆšÅšÄžÅ½ÆšÅšÄžÆŒ
         ÄÅ½ÆµÅ¶ÆšÅÄžÆÅÅ¶ÆšÅšÄžÅÆŒÄÅ½ÅµÅµÆµÆšÅÅ¶ÅÇŒÅ½Å¶ÄžÍ˜Ä‚ÆÅšÄžÄšÅ¯ÅÅ¶ÄžÆÅÅ¶ÄšÅÄÄ‚ÆšÄžÆšÅšÄžÅµÄžÄšÅÄ‚Å¶ÄÅ½ÆµÅ¶ÆšÇ‡Í²Å¯ÄžÇ€ÄžÅ¯EdZ
         ÅÄ‚Æ‰Í•ÇÅšÅÄÅšÅÆÏ±Í˜Ï´Æ‰ÄžÆŒÄÄžÅ¶ÆšÍ˜


Figure 6: Correlation of Own-County and Commuting Zone Exposure




                                                                       31
                                                                Mean Democrat Vote Share                                                                    Mean Probability of Democrat Victory
                                                                        Across Counties,k by NTR Gap                                                               Across Counties,k by NTR Gap




                     55




                                                                                                                                       .6
                            50
           Democrat Vote Share




                                                                                                                              Democrat Vote Share
                                                                                                                                              .5
                    45




                                                                                                                                     .4
           40




                                                                                                                             .3
                     35




                                                                                                                                       .2
                                 1992     1996                                 2000       2004           2008        2012                           1992    1996         2000        2004          2008        2012

                                        Above-Median NTR Gap                                     Below-Median NTR Gap                                      Above-Median NTR Gap             Below-Median NTR Gap



          Notes: Left panel average Democrat vote share across counties according to whether their own NTR gap and the average of their
          surrounding counties are both above or below the median of these gaps across all counties. Right panel is the same with respect to
          the average probability of Democrat victory.




Figure 7: Simple DID View of the Shift Towards Democrats (Own-County Exposure)




                                                                                      Democrat Victory Conditional on Victory Margin
                                                          1
                                          Probability of Democrat Victory
                                           .2       .4    0  .6       .8




                                                                            -100                   -50                     0                                        50                       100
                                                                                                                Democrat Margin of Victory


                                         EÅ½ÆšÄžÆÍ—hÅ¶ÅÆšÅ½Ä¨Ä‚Å¶Ä‚Å¯Ç‡ÆÅÆÅÆÄ‚ÄšÅÆÆšÆŒÅÄÆšÍ²Ç‡ÄžÄ‚ÆŒÆ‰Ä‚ÅÆŒÄ‚ÄÆŒÅ½ÆÆÆšÅšÄžÇ‡ÄžÄ‚ÆŒÆÏ­ÏµÏµÏ®ÆšÅ½Ï®Ï¬Ï­Ï¬Í˜dÅšÄžÅšÅ½ÆŒÅÇŒÅ½Å¶ÆšÄ‚Å¯Ä‚Ç†ÅÆ
                                        ÅÆÆšÅšÄžÄšÅÄ¨Ä¨ÄžÆŒÄžÅ¶ÄÄžÄÄžÆšÇÄžÄžÅ¶ÆšÅšÄžÄžÅµÅ½ÄÆŒÄ‚ÆšÄ‚Å¶ÄšZÄžÆ‰ÆµÄÅ¯ÅÄÄ‚Å¶Ç€Å½ÆšÄžÅµÄ‚ÆŒÅÅÅ¶Í˜dÅšÄžÇ€ÄžÆŒÆšÅÄÄ‚Å¯Ä‚Ç†ÅÆÅÆÄ‚
                                        ÄšÆµÅµÅµÇ‡Ç€Ä‚ÆŒÅÄ‚ÄÅ¯ÄžÅÅ¶ÄšÅÄÄ‚ÆšÅÅ¶ÅÇÅšÄžÆšÅšÄžÆŒÆšÅšÄž ÄšÅÆÆšÆŒÅÄÆšÅÆÆŒÄžÆ‰ÆŒÄžÆÄžÅ¶ÆšÄžÄšÄÇ‡Ä‚ÄžÅµÅ½ÄÆŒÄ‚ÆšÍ˜EÅ½ÆšÄžÆšÅšÄ‚Æš
                                        ÄÄžÄÄ‚ÆµÆÄžÄ‚ÄšÅÆÆšÆŒÅÄÆšÄÅ½ÆµÅ¯ÄšÄÄžÄÅ½Å¶ÆšÆŒÅ½Å¯Å¯ÄžÄšÄÇ‡Ä‚ÆšÅšÅÆŒÄšÆ‰Ä‚ÆŒÆšÇ‡Í•Æ‰Å½ÆÅÆšÅÇ€ÄžÅµÄ‚ÆŒÅÅÅ¶ÄšÅ½ÄžÆÅ¶Å½ÆšÆ‰ÄžÆŒÄ¨ÄžÄÆšÅ¯Ç‡
                                        Æ‰ÆŒÄžÄšÅÄÆšÄžÅµÅ½ÄÆŒÄ‚ÆšÆŒÄžÆ‰ÆŒÄžÆÄžÅ¶ÆšÄ‚ÆšÅÅ½Å¶Í˜^ÅšÄ‚ÄšÅÅ¶ÅÆŒÄžÆ‰ÆŒÄžÆÄžÅ¶ÆšÆÆšÅšÄžÏµÏ±Æ‰ÄžÆŒÄÄžÅ¶ÆšÄÅ½Å¶Ä¨ÅÄšÄžÅ¶ÄÄžÅÅ¶ÆšÄžÆŒÇ€Ä‚Å¯Í˜




                                                       Figure 8: Regression Discontinuity Intuition




                                                                                                                        32
                                                                          Democrat Votes on Trade Bills




                                                 .7       .6
                                       Trade-Related Bills
                                     .4       .5 .3

                                                               -100       -50               0                 50                  100
                                                                                 Democrat Margin of Victory


                                   EÅ½ÆšÄžÆÍ—hÅ¶ÅÆšÅ½Ä¨Ä‚Å¶Ä‚Å¯Ç‡ÆÅÆÅÆÄ‚ÄšÅÆÆšÆŒÅÄÆšÍ²Ç‡ÄžÄ‚ÆŒÆ‰Ä‚ÅÆŒÄ‚ÄÆŒÅ½ÆÆÆšÅšÄžÇ‡ÄžÄ‚ÆŒÆÏ­ÏµÏµÏ®ÆšÅ½Ï®Ï¬Ï­Ï¬Í˜&ÅÅÆµÆŒÄžÄšÅÆÆ‰Å¯Ä‚Ç‡ÆÆšÅšÄž
                                   ÄšÅÆÄÅ½Å¶ÆšÅÅ¶ÆµÅÆšÇ‡Å½Ä¨ÆšÅšÄžÆÅšÄ‚ÆŒÄžÅ½Ä¨Æ‰ÆŒÅ½Í²ÆšÆŒÄ‚ÄšÄžÇ€Å½ÆšÄžÆÍ¾Ç€ÄžÆŒÆšÅÄÄ‚Å¯Ä‚Ç†ÅÆÍ¿Ç€ÄžÆŒÆÆµÆÆšÅšÄžÄžÅµÅ½ÄÆŒÄ‚ÆšÇ€Å½ÆšÄžÆÅšÄ‚ÆŒÄž
                                   ÅµÄ‚ÆŒÅÅÅ¶Å½Ä¨Ç€ÅÄÆšÅ½ÆŒÇ‡Í¾ÅšÅ½ÆŒÅÇŒÅ½Å¶ÆšÄ‚Å¯Ä‚Ç†ÅÆÍ¿Í˜ÆšÆŒÅÄ‚Å¶ÅÆµÅ¯Ä‚ÆŒÅ¬ÄžÆŒÅ¶ÄžÅ¯ÅÆÆµÆÄžÄšÄ¨Å½ÆŒÅ¯Å½ÄÄ‚Å¯Å¯ÅÅ¶ÄžÄ‚ÆŒÆŒÄžÅÆŒÄžÆÆÅÅ½Å¶ÆÍ˜
                                   ^ÅšÄ‚ÄšÅÅ¶ÅÆŒÄžÆ‰ÆŒÄžÆÄžÅ¶ÆšÆÆšÅšÄžÏµÏ±Æ‰ÄžÆŒÄÄžÅ¶ÆšÄÅ½Å¶Ä¨ÅÄšÄžÅ¶ÄÄžÅÅ¶ÆšÄžÆŒÇ€Ä‚Å¯Í˜




                       Figure 9: Democrats' Votes On Trade Bills




                                                                 Democrat Vote on Economic Assistance Bills
                    .8
       Economic Assistance Bills
       .2       .4  0      .6




                                   -100                                 -50                0                       50                    100
                                                                                Democrat Margin of Victory


     EÅ½ÆšÄžÆÍ—hÅ¶ÅÆšÅ½Ä¨Ä‚Å¶Ä‚Å¯Ç‡ÆÅÆÅÆÄ‚ÄšÅÆÆšÆŒÅÄÆšÍ²Ç‡ÄžÄ‚ÆŒÆ‰Ä‚ÅÆŒÄ‚ÄÆŒÅ½ÆÆÆšÅšÄžÇ‡ÄžÄ‚ÆŒÆÏ­ÏµÏµÏ®ÆšÅ½Ï®Ï¬Ï­Ï¬Í˜&ÅÅÆµÆŒÄžÄšÅÆÆ‰Å¯Ä‚Ç‡ÆÆšÅšÄž
     ÄšÅÆÄÅ½Å¶ÆšÅÅ¶ÆµÅÆšÇ‡Å½Ä¨ÆšÅšÄžÆÅšÄ‚ÆŒÄžÅ½Ä¨Æ‰ÆŒÅ½Í²ÆŒÄžÄšÅÆÆšÆŒÅÄÆµÆšÅÅ½Å¶Ç€Å½ÆšÄžÆÍ¾Ç€ÄžÆŒÆšÅÄÄ‚Å¯Ä‚Ç†ÅÆÍ¿Ç€ÄžÆŒÆÆµÆÆšÅšÄžÄžÅµÅ½ÄÆŒÄ‚ÆšÇ€Å½ÆšÄž
     ÆÅšÄ‚ÆŒÄžÅµÄ‚ÆŒÅÅÅ¶Å½Ä¨Ç€ÅÄÆšÅ½ÆŒÇ‡Í¾ÅšÅ½ÆŒÅÇŒÅ½Å¶ÆšÄ‚Å¯Ä‚Ç†ÅÆÍ¿Í˜ÆšÆŒÅÄ‚Å¶ÅÆµÅ¯Ä‚ÆŒÅ¬ÄžÆŒÅ¶ÄžÅ¯ÅÆÆµÆÄžÄšÄ¨Å½ÆŒÅ¯Å½ÄÄ‚Å¯Å¯ÅÅ¶ÄžÄ‚ÆŒÆŒÄžÅÆŒÄžÆÆÅÅ½Å¶ÆÍ˜
     ^ÅšÄ‚ÄšÅÅ¶ÅÆŒÄžÆ‰ÆŒÄžÆÄžÅ¶ÆšÆÆšÅšÄžÏµÏ±Æ‰ÄžÆŒÄÄžÅ¶ÆšÄÅ½Å¶Ä¨ÅÄšÄžÅ¶ÄÄžÅÅ¶ÆšÄžÆŒÇ€Ä‚Å¯Í˜



Figure 10: Democrats' Votes On Economic Assistance Bills




                                                                                        33
Appendix
This appendix contains additional empirical results referenced in the main text.




A Legislator Voting Behavior
Figure A.1 displays the McCrary (2008) test of whether there is a discontinuity in
the density of Democrats' winning margin over Republicans.          The estimate of the
discontinuity is 0.003 with a standard error of 0.125, indicating that there is not a
statistically signicant discontinuity.   Figures A.2 to A.10 examine the distributions
of each of the district-level attributes included in the legislative voting regressions in
Section 5, plotted against the Democrat margin of victory. As discussed there, none
of these distributions exhibit discontinuities at the cuto point at which the Democrat
margin of victory is 0.




B Approaches for Estimating Regression Discontinu-
  ity Coecient
The nonparametric approach is a local linear estimation that uses observations within
a window of width   w   on both sides of the cuto point and assumes that   g(.)   and   f (.)
are linear, with potentially dierent slopes on the two sides of the cuto point. We
implement this approach using the procedure developed by Imbens and Kalyanaraman
                                           âˆ—
(2014) to calculate the optimal bandwidth w , and estimate analytical standard errors
using the procedure developed in Porter (2003).       In robustness checks, we examine
whether our estimates are sensitive to dierent bandwidths, e.g., halving and doubling
wâˆ— , as in Lee and Lemieux (2010). As indicated in Table A.1, we obtain similar results
in both cases for both sets of bills.
   Parametric estimation, by contrast, uses all of the observations over the domain of
the assignment variable and assumes high-order polynomial functions of      g(.)   and   f (.).
In the main text, we implement this approach using third-order polynomial functions
with potentially dierent coecients on the two sides of the cuto point. Following
Lee and Card (2008), we calculate standard errors clustered at the assignment variable
level. Here, we report results using second- and fourth-order polynomials to examine
the sensitivity of our estimates to using third order polynomials. As indicated in Table
A.2, we obtain similar results in both cases.




                                             34
Appendix Tables and Figures
                                                                         WÆŒÅ½Í²dÆŒÄ‚ÄšÄžsÅ½ÆšÄž^ÅšÄ‚ÆŒÄž
                                                            Î€Ï­Î                     Î€Ï®Î                     Î€Ï¯Î
          ÄžÅµÅ½ÄÆŒÄ‚Æš                                     Í²Ï¬Í˜Ï­Ï³Ï¯ÎŽÎŽÎŽ                Í²Ï¬Í˜Ï­Ï³ÏµÎŽÎŽÎŽ               Í²Ï¬Í˜Ï­Ï°ÏµÎŽÎŽÎŽ
                                                           Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï¬Ï³                  Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï¯Ï¯                   Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï¯Ï¬
          KÄÆÄžÆŒÇ€Ä‚ÆšÅÅ½Å¶Æ                                     Ï°Í•Ï®ÏµÏ°                  Ï°Í•Ï®ÏµÏ²                   Ï°Í•Ï®ÏµÏ²
          ZÏ®                                               Ï¬Í˜Ï±Ïµ                      Í˜                     Ï¬Í˜Ï­Ï±
          Å½Ç€Ä‚ÆŒÅÄ‚ÆšÄžÆ                                        zÄžÆ                     EÅ½                      EÅ½
          &ÅÇ†ÄžÄšÄ¨Ä¨ÄžÄÆšÆ                             ^ÆšÄ‚ÆšÄžÍ•Å½Å¶ÅÆŒÄžÆÆ                  Í˜               ^ÆšÄ‚ÆšÄžÍ•Å½Å¶ÅÆŒÄžÆÆ
          Ä‚Å¶ÄšÇÅÄšÆšÅš                                          Í˜                    Ï­Ï¬Ï¬Ð¹                       Í˜
          ÆÆšÅÅµÄ‚ÆšÅÅ½Å¶dÄžÄÅšÅ¶ÅÆ‹ÆµÄž                            >ÅÅ¶ÄžÄ‚ÆŒ             EÅ½Å¶Í²WÄ‚ÆŒÄ‚ÅµÄžÆšÆŒÅÄ           WÅ½Å¯Ç‡Å¶Å½ÅµÅÄ‚Å¯Ï¯
          EÅ½ÆšÄžÆÍ—dÄ‚ÄÅ¯ÄžÆÆµÅµÅµÄ‚ÆŒÅÇŒÄžÆÆšÅšÄžÆŒÄžÆÆµÅ¯ÆšÆÅ½Ä¨ZÄžÆ‰ÆŒÄžÆÄžÅ¶ÆšÄ‚ÆšÅÇ€ÄžÍ²Ç‡ÄžÄ‚ÆŒÅ¯ÄžÇ€ÄžÅ¯ÆŒÄžÅÆŒÄžÆÆÅÅ½Å¶ÄšÅÆÄÅ½Å¶ÆšÅÅ¶ÆµÅÆšÇ‡ÆŒÄžÅÆŒÄžÆÆÅÅ½Å¶Æ
          Å½Ä¨ÆšÅšÄžÆÅšÄ‚ÆŒÄžÅ½Ä¨Æ‰ÆŒÅ½Í²ÆšÆŒÄ‚ÄšÄžÇ€Å½ÆšÄžÆÅ½Å¶Ä‚Å¶ÅÅ¶ÄšÅÄÄ‚ÆšÅ½ÆŒÄ¨Å½ÆŒÇÅšÄžÆšÅšÄžÆŒÆšÅšÄžÆŒÄžÆ‰ÆŒÄžÆÄžÅ¶ÆšÄ‚ÆšÅÇ€ÄžÅÆÄ‚ÄžÅµÅ½ÄÆŒÄ‚ÆšÍ˜
          Å½Ç€Ä‚ÆŒÅÄ‚ÆšÄžÆÅÅ¶ÄÅ¯ÆµÄšÄžÆšÅšÄžÄšÅÆÆšÆŒÅÄÆšÍ²Ç‡ÄžÄ‚ÆŒÅ¯ÄžÇ€ÄžÅ¯ÄšÄžÅµÅ½ÅÆŒÄ‚Æ‰ÅšÅÄÄ‚ÆšÆšÆŒÅÄÆµÆšÄžÆÄ‚Å¶ÄšZÄžÆ‰ÆŒÄžÆÄžÅ¶ÆšÄ‚ÆšÅÇ€ÄžÍ²Ç‡ÄžÄ‚ÆŒÅ¯ÄžÇ€ÄžÅ¯
          Ä‚ÆšÆšÆŒÅÄÆµÆšÄžÆÄšÄžÆÄÆŒÅÄÄžÄšÅÅ¶^ÄžÄÆšÅÅ½Å¶Ï±Å½Ä¨ÆšÅšÄžÆšÄžÇ†ÆšÍ˜ÆÆšÅÅµÄ‚ÆšÄžÆÄ¨Å½ÆŒÆšÅšÄžÆÄžÄÅ½Ç€Ä‚ÆŒÅÄ‚ÆšÄžÆÄ‚ÆŒÄžÆÆµÆ‰Æ‰ÆŒÄžÆÆÄžÄšÍ˜
          WÅ½Å¯Ç‡Å¶Å½ÅµÅÄ‚Å¯Ï¯ÆŒÄžÄ¨ÄžÆŒÆÆšÅ½ÅÅ¶ÄÅ¯ÆµÆÅÅ½Å¶Å½Ä¨ÆšÅšÅÆŒÄšÅ½ÆŒÄšÄžÆŒÆ‰Å½Å¯Ç‡Å¶Å½ÅµÅÄ‚Å¯ÆÄ‚ÆÅÅ¶ÆÆšÆŒÆµÅµÄžÅ¶ÆšÆÍ˜ZÅ½ÄÆµÆÆšÆÆšÄ‚Å¶ÄšÄ‚ÆŒÄšÄžÆŒÆŒÅ½ÆŒÆÄ‚ÆŒÄž
          ÆŒÄžÆ‰Å½ÆŒÆšÄžÄšÄÄžÅ¯Å½ÇÄÅ½ÄžÄ¨Ä¨ÅÄÅÄžÅ¶ÆšÆÍ˜ÎŽÍ•ÎŽÎŽÄ‚Å¶ÄšÎŽÎŽÎŽÆÅÅÅ¶ÅÄ¨Ç‡ÆÆšÄ‚ÆšÅÆÆšÅÄÄ‚Å¯ÆÅÅÅ¶ÅÄ¨ÅÄÄ‚Å¶ÄÄžÄ‚ÆšÆšÅšÄžÏ­Ï¬Í•Ï±Ä‚Å¶ÄšÏ­Æ‰ÄžÆŒÄÄžÅ¶Æš
          Å¯ÄžÇ€ÄžÅ¯Í˜



             Table A.1: RD Results: Alternate Bandwidths



                                                                         WÆŒÅ½Í²dÆŒÄ‚ÄšÄžsÅ½ÆšÄž^ÅšÄ‚ÆŒÄž
                                                            Î€Ï­Î                     Î€Ï®Î                     Î€Ï¯Î
          ÄžÅµÅ½ÄÆŒÄ‚Æš                                     Í²Ï¬Í˜Ï­Ï³Ï¯ÎŽÎŽÎŽ                Í²Ï¬Í˜Ï­Ï³ÏµÎŽÎŽÎŽ               Í²Ï¬Í˜Ï­Ï°ÏµÎŽÎŽÎŽ
                                                           Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï¬Ï³                  Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï¯Ï¯                   Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï¯Ï¬
          KÄÆÄžÆŒÇ€Ä‚ÆšÅÅ½Å¶Æ                                     Ï°Í•Ï®ÏµÏ°                  Ï°Í•Ï®ÏµÏ²                   Ï°Í•Ï®ÏµÏ²
          ZÏ®                                               Ï¬Í˜Ï±Ïµ                      Í˜                     Ï¬Í˜Ï­Ï±
          Å½Ç€Ä‚ÆŒÅÄ‚ÆšÄžÆ                                        zÄžÆ                     EÅ½                      EÅ½
          &ÅÇ†ÄžÄšÄ¨Ä¨ÄžÄÆšÆ                             ^ÆšÄ‚ÆšÄžÍ•Å½Å¶ÅÆŒÄžÆÆ                  Í˜               ^ÆšÄ‚ÆšÄžÍ•Å½Å¶ÅÆŒÄžÆÆ
          Ä‚Å¶ÄšÇÅÄšÆšÅš                                          Í˜                    Ï­Ï¬Ï¬Ð¹                       Í˜
          ÆÆšÅÅµÄ‚ÆšÅÅ½Å¶dÄžÄÅšÅ¶ÅÆ‹ÆµÄž                            >ÅÅ¶ÄžÄ‚ÆŒ             EÅ½Å¶Í²WÄ‚ÆŒÄ‚ÅµÄžÆšÆŒÅÄ           WÅ½Å¯Ç‡Å¶Å½ÅµÅÄ‚Å¯Ï¯
          EÅ½ÆšÄžÆÍ—dÄ‚ÄÅ¯ÄžÆÆµÅµÅµÄ‚ÆŒÅÇŒÄžÆÆšÅšÄžÆŒÄžÆÆµÅ¯ÆšÆÅ½Ä¨ZÄžÆ‰ÆŒÄžÆÄžÅ¶ÆšÄ‚ÆšÅÇ€ÄžÍ²Ç‡ÄžÄ‚ÆŒÅ¯ÄžÇ€ÄžÅ¯ÆŒÄžÅÆŒÄžÆÆÅÅ½Å¶ÄšÅÆÄÅ½Å¶ÆšÅÅ¶ÆµÅÆšÇ‡ÆŒÄžÅÆŒÄžÆÆÅÅ½Å¶Æ
          Å½Ä¨ÆšÅšÄžÆÅšÄ‚ÆŒÄžÅ½Ä¨Æ‰ÆŒÅ½Í²ÆšÆŒÄ‚ÄšÄžÇ€Å½ÆšÄžÆÅ½Å¶Ä‚Å¶ÅÅ¶ÄšÅÄÄ‚ÆšÅ½ÆŒÄ¨Å½ÆŒÇÅšÄžÆšÅšÄžÆŒÆšÅšÄžÆŒÄžÆ‰ÆŒÄžÆÄžÅ¶ÆšÄ‚ÆšÅÇ€ÄžÅÆÄ‚ÄžÅµÅ½ÄÆŒÄ‚ÆšÍ˜
          Å½Ç€Ä‚ÆŒÅÄ‚ÆšÄžÆÅÅ¶ÄÅ¯ÆµÄšÄžÆšÅšÄžÄšÅÆÆšÆŒÅÄÆšÍ²Ç‡ÄžÄ‚ÆŒÅ¯ÄžÇ€ÄžÅ¯ÄšÄžÅµÅ½ÅÆŒÄ‚Æ‰ÅšÅÄÄ‚ÆšÆšÆŒÅÄÆµÆšÄžÆÄ‚Å¶ÄšZÄžÆ‰ÆŒÄžÆÄžÅ¶ÆšÄ‚ÆšÅÇ€ÄžÍ²Ç‡ÄžÄ‚ÆŒÅ¯ÄžÇ€ÄžÅ¯
          Ä‚ÆšÆšÆŒÅÄÆµÆšÄžÆÄšÄžÆÄÆŒÅÄÄžÄšÅÅ¶^ÄžÄÆšÅÅ½Å¶Ï±Å½Ä¨ÆšÅšÄžÆšÄžÇ†ÆšÍ˜ÆÆšÅÅµÄ‚ÆšÄžÆÄ¨Å½ÆŒÆšÅšÄžÆÄžÄÅ½Ç€Ä‚ÆŒÅÄ‚ÆšÄžÆÄ‚ÆŒÄžÆÆµÆ‰Æ‰ÆŒÄžÆÆÄžÄšÍ˜
          WÅ½Å¯Ç‡Å¶Å½ÅµÅÄ‚Å¯Ï¯ÆŒÄžÄ¨ÄžÆŒÆÆšÅ½ÅÅ¶ÄÅ¯ÆµÆÅÅ½Å¶Å½Ä¨ÆšÅšÅÆŒÄšÅ½ÆŒÄšÄžÆŒÆ‰Å½Å¯Ç‡Å¶Å½ÅµÅÄ‚Å¯ÆÄ‚ÆÅÅ¶ÆÆšÆŒÆµÅµÄžÅ¶ÆšÆÍ˜ZÅ½ÄÆµÆÆšÆÆšÄ‚Å¶ÄšÄ‚ÆŒÄšÄžÆŒÆŒÅ½ÆŒÆÄ‚ÆŒÄž
          ÆŒÄžÆ‰Å½ÆŒÆšÄžÄšÄÄžÅ¯Å½ÇÄÅ½ÄžÄ¨Ä¨ÅÄÅÄžÅ¶ÆšÆÍ˜ÎŽÍ•ÎŽÎŽÄ‚Å¶ÄšÎŽÎŽÎŽÆÅÅÅ¶ÅÄ¨Ç‡ÆÆšÄ‚ÆšÅÆÆšÅÄÄ‚Å¯ÆÅÅÅ¶ÅÄ¨ÅÄÄ‚Å¶ÄÄžÄ‚ÆšÆšÅšÄžÏ­Ï¬Í•Ï±Ä‚Å¶ÄšÏ­Æ‰ÄžÆŒÄÄžÅ¶Æš
          Å¯ÄžÇ€ÄžÅ¯Í˜



        Table A.2: RD Results: Alternate Polynomial Functions




                                                            35
                                   Distribution of Democrat Victory Margins
                                         McCrary (2008) Manipulation Test




      .02
      .015
      .01
      .005
      0




                            -100                          0                              100
                                               Democrat Margin of Victory

  EÅ½ÆšÄžÆÍ—&ÅÅÆµÆŒÄžÄšÅÆÆ‰Å¯Ä‚Ç‡ÆÆšÅšÄžDÄÆŒÄ‚ÆŒÇ‡Í¾Ï®Ï¬Ï¬Ï´Í¿ÆšÄžÆÆšÅ½Ä¨ÇÅšÄžÆšÅšÄžÆŒÆšÅšÄžÆŒÄžÅÆÄ‚ÄšÅÆÄÅ½Å¶ÆšÅÅ¶ÆµÅÆšÇ‡ÅÅ¶ ÆšÅšÄž
  ÄšÄžÅ¶ÆÅÆšÇ‡Å½Ä¨ÄžÅµÅ½ÄÆŒÄ‚ÆšÆÍ›ÇÅÅ¶Å¶ÅÅ¶ÅÅµÄ‚ÆŒÅÅÅ¶Å½Ç€ÄžÆŒZÄžÆ‰ÆµÄÅ¯ÅÄÄ‚Å¶ÆÍ˜dÅšÅÆÆšÄžÆÆšÆŒÄžÅ©ÄžÄÆšÆÅµÄ‚Å¶ÅÆ‰ÆµÅ¯Ä‚ÆšÅÅ½Å¶ÄÄžÄÄ‚ÆµÆÄž
  ÆšÅšÄžÄšÅÆÄÅ½Å¶ÆšÅÅ¶ÆµÅÆšÇ‡ÄžÆÆšÅÅµÄ‚ÆšÄžÍ¾ÅÍ˜ÄžÍ˜Í•ÆšÅšÄžÅÄ‚Æ‰ÄÄžÆšÇÄžÄžÅ¶ÄÅ½ÆµÅ¶ÆšÅÄžÆÅÅ¶ÆšÅšÄžÆšÆŒÄžÄ‚ÆšÅµÄžÅ¶ÆšÇ€ÄžÆŒÆÆµÆÄÅ½Å¶ÆšÆŒÅ½Å¯
  ÅÆŒÅ½ÆµÆ‰Ä‚ÆŒÅ½ÆµÅ¶ÄšÆšÅšÄžÅµÄ‚ÆŒÅÅÅ¶Å½Ä¨ÇŒÄžÆŒÅ½Í¿ÅÆÍ²Ï¬Í˜Ï¬Ï¬Ï¯ÇÅÆšÅšÄ‚ÆÆšÄ‚Å¶ÄšÄ‚ÆŒÄšÄžÆŒÆŒÅ½ÆŒÅ½Ä¨Ï¬Í˜Ï­Ï®Ï±Í˜



Figure A.1: RD Identifying Assumption Density Test




                              Log Population vs Democrat Margin of Victory
                                              Across Districts, 1992 to 2010
           13.45
           13.4
      13.3 13.35
    Log Population
           13.25
           13.2




                     -100               -50                0                   50                100
                                                Democrat Margin of Victory


  EÅ½ÆšÄžÆÍ—hÅ¶ÅÆšÅ½Ä¨Ä‚Å¶Ä‚Å¯Ç‡ÆÅÆÅÆÄ‚ÄšÅÆÆšÆŒÅÄÆšÍ²Ç‡ÄžÄ‚ÆŒÆ‰Ä‚ÅÆŒÄ‚ÄÆŒÅ½ÆÆÆšÅšÄžÇ‡ÄžÄ‚ÆŒÆÏ­ÏµÏµÏ®ÆšÅ½Ï®Ï¬Ï­Ï¬Í˜&ÅÅÆµÆŒÄžÄšÅÆÆ‰Å¯Ä‚Ç‡ÆÆšÅšÄž
  Å¯Å½ÅÅ½Ä¨ÄšÅÆÆšÆŒÅÄÆšÆ‰Å½Æ‰ÆµÅ¯Ä‚ÆšÅÅ½Å¶Í¾Ç€ÄžÆŒÆšÅÄÄ‚Å¯Ä‚Ç†ÅÆÍ¿Ç€ÄžÆŒÆÆµÆÆšÅšÄžÄžÅµÅ½ÄÆŒÄ‚ÆšÇ€Å½ÆšÄžÆÅšÄ‚ÆŒÄžÅµÄ‚ÆŒÅÅÅ¶Å½Ä¨Ç€ÅÄÆšÅ½ÆŒÇ‡
  Í¾ÅšÅ½ÆŒÅÇŒÅ½Å¶ÆšÄ‚Å¯Ä‚Ç†ÅÆÍ¿Í˜ÆšÆŒÅÄ‚Å¶ÅÆµÅ¯Ä‚ÆŒÅ¬ÄžÆŒÅ¶ÄžÅ¯ÅÆÆµÆÄžÄšÄ¨Å½ÆŒÅ¯Å½ÄÄ‚Å¯Å¯ÅÅ¶ÄžÄ‚ÆŒÆŒÄžÅÆŒÄžÆÆÅÅ½Å¶ÆÍ˜^ÅšÄ‚ÄšÅÅ¶ÅÆŒÄžÆ‰ÆŒÄžÆÄžÅ¶ÆšÆÆšÅšÄž
  ÏµÏ±Æ‰ÄžÆŒÄÄžÅ¶ÆšÄÅ½Å¶Ä¨ÅÄšÄžÅ¶ÄÄžÅÅ¶ÆšÄžÆŒÇ€Ä‚Å¯Í˜



Figure A.2: RD Identifying Assumption: Population




                                                        36
                     Log Median Household Income vs Democrat Margin of Victory
                                                           Across Districts, 1992 to 2010




                                   13
       Log Median Household Income
         10       119      12




                                        -100         -50                0                    50     100
                                                             Democrat Margin of Victory


     EÅ½ÆšÄžÆÍ—hÅ¶ÅÆšÅ½Ä¨Ä‚Å¶Ä‚Å¯Ç‡ÆÅÆÅÆÄ‚ÄšÅÆÆšÆŒÅÄÆšÍ²Ç‡ÄžÄ‚ÆŒÆ‰Ä‚ÅÆŒÄ‚ÄÆŒÅ½ÆÆÆšÅšÄžÇ‡ÄžÄ‚ÆŒÆÏ­ÏµÏµÏ®ÆšÅ½Ï®Ï¬Ï­Ï¬Í˜&ÅÅÆµÆŒÄžÄšÅÆÆ‰Å¯Ä‚Ç‡ÆÆšÅšÄž
     Å¯Å½ÅÅ½Ä¨ÅµÄžÄšÅÄ‚Å¶ÅšÅ½ÆµÆÄžÅšÅ½Å¯ÄšÅÅ¶ÄÅ½ÅµÄžÍ¾Ç€ÄžÆŒÆšÅÄÄ‚Å¯Ä‚Ç†ÅÆÍ¿Ç€ÄžÆŒÆÆµÆÆšÅšÄžÄžÅµÅ½ÄÆŒÄ‚ÆšÇ€Å½ÆšÄžÆÅšÄ‚ÆŒÄžÅµÄ‚ÆŒÅÅÅ¶Å½Ä¨
     Ç€ÅÄÆšÅ½ÆŒÇ‡Í¾ÅšÅ½ÆŒÅÇŒÅ½Å¶ÆšÄ‚Å¯Ä‚Ç†ÅÆÍ¿Í˜ÆšÆŒÅÄ‚Å¶ÅÆµÅ¯Ä‚ÆŒÅ¬ÄžÆŒÅ¶ÄžÅ¯ÅÆÆµÆÄžÄšÄ¨Å½ÆŒÅ¯Å½ÄÄ‚Å¯Å¯ÅÅ¶ÄžÄ‚ÆŒÆŒÄžÅÆŒÄžÆÆÅÅ½Å¶ÆÍ˜^ÅšÄ‚ÄšÅÅ¶Å
     ÆŒÄžÆ‰ÆŒÄžÆÄžÅ¶ÆšÆÆšÅšÄžÏµÏ±Æ‰ÄžÆŒÄÄžÅ¶ÆšÄÅ½Å¶Ä¨ÅÄšÄžÅ¶ÄÄžÅÅ¶ÆšÄžÆŒÇ€Ä‚Å¯Í˜



Figure A.3: RD Identifying Assumption: Household Income




                                           Log Per Capita Income vs Democrat Margin of Victory
                                                            Across Districts, 1992 to 2010
                          3.7  3.6
          Log Per Capita Income
       3.3     3.4      3.5
                          3.2




                                        -100          -50                0                   50     100
                                                              Democrat Margin of Victory


     EÅ½ÆšÄžÆÍ—hÅ¶ÅÆšÅ½Ä¨Ä‚Å¶Ä‚Å¯Ç‡ÆÅÆÅÆÄ‚ÄšÅÆÆšÆŒÅÄÆšÍ²Ç‡ÄžÄ‚ÆŒÆ‰Ä‚ÅÆŒÄ‚ÄÆŒÅ½ÆÆÆšÅšÄžÇ‡ÄžÄ‚ÆŒÆÏ­ÏµÏµÏ®ÆšÅ½Ï®Ï¬Ï­Ï¬Í˜&ÅÅÆµÆŒÄžÄšÅÆÆ‰Å¯Ä‚Ç‡ÆÆšÅšÄž
     Å¯Å½ÅÅ½Ä¨Æ‰ÄžÆŒÄÄ‚Æ‰ÅÆšÄ‚ÅÅ¶ÄÅ½ÅµÄžÍ¾Ç€ÄžÆŒÆšÅÄÄ‚Å¯Ä‚Ç†ÅÆÍ¿Ç€ÄžÆŒÆÆµÆÆšÅšÄžÄžÅµÅ½ÄÆŒÄ‚ÆšÇ€Å½ÆšÄžÆÅšÄ‚ÆŒÄžÅµÄ‚ÆŒÅÅÅ¶Å½Ä¨Ç€ÅÄÆšÅ½ÆŒÇ‡
     Í¾ÅšÅ½ÆŒÅÇŒÅ½Å¶ÆšÄ‚Å¯Ä‚Ç†ÅÆÍ¿Í˜ÆšÆŒÅÄ‚Å¶ÅÆµÅ¯Ä‚ÆŒÅ¬ÄžÆŒÅ¶ÄžÅ¯ÅÆÆµÆÄžÄšÄ¨Å½ÆŒÅ¯Å½ÄÄ‚Å¯Å¯ÅÅ¶ÄžÄ‚ÆŒÆŒÄžÅÆŒÄžÆÆÅÅ½Å¶ÆÍ˜^ÅšÄ‚ÄšÅÅ¶ÅÆŒÄžÆ‰ÆŒÄžÆÄžÅ¶ÆšÆÆšÅšÄž
     ÏµÏ±Æ‰ÄžÆŒÄÄžÅ¶ÆšÄÅ½Å¶Ä¨ÅÄšÄžÅ¶ÄÄžÅÅ¶ÆšÄžÆŒÇ€Ä‚Å¯Í˜



Figure A.4: RD Identifying Assumption: Per Capita Income




                                                                      37
                                                         Percent Black or African American vs Margin of Victory
                                                                           Across Districts, 1992 to 2010




                                    .4
                   Percent Black or African American
                        .1        .20        .3




                                                       -100          -50                0                   50   100
                                                                             Democrat Margin of Victory


                 EÅ½ÆšÄžÆÍ—hÅ¶ÅÆšÅ½Ä¨Ä‚Å¶Ä‚Å¯Ç‡ÆÅÆÅÆÄ‚ÄšÅÆÆšÆŒÅÄÆšÍ²Ç‡ÄžÄ‚ÆŒÆ‰Ä‚ÅÆŒÄ‚ÄÆŒÅ½ÆÆÆšÅšÄžÇ‡ÄžÄ‚ÆŒÆÏ­ÏµÏµÏ®ÆšÅ½Ï®Ï¬Ï­Ï¬Í˜&ÅÅÆµÆŒÄžÄšÅÆÆ‰Å¯Ä‚Ç‡ÆÆšÅšÄž
                 ÆÅšÄ‚ÆŒÄžÅ½Ä¨Æ‰Å½Æ‰ÆµÅ¯Ä‚ÆšÅÅ½Å¶ÆšÅšÄ‚ÆšÅÆÄÅ¯Ä‚ÄÅ¬Å½ÆŒÄ¨ÆŒÅÄÄ‚Å¶ÅµÄžÆŒÅÄÄ‚Å¶Í¾Ç€ÄžÆŒÆšÅÄÄ‚Å¯Ä‚Ç†ÅÆÍ¿Ç€ÄžÆŒÆÆµÆÆšÅšÄžÄžÅµÅ½ÄÆŒÄ‚ÆšÇ€Å½ÆšÄž
                 ÆÅšÄ‚ÆŒÄžÅµÄ‚ÆŒÅÅÅ¶Å½Ä¨Ç€ÅÄÆšÅ½ÆŒÇ‡Í¾ÅšÅ½ÆŒÅÇŒÅ½Å¶ÆšÄ‚Å¯Ä‚Ç†ÅÆÍ¿Í˜ÆšÆŒÅÄ‚Å¶ÅÆµÅ¯Ä‚ÆŒÅ¬ÄžÆŒÅ¶ÄžÅ¯ÅÆÆµÆÄžÄšÄ¨Å½ÆŒÅ¯Å½ÄÄ‚Å¯Å¯ÅÅ¶ÄžÄ‚ÆŒÆŒÄžÅÆŒÄžÆÆÅÅ½Å¶ÆÍ˜
                 ^ÅšÄ‚ÄšÅÅ¶ÅÆŒÄžÆ‰ÆŒÄžÆÄžÅ¶ÆšÆÆšÅšÄžÏµÏ±Æ‰ÄžÆŒÄÄžÅ¶ÆšÄÅ½Å¶Ä¨ÅÄšÄžÅ¶ÄÄžÅÅ¶ÆšÄžÆŒÇ€Ä‚Å¯Í˜



Figure A.5: RD Identifying Assumption: Black or African American Population Share




                                                Percent Bachelors of Higher vs Democrat Margin of Victory
                                                                           Across Districts, 1992 to 2010
                                 12
                   Percent Bachelors or Higher
                   8       9     10
                                 7        11




                                                       -100          -50                0                   50   100
                                                                             Democrat Margin of Victory


                 EÅ½ÆšÄžÆÍ—hÅ¶ÅÆšÅ½Ä¨Ä‚Å¶Ä‚Å¯Ç‡ÆÅÆÅÆÄ‚ÄšÅÆÆšÆŒÅÄÆšÍ²Ç‡ÄžÄ‚ÆŒÆ‰Ä‚ÅÆŒÄ‚ÄÆŒÅ½ÆÆÆšÅšÄžÇ‡ÄžÄ‚ÆŒÆÏ­ÏµÏµÏ®ÆšÅ½Ï®Ï¬Ï­Ï¬Í˜&ÅÅÆµÆŒÄžÄšÅÆÆ‰Å¯Ä‚Ç‡ÆÆšÅšÄž
                 ÆÅšÄ‚ÆŒÄžÅ½Ä¨Æ‰Å½Æ‰ÆµÅ¯Ä‚ÆšÅÅ½Å¶ÇÅÆšÅšÄ‚ÆšÅ¯ÄžÄ‚ÆÆšÄ‚ÄÄ‚ÄÅšÄžÅ¯Å½ÆŒÆÄšÄžÅÆŒÄžÄžÍ¾Ç€ÄžÆŒÆšÅÄÄ‚Å¯Ä‚Ç†ÅÆÍ¿Ç€ÄžÆŒÆÆµÆÆšÅšÄžÄžÅµÅ½ÄÆŒÄ‚ÆšÇ€Å½ÆšÄž
                 ÆÅšÄ‚ÆŒÄžÅµÄ‚ÆŒÅÅÅ¶Å½Ä¨Ç€ÅÄÆšÅ½ÆŒÇ‡Í¾ÅšÅ½ÆŒÅÇŒÅ½Å¶ÆšÄ‚Å¯Ä‚Ç†ÅÆÍ¿Í˜ÆšÆŒÅÄ‚Å¶ÅÆµÅ¯Ä‚ÆŒÅ¬ÄžÆŒÅ¶ÄžÅ¯ÅÆÆµÆÄžÄšÄ¨Å½ÆŒÅ¯Å½ÄÄ‚Å¯Å¯ÅÅ¶ÄžÄ‚ÆŒÆŒÄžÅÆŒÄžÆÆÅÅ½Å¶ÆÍ˜
                 ^ÅšÄ‚ÄšÅÅ¶ÅÆŒÄžÆ‰ÆŒÄžÆÄžÅ¶ÆšÆÆšÅšÄžÏµÏ±Æ‰ÄžÆŒÄÄžÅ¶ÆšÄÅ½Å¶Ä¨ÅÄšÄžÅ¶ÄÄžÅÅ¶ÆšÄžÆŒÇ€Ä‚Å¯Í˜



         Figure A.6: RD Identifying Assumption: College or Above Share




                                                                                     38
                                       Percent Veteran vs Democrat Margin of Victory
                                                     Across Districts, 1992 to 2010




                   16   14
        Percent Veteran
             12    10
                   8




                                -100           -50                0                   50             100
                                                       Democrat Margin of Victory


      EÅ½ÆšÄžÆÍ—hÅ¶ÅÆšÅ½Ä¨Ä‚Å¶Ä‚Å¯Ç‡ÆÅÆÅÆÄ‚ÄšÅÆÆšÆŒÅÄÆšÍ²Ç‡ÄžÄ‚ÆŒÆ‰Ä‚ÅÆŒÄ‚ÄÆŒÅ½ÆÆÆšÅšÄžÇ‡ÄžÄ‚ÆŒÆÏ­ÏµÏµÏ®ÆšÅ½Ï®Ï¬Ï­Ï¬Í˜&ÅÅÆµÆŒÄžÄšÅÆÆ‰Å¯Ä‚Ç‡ÆÆšÅšÄž
      ÆÅšÄ‚ÆŒÄžÅ½Ä¨Æ‰Å½Æ‰ÆµÅ¯Ä‚ÆšÅÅ½Å¶ÆšÅšÄ‚ÆšÄ‚ÆŒÄžÇ€ÄžÆšÄžÆŒÄ‚Å¶ÆÍ¾Ç€ÄžÆŒÆšÅÄÄ‚Å¯Ä‚Ç†ÅÆÍ¿Ç€ÄžÆŒÆÆµÆÆšÅšÄžÄžÅµÅ½ÄÆŒÄ‚ÆšÇ€Å½ÆšÄžÆÅšÄ‚ÆŒÄžÅµÄ‚ÆŒÅÅÅ¶Å½Ä¨
      Ç€ÅÄÆšÅ½ÆŒÇ‡Í¾ÅšÅ½ÆŒÅÇŒÅ½Å¶ÆšÄ‚Å¯Ä‚Ç†ÅÆÍ¿Í˜ÆšÆŒÅÄ‚Å¶ÅÆµÅ¯Ä‚ÆŒÅ¬ÄžÆŒÅ¶ÄžÅ¯ÅÆÆµÆÄžÄšÄ¨Å½ÆŒÅ¯Å½ÄÄ‚Å¯Å¯ÅÅ¶ÄžÄ‚ÆŒÆŒÄžÅÆŒÄžÆÆÅÅ½Å¶ÆÍ˜^ÅšÄ‚ÄšÅÅ¶Å
      ÆŒÄžÆ‰ÆŒÄžÆÄžÅ¶ÆšÆÆšÅšÄžÏµÏ±Æ‰ÄžÆŒÄÄžÅ¶ÆšÄÅ½Å¶Ä¨ÅÄšÄžÅ¶ÄÄžÅÅ¶ÆšÄžÆŒÇ€Ä‚Å¯Í˜



  Figure A.7: RD Identifying Assumption: Veteran Share




                                   Unemployment Rate vs Democrat Margin of Victory
                                                     Across Districts, 1992 to 2010
                   .08    .07
          Unemployment Rate
        .05      .06
                   .04




                                -100           -50                0                   50             100
                                                       Democrat Margin of Victory


      EÅ½ÆšÄžÆÍ—hÅ¶ÅÆšÅ½Ä¨Ä‚Å¶Ä‚Å¯Ç‡ÆÅÆÅÆÄ‚ÄšÅÆÆšÆŒÅÄÆšÍ²Ç‡ÄžÄ‚ÆŒÆ‰Ä‚ÅÆŒÄ‚ÄÆŒÅ½ÆÆÆšÅšÄžÇ‡ÄžÄ‚ÆŒÆÏ­ÏµÏµÏ®ÆšÅ½Ï®Ï¬Ï­Ï¬Í˜&ÅÅÆµÆŒÄžÄšÅÆÆ‰Å¯Ä‚Ç‡ÆÆšÅšÄž
      ÆµÅ¶ÄžÅµÆ‰Å¯Å½Ç‡ÅµÄžÅ¶ÆšÆŒÄ‚ÆšÄžÍ¾Ç€ÄžÆŒÆšÅÄÄ‚Å¯Ä‚Ç†ÅÆÍ¿Ç€ÄžÆŒÆÆµÆÆšÅšÄžÄžÅµÅ½ÄÆŒÄ‚ÆšÇ€Å½ÆšÄžÆÅšÄ‚ÆŒÄžÅµÄ‚ÆŒÅÅÅ¶Å½Ä¨Ç€ÅÄÆšÅ½ÆŒÇ‡Í¾ÅšÅ½ÆŒÅÇŒÅ½Å¶ÆšÄ‚Å¯
      Ä‚Ç†ÅÆÍ¿Í˜ÆšÆŒÅÄ‚Å¶ÅÆµÅ¯Ä‚ÆŒÅ¬ÄžÆŒÅ¶ÄžÅ¯ÅÆÆµÆÄžÄšÄ¨Å½ÆŒÅ¯Å½ÄÄ‚Å¯Å¯ÅÅ¶ÄžÄ‚ÆŒÆŒÄžÅÆŒÄžÆÆÅÅ½Å¶ÆÍ˜^ÅšÄ‚ÄšÅÅ¶ÅÆŒÄžÆ‰ÆŒÄžÆÄžÅ¶ÆšÆÆšÅšÄžÏµÏ±Æ‰ÄžÆŒÄÄžÅ¶Æš
      ÄÅ½Å¶Ä¨ÅÄšÄžÅ¶ÄÄžÅÅ¶ÆšÄžÆŒÇ€Ä‚Å¯Í˜



Figure A.8: RD Identifying Assumption: Unemployment Rate




                                                               39
                                         Percent 18 to 25 vs Democrat Margin of Victory
                                                       Across Districts, 1992 to 2010




                  .11     .105
         Percent 18 or 25
     .095       .1.09




                                 -100            -50                0                   50        100
                                                         Democrat Margin of Victory


   EÅ½ÆšÄžÆÍ—hÅ¶ÅÆšÅ½Ä¨Ä‚Å¶Ä‚Å¯Ç‡ÆÅÆÅÆÄ‚ÄšÅÆÆšÆŒÅÄÆšÍ²Ç‡ÄžÄ‚ÆŒÆ‰Ä‚ÅÆŒÄ‚ÄÆŒÅ½ÆÆÆšÅšÄžÇ‡ÄžÄ‚ÆŒÆÏ­ÏµÏµÏ®ÆšÅ½Ï®Ï¬Ï­Ï¬Í˜&ÅÅÆµÆŒÄžÄšÅÆÆ‰Å¯Ä‚Ç‡ÆÆšÅšÄž
   ÆÅšÄ‚ÆŒÄžÅ½Ä¨Æ‰Å½Æ‰ÆµÅ¯Ä‚ÆšÅÅ½Å¶Ä‚ÅÄžÄšÏ­Ï´ÆšÅ½Ï®Ï±Í¾Ç€ÄžÆŒÆšÅÄÄ‚Å¯Ä‚Ç†ÅÆÍ¿Ç€ÄžÆŒÆÆµÆÆšÅšÄžÄžÅµÅ½ÄÆŒÄ‚ÆšÇ€Å½ÆšÄžÆÅšÄ‚ÆŒÄžÅµÄ‚ÆŒÅÅÅ¶Å½Ä¨
   Ç€ÅÄÆšÅ½ÆŒÇ‡Í¾ÅšÅ½ÆŒÅÇŒÅ½Å¶ÆšÄ‚Å¯Ä‚Ç†ÅÆÍ¿Í˜ÆšÆŒÅÄ‚Å¶ÅÆµÅ¯Ä‚ÆŒÅ¬ÄžÆŒÅ¶ÄžÅ¯ÅÆÆµÆÄžÄšÄ¨Å½ÆŒÅ¯Å½ÄÄ‚Å¯Å¯ÅÅ¶ÄžÄ‚ÆŒÆŒÄžÅÆŒÄžÆÆÅÅ½Å¶ÆÍ˜^ÅšÄ‚ÄšÅÅ¶Å
   ÆŒÄžÆ‰ÆŒÄžÆÄžÅ¶ÆšÆÆšÅšÄžÏµÏ±Æ‰ÄžÆŒÄÄžÅ¶ÆšÄÅ½Å¶Ä¨ÅÄšÄžÅ¶ÄÄžÅÅ¶ÆšÄžÆŒÇ€Ä‚Å¯Í˜



Figure A.9: RD Identifying Assumption: 18 to 25 Share




                                        Percent 65 or Over vs Democrat Margin of Victory
                                                       Across Districts, 1992 to 2010
                  .15     .14
       Percent 65 or Over
     .12       .13.11




                                 -100            -50                0                   50        100
                                                         Democrat Margin of Victory


   EÅ½ÆšÄžÆÍ—hÅ¶ÅÆšÅ½Ä¨Ä‚Å¶Ä‚Å¯Ç‡ÆÅÆÅÆÄ‚ÄšÅÆÆšÆŒÅÄÆšÍ²Ç‡ÄžÄ‚ÆŒÆ‰Ä‚ÅÆŒÄ‚ÄÆŒÅ½ÆÆÆšÅšÄžÇ‡ÄžÄ‚ÆŒÆÏ­ÏµÏµÏ®ÆšÅ½Ï®Ï¬Ï­Ï¬Í˜&ÅÅÆµÆŒÄžÄšÅÆÆ‰Å¯Ä‚Ç‡ÆÆšÅšÄž
   ÆÅšÄ‚ÆŒÄžÅ½Ä¨Æ‰Å½Æ‰ÆµÅ¯Ä‚ÆšÅÅ½Å¶Ä‚ÅÄžÄšÏ²Ï±Å½ÆŒÅ½Ç€ÄžÆŒÍ¾Ç€ÄžÆŒÆšÅÄÄ‚Å¯Ä‚Ç†ÅÆÍ¿Ç€ÄžÆŒÆÆµÆÆšÅšÄžÄžÅµÅ½ÄÆŒÄ‚ÆšÇ€Å½ÆšÄžÆÅšÄ‚ÆŒÄžÅµÄ‚ÆŒÅÅÅ¶Å½Ä¨
   Ç€ÅÄÆšÅ½ÆŒÇ‡Í¾ÅšÅ½ÆŒÅÇŒÅ½Å¶ÆšÄ‚Å¯Ä‚Ç†ÅÆÍ¿Í˜ÆšÆŒÅÄ‚Å¶ÅÆµÅ¯Ä‚ÆŒÅ¬ÄžÆŒÅ¶ÄžÅ¯ÅÆÆµÆÄžÄšÄ¨Å½ÆŒÅ¯Å½ÄÄ‚Å¯Å¯ÅÅ¶ÄžÄ‚ÆŒÆŒÄžÅÆŒÄžÆÆÅÅ½Å¶ÆÍ˜^ÅšÄ‚ÄšÅÅ¶Å
   ÆŒÄžÆ‰ÆŒÄžÆÄžÅ¶ÆšÆÆšÅšÄžÏµÏ±Æ‰ÄžÆŒÄÄžÅ¶ÆšÄÅ½Å¶Ä¨ÅÄšÄžÅ¶ÄÄžÅÅ¶ÆšÄžÆŒÇ€Ä‚Å¯Í˜



Figure A.10: RD Identifying Assumption: Over 65 Share




                                                                 40
