                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 SOCIAL MOBILITY AND STABILITY OF DEMOCRACY:
                        RE-EVALUATING DE TOCQUEVILLE

                                        Daron Acemoglu
                                         Georgy Egorov
                                        Konstantin Sonin

                                       Working Paper 22174
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w22174


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2016




We thank participants of Stanford Institute for Theoretical Economics (SITE) conference on
Dynamics of Collective Decision-Making, CIFAR meeting, NBER Political Economy
conference, Econometric Society World Congress in Montreal, Economic Theory conference at
the University of Miami, Warwick/Princeton Political Economy Conference in Venice, and
seminars at the University of Chicago, Higher School of Economics, MIT, University of
Waterloo, University of Wisconsin-Madison, and the University of Zurich for helpful comments.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Daron Acemoglu, Georgy Egorov, and Konstantin Sonin. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Social Mobility and Stability of Democracy: Re-evaluating De Tocqueville
Daron Acemoglu, Georgy Egorov, and Konstantin Sonin
NBER Working Paper No. 22174
April 2016
JEL No. D71,D74

                                          ABSTRACT

An influential thesis often associated with De Tocqueville views social mobility as a bulwark of
democracy: when members of a social group expect to join the ranks of other social groups in the
near future, they should have less reason to exclude these other groups from the political process.
In this paper, we investigate this hypothesis using a dynamic model of political economy. As well
as formalizing this argument, our model demonstrates its limits, elucidating a robust theoretical
force making democracy less stable in societies with high social mobility: when the median voter
expects to move up (respectively down), she would prefer to give less voice to poorer
(respectively richer) social groups. Our theoretical analysis shows that in the presence of social
mobility, the political preferences of an individual depend on the potentially conflicting
preferences of her “future selves,” and that the evolution of institutions is determined through the
implicit interaction between occupants of the same social niche at different points in time. When
social mobility is endogenized, our model identifies new political economic forces limiting the
amount of mobility in society – because the middle class will lose out from mobility at the bottom
and because a peripheral coalition between the rich and the poor may oppose mobility at the top.

Daron Acemoglu                                   Konstantin Sonin
Department of Economics, E52-446                 Irving B. Harris School of
MIT                                                Public Policy Studies
77 Massachusetts Avenue                          University of Chicago
Cambridge, MA 02139                              1155 E60th St
and CIFAR                                        Chicago, IL 60637
and also NBER                                    ksonin@uchicago.edu
daron@mit.edu

Georgy Egorov
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
g-egorov@kellogg.northwestern.edu
1    Introduction

An idea going back at least to Alexis De Tocqueville (1835) relates the emergence of a stable demo-
cratic system to an economic structure with relatively high rates of social mobility. De Tocqueville,
for example, argued:

         “In the midst of the continual movement which agitates a democratic community,
      the tie which unites one generation to another is relaxed or broken; every man readily
      loses the tract of the ideas of his forefathers or takes no care about them. Nor can men
      living in this state of society derive their belief from the opinions of the class to which
      they belong, for, so to speak, there are no longer any classes, or those which still exist
      are composed of such mobile elements, that their body can never exercise a real control
      over its members.” (De Tocqueville, 1835-40 [1862], Book 2, pp. 120-121).

    Lipset (1992) summarizes and further elaborates De Tocqueville’s hypothesis as follows:

         “In describing ‘The Social Conditions of the Anglo-Americans’in the Democracy in
      America Tocqueville concluded that the institutionalization of widespread individual
      social mobility, upward and downward, has ‘political consequences’, the stabilization of
      the democratic order.”

    Many commentators have continued to view social mobility as a vital factor for the health
of American democracy. While Lipset and Bendix (1959) deem it to be “a critical, if not the
most important, ingredient of the American democracy,” Blau and Duncan’s seminal (1967) study
concluded “the stability of American democracy is undoubtedly related to the superior chances of
the upward mobility in this country”(similar ideas also appear in Pareto, 1935, Barrington Moore,
1966, Sombart, 1906, and Erikson and Goldthorpe, 1992). This perspective suggests that a greater
social mobility, caused for example by improvements in the educational system, the dismemberment
of barriers against occupational mobility, or technological changes, may improve the prospects of
democracy’s survival and ‡ourishing.
    Despite its ubiquity in modern debates on democracy and in modern social theories, there has
been little systematic formalization or critical investigation of this idea. The next example illustrates
not only why this idea is intuitive, but also why greater social mobility may actually destabilize
democracy.

Example 1 Consider a society with n individuals, with 25 n, or 40 percent of them, rich, 15 n or 20
                             2
percent, middle class, and   5n   or 40 percent poor. There are three possible political institutions:
democracy, where decisions are made by the median voter who is a member of the middle class;
left dictatorship, where all political decisions are made by the poor; and elite dictatorship, where

                                                   1
all political decisions are made by the rich. Suppose that the economy lasts for two periods, and
in each period, society adopts a single policy, pt . There is no discounting between the two periods.
All agents have stage payo¤s given by              (pt     bi )2 , where political bliss points, bi , for the poor,
middle-class, and rich social groups are, respectively,            1; 0, and 1. Society starts out with one of
the three political institutions described above, and in the …rst period, a member of the politically
decisive social group decides both the current policy and the political institution for the second
period. Then, in the second period, the group in power chooses policy.
       Suppose we start with elite dictatorship. Without social mobility, the politically-decisive rich
prefer to keep their dictatorship so as to be able to set the policy in the second period as well.1
Suppose, instead, that there is very high social mobility, involving complete reshu- ing of all in-
dividuals across the three social groups. (At the time decisions are made, what will happen to
a given individual is not known, so there is no asymmetry of information or con‡ict of interest
within a group.) If so, a rich individual expects to be part of the rich, the middle class, and the
poor with probabilities 2=5; 1=5; and 2=5, respectively. His second-period expected utility is then
  2
  5    (p2 + 1)2    1 2
                    5 p2
                           2
                           5   (p2   1)2 =   p22   4
                                                   5.    Thus, he prefers, in expectation, p2 = 0. To achieve
this, he would like next period’s political institutions to be democratic.

       The same example can also be used to highlight the opposite political forces in play.

       Example 1 (continued) Consider now a di¤erent pattern of social mobility: r middle-class
agents become rich and r rich agents move down to the middle class between periods 1 and 2. Let
        5r
  =     n    denote the share of the middle class that moves upwards. Suppose that the society starts
out as a democracy. Then, if su¢ ciently many members of the middle class move upwards (i.e., if
  > 1=2), the middle-class agents expect, on average, to have the preferences of the rich tomorrow,
and hence prefer policy tomorrow to be determined in elite dictatorship, making democracy unstable.

       This example thus provides a simple (and as we will see, robust) reason why greater social
mobility may undermine the stability of democracy: if social mobility means that members of the
politically pivotal middle class expect to change their preferences in a certain direction, they will
have an incentive to change the political institutions in that direction as well.2
       Di¤erently from this example, our main model will consider an in…nite-horizon setting. This is for
three reasons. First, in a two-period model, if the current decision-makers could set policies for the
next period (as in Benabou and Ok’s, 2001, analysis of the relationship between social mobility and
   1
     Throughout the paper, when all current members of a social group have the same preferences, we will interchange-
ably refer to a member of that social group or the entire social group.
   2
     The fact that the social mobility in this example makes middle-class agents more likely to move upwards rather
than downwards is important, as we will see in our analysis. If they expected to move upwards or downwards
symmetrically, then they would continue to prefer democracy to other political regimes because they would lose in
expectation even more from elite (or left) dictatorship than they would gain.



                                                           2
redistribution), then there would be no need for institutional changes. Second, such a model also pre-
cludes any e¤ect of future social mobility on preferences, e.g., from the fact that middle-class agents
may not only move up to the next social group in the next period, but move yet further up or even
possibly down in subsequent periods. Third and relatedly, we will see that beyond the two-period set-
ting what matters for the political equilibrium is not simply mobility next period, but the interplay
of the evolution of the preferences of an agent’s ‘future selves’(because of evolving social mobility)
and expectations about future institutions. This last feature is illustrated in the next example.3

Example 2 Consider the same setting as in Example 1, but now each agent maximizes her dis-
counted utility over an in…nite number of periods, and we take the discount rate to be                          = 4=5.
In each period, the current decision-maker determines next period’s institution, and in-between, r
                                                                                                               5r
people move upwards from the middle class, and r rich agents move downwards. Let                           =   n    again
denote the share of the middle class moving upwards.
       In left dictatorship, the poor, who are not upwardly mobile, would maintain this political insti-
tution forever, and choose pt =         1 (their political bliss point) at all t. In elite dictatorship, the rich
also have no incentive to change the political institutions. Middle-class preferences, on the other
hand, depend on their expectations of future institutions and of how future middle-class agents will
behave. Suppose that 1=4 <            < 1=2. Then a middle-class individual prefers her group to remain
in power in the next period, but the rich to be in power after a few periods. (In the long run, the
current middle-class expect to be rich 2=3 of the time and remain in the middle class 1=3 of the
time.) Consequently, when today’s middle class expects a transition to elite dictatorship tomor-
row, it prefers to remain in democracy, and when it expects the survival of democracy, it prefers
an immediate transition the dictatorship. This logic not only illustrates the interplay between the
preferences and strategies of current and future ‘selves’but also shows that there is no pure-strategy
Markovian equilibrium in this case because of this same interplay.

       Our baseline framework corresponds to a straightforward generalization of the setup discussed
in this example. Society consists of a …nite number of social groups, each of which comprises a
…nite number of identical individuals. Individuals (and thus groups) are ordered with respect to
their policy preferences. Social mobility results from well-de…ned stationary probabilities specifying
how each individual transitions from one social group to another. There is a …nite set of alternative
   3
     This example and our analysis below highlight the importance of two kinds of con‡icts of interest: between
agents from di¤erent social groups; and between today’s decision-maker and future decision-makers who will occupy
in the future the same social group as the current decision-maker. The latter con‡ict arises from the fact that
today’s decision-maker anticipates being in di¤erent social class in the future. This con‡ict is not only essential for
understanding the political implications of social mobility, but also highlights a new trade-o¤ in dynamic political
economy models: without social mobility, changing institutions entails delegating future political power to agents with
di¤erent preferences, whereas with social mobility, even with unchanged institutions, future political power will be
e¤ectively delegated to agents with di¤erent preferences. It is also related to the con‡ict between the di¤erent ‘selves’
of an individual (or more appropriately, of individuals who belong to the same social class in future dates), and yet
its origins are not in time-inconsistent preferences, but in social mobility.


                                                           3
political institutions, which we refer to as ‘states’, and each state is represented by a set of weights
assigned to individuals within each social group. These weights determine the distribution of po-
litical power and the identity of the pivotal voter who chooses the current policy as well as next
period’s political state (which is equivalent to choosing next period’s pivotal voter).
       Our main results are of two sorts. First, we establish the existence and certain basic properties
of Markov Perfect Equilibria in this economy. We focus on equilibria that are “monotone,” which
have the property that the equilibrium path starting from a state is always to the further right
in the sense of …rst-order stochastic dominance relative to the equilibrium path starting from
another state to the left. Though, as Example 2 suggests, pure-strategy equilibria may fail to
exist, we demonstrate that mixing takes a particularly simple form: (generically) there is mixing
only between keeping the current institution and transiting to a uniquely de…ned alternative.
This property implies, in particular, that the equilibrium direction of transition is always well
de…ned. Similarly, the interplay between di¤erent selves of the current pivotal voter can lead to
multiple equilibria. Nevertheless, we establish the uniqueness of equilibrium under a simple (even
if somewhat demanding) within-person monotonicity condition, which requires that the preferences
of the future selves of an individual evolve monotonically. Speci…cally, this condition requires that
as we consider selves further away from the present, preferences will either gradually shift to the
left or to the right, and thus enable consistent aggregation of the preferences of future selves.
       Second, we provide a comprehensive analysis of the relationship between social mobility and
the stability of democracy. We quantify the stability of democracy with the size of its basin of
attraction along the equilibrium path. Hence, we say that democracy is more stable under social
mobility process M than M 0 if it is stable under M whenever it is stable under M 0 , and moreover,
it is asymptotically stable under M whenever it is asymptotically stable under M 0 .4 Example 1
provides an illustration of how social mobility may make democracy unstable — even starting in
democracy, society will not stay there. Our main results, presented in Theorems 4 and 5, state
that if the preferences of the median voter in democracy in the very distant future are close to her
current preferences, then greater social mobility makes democracy more stable; otherwise, greater
social mobility makes democracy less stable. When there is mobility between all social groups
(so that the unique irreducible component of the social mobility process is the entire society), the
condition on the preferences of the median voter takes an even more intuitive form: it requires the
preferences of the median of the society to be close to the average of the preferences of all voters.
       Our paper is most closely related to the small literature on the interplay between social mobil-
ity and redistribution. The important paper by Benabou and Ok (2001), which has already been
   4
    This notion of stability thus captures both the potential instability of democracy resulting from the median voter
preferring other political institutions to democracy, and other, neighboring social groups wishing to keep society away
from democracy (which would be relevant if society started in nondemocracy, or if political power randomly shifted
to these groups or enabled them to mount actions against democracy).



                                                          4
mentioned, shows how greater social mobility (or expectations thereof) discourages redistributive
taxation (see also Wright, 1986, for a similar argument in the context of unemployment bene…ts, and
Piketty, 1995, for a related point in a model in which agents learn from their dynasties’experience
about the extent of social mobility). The key economic mechanism in Benabou and Ok is linked to
De Tocqueville’s hypothesis — greater mobility makes the middle class less willing to tax the rich be-
cause they expect to become rich in the future. They generate this e¤ect by assuming that taxes are
‘sticky’(i.e., there is some commitment to future taxes). In Benabou and Tirole (2006), beliefs about
future social mobility support di¤erent equilibria — e.g., ‘the American dream’equilibrium, in which
high level of e¤orts stems from the belief in high social mobility (see also Alesina and Glaeser, 2004,
and Alesina and Giuliano, 2010). Nevertheless, this literature does not consider the relationship
between social mobility and support for di¤erent types of political institutions. More importantly,
it neither incorporates the dynamic political trade-o¤s that are at the heart of our paper nor does
it feature the potentially destabilizing role of social mobility for democracy. Notably, Leventoglu
(2005) investigates the link between social mobility and democracy in a world with three social
groups, but only obtains the stabilizing role of social mobility due to various special assumptions.
   Our modeling approach overlaps with dynamic political economy models studying democrati-
zation, constitutional change, repression and the e¢ ciency of long-run institutional arrangements,
including Besley and Coate (1998), Bourguignon and Verdier (2000), Acemoglu and Robinson (2000
and 2001), Lizzeri and Persico (2004), Gomes and Jehiel (2005), Laguno¤ (2006), Acemoglu, Egorov,
and Sonin (2010, 2015), and Roberts (2015), though again none of this literature studies social mo-
bility and the mechanisms that are at the heart of our paper.
   Finally, the role of the implicit con‡ict between the current self and the future selves of the pivotal
voter relates to a handful of papers considering time-inconsistency of collective or political decisions,
most notably, Amador (2003), Gul and Pesendorfer (2004), Strulovici (2010), Bisin, Lizzeri, and
Yariv (2015), Jackson and Yariv (2015) and Cao and Werning (2016), though none of these works
note the con‡ict between current and future selves resulting from social mobility or study the
implications of this type of con‡ict for institutional change.

   The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we introduce our setup. Section 3 solves
the model and establishes existence of an equilibrium, provides conditions for uniqueness, and studies
its main properties. Section 4 contains our main results linking the speed of social mobility to the sta-
bility of democracy. Section 5 contains two sets of further results: …rst, we show how social mobility
changes the nature of slippery slopes in dynamic political economy (whereby political changes that
are bene…cial in the short run are forsaken because of their medium-run or long-run consequences);
and second, we generalize our main results to environments with multiple equilibria. Section 6 endo-
genizes social mobility and studies how, in a simpli…ed version of our baseline model, concerns about
changes in future social mobility constrain equilibrium mobility decisions. Section 7 concludes. Ap-


                                                   5
pendix A contains the proofs of the main results presented in the text, while Appendix B, which is
not for publication, includes the remaining proofs, several additional examples and further results.


2     Model

In this section, we introduce our basic model and our notion of equilibrium.

2.1    Society, policies and preferences

Time is discrete and in…nite, indexed by t   1. Society consists of n individuals split into g social
                                                                                     P
groups, G = f1; :::; gg with each group k, 1 k g, comprising nk > 0 agents (so gk=1 nk = n).
The groups are ordered, and the order re‡ects their “economic” preferences (e.g., lower-indexed
groups could be those that are richer and prefer lower taxes). All individuals share a common
discount factor      2 (0; 1).
    Preferences are de…ned over a policy space represented by the real line, R. We assume that
individuals in each group have stage payo¤s represented by the following quadratic function of the
distance between current policy and their bliss point:

                                            uk (pt ) = Ak       (bk   pt )2 ,                                       (1)

where pt is the policy at time t, bk is the (political) bliss point of agents in group k, and Ak is an
arbitrary constant, allowing for the possibility that some groups are better o¤ than others (e.g.,
because they are richer).5 In what follows, b = fbk g will denote the column vector of political bliss
points. We assume that each bk is di¤erent from the others, and order the groups so that fbk g is
(strictly) increasing.
    Decision-making power depends on the current political state; in each period society makes
decisions both on the current policy pt 2 R and on the next period’s arrangement. We assume that
there are m (political) states s 2 S = f1; : : : ; mg, which encapsulate the distribution of political
power in society. In state s, individuals in group k are given weights wk (s), and political decisions
are made by weighted majority voting as we specify below (this could be a reduced form for a
political process involving legislative bargaining or explicit partial or full exclusion of some groups
from voting via legislation or repression).
                          P
   We also assume that jk=1 wk (s) nnk 6=           1
                                                    2   for all s 2 S and all j 2 G. This is a mild assumption
adopted for technical convenience and holds generically within the class of weights. It ensures
                                                                        Pds           nk    1
the pivotal group in each state s — namely, the group ds such that         k=1 wk (s) n     2 and
Pg            nk   1
  k=ds wk (s) n    2 — is uniquely de…ned. Since, for our purposes, two states that have the same
   5
     For example, if all Ak = 0, then members of the middle class might not want to become rich if the political
institution is democracy, because this may hurt policy payo¤. This is inconsequential when social mobility is exogenous,
but would lead to unrealistic predictions once we endogenize social mobility.



                                                            6
pivotal group are equivalent, we can without loss of any generality assume that each state has a
di¤erent pivotal group, so fds gs2S are all di¤erent. We can then order states such that the sequence
of pivotal groups, fds g, is increasing.

2.2      Social mobility

We model social mobility by assuming that individuals can change their social group — corre-
sponding to a change in their economic or social conditions and thus their preferences. This can be
interpreted either as an individual becoming richer or poorer over time, or as the her o¤spring mov-
ing to a di¤erent social group than herself (and the individual herself having dynastic preferences).
       Throughout we assume that, though there is social mobility, the aggregate distribution of popu-
lation across di¤erent social groups is stationary. Since social mobility is treated as exogenous here,
this assumption amounts to supposing that there exists a stationary aggregate distribution and that
we start the analysis once society has reached this stationary distribution.6
       Formally, we represent social mobility using a g g matrix M =                  jk   , where   jk   2 [0; 1] denotes
the probability that an individual from group j moves to group k, with the natural restrictions:
                                              g
                                              X
                                                       jk    = 1 for all j, and                                        (2)
                                              k=1
                                            g
                                            X
                                                  nj   jk    = nk for all k,                                           (3)
                                            j=1

where the latter condition imposes the stationarity assumption requiring that the sizes of di¤erent
groups remain constant. Since there is no within-group heterogeneity, the stochastic process for
social mobility is the same for each individual within the same social group.7 Throughout the
paper, we also impose the following assumption:

Assumption 1 (Between-Person Monotonicity) For two groups j1 and j2 with j1 < j2 , mar-
ginal probability distribution         j1    over G is …rst-order stochastically dominated by                  j2   . For-
mally, for any l 2 f1; : : : ; gg,
                                                   l
                                                   X                   l
                                                                       X
                                                            j1 k   >         j2 k .                                    (4)
                                                   k=1                 k=1
   6
      This assumption is both technical and substantive. Technically, it enables Markovian strategies to be ‘stationary’:
if the aggregate distribution of population changed over time, it would have to be part of the payo¤-relevant state
variable, and the restriction to Markovian strategies would have little bite. Substantively, it enables us to focus on
social mobility rather than the implications of changes in the social structure of society, which would be continuously
ongoing if the aggregate distribution of population across social groups did not remain constant.
    7
      Matrix M can be equivalently de…ned by using permutations 2 SN of individuals and assuming    P         that in each
period, Nature changes identities of individuals according to with probability         , such that      2SN      = 1. The
symmetry requirement then becomes           =         for any ; 2 SN that reshu-
                                                                              P     e individuals
                                                                                      P            within  groups only. In
this case, denoting the set of individuals in group j by Gj , we have jk = n1j i2Gj      2SN : (i)2Gk    . The  converse is
also true: for any matrix M =   jk of nonnegative elements satisfying (2)–(3), there is a corresponding distribution
   over permutations (this distribution may be not uniquely de…ned). This relatively minor generalization of the
Birkho¤-von Neumann theorem for doubly stochastic matrices is proved in Lemma B2 in Appendix B.


                                                                   7
         This assumption, which is quite weak, imposes that the distribution of a richer individual’s
future selves …rst-order stochastically dominates the distribution of the poorer individual’s future
selves. In essence, it rules out ‘deterministic reversals of fortune’, where poorer people become (in
expectation) richer than the currently richer individuals. We impose Assumption 1 in all of our
analysis without explicitly stating it.8 We next provide an example of a class of social mobility
matrices satisfying this assumption.

Example 3 Let I be the identity matrix, so that M = I corresponds to a society with no social
                                                                          nk
mobility. Let F be the matrix with elements                      jk   =   n ;   it corresponds to full (and immediate) social
mobility, as the probability of an individual becoming part of group k is proportional to the size
of this group and does not depend on the identity of the original group j. Then for any                              2 (0; 1],
 I + (1           ) F is a matrix of social mobility satisfying Assumption 1.

         Throughout the rest of the paper, we use the standard notation M to denote the th power of
the social mobility matrix M , and use                   jk    to denote its generic element. The element          jk   of this
matrix gives the probability that an individual currently in social group j will be in social group k
in        periods time.

2.3        Timing of events

To specify how political decisions are made, we assume that there is a …xed order of groups in each
state,       s   : f1; :::; gg ! G, which determines the sequence in which (representatives of) di¤erent
groups make proposals, and that group ds is included among the proposers in state s (which is
trivially satis…ed if all groups have the opportunity to make proposals in each state).
         The …rst period’s state s1 is exogenously given, and so is some default policy, p0 , in the …rst
period. Thereafter, denoting the group that individual i belongs to at time t by git , the timing in
each period t          1 is as follows.

     1. Policy decision:

            (a) In each state st , we start with j = 1 and the default option of preserving the previous
                 period’s policy, p0t = pt     1.

            (b) A random agent i from group               st   (j) is chosen as the agenda setter and makes an amend-
                 ment (policy proposal)      p~jt .   (Since all members of social groups have the same preferences,
                 which agent is chosen to do this is immaterial).
     8
    This assumption can be further weakened to have a weak inequality in (4), but the version with strict inequality
simpli…es our exposition and proofs. In fact, Example 1 in the Introduction only satis…es this assumption with weak
inequality, but this is also just for simplicity, and having less than full reshu- ing in that example would not a¤ect
the conclusions.



                                                                      8
         (c) All individuals vote, sequentially, with each agent i casting vote vip (j) 2 fY; N g.
                Pn                  p
                  i=1 wg t (st )1fvi (j)=Y g
         (d) If       Pin
                               w t (st )
                                             > 12 , then the current proposal becomes the default policy (pjt =
                           i=1    g
                                      i
             p~jt ), otherwise the default policy stays the same (pjt = pjt        1
                                                                                       ). The game returns back to
             stage 1(b) with j increased by 1, unless j = g.
         (e) The policy decided in the last stage is implemented: pt = pgt .

   2. Political decision:

         (a) In each state st , the default option to preserve the current institution, s0t+1 = st , is on
             the table, and we start with j = 1.
         (b) A random agent i from group              st   (j) is chosen as the agenda setter and makes an amend-
             ment (proposal of political transition), s~jt+1 .
         (c) All individuals vote, sequentially, with each individual i casting vote vis (j) 2 fY; N g.
                Pn                 s
                  i=1 wg t (st )1fvi (j)=Y g
         (d) If       Pin
                              w t (st )
                                             > 12 , then the current proposal becomes the default transition
                            i=1   g
                                      i
             (sjt+1   =   s~jt+1 ),   otherwise the default transition stays the same (sjt+1 = sjt+11 ). The game
             returns back to stage 2(b) with j increased by 1, unless j = g.
         (e) The transition decided in the last stage is implemented: st+1 = sgt+1 .

   3. Payo¤ s: Each individual i receives time-t payo¤ of ugit (pt ), given by (1).

   4. Social mobility: At the end of the period, there is social mobility, so that individual i who
        belonged to group git in period t will start period t + 1 in group k with probability             git k .


      This speci…c game form, where proposals (for policies or political transitions) within a period
are accepted temporarily and act as a status quo until the whole sequence of proposals are made,
is similar to the “amendments” games discussed in Austen-Smith and Banks (2005).

2.4     De…nition of equilibrium

We focus on symmetric monotone Markov Perfect Equilibrium (MPE for short). Symmetry requires
that equilibria involve the same strategies for any individuals in the same social group. Monotonicity
rules out equilibria in which the direction of political transitions is reversed.9 Since, as shown in
Example 2 in the Introduction, pure-strategy equilibria may fail to exist, we allow proposers to mix
between alternatives. Thus, a strategy of player i is a mapping from history (which codi…es her
current group a¢ liation, the current institution, as well as the entire sequence of moves within the
period). This mapping is into R when player i is making a policy proposal, into                    (S) when she is
  9
   Example B5 in Appendix B provides an example of a non-monotonic Markov Perfect Equilibrium, but Theorem
B2 provides intuitive su¢ cient conditions for all equilibria to be monotone.


                                                               9
proposing political transition, and into fY; N g when she is at the voting stage. We next de…ne our
equilibrium concept more formally.

De…nition 1 (Symmetric Monotone Markov Perfect Equilibrium) A subgame perfect equi-
librium ^ is a Markov Perfect Equilibrium (MPE) if the strategy of each player i, ^ i , is conditioned
only on player i’s current social group and the current political institutions (in addition to the history
of proposals and votes within the same stage).10
         An MPE       is symmetric if for any two individuals i and j in the same social group k,                 i   =    j.

         An MPE is monotone if for any two states x; y 2 S such that x                y, the distribution of states in
period         > t starting with st = x is …rst-order stochastically dominated by the distribution of states
starting with st = y, i.e., for any l 2 [1; m],

                                      Pr (s     l j st = x)    Pr (s      l j st = y) .                                   (5)

         In what follows, we refer to symmetric monotone MPE simply as ‘equilibria’. Moreover, although
equilibria formally correspond to a complete list of strategies, it will also be more convenient to work
with the policy choices and the equilibrium transitions (across di¤erent political states) induced by
an equilibrium, and not distinguish between equilibria that di¤er in terms of strategies but have
the same equilibrium transitions.
         Finally, we say that a (political) state s is stable, if st = s implies that st+1 = s. We say that
a state s is asymptotically stable if st 2 fs             1; s; s + 1g \ S implies that lim     !1 Pr (s     = s) = 1,
in other words if, starting from one of the neighboring states of s, the sequence of states induced
in equilibrium converges to s with probability 1. This last de…nition is the analog in discrete state
space of the usual notion of asymptotic stability: starting with a small enough deviation from an
asymptotically stable state, the equilibrium path will approach the initial state arbitrarily closely
with an arbitrarily high probability. For a monotone symmetric MPE, asymptotic stability of a state
implies stability. We also quantify the notion of stability by saying that a state becomes more stable
under a change in parameters if (i) it remains stable whenever it was stable before the change of
parameters, and (ii) it remains asymptotically stable whenever it was asymptotically stable before
the change. The notion of less stable is de…ned analogously.


3         Analysis

In this section, we prove the existence of equilibrium, present some basic characterization results,
and also provide conditions for uniqueness.
    10
         Since ours is a complete information game, the de…nition of a subgame perfect equilibrium is standard.




                                                              10
3.1      Existence and characterization

The next theorem establishes the existence of an equilibrium (symmetric monotone MPE) and shows
that an equilibrium can be represented by a sequence of policies and transitions that take a simple
form, and the preferences of the current pivotal group play a critical role.

Theorem 1 (Existence and characterization) There exists an equilibrium. Moreover, in every
equilibrium:

   1. The equilibrium policy coincides with the bliss policy of the current pivotal group at each t.
         That is, if the current state at time t is s, then the policy is pt = bds ;

   2. The next state maximizes the expected continuation utility of current members of the cur-
         rent pivotal group.    That is, if we de…ne the transition correspondence Q = Q ( ) by
         qsz = Pr (st+1 = z j st = s), then qsz > 0 implies
                                                             X
                                             z 2 arg max           ds j Vj   (x) ,                              (6)
                                                       x2S
                                                             j2G


         where fVj (x)gx2S
                       j2G satis…es
                                                             X           X
                                    Vj (x) = uj (bdx ) +           qxy          jk Vk   (y) ;                   (7)
                                                             y2S         k2G


   3. The transitions induced by the equilibrium are strongly monotonic: if x < y and qxa > 0,
         qyb > 0 (i.e., transitions from x to a and from y to b may happen along the equilibrium path),
         then a    b;

   4. Generically, mixing is only possible between two states, one of which is the current one. Specif-
         ically, for almost all parameter values, if qsx > 0 and qsy > 0 for x 6= y, then s 2 fx; yg.

       The …rst two parts of this proposition imply that, starting in the current state s, the political
process induces a path of policies and transitions that maximizes the discounted utility of the pivotal
group, ds .11 Note that this maximization naturally takes into account that the current pivotal group
may not be pivotal in the future. This feature of our (monotone) equilibria will greatly simplify the
rest of the analysis, and we will often work with the preferences of the current pivotal group (or
with a slight abuse of terminology, the ‘current decision-maker’).
       Part 3 establishes that (stochastic) equilibrium transitions are strongly monotonic, meaning that
transitions that have positive probability starting from a higher state will never fall below transitions
that have positive probability starting from a lower state. This property implies that if a transition
  11
    There is an analogous result in Roberts (2015) in a non-strategic environment (and without social mobility), and
also in Acemoglu, Egorov and Sonin (2015) in a setting without social mobility.


                                                        11
from x to a is possible in equilibrium, then from y > x, only transitions to states a; a + 1; : : : are
possible. Notice that, as the quali…er ‘strongly’ suggests, this result signi…cantly strengthens the
monotonicity requirement of our symmetric monotone MPE, which only required …rst-order stochas-
tic dominance of the equilibrium path when starting from a higher state. The result here instead
establishes that when we start in a higher state, the lowest state to which there can be a transition
is higher than the highest state to which there can be a transition starting from a lower state.
       Finally, Part 4 will greatly simplify our subsequent analysis. It establishes that equilibria in
mixed strategies take a simple and intuitive form: they involve mixing only between the current
state and some other state. Mixed strategies arise as a way of slowing down the transition from
today’s state to some unique ‘target’state. This is intuitive; as Example 2 illustrated, pure-strategy
equilibria may fail to exist because the current decision-maker would like to stay in the current
state if he expects the next decision-maker to move away, and would like to move if he expects
the next decision-maker to stay. This was a re‡ection of the fact that the current decision-maker
prefers the current state but would like to be in a di¤erent state because he expects his preferences
to change in the near future as a result of social mobility. Mixed strategies resolve this problem
by slowing down transitions: when she expects the next decision-maker to slowly move away
(i.e., move away with some probability), the current decision-maker is indi¤erent between moving
towards her target state and staying put. This intuition also clari…es why, generically, there is
only mixing between two states: the current decision-maker can be indi¤erent between three states
only with non-generic preferences/probabilities.12 The notion of genericity here is essentially that
the set of parameter values for which the statement is not true is of measure zero (because it
requires the decision-maker to be exactly indi¤erent between three states).13 One implication of
this characterization is that even though there may be mixed strategies, this will not change the
direction of transitions, but will just a¤ect its speed.
       Note also that the expected stage utility of an agent currently in group j in                         periods if policy
p were to be implemented at that point is
          g                                    g
                                                                  !2       g
                                                                                         !2       g
          X                           2
                                               X                           X                      X
                jk   Ak   (bk    p)       =          jk bk    p        +         jk bk        +         jk   Ak   b2k ,
          k=1                                  k=1                         k=1                    k=1
  12
      Mixing can take place between two non-neighboring states because the continuation utility of the current decision-
makers may be maximized at two non-neighboring states. Though this might at …rst appear to contradict the concavity
of utility functions, Example B3 in Appendix B demonstrates that it may take place as a result of the con‡ict between
near and distant future selves (in particular, near selves prefer to stay in the current state, while distant ones prefer
to move to states farther away and rapidly, and at the same time, moving to a neighboring state makes none of the
selves happy).
   13
      More formally, the genericity notion requires that the parameters, , the ’s and the b’s, to be such that no subset
of them are roots of a (nontrivial) polynomial with rational coe¢ cients (since the value functions will be shown to be
polynomial with rational coe¢ cients in these parameters, see the proof of Theorem 1 in Appendix A). As there is a
countable set of such polynomials, each of which de…nes a set of (Lebesgue) measure zero, the union of such points has
measure zero as well. This substantiates the claim that the statements that are true generically in this and subsequent
propositions hold for all parameters except a subset that is of measure zero.


                                                             12
where    jk   denotes the jkth element of M , the th power of the mobility matrix M . The last two
terms in this expression are constants (re‡ecting, after rearranging, the expectation of Ak and the
variance of bk ). This implies that policy preferences can be equivalently represented by the square
of the distance between the policy and the political bliss point of the self in                         periods given by
                                                          g
                                                          X
                                                ( )
                                               bj     =         jk bk   = (M b)j .
                                                          k=1

                          (0)               (1)
Let us also de…ne bj            = bj and bj       = lim    !1 (M        b)j (this limit exists by standard properties of
stochastic matrices).
   Some of our results — speci…cally, the ones dealing with                           close to 1 — are easiest to formulate
under the following assumption. We will speci…cally note when we impose this assumption.

Assumption 2 (Su¢ ciently rich set of states) For each group j 2 G, if state sj 2
                                     ( )
arg mins2S jbds       bj j, then     jdsj   > 0 for some        > 0.

   This assumption states that every social group has a positive probability of becoming pivotal
starting in its ideal state (i.e., the state with induced policy choice maximizing the stage payo¤
of individuals in this social group). This assumption is not particularly restrictive as it holds
automatically either if for each group there is a state in which it is pivotal (i.e., S = G), or if the
social mobility matrix M is ‘ergodic’(meaning that there is a positive probability that an individual
from any social group can eventually reach any other social group).

Theorem 2 (Very myopic or very patient players)

  1. There exists         0   > 0 such that for any         2 (0;       0 ),   the equilibrium is such that if in period t the
                                                                                                      (1)
     state is s, then the state in period t + 1 is z 2 S that minimizes bdz                         bds . In other words, if
     agents are su¢ ciently myopic, then society immediately moves to a state where the resulting
                                                                                                                  (1)
     policy is closest to the bliss point of tomorrow’s self of the current pivotal group, bds .

  2. Suppose in addition that Assumption 2 holds. There exists ~ < 1 such that for any                                  2 ( ~ ; 1)
     there is an equilibrium such that if in period t the state is s, then the sequence of states along
     the equilibrium path st+1 ; st+2 ; : : : will converge, with probability 1, to state z that minimizes
                (1)
        bdz    bds    .

   The …rst result is straightforward: su¢ ciently myopic players in the pivotal group will choose
the political institution that maximizes the welfare of their immediate future selves. In fact, in this
case, it can also be shown that the equilibrium is generically in pure strategies (where genericity is
to rule out the cases in which tomorrow’s ideal point is exactly half way between the policies that
will follow from two adjacent states).

                                                                 13
   The second result is more subtle and already starts illustrating some of the reasoning that will
play an important role in the rest of our analysis: if           is high, agents are patient and are willing to
act in a way that will eventually lead to a state where the utilities of their distant future selves are
maximized. Thus, if the equilibrium evolution did not take society to such a state, then the current
decision-maker would have an incentive to move there immediately. Intuitively, when the discount
factor is su¢ ciently large, agents care about the preferences of their current and near-future selves
only inasmuch as this does not con‡ict with the preferences of their distant future selves. To com-
                                                                                        (1)
plete the argument, one needs to show that the state z that minimizes bdz              bds    is stable, so once
the society gets there, it stays there forever. Though the mathematical argument is more involved,
the intuition for this result is straightforward: in the long run, the distributions of future selves of
individuals from groups ds and dz are the same, and therefore their interests are aligned. So decision-
makers from group dz prefer to maintain state z, which is exactly what group ds , from the vantage
point of the beginning of the game, wishes to achieve in the long run. Notice also that Theorem 2
does not imply immediate transition to the long-run stable state even when               is very close to 1 be-
cause current decision-makers might still prefer to spend the next several periods in the current state.

3.2     Multiplicity and Uniqueness

The same economic forces that lead to equilibria in mixed strategies also open the way to multiplicity
as the next example demonstrates. The key feature of the example, responsible for multiplicity, is
the presence of di¤erent aspects of social mobility that take place at di¤erent speeds. In the next
example, there is ‘fast social mobility,’meaning a high likelihood of the members of the middle class
to move up, which will make them have preferences similar to the rich in the near future, but also
‘slow social mobility,’meaning a lower but still positive probability for them to move down, which
implies that their preferences in the very far future will coincide with those of the current poor.

Example 4 Consider an environment as in Example 2, but with the following changes: …rst, the
discount factor, , can take any value; and second, in each period, r members of the middle class
become rich and an equal number of rich become middle class, while also r0 other members of the
middle class become poor, while an equal number of poor become middle class. Assume that r = 81 n
           1
and r0 =   50 n   (where n is any number divisible by 200). Notably, r is much larger than r0 , which will
imply that for the middle class, mobility upwards is considerably faster than mobility downwards,
though because they are part mixing with the middle class and the poor have the same preferences
in the very distant future.
      Current members of the middle class prefer policy 0 today, but for tomorrow, their bliss point
              5          1             21
is given by   8     1+   10   ( 1) =   40 .   Consequently, these individuals would prefer the rich to rule in
the next period, which is a consequence of the fast mobility upwards. But in subsequent periods,
because of slow mobility downwards, they again prefer democracy: for example, in the period after

                                                          14
                                5   11       11   5          1          19        11   1              1533
next, their bliss point is      8   16   +   40   8   1+     10         20   +    40   10    ( 1) =   3200   < 12 . In fact,
thereafter their bliss points decline monotonically towards zero, which is the bliss point of the very
distant future self of all agents (computed as the weighted average of the bliss points of di¤erent
social groups in the stationary distribution).
      It can be veri…ed that for         > 0:373, there is an equilibrium in which democracy is stable. In
this equilibrium, the middle class can resist the temptation to transfer power to the rich, because
this would be bene…cial for only one period, and when                   > 0:373, this is not su¢ cient to compensate
for the lower utility thereafter. At the same time, for all                       2 (0; 1), and thus a fortiori for       >
0:373, there is an equilibrium in which democracy is unstable, and where the society immediately
transitions to elite dictatorship and stays there forever. Intuitively, when the transition to elite
dictatorship tomorrow is expected, the current middle class know that their transition decision
a¤ects the utility of their tomorrow’s selves, but not the utility of their more distant selves, who
will …nd themselves in elite dictatorship even if the middle class stays in democracy for the next
period. Since only the utility of tomorrow’s self is at stake, and this self prefers elite dictatorship
to democracy, moving away from democracy is indeed a best response by the middle class. (In
addition, when         > 0:373, there is also a third equilibrium involving mixing).

      Notice that the multiplicity illustrated in this example is not just a multiplicity of equilibrium
strategies but of induced equilibrium paths. The economic intuition comes from the interplay
between the current decision-maker’s strategies and her expectation of future behavior by both
those who in the future will be in the same social group as herself and those in other social groups.
Though this type of multiplicity can occur whenever there is social mobility at di¤erent speeds,
a straightforward (though not necessarily weak) assumption is su¢ cient to rule it out. We next
present this assumption, which will be imposed in some of our results to ensure uniqueness.

Assumption 3 (Within-person                   monotonicity) For any social group k, the sequence
 (0) (1) (2)                                                      ( )         ( +1)                           ( )     ( +1)
bk ; bk ; bk ; : : :   is monotone, meaning that either bk                   bk        for   = 0; 1; ::: or bk       bk
for     = 0; 1; :::.

      To understand the implications of within-person monotonicity, let us revisit the reasoning of
the current decision-maker. This agent, by choosing the state tomorrow, is indirectly deciding the
sequence of states at all future dates. Imagine a situation in which she expects her preferences to
…rst move to the right and then to the left (thus violating within-person monotonicity). In this case,
she might be happy to stay in the original state in order to balance the interests of all future selves.
However, if she expected future decision-makers to move right in the next period, she would prefer
to do so immediately, because tomorrow’s self is the only one that bene…ts from such a move. This
paves the way for multiplicity. If, on the other hand, the within-person monotonicity condition is
satis…ed, this sort of multiplicity is not possible: her tomorrow’s self wishes a move to the right more

                                                        15
than her current self, and if future decision-makers are more likely to move to the right, the current
self, who tries to balance the interest of all future selves, becomes less likely to move the right.
   The intuition that within-person monotonicity should ensure uniqueness (in the sense of unique-
ness of equilibrium paths) is con…rmed by the next theorem.

Theorem 3 (Uniqueness) The equilibrium is generically unique (meaning that decisions on cur-
rent policy and transitions in each state are determined uniquely within the class of symmetric
monotone MPE, except for a set of parameters of measure zero) if either (i) the discount factor
is su¢ ciently low, or (ii) Assumption 3 (within-person monotonicity) is satis…ed.

   That the equilibrium is generically unique when the players are very myopic (have a very low
discount factor) follows readily from the fact that such myopic players will simply maximize their
next period utility, which generically has a unique solution. It is also of limited interest, since we
are more concerned with situations in which the discount factor takes intermediate values so that
the current decision-maker takes into account the preferences of all of her future selves. For these
cases, within-person monotonicity provides a su¢ cient condition for uniqueness as anticipated by
our previous discussion.
   It is also worth recalling from Example 4 that in the absence of within-person monotonicity,
multiplicity of equilibria does not disappear even as        approaches 1. The reason is that even if
the current and long-run selves have similar preferences, they still need to coordinate so that the
pivotal voter at each point chooses policies in line with their long-run preferences, not their short-
run incentives. As     approaches 1, these short-run incentives become less and less important, but
the coordination problem does not vanish.
   The within-person monotonicity condition and its role in uniqueness can be understood alterna-
tively as an instance of aggregation of heterogeneous preferences — in particular, the preferences of
all future selves. Consider the problem of a current decision-maker comparing two states, x and y.
This decision-maker will be implicitly aggregating the preferences of her future selves with weights
given by the discount factor and the social mobility process. Within-person monotonicity means
that if self-t and self-t0 prefer x to y, then the same is true for self-t00 , provided that t < t00 < t0 .
This order implies that each current agent acts as if she were a ‘weighted median’ of her future
selves; moreover, the weights of all future selves are the same across individuals. This guarantees
that the preferences of future selves can be aggregated in a simple way and can be represented as
the weighted median future self of the current decision-maker. Since current decisions are made by
the current (weighted) median voter, this implies that they will maximize the preferences of the
weighted median future self of the current weighted median voter. This aggregation in turn further
implies uniqueness of equilibrium — once more because of the uniqueness of the weighted median
voter in the presence of such well-de…ned preferences. This argument also provides a complementary


                                                    16
intuition for why within-person monotonicity is not needed when        is su¢ ciently low: in this case,
tomorrow’s self receives almost all of the weight, and the problem of aggregation of preferences of
di¤erent future selves becomes moot.

3.3   Farsighted stability of institutions

If agents are su¢ ciently farsighted, Theorem 2 yields two corollaries, which are both interesting in
their own right and will also be crucial for the rest of our analysis (even though this analysis will
be for the case in which   takes an arbitrary value).
   Theorem 2 implies that when       is very high, the preferences of very distant future selves b(1)
play a key role. These distant preferences are straightforward to compute. Let us introduce the
following notation: for every group j 2 G, let LM (j) be the set of all groups k such that       jk   >0
for some      1. In the language of Markov chains, LM (j) is a component (communication class) of
matrix M , and the set of components, fLM (j)g, is a partition of G (i.e., LM (j1 ) \ LM (j2 ) 6= ? and
LM (j1 )[LM (j2 )[: : : = G. Intuitively, LM (j) includes all groups which a current member of group
j may eventually reach. Condition (3) guarantees that a member of group j may (eventually) move
to group k if and only if members of group k can move to group j. Hence, these two groups need
to be part of the same component. Moreover, from Assumption 1, each component is ‘connected’,
that is, whenever k1 < k2 < k3 and k1 ; k3 2 LM (j), we have k2 2 LM (j). This enables us to write
the preferences of individuals from group j in the very distant future as the average preferences of
all agents within the same component:
                                               P
                                        (1)      k2LM (j) nk bk
                                       bj     = P                  .                                  (8)
                                                     k2LM (j) nk

   The next several results will be stated under the assumption that the equilibrium is unique.
Since we will also adopt Assumption 3, Theorem 3 already ensures generic uniqueness. We impose
equilibrium uniqueness as an additional assumption both for emphasis and to avoid further reference
to generic parameter values.

Corollary 1 (Farsighted stability of institutions) Suppose that Assumptions 2 and 3 hold and
the equilibrium is unique. Then state s 2 S is stable for su¢ ciently high      (formally, there exists
~ < 1 such that for any 2 ( ~ ; 1), qss = 1) if and only if

                                                             (1)
                                       s 2 arg min bdz      bds    .                                  (9)
                                               z2S

   This result states that when players are su¢ ciently farsighted, a state is stable if and only if it
guarantees a policy outcome closer to the (group-size weighted) average of the political bliss points
of groups which the current decisions can move to than the policy choice that will result in any other
state. Applying this result to democracy, we can conclude that democracy is stable if and only if the

                                                     17
median voter’s long-run future self would still prefer democracy over any other institution — i.e., if
his political bliss point lies closer to the policy that the median voter will choose under democracy
than to the policy that the decisive voter under any other institution would choose. Given single-
peakedness (and symmetry) of preferences, it is su¢ cient to compare policies under democracy and
under the two neighboring institutions. More precisely, we have the following corollary:14

Corollary 2 (Farsighted stability of democracy) Suppose that Assumptions 2 and 3 hold and
the equilibrium is unique. Denote democracy by x. Then democracy is stable for su¢ ciently high
if and only if
                                           bdx   1    + bdx         (1)        bdx + bdx+1
                                                                bdx                        .                                 (10)
                                                     2                              2
         This corollary, which follows directly from Corollary 1, provides a simple, and as it will turn out
powerful, characterization of the stability of democracy when the discount factor, , is su¢ ciently
close to 1. Intuitively, it requires that the preferences of the current median voter in the very
distant future are closer to his own current preferences than those of the decision-makers in either
neighboring state.15 When this is the case, the current median voter prefers to delegate future
decisions to future median voters (in democracy). When it is not, he would like to empower a group
other than the one containing the median voter, which implies a deviation from democracy. We will
see in the next section that this condition not only determines whether or not democracy is stable
for high values of the discount factor , but also shapes the comparative statics of democracy with
respect to the speed of social mobility (for any value of ).
         A complementary interpretation of conditions (9) and (10) further clari…es the intuition. Note
                       (1)
from (8) that bdx            is the average bliss point within the component of the social mobility matrix
M to which group x belongs. In the special case where this component corresponds to G (when
                                                                                                                   (1)
there is, possibly indirect, social mobility from each group to every other group), bdx                                  is simply
                                                                                                          (1)
the average bliss point in society, so the condition that x 2 arg minz2S bdx                             bdx     requires median
preferences, bdx , which are those which will be implemented by democracy, to be su¢ ciently close
                                        (1)
to these average preferences, bdx .


4         Social Mobility and the Stability of Democracy

In this section, we present our main results on how social mobility a¤ects the stability of democracy.
Once again we simplify the exposition by assuming within-person monotonicity, relegating the
results that relax this assumption to the next section. Moreover, given our focus in this section, we
…x all other parameters of the model, and only vary the matrix of social mobility.
    14
    To formally cover the cases in which the political institutions are the lowest and highest feasible ones, i.e., 1 and
m respectively, in what follows we set bd0 = 1 and bdm+1 = +1, which ensures that for these lowest and highest
political institutions, condition (10) is only relevant on one side.
    15                                           (1)                     (1)               (1)             (1)
         This condition is equivalent to bdx   bdx        bdx   1     b dx     and bdx    b dx   bdx+1    bdx .


                                                                    18
De…nition 2 (Comparing the speed of social mobility) Suppose we have two matrices of
social mobility M and M 0 with the same components (which implies that b(1) = b0(1) ). Then, we
say that social mobility is faster under M 0 than under M if for each group j 2 G and each t                                                 1,
              (t)  0(t)           0(1)        (1)                  (t)      0(t)      0(1)                (1)
either bj bj      bj             bj      =   bj         or bj     bj       bj        bj              =   bj ,     with the inequality between
 (t)     0(t)
bj and bj being strict           at least for some j.

       Thus two matrices M and M 0 are comparable in terms of the speed of social mobility only if
the preferences of very distant future selves coincide, which is in turn guaranteed if they have the
same components. Under this condition, mobility under M 0 is faster if the preferences of future
                                                                (1)
selves at any time t are weakly closer to bj                          (and weakly further from bj ) than under M . This
de…nition makes it clear that faster social mobility implies that the preferences of future selves will
                                                                                                         (1)
converge more rapidly to the preferences of the very distant self, bj                                          , which is the feature that will
be responsible for the nature of the comparative statics we present in this section.

Example 5 The simplest example of a collection of matrices that can be ranked in terms of speed of
mobility can be constructed as follows. Take some matrix M satisfying within-person monotonicity).
Consider a family of matrices of social mobility M ( ) = M + (1                                                   ) I, where I is the identity
matrix and            2 (0; 1] is a parameter. Then social mobility for M ( 0 ) is faster than that in M ( ) if
and only if       0   > .
       Another example is the following. Take some matrix Z that satis…es within-person monotonicity.
Assume that individuals are reshu- ed according to Z at random times determined according to a
Poisson process with rate            2 (0; 1). If so, the probabilities of transitions over an interval of time
of unit length, corresponding to the interval between the two periods where political decisions are
made, is given by                                                                                !
                                                                              1
                                                                              X      k
                                                                                             k
                                              M( )=e                     I+              Z           .
                                                                                    k!
                                                                              k=1
                                                    0                                                                0
In this case, social mobility for M                      is faster than M ( ) if and only if                             > .

       The next theorem shows that the relationship between social mobility and the stability of democ-
racy depends on condition (10) introduced in Corollary 1.

Theorem 4 (When social mobility increases the stability of democracy) Suppose that
Assumption 3 holds and the equilibrium is unique. Suppose also that social mobility under M 0 is
faster than under M , and inequality (10) holds for either M or M 0 (these conditions are equivalent).
Then democracy is more stable for M 0 than for M . More precisely, democracy is stable under both
M and M 0 , and, furthermore, if it is asymptotically stable under M , then it is also asymptotically
stable under M 0 .16
  16
       The following stronger version of this result is also proved at the end of the proof of Theorem 4: let qsz be the


                                                                      19
      In the case where (10) holds, this theorem thus supports De Tocqueville’s hypothesis that social
mobility contributes to the stability of democracy. The intuition for this result is instructive about
the workings of our model. We know from Corollary 1 that (10) holds, democracy is stable for
  su¢ ciently close to 1, because the long-run preferences of the current median voter are close
to the preferences of the median voter in the very far future. This does not guarantee stability
for     signi…cantly less than 1, however, because the current median voter may bene…t su¢ ciently
from shifting political power in the near future future to another social group. In this situation,
faster social mobility makes ‘time run faster’, making the preferences of all future selves closer to
b(1) . Put di¤erently, with faster social mobility, individuals put less weight on events in the very
near future because the very near future itself becomes more transient, and consequently, their
preferences become more aligned with those of their distance selves. This implies that whenever
democracy is stable under M , it will also be stable under M (and the converse is not true).
      Why does asymptotic stability under M guarantee asymptotic stability under M 0 ? To under-
stand this result, recall that faster social mobility also implies that, for any , the preferences of all
future selves of all social groups approach the preferences of their very distant self, and because the
preferences of the very distant self are the same for all groups (within the component), the prefer-
ences of all social groups approach each other as well. Since, from condition (10), the very distant
self of the current decision-maker prefers democracy to any other political system, this is also true
for any other group in the same component as the current decision-maker, and consequently, faster
social mobility makes neighboring groups (that are in the same component) also prefer democracy
to any other political system, and thus implies that asymptotic stability under M translates into
asymptotic stability under M 0 (and once again, the converse not being true).
      What if (10) does not hold? In this case, the current median voter expects that her future
selves in the very distant future will prefer another state. When the discount factor, , is not too
close to 1, this does not necessarily imply that she would want to go to this state immediately,
and democracy may still be stable. Nevertheless, it does imply that faster social mobility makes
democracy less stable as we show in the next theorem.

Theorem 5 (When social mobility reduces the stability of democracy) Suppose that As-
sumption 3 holds, the equilibrium is unique and that social mobility under M 0 is faster than under
M . Suppose also that for M , inequality (10) does not hold, but we have

                                bdx   2   + bdx   1    (1)            (1)    bdx+1 + bdx+2
                                                      bdx            bdx+1                 .                       (11)
                                          2                 1                      2
                                                                       0
probability of transitioning from state s to state z under M , and qsz   be the same probability under M 0 . Let us also
denote democracy by x. Then qx 1;x qx 1;x (with strict inequality, unless qx0 1;x = qx 1;x = 1) and qx+1;x
                                   0                                                                     0
                                                                                                                  qx+1;x
                                 0
(with strict inequality, unless qx+1;x = qx+1;x = 1), so that the speed of reaching democracy from neighboring states is
greater under M 0 than under M . A similar strengthening of Theorem 5 can also be proved, but is limited to save space.




                                                                20
Then democracy is ‘less stable’ for M 0 than for M . More precisely, democracy is asymptotically
stable at neither M nor M 0 , and if it is not stable at M , then it is not stable at M 0 either.

    The substantive result of this theorem is that, when (10) does not hold, and under the additional
condition given by (11), faster social mobility has the opposite e¤ect to that maintained by De
Tocqueville’s hypothesis and to that characterized in Theorem 4: it makes democracy less stable.
    The intuition for this result is closely related to that of Theorem 4. When (10) does not hold,
democracy is not stable for su¢ ciently high , but may still be stable for     < 1, because the current
median voter bene…ts in the near term from preserving democracy. But then as in Theorem 4, faster
social mobility aligns the preferences of the current median voter with her very distant selves, but
this may not destabilize and otherwise-stable democracy.
    Why does this theorem need condition (11)? The reason is the slippery slope considerations
which will be discussed in greater detail in the next section: these considerations may make in-
dividuals unwilling to move to an institution that is more preferred in the short run because this
transition might pave the way to yet other transitions which may be less desirable for them. In
this instance, as the speed of social mobility increases, institutions that lie between democracy and
the institution most preferred by the very distant self may become unstable as well, and this might
in turn make democracy stable because, due to slippery slope concerns, the current decision-maker
may not wish to move to these unstable institutions in the next period. Condition (11), on the other
hand, ensures stability of the neighboring states, thus alleviating the slippery slope e¤ect.


5     Further Results and Extensions

In this section we discuss slippery slope considerations and extend our main results to an environ-
ment without the within-person monotonicity assumption.

5.1   Slippery slopes

We emphasized in the context of Theorem 5 how slippery slope considerations, which discourage
a transition to a preferred state because of subsequent transitions that this would unleash, play a
role in shaping when democracy may remain stable even when the preferences of future selves favor
another state. More precisely, slippery slope considerations refer to the situation where in some
state s, a winning coalition (e.g., a weighted majority) would obtain greater stage payo¤s in some
state x 6= s than in s, but in equilibrium stays in s because it anticipates further, less preferred
transitions after the move to x (see Acemoglu, Egorov, and Sonin, 2012). In models without social
mobility, slippery slope considerations are more powerful when the discount factor is closer to 1
because in this case agents care little about the outcomes in the next period and a lot about future
outcomes. Slippery slope considerations continue to be important in models of social mobility, but


                                                   21
they arise not when the discount factor is high but when it is intermediate. The next theorem
characterizes the extent of slippery slope considerations. Like all remaining results in the paper,
the proof of this theorem is in Appendix B.

Theorem 6 (Slippery slopes) Suppose that Assumptions 2 and 3 hold. There exist 0                                     0   <
 1     < 1 such that for any           2 (0; 1) n (      0;     1 ),   if some state s 2 S is stable, then for any x 2 S,
the expected continuation utility of pivotal group ds from staying in x forever cannot exceed their
equilibrium continuation utility:
                                1 X
                                X                                        1 X
                                                                         X
                                             t t                                   t t
                                               ds k uk        (bds )                 ds k uk   (bdx ) .              (12)
                                t=1 k2G                                  t=1 k2G

                                                   (1)          bds +bdx
Furthermore, if for any states s 6= x, bds 6=                       2    ,   then one can take        0   > 0.
       If, on the other hand,          2 (   0;   1 ),   (12) need not hold and slippery slope considerations can
prevent certain transitions.

       In other words, this result suggests that for both high and low , all stable states give higher
expected utility to the current decision-maker than any other state (with the expectation taken with
respect to the social mobility process).17 When slippery slope considerations are important, this
need not be the case: there may be a state providing a higher expected utility to the current decision-
maker than the current state, but moving to this state would unleash another set of transitions that
reduce the discounted continuation payo¤ of the current decision-maker. Theorem 6 shows that such
slippery slope considerations arise only for intermediate values of . (See Example B1 in Appendix
B for the second part of the theorem.)
       The intuition for why slippery slope considerations do not play a role for myopic players (with
low ) is straightforward: myopic players care only about the next period’s state, so the subsequent
moves do not modify their rankings over states. That these considerations do not arise for very
farsighted players (with high             ) is more interesting and perhaps surprising. Suppose a situation
in which the current-decision-maker, who is pivotal in the current state s, prefers a di¤erent state,
x, where by de…nition he will not belong to the pivotal group unless his preferences change due
to social mobility. Such preferences are possible only when members of the current pivotal group
have a positive probability of joining the group that is pivotal in state x (and conversely, those in
the group pivotal in state x could move to the group that is pivotal in state s). An implication
is that even though the distribution of political power in states s and x have a con‡ict of interest
today, because of social mobility their preferences in the distant future will be aligned. Therefore,
with a su¢ ciently high discount factor, the current decision-maker will not be worried about deci-
sion rights shifting to the group that is pivotal in state x, averting slippery slope considerations.
  17                (1)     bds +bdx
    The condition bds 6=        2
                                        in this theorem rules out situations where tomorrow’s self is exactly indi¤erent
between these two states.


                                                                       22
In contrast, with intermediate discount factors, the loss of control in the near future can trigger
concerns about slippery slopes, encouraging the current decision-maker not to move in the direction
of states that increase their immediate payo¤s. Notably, this result is very di¤erent from that in
Acemoglu, Egorov, and Sonin (2012), where slippery slope considerations became more important
as the discount factor became larger. The di¤erence is due to the fact that social mobility changes
the nature of the slippery slope concerns (and as social mobility limits to zero, we recover the result
in Acemoglu, Egorov, and Sonin, 2012).

5.2   Comparative statics without within-person monotonicity

We stated our main results, Theorems 4 and 5, under the assumption that the equilibrium was
unique, which is ensured generically under Assumption 3 (within-person monotonicity). We next
provide direct generalizations of these results when neither equilibrium uniqueness nor Assumption 3
is imposed. The substantive and intuitive economic content of these results are essentially identical,
but the statements are a little more involved because the language has to be adjusted for possible
multiplicity of equilibria.

Theorem 7 (Social        mobility          and       stability         of      democracy       without        within-person
monotonicity I) Suppose that social mobility under M 0 is faster than under M , and (10) holds
with strict inequalities. Then democracy is more stable for M 0 than for M . More precisely, democ-
racy is stable in all equilibria under M and M 0 , and, furthermore, if it is asymptotically stable in
every equilibrium under M , then it is asymptotically stable in every equilibrium under M 0 .

Theorem 8 (Social        mobility          and       stability         of      democracy       without        within-person
monotonicity II) Suppose that social mobility under M 0 is faster than under M . Suppose also
that for M , inequality (10) does not hold, but
                              bdx   2   + bdx   1      (1)           (1)       bdx+1 + bdx+2
                                                    < bdx            bdx+1 <                 .
                                        2                   1                        2
Then democracy is less stable for M 0 than for M . More precisely, democracy is not asymptotically
stable under any equilibrium under M or M 0 , and if it is not stable in every equilibrium under M ,
then there is no equilibrium under M 0 where it is stable.


6     Endogenous social mobility

In this extension, we allow the society to choose the speed of social mobility (thus endogenizing the
extent of social mobility). We show how political preferences over social mobility are formed, and
how this introduces a new set of forces limiting equilibrium social mobility.
    To simplify the analysis, we focus on a setting with only three social groups, the poor (P ), the
middle class (M ), and the rich (R), with shares                P,    M    and   R;   respectively;   P   +   M+ R   = 1. We

                                                                23
also assume that          P;     R   < 21 , so that the median voter belongs to the middle class. Let us denote
the states where these groups are decisive by, respectively, l (left), d (democracy), and r (right).
      For ease of exposition, we consider two alternative scenarios: social mobility at the bottom (i.e.,
between P and M while leaving R intact), and social mobility at the top (i.e., between M and R
while leaving P intact). These two scenarios can be combined to obtain arbitrary patterns of social
mobility in this three-class society, but we do not discuss this hybrid case so as to keep the choice
over social mobility single-dimensional and to economize on space.
      Let us normalize the preferences of the middle class to bM = 0, and let bP < 0 and bR > 0 be
the political bliss points of the poor and the rich, respectively. The constants fAk g, which have so
far played no major role, will be important because they will parameterize the direct bene…ts from
social mobility (e.g., how important it is for the rich to remain rich rather than transition to the
middle class). We normalize AM = 0 and assume that AP <                          b2P and AR > b2R . These two natural
assumptions impose that even when the poor rule, it is better to be in the middle class than the
poor, and even when the middle class rule, it is still better to be rich than middle class.
      The rest of the section proceeds as follows. In the next subsection we use our characterization
results from Section 3 to derive the preferences of the three social groups over social mobility. In
the following subsection we allow a one-time choice over social mobility and derive our main results
on the interplay between the evolution of political institutions and endogenous social mobility. In
the last subsection we discuss the case in which there are frequent choices over social mobility,
corresponding to the decision over the speed of social mobility being made at each date together
with the policy and institutional transition decisions.

6.1        Preferences for social mobility

Let us …rst suppose that the level of social mobility is chosen once at the beginning and remains
constant thereafter. Under this assumption, the next two propositions characterize the preferences
of the three social groups over the pace of social mobility.
      We start with social mobility at the bottom — that is, between the poor and the middle class.
       l
Let        be the share of middle class who become poor at the end of each period (accordingly, it is the
probability that a given person moves down). Then the probability that a member of the poor moves
                                           l                     l                                         l           l
up to the middle class is              M
                                               . The values of       consistent with Assumption 1 are          2 0;    max   ,
                                       P
            l           1
where       max   =   1+ M
                           .18
                         P


                                                                                                                   l
Proposition 1 (Preferences over mobility at the bottom) If                            M   >   P,   then a higher       makes
the poor better o¤ and the middle class worse o¤ , while the rich are indi¤ erent over the speed of
  18
     When l = lmax (and similarly, below when h = hmax ), Assumption 1 holds only as a weak inequality. None of the
results we use here depend on this assumption holding as a strict inequality, or we could specify that l 2 [0; lmax "]
for some small " (and similarly for h ), with no impact on our results.



                                                                 24
social mobility.
                                                                l
          If       M        <       P,   then a higher                  makes the poor better o¤ and the middle class worse o¤ . The
                                                                        l                                                                l
rich"become weakly# worse o¤ as                                             increases; strictly worse o¤ if                                  increases within the inter-
                        1
val                             M
                                     ; 12      (because the probability of transitioning from democracy to left dictatorship
               2           1+
                                P
increases on this interval); and their utility is constant outside of this interval.

          The poor always value social mobility at the bottom, both for economic reasons (this enables
them to transition to the middle class) and for political reasons (it can lead to institutional change
from democracy to left dictatorship when they are more numerous than the middle class). In
contrast, the middle class, which stands to transition to a lower social class, dislikes social mobility.
The rich are not directly impacted by social mobility as long as democracy remains stable. This
stability is guaranteed when                              M    >            P,   and also holds when                     M     <    P    provided that social mobility
                                                           l
is not very high. For higher                                   , which corresponds to faster social mobility, democracy becomes
unstable, making way to a left dictatorship. In this case, the rich lose out indirectly from greater
social mobility — because it destabilizes democracy in favor of a left dictatorship.
          We next turn to social mobility at the top. Let us now denote the share of middle class who
                                         h
become rich by                               , which then implies that the share of the rich that move to the middle class
                   h                                                             h                                                                 h           h
is        M
                       . In this case, the values of                                 consistent with Assumption 1 are                                  2 0;    max    , where
          R
    h                    1
    max        =       1+ M
                                .
                            R


                                                                                                                                                               h
Proposition 2 (Preferences mobility at the top) If                                                                       M   >      R,       then a higher          makes the
middle class better o¤ and the rich worse o¤ , while the poor are indi¤ erent.
                                                                    h
          If       M        <       R,   then a higher                      makes the
                                                                                   " middle class#better o¤ , and the utility of the poor
                                                                                                 1
is monotonically decreasing on the interval                                                               M
                                                                                                                  ; 21    (because the probability of transition
                                                                                          2         1+
                                                                                                          R
from democracy to elite dictatorship on this interval) and is constant ouside of this interval. The
                                                                                                 h                       AR
utility of the rich is monotonically decreasing in                                                   if           M
                                                                                                                         b2R
                                                                                                                               +1             4, and is nonmonotone in
                                                                                                                  R

     otherwise.19

          Now conversely, the poor do not directly care about social mobility at the top, and they will not
oppose it as long as it does not have institutional consequences. But they do so indirectly, because
if it makes democracy less stable in favor of elites dictatorship, it makes the poor worse o¤. In
     19
"         More              precisely,              the       utility                of    the           rich !# is                increasing          on     the      interval
                                                    r                                                      1
           1                                                   AR                                                 1
                            ; min (1            )         M
                                                               b2
                                                                        +1                1+   M
                                                                                                              ;   2
                                                                                                                         , which is in this case nonempty.                  At
    2          1+ M                                       R     R                               R
                       R
the lower end of the interval, the middle class are indi¤erent between staying in democracy forever and transiting to
elite dictatorship. The interval may extend all the way up to 12 , where transition to the rich class becomes immediate,
or to an interior point, in which case the rich do not bene…t from a faster transition as it is achieved by excessively
rapid social mobility.



                                                                                               25
contrast, social mobility at the top always bene…ts the middle class, but poses a trade-o¤ for the
rich: on the one hand, they may move to the middle class, which will make them worse o¤; on
the other hand, the middle class may change the political institutions in their favor. Proposition
2 describes how this trade-o¤ is resolved: a marginal increase in the pace of social mobility is
favored only if it a¤ects the probability of transition away from democracy, and within that range,
                                                         h
it is more likely to have an impact for smaller              . The rich are more likely to bene…t from social
mobility if inequality between M and R, as captured by AR , is small. This is because, with limited
inequality, they do not get much extra bene…t from being rich in a world with middle class policies,
but would bene…t considerably from institutional change. If, in contrast, inequality is high, it is
more important for the rich to stay rich than to secure a transition to elite dictatorship; hence
a lower bR , which corresponds to less con‡ict of interest between the middle class and the rich,
decreases the chance that the rich will bene…t from mobility. The rich are also more likely to bene…t
from mobility when       M= R   is small, because in this case rich agents are expected to remain rich
longer even with more rapid social mobility.

6.2   Collective decisions over social mobility

We next turn to collective choices over social mobility. Suppose …rst that social mobility is decided
once at the beginning of the game and society starts in democracy. Intuitively, this corresponds to
the case in which social mobility choices are made much less frequently than decisions over political
transitions, for example, because social mobility is primarily a¤ected by the educational system,
which can only be changed infrequently or has a slow-acting impact.
   Formally, the game form from our main analysis is now augmented with a stage t = 0 where a
(constant) level of social mobility is chosen for the rest of the game. We also specify, for completeness,
the default level of social mobility   0,   though as in our main analysis, this default does not impact
equilibrium outcomes.

   0. Social mobility decision:

                                                                                        0
       (a) The status-quo option is to preserve the default social mobility,                =   0,   and we start
           with j = 1.

       (b) A random agent i from group          st   (j) is chosen as the agenda setter, and proposes social
                     j
           mobility ~ 2 [0; max ].

       (c) All individuals vote, sequentially, with each agent i casting vote vi (j) 2 fY; N; Ag.
             P                                P
       (d) If ni=1 wgit (d) 1 vi (j) = Y > ni=1 wgit (d) 1 vi (j) = N , then the current proposal
                                               j
           becomes the new default ( j = ~ ); otherwise the default stays the same ( j = j 1 ).
           The game returns back to stage 0(b) with j increased by 1, unless j = g.


                                                        26
                                                                                       g
         (e) The social mobility decided in the last stage is implemented:         =       , and the game moves
               to stage 1 (described in Section 2)

   Observe that social mobility stage is essentially identical in structure to that for policy and
political decisions. Furthermore, to avoid uninteresting multiplicities, we assume that agents who
are indi¤erent between supporting and opposing a proposal choose to abstain. This assumption
ensures that pairwise plurality — meaning that one of the two groups that directly care about the
type of social mobility under consideration is larger than the other — produces a unique winner.
We start with endogenous social mobility at the bottom.

Proposition 3 (Endogenous social mobility at the bottom) If M > P , the unique equilib-
                                               l
rium choice of social mobility at the bottom ^ is 0. If M < P , then the unique equilibrium choice
                                     l
of social mobility at the bottom is ^ =      1
                                                    , which is decreasing in and increasing in the
                                                       M
                                              2   1+
                                                       P
relative size of the middle class,    M
                                          . In either case, democracy is stable.
                                      P



   Here, the middle class and the poor are in direct con‡ict: the former want less social mobility,
and the latter want more. As long as the rich are indi¤erent, the larger of the two groups will be able
to implement their preferred policy. The rich, in turn, are indi¤erent between any social mobility as
long as this level does not induce democracy to transition to left dictatorship. Thus, if the middle
class is more numerous than the poor, they will be able to impose no social mobility, and when the
poor are more numerous, they will be able to choose higher levels of social mobility, but only up to
          1
 =             M
                    — the point where the middle class are indi¤erent between preserving democracy
     2    1+
               P
and abandoning it. The poor would not be able to go beyond this level because the rich would now
start caring about the level of social mobility and vote against proposals increasing it beyond this
level. Put di¤erently, a coalition of middle class and rich would stop increases in social mobility be-
yond this level. This result thus highlights how concerns about the interplay between social mobility
and the stability of democracy can act as a powerful force constraining the pace of social mobility.
   The comparative statics in Proposition 3 follow from this observation. When                  M   <       P,   social
mobility is decreasing in      because the middle class is more likely to abandon democracy when they
are more forward-looking, and this reduces the maximum threshold of social mobility that keeps
democracy stable. The comparative statics with respect to          M
                                                                       are also intuitive: when         M   <     P,   a
                                                                   P

larger size of the middle class relative to the poor means that current middle class members would
spend comparatively less time being poor for any given , making them less willing to abandon
democracy. This then reduces the threshold of social mobility that keeps democracy stable. This
result also implies that both a very large and a very small middle class is bad for social mobility at
the bottom, which is greatest when the middle class is su¢ ciently large to value social mobility in
the long run, but not too powerful to be able to stop it unilaterally.

                                                           27
       We next turn to the mobility at the top. One new result in this case is that peripheral coalitions
(between the rich and the poor) can form because both the rich and the poor may be opposed
to high social mobility — for the rich, because of its direct costs, and for the poor because of its
indirect cost in terms of its impact on stability of democracy.

Proposition 4 (Endogenous social mobility at the top) If                             M   >   R,   then the equilibrium
                                         h
choice of social mobility at the top is ^ = hmax . If M < R and

                                         AR                       R
                                             > (2        )            1 +1                                         (13)
                                         b2R                      M

             h                                      h
holds, then ^ = 0, and if (13) does not hold, then ^ =                 1
                                                                       2.     In the …rst two cases, democracy is
stable, whereas in the third case it is immediately abandoned in favor of elite dictatorship. Condition
(13) is satis…ed for a larger range of parameters if AR is high, bR is low,                  is high, or   M
                                                                                                               is high.
                                                                                                           R



       When    M   >   R,   so that the middle class is more numerous than the rich, maximal social
mobility (consistent with Assumption 1) will arise, and because the preferences of the middle class
in this case are still su¢ ciently to the left of the rich, democracy remains stable. The situation
changes dramatically, however, when             M   <   R.   In this case, so long as the poor are not opposed
to their preferences, the rich can dictate its level. When (13) holds, the level of inequality between
the rich and the middle class is relatively high,20 and the rich prefer having no social mobility to
inducing a transition to elite dictatorship (and because              M   <    R,   su¢ ciently high social mobility,
                                        1
in particular anything above        =   2,   induces the middle class to abandon democracy). This case can
be viewed as a rich-poor coalition against the middle class (for had the poor supported the middle
class, there would be positive social mobility). If, on the other hand, (13) does not hold, the rich
prefer a transition to elite dictatorship to staying in democracy with zero social mobility. They then
enter into a middle class-rich coalition in favor of high social mobility, but one that also makes the
middle class abandon democracy.
       Summarizing our results, we have seen that with social mobility at the bottom, democracy
remains stable, because there will always be a middle class-rich coalition limiting social mobility
below the level at which democracy might be endangered. In contrast, with social mobility at the
top, democracy may collapse in favor of elite dictatorship when the middle class is su¢ ciently small,
when inequality at the top is low, and when there is substantial con‡ict of interest between the rich
and the middle class (bR high). These results con…rm the long-held hypothesis that a larger middle
class is generally good for the stability of democracy.
  20
    In addition to AR , the level of inequality between the middle class and the rich, note that (13) depends on b2R ,
since this parameter captures the extent of con‡ict of interest between the middle class and the rich over policy.




                                                             28
6.3   Joint dynamics of institutions and social mobility

We have so far focused on the case in which social mobility is chosen only once. As already men-
tioned, this case corresponds to an environment in which decisions over the determinants of social
mobility are made relatively infrequently (compared to other political decisions). The alternative,
where both types of decisions are made at the same frequency, leads to a setup where social mobility
will be chosen in each period at the same time as the decisions about next period’s political state.
A full analysis of this case is challenging, as it requires the treatment of political decisions on two
dimensions, institutional transitions and social mobility, one of which does not even satisfy a natural
single-crossing property. It is thus beyond the scope of the current paper. Nevertheless, some basic
conclusions can be derived, and we now discuss them brie‡y.
   As in the case with only a single decision over social mobility, in this environment elite dictator-
ship is stable, and left-wing dictatorship is stable whenever it is relevant (whenever the middle class
would consider transitioning to it). Hence, the main question is when a democracy is stable and
what level of social mobility will be chosen in this political regime. When we consider mobility at
the bottom, the conclusions are similar to those of Proposition 3, in that democracy is always stable,
and when it is more numerous than the poor, the middle class restrict social mobility because it is
not in their interest. When the poor are more numerous than the middle class, as we have already
seen, high levels of social mobility can trigger a transition to left dictatorship, and this motivates
a coalition between the middle class and the rich to restrict social mobility. The only di¤erence in
this case is that this now permits a greater equilibrium level of social mobility. This is because the
middle class are less keen on a transition to left dictatorship as they anticipate that such a transition
will further increase social mobility once the poor become the decision-maker (since higher social
mobility is always in the interest of the poor), and this makes them more willing to preserve democ-
racy, and increases the level of social mobility that the rich are willing to tolerate (for the only reason
why the rich oppose social mobility at the bottom is to prevent a transition to left dictatorship).
   Likewise, when we consider mobility at the top, the conclusions are similar to those of Proposition
4, modi…ed mainly because the middle class now expect a slower pace of social mobility following
a transition to elite dictatorship. This translates into a greater level of social mobility at which
the middle class would be willing to abandon democracy, and as in Proposition 3, this happens
when the middle class is su¢ ciently small (   M= R   low); when inequality at the top is low (AR low);
and when there is substantial con‡ict of interest between the rich and the middle class (bR high).
Consequently, as in the previous subsection, there is a possible instability of democracy, though
only at even higher levels of social mobility. Put di¤erently, the instability of democracy no longer
comes hand-in-hand with high levels of social mobility, but with a high level of social mobility at
…rst, followed with a sharp decline in mobility once the rich come to power.
   Summing up, with frequent decisions over social mobility, as with the case of infrequent decisions,

                                                    29
democracy remains stable when social mobility is at the bottom, but a middle class-rich coalition
limits the extent of this type of social mobility. Instead, with social mobility at the top, democracy
might make way to elite dictatorship, because the middle class may support a high level of social
mobility but also wish to abandon democracy, particularly when it is small, when inequality at the
top is low, and when there is substantial con‡ict of interest between the rich and the middle class.
With both frequent and infrequent decisions, the interplay between social mobility and the stability
of democracy is an additional force constraining the equilibrium level of social mobility.


7    Conclusion

An in‡uential thesis often associated with Alexis De Tocqueville views social mobility as an impor-
tant bulwark of democracy: when members of a social group expect to transition to some other
social group in the near future, they should have less reason to exclude these other social groups from
the political process. Despite the importance of this thesis for the evolution of the modern theories
of democracy and its continued relevance in contemporary debates, it has received little attention
in the modern political economy literature. This paper has investigated the link between social mo-
bility and the dynamics of political institutions. Our framework provides a natural formalization of
De Tocqueville’s hypothesis, showing that greater social mobility can further enhance the stability
of democracy for reasons anticipated by De Tocqueville. However, more importantly, it also demon-
strates the limits of this hypothesis. There is a robust reason why greater social mobility can under-
mine the stability of democracy: when the median voter expects to move up (respectively, down), she
would prefer to give less voice to poorer (respectively, richer) social groups, because she anticipates
to have di¤erent preferences than future agents who will occupy the same social station as herself.
We provided a tight characterization of these two competing forces and demonstrated that the im-
pact of social mobility depends on whether the mean and the median of preferences over policy are
‘close’. When they are, not only is democracy stable (meaning that the median voter would not wish
to undermine democracy), but it also becomes more stable as social mobility increases. Conversely,
when the mean and median are not close, greater social mobility reduces the stability of democracy.
    In addition to enabling a tight characterization of the relationship between social mobility and
stability of democracy, our theoretical analysis also shows that in the presence of social mobility, the
political preferences of an individual depend on the potentially con‡icting preferences of her ‘future
selves’, under certain conditions paving the way to multiple equilibria. When society is mobile, the
current political institution may be disliked by the current decision-makers not only because their
future selves prefer another institution (which was at the root of the instability of democracy in the
presence of high social mobility), but also because if the current institution were to continue, future
decision-makers might choose transitions that are not favored by the future selves of the current
decision-maker (which is a form of slippery slope consideration).

                                                  30
   Motivated by this reasoning, we further characterized the conditions for general slippery slope
considerations — which prevent certain institutional choices because of the additional series of
changes that these choices would induce. But di¤erently from other dynamic political economy
settings, slippery slopes concerns are more important when the discount factor takes intermediate
values rather than when it is large. This is because in the presence of social mobility, high discount
factors make current decision-makers not care about losing political power to another social group
(since, in the long run, they will have preferences similar to the members of the group that will
become pivotal in a di¤erent state). But with intermediate discount factors, they still care a lot
about political developments in the next several periods, making slippery slope considerations
relevant again.
   Finally, we also showed that when social mobility is endogenized (albeit in a simpler version of
our model with only three social groups), our model identi…es new political economic forces limiting
the extent of mobility. First, the middle class, which tends to be pivotal, is generally opposed
to social mobility at the bottom (between the middle class and the poor). Second, a peripheral
coalition between the rich and the poor may emerge to limit social mobility at the top, because
the rich dislike this type of mobility while the poor are wary that very high levels of this type of
mobility may destabilize democracy in favor of elite dictatorship.
   There are many fruitful areas of research related to the political implications of social mobility.
First, there is a clear need for systematic empirical analyses of the impact of social mobility (and
perceptions thereof) on political attitudes and the resulting political behavior. Second, though we
provided a …rst attempt at endogenizing social mobility, there is much more that can be done to
study the interplay of endogenous social mobility and the impact of social mobility on political
dynamics, for example by considering several groups, fully studying the case with frequent decisions
over the speed of social mobility, and introducing multiple policy levers impacting social mobility.
Third, this framework can also be enriched to include individual decisions, such as on the quantity
or quality of education, which a¤ect the mobility of the members of a dynasty, while also shaping
political attitudes. Fourth, the framework we presented here can be generalized to include political
actions by di¤erent political coalitions (e.g., collective action, social unrest or coups), which will be
a¤ected by social mobility as well. Finally, we also abstracted from structural change and social
change which often accompany periods of rapid social mobility and impacts the sizes of di¤erent
social groups. An extension in this direction would be particularly interesting as it could improve
our understanding of what types of structural changes contribute to the emergence and consolidation
of democracy via both their direct e¤ects and indirectly by changing the level of social mobility.




                                                   31
 References

Acemoglu, Daron, Georgy Egorov, and Konstantin Sonin (2010) “Political Selection and Persistence
of Bad Governments,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125 (4): 1511-1575.
Acemoglu, Daron, Georgy Egorov, and Konstantin Sonin (2012) “Dynamics and Stability of Con-
stitutions, Coalitions and Clubs,” American Economic Review, 102 (4): 1446-1476.
Acemoglu, Daron, Georgy Egorov, and Konstantin Sonin (2015) “Political Economy in a Changing
World,” Journal of Political Economy, 123(5): 1038-1086.
Acemoglu, Daron, and James Robinson (2000) “Why Did The West Extend The Franchise? Democ-
racy, Inequality, and Growth In Historical Perspective,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115(4):
1167-1199.
Acemoglu, Daron, and James Robinson (2001) “A Theory of Political Transitions,”American Eco-
nomic Review, 91: 938-963.
Alesina, Alberto and Edward Glaeser (2004) Fighting Poverty in the US and Europe: A World of
Di¤ erence, Oxford University Press, Oxford UK.
Alesina, Alberto and Paola Giuliano (2010) “Preferences for Redistribution” in Jess Benhabib,
Alberto Bisin, Matthew O. Jackson (eds.): Handbook of Social Economics, Vol. 1A, Netherlands:
North-Holland: 93-131.
Amador, Manuel (2003) Essays in Macroeconomics and Political Economy, PhD thesis, MIT.
Austen-Smith, David, and Je¤rey S. Banks (2005) Positive Political Theory II: Strategy and Struc-
ture. Ann Arbor: U. Michigan Press.
Besley, Timothy and Stephen Coate (1998) “Sources of Ine¢ ciency in a Representative Democracy:
A Dynamic Analysis,” American Economic Review, 88(1), 139-56.
Benabou, Roland, and Efe Ok (2001) “Social Mobility and the Demand for Redistribution: The
POUM Hypothesis,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(2), 447-487.
Benabou, Roland and Jean Tirole (2006) “Belief in a Just World and Redistributive Politics,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121(2), 699-746.
Bisin, Alberto, Alessandro Lizzeri, and Leeat Yariv (2015) “Government Policy with Time-
Inconsistent Voters,” American Economic Review, 105(6): 1711-1737.
Blau, Peter, and Otis Duncan (1967) The American Occupational Structure, New York: Wiley.
Bourguignon, Francois and Thierry Verdier (2000) “Oligarchy, democracy, inequality and growth,”
Journal of Development Economics, 62(2), 285-313.
De Tocqueville, Alexis (1835). De la démocratie en Amérique, Paris: Librairie de Charles Gosselin:
English translation, 2000, Democracy in America. Chicago: U. Chicago Press.
Erikson, Robert, and John Goldthorpe (1992) The Constant Flux: A Study of Class Mobility in
Industrial Societies, Oxford: Clarendon Press.



                                                 32
Fearon, James (1995) “Rationalist Explanations for War,” International Organization, 49(3): 379-
414.
Gomes, Armando, and Philippe Jehiel (2005) “Dynamic Processes of Social and Economic Interac-
tions: On the Persistence of Ine¢ ciencies”, Journal of Political Economy, 113(3), 626-667.
Gul, Faruk and Wolfgang Pesendorfer (2004) “Self Control, Revealed Preferences and Consumption
Choice,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 7(2): 243-264.
Hungerford, Thomas (1974) Algebra, New York: Springer.
Jackson, Matthew and Leeat Yariv (2015) Collective Dynamic Choice: The Necessity of Time
Inconsistency, American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, forthcoming.
Jehiel, Philippe and Suzanne Scotchmer (2001) “Constitutional Rules of Exclusion in Jurisdiction
Formation.” Review of Economic Studies, 68: 393-413.
Laguno¤, Roger (2006) “Markov Equilibrium in Models of Dynamic Endogenous Political Institu-
tions,” Georgetown, mimeo.
Lipset, Seymour, and Reinhard Bendix (1959) Social Mobility in Industrial Society, Berkeley: U.
California Press, 1959).
Lipset, Seymour (1960) Political Man: The Social Bases of Politics, Garden City, New York: Anchor
Books.
Lizzeri, Alessandro, and Nicola Persico (2004) “Why Did the Elites Extend the Su¤rage? Democracy
and the Scope of Government, With an Application to Britain’s ‘Age of Reform’”Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 119(2): 705-763.
Marshall, Albert W., Ingram Olkin, and Barry C. Arnold (2011). Inequalities: Theory of Majoriza-
tion and Its Applications, Springer, New York.
Moore, Barrington (1966) Social Origins of Dictatorship and Democracy: Lord and Peasant in the
Making of the Modern World, Beacon Press, Boston.
Pareto, Vilfredo (1935) The Mind and Society, New York: Harcourt, Brace and Company.
Piketty, Thomas, “Social Mobility and Redistributive Politics,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
110, 551–583.
Roberts, Kevin (2015) “Dynamic Voting in Clubs,” Research in Economics, 69(3), 320-335.
Sombart, Werner (1906) Warum gibt es in den Vereinigten Staaten keinen Sozialismus? Tübingen:
English: Why is there No Socialism in the United States? New York: Sharpe, 1976.
Strulovici, Bruno (2010) “Learning While Voting: Determinants of Collective Experimentation,”
Econometrica, 78(3): 933-971.
Wright, Randall (1986) “The Redistributive Roles of Unemployment Insurance and the Dynamics
of Voting,” Journal of Public Economics, 377-399.




                                                 33
Appendix A: Proofs of Main Results

In Appendix A, we provide proofs of Theorems 1–5, for which we need a number of lemmas. Proofs
of lemmas A4–A8 are relegated to Appendix B. To formulate intermediate results, which together
establish that continuation utilities satisfy increasing di¤erences, we will need the following notation.
First, de…ne two constants:

                                    U     = max jAj j + max (bk                   bj )2 ,
                                              j2G               j;k2G

                                     u =          min      (bk        bj )2 .
                                              j;k2G:j6=k


In what follows, we say that a gm-dimensional vector v = fvj (x)gx2S
                                                                 j2G 2 R
                                                                         gm satis…es increasing

di¤ erences if for j1 ; j2 2 G and x1 ; x2 2 S, j1 < j2 and x1 < x2 implies vj2 (x2 )                              vj2 (x1 ) >
vj1 (x2 )   vj1 (x1 ). We call a subset X     S connected if X = [a; b] \ S for some integers a; b. We also
use the strong set order: i.e., sets X; Y         S satisfy X            Y if min X             min Y and max X       max Y ,
and moreover, for X          S and y 2 S; X          y if X            fyg. Other binary relations (<,               , >) are
de…ned similarly. We will use       s   to denote the set of states to which the society can transition (in
the next period) starting from state s in equilibrium, or more formally                           s   = fx 2 S : qsx > 0g.

Lemma A1 Suppose that vector fVj (x)gx2S
                                     j2G 2 R
                                             gm satis…es increasing di¤ erences. Let

                                                        X
                                            Wj (x) =             jk Vk    (x) .                                          (A1)
                                                        k2G


Then vector fWj (x)gx2S
                    j2G 2 R
                            gm also satis…es increasing di¤ erences.



Proof of Lemma A1. Take two states x; y 2 S such that x < y and consider the di¤erence
                                                                  X
                                         Wj (y)     Wj (x) =                jk Zk ,
                                                                  k2G

where Zk = Vk (y)          Vk (x) is a sequence that is increasing in k by assumption. Let j; l 2 G
satisfy j < l. Since, By Assumption 1, the probability distribution                         j    is …rst-order stochastically
dominated by f     l   g, the expected values of a monotone sequence fZk g satisfy the inequality
                                            X                   X
                                                   jk Zk   <            lk Zk .
                                            k2G                 k2G

This implies
                                    Wj (y)     Wj (x) < Wl (y)                  Wl (x) ,

which proves that fWj (x)gx2S
                          j2G satis…es increasing di¤erences.




                                                           34
Lemma A2 Suppose that vector fVj (x)gx2S
                                     j2G 2 R
                                             gm satis…es increasing di¤ erences. Suppose that

matrices Q = fqsz gs;z2S are such that for x < y, the distribution qx is (weakly) …rst-order stochas-
                               n       ox2S
tically dominated by qy . Then Vj0 (x)      , de…ned by
                                                     j2G
                                                                  X           X
                                      Vj0 (x) = uj (bdx ) +             qxy           jk Vk   (y) ,                           (A2)
                                                                  y2S         k2G

satisfy increasing di¤ erences; moreover, if j; l 2 G, x; y 2 S and j < l, x < y, then

                                       Vl0 (y)     Vl0 (x)       Vj0 (y)      Vj0 (x)          2u.                            (A3)

Proof of Lemma A2. Take two groups j; l 2 G with j < l. For each s 2 S, consider the following
di¤erence:
                                                                              X
                     Vl0 (s)    Vj0 (s) = (ul (bds )         uj (bds )) +           qsz (Wl (z)         Wj (z)) .
                                                                              z2S

By Lemma A1, the term Wl (z) Wj (z) is increasing in z. Take x; y 2 S such that x < y; then distri-
bution qx is (weakly) …rst-order stochastically dominated by qy , and thus the expectation of Wl (z)
Wj (z) is weakly smaller when evaluated with the former distribution than with the latter, i.e.,
                               X                                   X
                                     qxz (Wl (z)       Wj (z))           qyz (Wl (z)           Wj (z)) .
                               z2S                                 z2S

We thus have

 Vl0 (y)   Vj0 (y)       Vl0 (x)       Vj0 (x)     =     ul bdy         uj bdy             (ul (bdx )    uj (bdx ))
                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                X                                       X
                                                        +             qyz (Wl (z)        Wj (z))              qxz (Wl (z)   Wj (z))
                                                                z2S                                     z2S
                                                        2 (bl     bj ) bdy      bdx           2u.

Lemma A3 Suppose that vector W = fWj (x)gx2S
                                         j2G 2 R
                                                 gm satis…es increasing di¤ erences. Suppose

that X; Y are connected subsets of S and X                         Y . Suppose j; k 2 G and j < k, and suppose
x 2 arg maxz2X Wj (z) and y 2 arg maxz2Y Wk (z). Then x                               y.

Proof of Lemma A3. Suppose, to obtain a contradiction, that x > y. Since X and Y are
connected and X            Y , this implies that x; y 2 X \ Y . Now, x 2 arg maxz2X Wj (z) implies
Wj (x)       Wj (y), and since W satis…es increasing di¤erences, x > y and k > j, it must be that
Wk (x) > Wk (y). However, this contradicts that y 2 arg maxz2Y Wk (z).

    In the following proofs, we will slightly abuse notation Wj (x; y; z; : : :) to denote the continuation
value of group j when the sequence of states is x; y; z; : : :.
Proof of Theorem 1. We …rst establish the existence of a monotone symmetric MPE (existence
of some MPE trivially follows from Kakutani’s theorem.) We will instead prove existence of a
symmetric monotone MPE in a more general class of games, where some transitions are ruled out.

                                                                 35
This generality will be used in later proofs. Speci…cally, we require that all proposals x made in
state s must satisfy x 2 Fs , where Fs                                   S, and fFs gs2S satis…es the following two conditions: (a)
for each s, s 2 Fs and (b) if x < y < z or x > y > z, z 2 Fx implies y 2 Fx and z 2 Fy . If we do
so, then the statement of Theorem 1 follows immediately as a special case when all transitions are
feasible (i.e., Fs = S for all s 2 S).
   We prove this claim in two steps. First, we construct a feasible monotone transition correspon-
                                   ^ such that q^sx > 0 only if x 2 Fs , and also q^x weakly …rst-order
dence, i.e., we construct a matrix Q
stochastically dominates q^y whenever x > y. Second, we prove that there is an equilibrium                                                                            such
that Q ( ) = Q.^
      De…ne                  Rgm by the following constraints: fVj (x)gx2S
                                                                       j2G 2                                               if and only if (i) for all j 2 G; x 2
                             U
S, jVj (x)j              1        and (ii) for all j; k 2 G such that j < k and for all x; y 2 S such that x < y,

                                                 (Vk (y)            Vk (x))               (Vj (y)            Vj (x))        2u.

This implies, in particular, that any fVj (x)gx2S
                                              j2G 2                                               satis…es strict increasing di¤erences, and also
that        is compact and convex.
      Consider the following correspondence                                           from               into itself. Take a vector of values V =
fVj (x)gx2S
        j2G             2        , and let W =        fWj (x)gx2S
                                                              j2G                be given by (A1). For each state s 2 S, let ps be the
ideal policy of pivotal group ds , i.e., ps = bds , and                                              s   be the expected utility of the members of
pivotal group ds from transitioning into state s, i.e.,                                                  s   = arg maxx2Fs Wds (x). Furthermore, let
 s   be any probability distribution over S the support of which is a subset of                                                               s,     and let     s   be the
set of such distributions. We also de…ne                                     (V )                 to be such that V 2              0         (V ) if and only if for
each s 2 S there is                  s   2   s   such that for each j 2 G,
                                                                         X
                                                    Vj0 (s) = uj (ps ) +                                 s (x) Wj        (x) .                                        (A4)
                                                                                               x2S

      Let us prove that                  (V ) is nonempty for any V 2                                . For each s, take any                  s   2      s   (which exists,
because         s   is nonempty), and de…ne                        Vj0 (s)   as in (A4). Then for all j 2 G and s 2 S,

                                                  Vj0 (s)                juj (ps )j +                jWj (zx )j
                                                                                                     X
                                                                         juj (ps )j +                     jk jVk (zx )j
                                                                                                     k2G
                                                                                              U                  U
                                                                         U+                          =               .
                                                                                          1                  1
Furthermore, notice that since W satis…es increasing di¤erences, for any x; y 2 S where x < y,
any a 2             x    and b 2         y   must satisfy a                   b (by Lemma A3), and thus there is c 2 S such that
 x      fcg                 y,   which implies that any                  x   2        x   is (weakly) …rst-order stochastically dominated by
any     y   2       y.      Lemma A2 now implies that V satis…es (A3). Therefore, V 0 2
                                                                                  0                                                              , which means that
     (V ) is nonempty for any V 2                          .
      We now prove that                      (V ) is convex for all V . Suppose V 0 ; V 00 2                                       (V ). Let the corresponding
                                                               0             00                                                                    0                 00
probability distributions in                      s   be       s   and       s,   respectively. For any                          2 (0; 1),         s   + (1      )   s    is a

                                                                                          36
probability distribution in         s,   and in particular its support is in Fs , and moreover,
                                   X
                                            0                 00
                      uj (ps ) +            s   + (1      )   s    Wj (x) = Vj0 (s) + (1               ) Vj00 (s) .
                                   x2S

Thus, for any          2 (0; 1), V 0 + (1         ) V 00 2     (V ), which implies convexity of                 (V ).
     We next prove that             ( ) is an upper-hemicontinuous correspondence.                           Notice that it is a
composition of the following mappings: (i) arg maxx2Fs Wdx (x), which is a mapping from                                         to
2S   n f?g, the set of nonempty subsets of S (and has a closed graph when                             2S   n f?g is endowed with
discrete topology); (ii) a mapping from            2S nf?g     to        (S), where each subset X 2 2S nf?g is mapped
to the set of probability distributions on S with support in X, which also has a closed graph;
and (iii) a mapping from            (S) to       , which is linear and thus continuous. Since a composition of
upper-hemicontinuous correspondences is upper-hemicontinuous,                                  (V ) also satis…es this property.
     Since         ( ) is upper-hemicontinuous and             (V ) is nonempty and convex-valued for all V 2                    ,
and       is compact and convex, Kakutani’s theorem implies that there is V 2                               such that V 2   (V ).
By de…nition of          (V ) there are f s gs2S that satisfy
                                                                    X
                                         Vj (s) = uj (ps ) +                s (x) Wj    (x) .
                                                                    x2S

                 ^ by setting q^sx =
De…ne the matrix Q                                 s (x),    then we have
                                                                   X            X
                                     Vj (s) = uj (bds ) +                q^sx         jk Vk   (x) .                         (A5)
                                                                   x2S          k2G

                                              ^ de…nes a feasible monotone transition correspon-
     We now prove that this transition matrix Q
dence. It is feasible by construction, since q^sx > 0 only if x 2                        s,   which is only possible if x 2 Fs .
It is monotone, because we proved above that for any choice of f s gs2S , x < y implies that                                x   is
(weakly) …rst-order stochastically dominated by y , which means this is also true for q^x and q^y .
This proves that both properties of Q^ are satis…ed.
     We now construct an equilibrium                                                             ^ Consider the
                                                       that has transition matrix Q ( ) equal to Q.
game       s;p   that takes place in a period where the current state is st = s and the default policy is
pt   1   = p. De…ne utilities of player i who is currently in group j 2 G by

                                   Uj (pt ; st+1 ) = uj (pt ) + Wj (st+1 )
                                                                X
                                                   = uj (pt ) +      jk Vk (st+1 ) ,
                                                                            k2G

where fVj (x)gx2S
              j2G are de…ned as the unique solutions to (A5). We construct strategies of the
players as follows. Denote the stage where a representative from group ds makes proposal by J, so
 s (J)    = ds .
     In what follows, we proceed by backward induction, and in every stage we de…ne strategies that
are identical in isomorphic subgames (thus ensuring that the strategy pro…le is Markovian) and that
are identical for di¤erent players that currently belong to the same group (thus ensuring symmetry).

                                                                   37
Following the logic of backward induction, we start with the political decision. In stages l > J, we
allow proposers and voters to choose any pure strategy consistent with backward induction, with
the only restriction being the following: if in stage l, the current status quo slt+11 2                                      s,   then a
weighted majority votes against the new proposal s~lt+1 . Speci…cally, if in the subgame that follows
acceptance of alternative s~lt+1 , the ultimate decision is st+1 = s~, then individuals from all groups
                                                 l 1
j        ds vote N in case s~                   st+1 , and individuals from all groups j             ds vote N in case s~ < slt+11 ;
these voting strategies ensure that any proposal made in such situation is rejected. In stage l = J,
the represenative from ds chosen to make a proposal randomizes over proposals in                                    s   and proposes
x2        s   with probability q^sx =                    s (x)   (and makes any other proposal with probability zero), and any
proposal         s~lt+1     2   s   is then accepted by voters. Speci…cally, if rejecting the current proposal would
ultimately lead to decision s~, then individuals from all groups j                               ds vote Y in case s~lt+1          s~, and
individuals from all groups j                            ds vote Y in case s~lt+1 > s~. If some proposal s~lt+1 2
                                                                                                                =        s   is made at
this stage, then individuals make any voting choices consistent with backward induction. Finally,
in stages l < J, individuals make any proposals and any votes consistent with backward induction.
It is easy to see that strategies constructed in this way form an SPE in the subgame where political
decision is made, and since they only depend on payo¤-relevant histories, they are Markovian.
Indeed, if these strategies are followed, then transition to state x 2 S happens with probability q^sx ,
and the decisions made in stages l < J are irrelevant for the outcome; then at stage J, proposals in
    s   are made with these respective probabilities, and are accepted. Finally, in each of the subsequent
stages, no alternative from                         s   is ever voted down, even by another alternative from            s.
        To de…ne strategies in the stage where the policy decision is made, we again solve the game by
backward induction. For l > J, we choose any pure strategies (again, identical in isomorphic sub-
games and symmetric across players in the same group). This ensures that if the current status quo
is plt   1
              = bds , then any alternative p~lt 6= bds will not be accepted. For l = J, we require that the repre-
sentative from ds chooses bds , which is subsequently accepted; if another proposal is chosen, then any
pure strategies consistent with backward induction are allowed. Finally, for l < J, we allow any pro-
posals and votes to be made. We thus get a symmetric MPE in the within-period game, where policy
pt = bds is chosen with probability 1, and transition to alternative x takes place with probability q^sx .
        Denote the resulting pro…le of strategies                        s   (by construction, it does not depend on t explicitly,
as we were choosing Markovian strategies). Taking these pro…les for all values of s, we get strategy
pro…le  , which prescribes strategies for all players in the original game . By construction, the
corresponding transition mapping is Q ( ) = Q, ^ and if pro…le is played, continuation utilities of
each player in each subgame are equal to the corresponding continuation utility in the corresponding
game          st ;pt   1   . Furthermore,               is a SPE: by one shot deviation principle, if there is a deviation, there
must be a deviation in some period t where the current state is st = s, but this contradicts that                                       s
is a SPE in the game                   st ;pt   1   . Thus,       is a MPE in . Since in the construction of      s,    the strategies
were de…ned identically for di¤erent players in the same group, the MPE is symmetric, and since
^ is feasible and monotone, these properties are also retained by . Thus, is an equilibrium with
Q



                                                                             38
the desired properties. This completes the proof of existence a symmetric monotone MPE for any
combination of feasible transitions fFs gs2S that we allow, and in particular for Fs = S for all s 2 S,
as stated in the theorem.
    We next prove the remaining claims in the theorem.
Proof of Part 1. Take symmetric MPE . Consider period t where the current state is st = s,
and the previous period’s policy is pt   1   = p. Notice that the society’s decision on pt does not a¤ect
equilibrium actions when choosing transition, nor does it a¤ect any actions is subsequent periods,
because strategies in     are Markovian. Thus, without loss of any generality, we can suppress the
policy decision and endow each group j with payo¤ uj (pt ) at time t.
    As before, let J denote the stage where group ds makes a proposal. Let us prove the following
statement by backward induction: if at some stage l         J the decision made (status quo for the next
stage) plt = bds , then the ultimate policy decision pt = bds . The base is trivial: in the last stage,
where l = g, the new status quo automatically becomes policy decision, so pt = plt = bds . Step:
take l < g, and suppose this statement is true for k > l, let us prove it for stage l. Suppose that
plt = bds and consider stage l + 1. Suppose, to obtain a contradiction, that pt 6= bds with a positive
probability. By induction, this is only possible if pl+1
                                                     t   6= bds with positive probability. For this to be
true, it must be that at stage l +1, representative of group    s (l   + 1) with positive probability makes
proposal x 6= bds , which is subsequently accepted, and after that pt 6= bds with a positive probability.
Let H be the distribution of pt conditional on x becoming the new status quo pl+1
                                                                              t   after stage
l + 1; notice that if ptl+1 = bds , then pt = bds by induction. Now, if EH < bds then all individuals
in groups j     ds prefer bds to H (because of quadratic utility), similarly, if EH > bds then all
individuals in groups j     ds prefer bds to H. Lastly, if EH = bds then all individuals in all groups
j    ds prefer bds to H, because, by assumption, under H, pt 6= bds with a positive probability,
which implies that H has positive variance, which makes the expectation bds preferable to H for
all agents. In all cases, a weighted majority strictly prefers bds to H, and hence in a sequential
voting x, leading to H, cannot be the outcome. This contradiction proves the induction step.
    Let us now prove that in the subgame starting with stage J, pt = bds . To show this, it su¢ ces
to prove that pJt = bds with probability 1. Notice that if p~Jt = bds is proposed, then pt = bds ; indeed,
if this were not the case, then a weighted majority would prefer to have pt = bds to any distribution
H 0 of pt conditional on the proposal being rejects (the argument is similar to the one in the previous
paragraph), and thus in the sequential voting, agents will ensure that the new status quo is pJt = bds .
Now suppose that pt 6= bds with a positive probability; this is only possible if group ds proposes p~Jt 6=
bds with a positive probability. However, in this case it has a pro…table deviation, which is proposing
bds and thus pt = bds . This contradiction proves that in the subgame starting with stage J, pt = bds .
    The last result holds regardless of the play in stages l < J. Consequently, in equilibrium            ,
pt = bds with probability 1, which completes the proof.
Proof of Part 2. Take an equilibrium            , and consider period t where the current state is st =
s. Notice that by the time the political decision is made, the policy is already decided (and in



                                                     39
equilibrium, it is pt = bds ) and the continuation utility of a player from group j is given by Wj (st+1 ).
In what follows, let W = maxx2S Wds (x); it equals Wds (y) for y 2                                                       s.
         Let us …rst prove that in any equilibrium, the vector of continuation utilities V = fVj (s)gs2S
                                                                                                     j2G
satis…es increasing di¤erences. Indeed, if Q is the transition correspondence in equilibrium , then
V is the unique solution to (A5), and it may be obtained through in…nite iteration of mapping
(A2), because, given                        < 1, this mapping is a contraction on Rgm in the L1 -metric. Since for any
V that satis…es increasing di¤erences, V 0 also does by Lemma A2, the limit point V must satisfy
increasing di¤erences.
         By Lemma A1, the vector W = fWj (s)gs2S
                                             j2G also satis…es increasing di¤erences. As before, let
     s   = arg maxx2S Wds (x) (the maximum is taken over S because all transitions are feasible). Also,
as before, let J be the stage where group ds makes the proposal.
         Suppose …rst that J = g, so group ds is the last to propose. In that case, ds can ensure that
it gets the payo¤ W . Indeed, if the current status quo is sJt+11 2                                                       s.       Then it can propose the
same alternative                  s~Jt+1 = sJt+11 ,   in which case it will be implemented regardless of how people vote.
On the other hand,                    if sJt+11 2
                                                =       s,      then it can propose s~Jt+1 2                s;    then in the voting subgame, this
alternative s~Jt+1 must be accepted, because a weighted majority (all groups j                                                                     ds if s~Jt+1 < sJt+11
and all groups j                      ds if s~Jt+1 > sJt+11 ) prefer it to sJt+11 . Since group ds can ensure its maximum
payo¤ W in this subgame, it will do so; consequently, alternatives x 2
                                                                     =                                                             s   cannot be implemented
as st+1 .
         Consider the other case, where J < g. Let                                         s (g)   = j; suppose, without loss of generality,
that j < ds (the case j > ds is considered similarly). In this case, we …rst prove the following:
in any subgame that includes stage g (where j makes proposal), the ultimate political decision
st+1 satis…es st+1 2                       s,   where       s    =   s   [ fx 2 S : x < min                s g.   Indeed, consider possible values
of the current status quo                        sgt+11 .    If    g 1
                                                                  st+1       2   s,   then no proposal s~gt+1 made by group j may be
accepted in equilibrium, unless s~gt+1 2                                 s    as well. Therefore, in this case the statement is correct.
If   sgt+11   2
              =           s,    consider two possibilities. Suppose that sgt+11 > min                                         s.    Then if group j instead
proposes          s~gt+1       = min       s,   with a similar argument to above, it will be accepted. Moreover, since
Wds (min              s)         Wds (y) for any y 2 S, including y > min                             s,    then j < ds implies Wj (min                               s)   >
Wj (y) for such y. Consequently, if                                  sgt+11   > min         s,   then group j prefers to propose min                                  s    as
compared to proposing any alternative y > min                                          s.    If it proposes an alternative y < min                                s   that
is subsequently rejected, then                        sgt+1     =     g 1
                                                                     st+1     and again group j is better o¤ proposing min                                   s.   Thus,
the only alternative action that group j may (weakly) prefer to proposing min                                                                         s   is proposing
y < min               s   that is subsequently accepted. Consequently, if                                  sgt+11    > min                  s,   then in equilibrium
either group j proposes min                           s,    which is accepted, or some y < min                                s    that is accepted; in either
case      sgt+1   2        s.   Finally, consider the possibility                 sgt+11   < min      s.   The statement may only fail if group
j proposes, with a positive probability, some alternative y > min                                                   s,   y2
                                                                                                                          =            s,   which is subsequently
accepted. In that case, however, group j has a pro…table deviaton: it would do better by proposing
min         s,    since this proposal will be accepted, and Wds (min                                       s)     > Wds (y) implies, since j < ds ,



                                                                                      40
that Wj (min            s)      > Wj (y) as well. This is impossible in equilibrium, which proves that in all cases,
sgt+1   2   s.
    Since pgt 2             s   in all subgames, we can prove the following statement by backward induction:
if at some stage l, 0                  l        g, slt+1 = max        s   (which also equals max                        s ),   then sgt+1 2       s.      The
base (l = g) is trivial. To establish the inductive step, suppose that this is true for stage l, and
consider stage l                 1. We have that the current status quo is slt+11 = max                                        s.   Suppose, to obtain
a contradiction, that               sgt+1   2
                                            =     s   with a positive probability. By induction, this is only possible if
slt+1 6= max           s,   which, in turn, is only possible if proposal s~lt+1 6=                                  s   is made and is accepted.
However, we showed that subsequent subgame will result in                                           sgt+1   having some distribution with
support in         s   and, moreover, with some y 2
                                                  =                   s   having a positive probability. Notice, however, that
all y 2     s    satisfy Wk (y)             Wk (max        s)   for all k      ds , and the inequality is strict if y 2                       s   n       s   for
all such k. Thus, in this case a weighted majority strictly prefers to reject proposal y, which is a
contradiction proving the induction step.
    To complete the proof, notice that if group ds proposes in stage J, then it can always guarantee
utility W : if preserving current status quo sJt+11 (by proposing s~Jt+1 = sJt+11 , so sJt+1 = sJt+11 ) results
in st+1 2
        =          s   with a positive probability, group ds can propose max                                        s,    which will be accepted,
since all groups k                ds strictly prefer       sJt+1    = max      s   to   sJt+1   =   sJt+11 .   Consequently, st+1 2                   s   with
probability 1, which completes the proof.
Proof of Part 3. Take equilibrium , and take x; y 2 S such that x < y. Suppose that qx;a > 0
and qy;b > 0; by Part 2, this implies a 2                       x   = arg maxz2S Wdx (z) and b 2                          y    = arg maxz2S Wdy (z).
We proved already that in equilibrium,                          fWj (x)gx2S
                                                                        j2G         satisfy increasing di¤erences. Since x < y,
dx < dy , and by Lemma A3 (where we set X = Y = S), we have a                                                  b.
Proof of Part 4. To prove this part of the theorem, we will show that for every equilibrium in
which there is a possible transition to more than two states (i.e., s 2 S, j                                              s    n fsgj    2), the model
parameters fbk gk2G ; fAk gk2G ; f                      k gk2G ;      jk j;k2G ;           satisfy a nontrivial polynomial equation
with rational coe¢ cients (we will achieve this by showing that if this were not the case, some equi-
librium condition would be violated). Then because the set of nontrivial polynomials with rational
coe¢ cients is countable, the set of such parameters has measure zero. (In fact, we will establish
a stronger result, that the parameters must satisfy one of a …nite subset of such polynomials). In
what follows, let F denote the smallest …eld that contains Q and all the above-mentioned parameters
(e.g., Hungerford, 1974). Furthermore, let F be the set of all solutions to polynomial equations with
coe¢ cients in F. Then standard arguments show that F is an algebraically closed …eld.
    Suppose, to obtain a contradiction, that for some parameter values that do not satisfy a nontrivial
polynomial equation with coe¢ cients in Q the statement is nevertheless wrong. Without loss of
generality, suppose that the set of states S contains the fewest elements among any such examples.
Then the groups fds gs2S belong to the same irreducible component of matrix M (otherwise there
are at least two groups of states without transition between them, and we can remove one such
group), and we can without loss of generality assume that there is no other component (preferences



                                                                          41
of individuals in the other groups, if they exist, are irrelevant).
   Let Z be the (nonempty) set of states s such that j                                        s   n fsgj        2. Consider …rst the case where
there is s such that              s   \ [s + 1; m]        2. Then s = 1 (otherwise all states to the left of x could be
removed, thus violating the assumption that the number of states in S is minimal). Furthermore,
for every state x < m, there is y > x with y 2                             x   (otherwise, monotonicity implies that for all z                         x,
transitions to states greater than x are impossible, and then those states may be removed). If so,
for all x 2 S,         x      x (otherwise, if we take the smallest x for which this is violated, we would get
a contradiction with monotonicity). Consequently, for all x 2 (1; m), there is a unique y 2                                                      x   such
that y > x (for x = 1 there are two such y, and for x = m there is none). Now let A                                                    S be de…ned
by A = fx 2 S : j            xj       2g. Now for each x 2 A, let                         x   = max         x    and let   x   = max (      x   n f x g);
notice that for x > 1,                x    = x, and for x = 1,                 x   > 1. In what follows, for x 2 A, let                     x   = qx   x   ,
then for x 2 A n f1g, qx               x   =1        x.
   Let us prove, by backward induction over the set of elements in A that the following is true for
every element x in A. First, the equilibrium utility of group dx in state x, Wdx ( x ), is not equal to its
utility if transitions correspondence was Q~ such that q~y = qy for y 6= x and q~x = 1, while q~xy = 0
                                                                                   x

for y 6= x. Second, if x 6= 1, then the transition probability to                                    x,    x,   satis…es a nontrivial polynomial
equation with coe¢ cients being polynomials in the parameters of the model. Third, if x 6= 1, then
                                                                             P1          1 ( ) 2
for any group j 2 G and any state y < x , let Hjx bdy = bd1 Wj ( x )            =1         jdy bdy          y
be a function of bdy for all other parameters of the model …xed; then it is a well-de…ned real
analytic function in the neighborhood of the true parameter bdy , and any analytic continuation
of this function is bounded at 1 (more precisely, there is C; K > 0 such that bdy > K implies
Hjx bdy          < C). Indeed, if we prove this for all x, then the …rst property applied to x = 1 would
imply that the equilibrium utility of group d1 is not equal to its utility when the society immediately
transits to       1   > 1, which would be a contradiction.
   Base: If x = max A, then equating Wdx (                            x)
                                              to Wdx (x; x; x; : : :) results in a nontrivial polynomial
                                               P1         1 ( )      2
equation (it is nontrivial, because Wdx ( x )     =1         dx dx bx is linear in bx , as the society
never gets to state x on a path starting from                                      x,   and the only terms that are quadratic in bx
come from individuals from group dx being in this group in the future, whereas Wdx (x; x; x; : : :)
P1       1 ( )    2
   =1      dx dx bx has quadratic terms in bx , and the coe¢ cient is nonzero because it is polynomial
in other parameters, and it cannot be equal to zero if the parameters are generic). Now, continuation
values fVj (s)gsj2G
                  x
                    solve the system of equations (A5) with q as linear functions of                                             x,   which implies
that   fVj (s)gsj2G
                  x
                           can be expressed as ratios of polynomials of                               x;   then equating Wdx (         x)   to Wdx (x)
results in a nontrivial polynomial of                     x   (it is nontrivial, because it holds for some                       x   as there is such
an equilibrium, but not for some other, say                            x       = 0, as in that case Wdx (x) = Wdx (x; x; x; : : :) 6=
Wdx (    x ),   as we just proved). Finally, the function Hjx bdy does not depend on                                             x,   and the result
follows immediately by evaluating Wj (                         x ).
   Step: Suppose that the result is proven for z 2 A such that z > x, let us prove it for x. Notice
that as before, equating Wdx (                  x)   to Wdx (x; x; x; : : :) would give rise to a polynomial equation in all



                                                                               42
parameters of the model and f         y gy2A;y>x .
                                             As before, this equation is nontrivial, because Hdx x (bdx ) is
                                                                                        P1       1 ( )     2
bounded for bdx     high enough by induction (since x < x ), while Wdx (x; x; x; : : :)   =1        dx dx bx
has quadratic terms, and thus is unbounded, even after dividing by bdx . Now suppose x > 1; as
before, we get that equating Wdx (             x)   to Wdx (x) gives rise to a polynomial equation in               x   with
coe¢ cients in all parameters of the model and also f                    y gy2A;y>x   (which is nontrivial for the same
reasons as before). Since F is algebraically closed,                     x   must satisfy a polynomial equation with
coe¢ cients in F. Moreover, since F consists of ratios of polynomials of the parameters of the model
with coe¢ cients in Q, we can multiply by the common denominator to prove the second part of the
statement.
     Finally, we need to prove that if x > 1, then for any group j 2 G and any state y <                                   x,
Hjx bdy is bounded for bdy large enough. Notice that Hjx bdy depends on bdy explicitly (and it
is a linear function), and also through f             y gy2A;y>x ,   which can appear both in the numerator and
the denominator. It now su¢ ces to prove that the denominator does not tend to 0 as bdy tends
to 1. Since each          y   satis…es a polynomial equation with coe¢ cient that are polynomials in the
parameters of the model, either          y   does not depend on bdy explicitly, or there is only a …nite number
of limit points (including 1) of the solutions to this equation as bdy tends to 1. If for at least
one of these limit points, the denominator tends to 0, this yields a polynomial equation on                         z   for z
being the smallest element in A greater than x. This means that there are two polynomial equations
on    z   that have a common root, which is only possible if their resultant equals zero, which again
gives a polynomial condition on the parameters of the model. Since by assumption such a condition
cannot be satis…ed, we have proved the induction step.
     This backward induction leads to a contradiction, as it means that the society may not be
indi¤erent between Transitioning from state 1 to                     1   and    1.   This proves that there is no state
s 2 Z such that       s   \ [s + 1; m]       2. We can similarly prove that there is no state s 2 Z such that
 s   \ [1; s   1]   2. Consequently, if Z is nonempty, there must exist s 2 Z and x; y 2                      s   such that
x < s < y. In this case, we can follow a very similar logic and arrive at a similar contradiction. This
implies that Z is empty, which completes the proof.

     The following lemma will be used in several proofs. (Proof of this and all subsequent lemmas
are relegated to Appendix B.)

Lemma A4 Suppose that                is an equilibrium with transition correspondence Q in a game where
the set of states is S and set of feasible transitions is F . Suppose that S 0                   S is such that for any
x 2 S 0 and y 2 S n S 0 , qxy = 0 (i.e., S 0 is such that Q does not include transitions out of it, which
is true, for example, if S 0 = S), and suppose that the set of feasible transitions F 0 on S 0 is such
that for x; y 2 S 0 , qxy > 0 implies y 2 Fx0 , and y 2 Fx0 implies y 2 Fx (i.e., F 0 is more restrictive
than F , but is nevertheless consistent with Q). Then there is an equilibrium                     0   in a game where the
set of states is S 0 and the set of feasible transitions is F 0 (and other parameters are the same) such
that its transition correspondence Q0 satis…es qxy
                                                0 =q                    0
                                                     xy for any x; y 2 S .



                                                             43
     The next lemma will be used in the proof of Theorem 2.

Lemma A5 Let Q = fqx;y gx;y2S be a monotone transition correspondence, and suppose that for
                               ~ d , which does not depend on b. Suppose that for some x0 ; y 0 2 S,
any a 2 S and b 2 a , Wd (b) = W        a             a

we have Wdx0    (y 0 )    ~ d 0 . Then there also exist x; y 2 S such that Wd (y) > W
                         >W                                                         ~ d and, in addition,
                             x                                               x         x

the correspondence Q0 : S ! S given by
                                     8
                                     < qsa      if s 6= x,
                                0
                               qsa =    1 if s = x and a = y,                                                                                                 (A6)
                                     :
                                        0 if s = x and a 6= y
is monotone.

Proof of Theorem 2. Part 1. Let                              0   be de…ned by                   0   =         +2U
                                                                                                                    , where

                                                                                                 (1) 2                           (1) 2
                           =                       min                              bdy         bds                   bdz       bds         .
                                                     (1)               (1)
                                 s;y;z2S; bdy bds > bdz bds

Suppose to obtain a contradiction that the statement in the theorem is not true, i.e., for some
                                                                                                                      (1)
s 2 S, a transition to a state z which does not minimize bdz                                                        bds     occurs. This means that for
                           (1)                     (1)
some y 2 S, bdy           bds < bdz                bds . Now consider the utility of individuals from group ds if they
transitioned to y instead. Their gain in utility (after factor ) would be
                                  X
          Wds (y) Wds (z) =            ds k (Vk (y)  Vk (z))
                                                   k2G
                                                   X                                                 2
                                             =              ds k    Ak          bk         bdy                Ak + (bk              bdz )2 +        (: : :)
                                                   k2G
                                                   X                                                                  2
                                                            ds k    (bk        bdz )2            bk           bdy           +              2U
                                                                                                                                1
                                                   k2G
                                                                       X
                                             =      bdy       bdz               ds k       2bk           bdy        bdz +                  2U
                                                                                                                                 1
                                                                       k2G
                                                                              (1)
                                             =      bdy       bdz        2bds             bdy         bdz +                     2U
                                                                                                                      1
                                                      (1)               2            (1)                  2
                                             =      bds          bdz                bds         bdy           +             2U > 0,
                                                                                                                  1
provided that       2 (0;        0 ).   Therefore, a transition to z does not maximize the continuation utility of
the pivotal group ds (they would be better o¤ moving to y), which contradicts Part 2 of Theorem
1.
                                                                                     (1)
Part 2. In this proof, let Zs = arg minz2S bdz                                      bds     ; this set is either a singleton or consists of
two adjacent states. The result follows from the following three steps.
Step 1. Denote
                                                                                                     (1) 2                            (1) 2
                          =                        min                               bdy            bds                   bdz        bds        ,
                                                    (1)                 (1)
                                 s;y;z2S; bdy bds           > bdz bds

                          = bm              b1 ,

                                                                              44
                                                                                                                                                   (t)         (1)
and take " =           4       . For such " there exists T                    1 such that for all s 2 S and t > T , bds                                     bds        < ".
                                    1=T
Let ~ =        1           4    2         . Then for             2 ( ~ ; 1), if for s 2 S, some state z 2 Zs is stable (satis…es
 z   = fzg), and the equilibrium path starting from state x never reaches the set Zs , then the
decisive group in s, ds , strictly prefers moving to z to moving to x: Wds (z) > Wds (x).
Proof. Consider the following di¤erence:
                      X
Wds (z) Wds (x) =           ds k (Vk (z) Vk (x))
                                          k2G
                                          XXX                                                                                                                  2
                                                              t 1 (t)
                                    =                             ds k       Pr (st = y) Ak                    (bk      bdz )2     Ak + bk               bdy
                                          t 1 k2G y2S
                                          XX X                                                                                     2
                                                                     t 1 (t)
                                    =                                          t
                                                                         ds k Mds ;k          Pr (st = y)            bk     bdy          (bk       bdz )2
                                          t 1 k2G y2SnZs
                                          XX X
                                                                     t 1 (t)
                                    =                                    ds k   Pr (st = y) bdz                   bdy      2bk         bdy       bdz
                                          t 1 k2G y2SnZs
                                          X X                                                                    (t)
                                                             t 1
                                    =                                Pr (st = y) bdz                bdy        2bds        bdy     bdz
                                          t 1 y2SnZs
                                          X X                                                                        (1)                                                      (t)    (1)
                                                             t 1
                                    =                                Pr (st = y)              bdz        bdy     2bds        bdy        bdz + 2 bdz                bdy    bds       bds
                                          t 1 y2SnZs
                                          X X                                                     (1)            2          (1)              2                                (t)    (1)
                                                             t 1
                                    =                                Pr (st = y)              bds          bdy             bds         bdz       + 2 bdz           bdy    bds       bds
                                          t 1 y2SnZs
                                                                         T                        T +1
                                                                 1              2
                                                         2                                2               "
                                          1                      1                            1
                                    >                        2 1         ~T       2
                                                                                          2 "
                                          1
                                                                         2
                                    =                        2       2
                                                                              2                   = 0.
                                          1                      4                    4
Thus, Wds (z) > Wds (x).
Step 2. Suppose that                          is su¢ ciently close to 1, and in some equilibrium, for state s 2 S, at least
one of the states z 2 Zs is stable. Then with probability 1 the society starting from s will end up
in one of such states (in some z 2 Zs that is stable).
Proof. If s 2 Zs and is stable, then the statement is trivial.
     Suppose s 2 Zs and is not stable. Without loss of generality, s < z (where z is the stable state
from Zs ). Then                 s       z due to monotonicity. On the other hand, from Step 1 it follows that                                                      s     s,
for otherwise members of ds would be strictly better o¤ moving to z. Thus, starting from s, only s
and z may be reached, and since s is unstable, z is reached with a positive probability every period.
Thus, it is reached with probability 1.
     Finally, suppose s 2
                        = Zs . Again, without loss of generality, s < Zs . From Step 1 it follows that
 s     s. If       s   6= fsg, then y 2              s   for some y > s, and then by monotonicity y                                              z for z 2 Zs that
is stable. Moreover, the last inequality holds for all states that may be reached from y. But such
paths must reach Zs with probability 1 (otherwise it would contradict the result in Step 1), and

                                                                                    45
once they do, they must reach a stable state in Zs . The only remaining possibility is               s   = fsg, so
s is stable. But this is impossible from Step 1. This proves that a stable state from Zs is reached
with probability 1.
Step 3. For su¢ ciently high , there exists an equilibrium such that for each state s 2 S, at least
one of the states z 2 Zs is stable:       z   = fzg.
Proof. First, notice that for all states in z 2 Zs , the corresponding bliss point of the decision-
                                                       (1)      (1)
makers’ distant future selves is the same, bdz               = bds , and thus Zz = Zs . This follows from
Assumption 1, which implies that each component is a connected set (intersection of S with an
                                                              (1)
interval), and for each state x in this component bdx               and lies in the convex hull of the current
selves’bliss points.
    We now de…ne the following set of feasible transitions, so as to make use of the more general result
established in the proof of Theorem 1. Suppose …rst that Zs is a singleton fzg. Then de…ne the set
of feasible transitions fFx gx2S in the following way: y 2 Fx if either x < z and y             z, or x > z and
y   z, or x = y = z (in other words, we postulate that state z is stable, and allow any transitions
that do not lead from the left of z to the right of z or vice versa). We estalished that this game has
an equilibrium, with a corresponding transition matrix Q;   ~ let ~ s be the set fx 2 S : q~sx > 0g. By
construction, q~zz = 1, so ~ z = fzg. If there exists a symmetric monotone MPE in the original game
                                                                           ~ the result is proven. If
(without restricted transitions) that also gives rise to transition matrix Q,
not, then by Lemma A5 there must exist a monotone deviation, namely, states x; y; a 2 S such
that q~xa > 0, Wdx (y) > Wdx (a) and, in addition, the correspondence q 0 : S ! S de…ned by (A6)
(replacing q with q~) is monotone.
   Notice that it must be that x = z. If not, then without loss of generality assume x > z, and
monotonicity implies y z and a z (because z is stable under Q),  ~ but then Wd (y) > Wd (a)
                                                                                  x        x
                       ~         ~
would be equivalent to Wd (y) > Wd (a) as the paths would be identical in the two games, with
                                x             x
                                                                                   ~ is a transition
or without restriction on transitions. But the last equation would contradict that Q
                                                  qza > 0 implies a = z). Now, Wdx (y) > Wdx (a)
matrix of a MPE. Thus, x = z, and then a = x = z (~
implies Wdz (y) > Wdz (z), so y 6= z. Without loss of generality, assume y > z. But by monotonicity
of this deviation, we must have ~ (y) y, and therefore all paths that start from y never reach z.
But then Wdz (y) > Wdz (z) contradicts Step 1, because, as argued above, Zz = Zs = fzg. This
contradiction completes the proof in this case.
    Now assume that Zs consists of two points, z < z 0 . Here, we need an auxiliary step. Introduce
the set of feasible transitions F 0 in the following way: (x; y) 2 F 0 if either x < z and y                   z0,
or x > z 0 and y        z, or x; y 2 Zs . As before, there is an equilibrium            0   that gives rise to a
transition mapping     Q0 .   By feasibility, it is only possible to transition from z and z 0 onto this set,
and monotonicity implies that at least one of the states z and z 0 is stable in this equilibrium.
Without loss of generality, suppose that state z is stable; then from z 0 it may only be possible to
stay in z 0 or transit to z. Now, let us lift the restriction on transitions. If matrix Q0 corresponds to
an equilibrium in the original game, the result is proven. Otherwise, as before, by Lemma A5 there



                                                         46
must exist a monotone deviation. For the tuple (x; y; a) that constitutes a deviation, it is impossible
that x < z or x > z 0 (there is no monotone deviation that would not be feasible under F 0 ). Suppose
instead that x 2 Zs = fz; z 0 g. A deviation within Zs (i.e., y 2 Zs ) cannot yield a higher utility
to ds , because it was feasible under F 0 . Thus, the remaining case to consider is y 2
                                                                                      = Zs . If y < z,
then this deviation leads to a path that never reaches Zs , which contradicts Step 1. If y > z, then
monotonicity of deviation implies that from state y it is impossible to move to any state b < y, and
in particular to return to Zs , which again contradicts Step 1. This contradiction proves Step 3 for
the case where Zs consists of two points. This completes the proof of Part 2 of the Theorem.

      We next state three more lemmas that will be used in the remaining proofs.

                                                                                 (t)
Lemma A6 Suppose that for some j, the sequence bj is nondecreasing (respectively, nonincreas-
ing). Then if in state s 2 S, j = ds , then                       s        s (respectively,      s     s).

                                                                                 (t)
Lemma A7 Suppose that for some j, the sequence bj is nondecreasing (respectively, nonincreas-
                                                                                                                      (1)
ing). Furthermore, suppose that some state s 2 S satis…es j = ds , and arg minz2S bj                                           bdz = fsg.
Then       s   = fsg.

                                                                                     (t)
Lemma A8 Suppose that for some j, the sequence bj                                          is nondecreasing and, moreover, there is
                               ( )         ( +1)
some            1 such that   bj     6=   bj     .       Fix a state s where j = ds and consider any monotone set of
mappings Q = fqxy g for x 6= s. Suppose that for some x > s,                                         (x)     x. For any       , denote the
                                                                                                                               ( )
continuation utility of individuals from current group j from moving to state x by Wj                                                (x), and
                                                                                                                       ( )
from staying in s and moving to x with probability                               in each period thereafter by         Wj (s;         ). Let

                                                        f ( ) = Wj (s; )              Wj (x) .

Then f satis…es the following strict single-crossing property: if for some , f ( ) = 0, then f ( 0 ) > 0
for    0   >    and f ( 0 ) < 0 for         0   < .

Proof          of   Theorem        Uniqueness nwhen
                                     3.                      is su¢ ciently smallo   is straight-
                                                               (1)
forward:     consider the sets A             =    x 2 R j x = bds for some s 2 S    and B      =
n            bd +bd
                                                   o
  y 2 R j y = s 2 s+1 for some s 2 f1; : : : ; m 1g . For generic parameter values, A \ B = ?. If
so, then there is a unique mapping satisfying the description in Part 1 of Theorem 2, and therefore,
the equilibrium is generically unique if                      <       0.
      We now turn to generic uniqueness under Assumption 2, which will be proved in several steps.
Step 1. Suppose that there are two equilibria                              1   and     2,   and let Q1 and Q2 be the corresponding
transition matrices. Then, for generic parameter values, if Q1 6= Q2 , then there are two at least
states x; y 2 S, x 6= y, such that the distributions qx1 6= qx2 and qy1 6= qy2 . In other words, it is
impossible that transition probabilities from only one state are di¤erent.
Proof of Step 1. Suppose not, so there is a unique state s such that qs1 6= qs2 . Let us …rst prove
that, generically, for set           =          1   [    2   n fsg, j j = 1. Indeed, if              is empty,    1   =   2   = fsg, hence
                                                s        s                                                        s       s


                                                                           47
qs1 = qs2 , which contradicts the choice of s. On the other hand, suppose that there are x; y 2
such that x 6= y; without loss of generality, x < y. Without loss of generality, suppose x 2                                           1.
                                                                                                                                       s
Then by Part 4 of Theorem 1, for generic parameter values, y 2
                                                             =                               1,   which means that y 2                 2,
                                                                                             s                                         s
which, again by Part 4 of Theorem 1, implies x 2
                                               =                        2   for generic parameter values. Now, consider
                                                                        s
three possibilities. If x < s < y, then, from Part 3 of Theorem 1, x 2                            1   implies       1       x for z < s;
                                                                                                  s                 z
moreover, for such z,       qz2   =   qz1   . Therefore, if society moves from state s to x, the continuation
utilities of group ds should be the same for both equilibria: Wd1s (x) = Wd2s (x). Similarly, from
y2      2   implies   2   y for all z > s; moreover, for such z, qz1 = qz2 . Thus, if the society moves from
        s             z
state s to y, the continuation utilities again coincide: Wd1s (y) = Wd2s (y). But by Part 2 of Theorem
1, we have Wd1s (x)        Wd1s (y) = Wd2s (y)            Wd2s (x) = Wd1s (x), which implies that both inequalities
hold with equality, in particular, Wd1s (x) = Wd1s (y). This means x; y 2                             1,
                                                                                                      s    which, as shown in the
proof of Part 4 of Theorem 1, is impossible for generic parameter values. The remaining possibilities
are x < y < s and s < x < y; they are considered similarly.
      We have therefore proved that there is a unique x 2 . Suppose that x > s (the case of x < s is
                                  1 6= q 2 ; otherwise, since
entirely analogous). Notice that qsx                                                  1   fs; xg and         2      fs; xg we would
                                        sx                                            s                      s
      1 = q 2 , again meaning that q 1 = q 2 and contradicting the choice of s. Without loss of
have qss   ss                       s     s
                    1 < q 2 , so in equilibrium
generality, assume qsx                                                the society stays in s longer than in equilibrium
                         sx                                       1
                                                             1             2 > 0. It must be that the sequence b                       (t)
 2,   in expectation; this means, in particular,            qsx   < 1 and qsx                                   ds
                                                                    2 > 0 would contradict Lemma
is nondecreasing and, moreover, it is nonstationary, for otherwise qsx
A6.
      Let j = ds . The continuation utilities from moving to x are the same in both equilibria: Wj1 (x) =
Wj2 (x), because the transition probabilities are identical thereafter. Moreover, in equilibrium                                       2,
transiting to x is a best response, so                Wj2 (x)     Wj2 (s),     and in equilibrium             1,   staying is a best
response, so Wj1 (s)          Wj1 (x). We thus have               Wj1 (s)        Wj1 (x) = Wj2 (x)                 Wj2 (s), meaning
that the utility of individuals from group j from staying is at least as high under                                     1   as under   2.
Denote Wj (s; ) the utility of staying in s if the subsequent equilibrium play has probability
                            1
of moving to x; then Wj s; qsx = Wj1 (s) and Wj s; qsx
                                                    2  = Wj2 (s). By Lemma A8, the function
f ( ) : [0; 1] ! R, de…ned by, f ( ) = Wj (s; ) Wj (x), satis…es the strict single-crossing condition.
           1
Now, if f qsx              2
              = 0, then f qsx                          2
                              > 0, meaning that Wj s; qsx > Wj (x), which contradicts that
moving to x is a best response in                                       2               1
                                                 2.    Similarly, if f qsx = 0, then f qsx < 0, meaning that
       1
Wj s; qsx < Wj (x), which contradicts that staying at s is a best response in                                            1
                                                                                                             1.    If f qsx 6= 0 and
   2
f qsx 6= 0, then since staying in s is a best response in                                             1
                                                                                 1,   we must have f qsx > 0; similarly,
                2
we must have f qsx < 0. But then by continuity there is                                      1 ; q2
                                                                                          2 qsx   sx such that f ( ) = 0.
                                 1
In that case, it must be that f qsx          2 . But this would contradict Lemma A8. This
                                    < 0 < f qsx
contradiction completes the proof of Step 1.
Step 2. Let m be the minimal number of states for which there are two equilibria,                                    1   and    2.   Then
m = 2.




                                                                  48
Proof. Suppose not, then either m = 1 or m                                 3. If m = 1, there is only one possible transition
mapping: Q with q11 = 1. Suppose m > 3 and let Q1 and Q2 the transition matrices in equilibria
 1   and         2.     Let Z            S be the set of z 2 S such that qz1 and qz2 are di¤erent distributions;
from Step 1 it follows that jZj                         2. In what follows, let L = s 2 S :         1     s;    2       s and R =
                                                                                                    s           s
 s2S:                     s;     2     s . By Lemma A6, L [ R = S; let us denote I = L \ R.
                 s               s
     First, we show that if s 2 S and 1 < s < m, then s 2
                                                        = I. Indeed, otherwise, we would have
 1   =       2   = fsg. Take x 2 Z n fsg. If x < s, then by Lemma A4 there exist two equilibria
 s           s                                                                                                                     1 j[1;s]
and      2 j[1;s]     in the game with the set of states S 0 = S \ [1; s]. Similarly, if x > s, then there are two
equilibria            1 j[s;m]   and     2 j[s;m]   in the game with the set of states S 0 = S \ [s; m]. In either case, we
get a contradiction with that m is the lowest number of states where multiple equilibria are possible.
     Second, let x = min (Z n f1g) and y = max (Z n fmg) (both are well-de…ned because jZj                                               2).
We must have x 2 L. Indeed, suppose not, then x 2 R. If x = m, then we have                                         1   =     2   = fxg
                                                                                                                    x         x
by de…nition of R, and then x 2
                              = Z, a contradiction. If, on the other hand, x 2 R and x < m, then,
again using Lemma A4, we get that there exist two di¤erent equilibria                               1 j[x;m]   and      2 j[x;m] in     the
game with the set of states                   S0    = S \ [x; m], a contradiction. We can similarly prove that y 2 R.
     There are two possibilities. If Z 6= f1; mg, then x = min (Z n f1g) = min (Z \ [2; m                                          1])
max (Z \ [2; m                   1]) = max (Z n fmg) = y. This means, again by Lemma A4 that                                1 j[x;y]   and
 2 j[x;y]   are two di¤erent equilibria on [x; y], which again contradicts the choice of m. The remaining
case to consider is Z = f1; mg. Since m                         3, 2 2
                                                                     = f1; mg. Then if 2 2 L, then we have two equilibria
 1 j[1;2]   and         2 j[1;2]     on [1; 2] and if 2 2 R, we have two di¤erent equilibria            1 j[2;m]    and      2 j[2;m]    on
[2; m]. In either case, we get a contradiction; this contradiction proves that m = 2.
Completing the proof. We have shown that there is a game with two states, S = f1; 2g, and two
equilibria. Moreover, the set of states Z where qz1 and qz2 are di¤erent is the whole set S. Without
                             1 > q 2 . Since q 2 < 1, q 2 > 0, and in a monotone equilibrium we
loss of generality, suppose q11   11          11       12
           2 = 1; this means q 1 < 1, and thus q 1 > 0 and again by monotonicity q 1 = 1. From
must have q22                 22                21                                11
                                                                    (t)
Lemma A6, this implies that the sequence bd1 is nondecreasing (because equilibrium             2 exists)
       (t)                                                        (1)        bd1 +bd2
and   bd2
        is nonincreasing (because equilibrium 1 exists). Suppose bd1 <           2    , then Lemma A7
              1 = q 2 = 1, which contradicts q 1 > q 2 . If b(1)   bd   +b d
implies that q11    11                        11     11      d2 >
                                                                      1
                                                                        2
                                                                            2
                                                                               , then we get a similar
                      (1)    (1)                                  (1)         (1)       b +b
contradiction. Since bd1    bd2 by Assumption 1, we must have bd1 = bd2 = d1 2 d2 , which is
nongeneric. This proves that under Assumption 3 for generic parameter values, we have a unique
equilibrium.

Proof of Corollary 1. By Part 2 of Theorem 2, there exists an equilibrium with the desired
properties, and since the equilibrium is unique, the result follows.

Proof of Corollary 2. Follows immediately from Corollary 1.

Proof of Theorem 4. Let us …rst prove that there is an equilibrium with democracy stable
under both M and M 0 ; since we consider only the cases of unique equilibria, it would imply that
democracy is stable under both M and M 0 . Let us do this in case of M . Impose the following

                                                                          49
restrictions on transitions: transition from y to z is infeasible if y                                                  x < z or z < x                    y and
feasible otherwise. In the proof of Theorem 1, we established that there is an equilibrium in this
case under some transition probability matrix Q; since transitions from x were ruled out, qxx = 1.
Let us now lift the requirement on feasibility of transitions and assume that all transitions are
feasible. Lemma A5 implies that if matrix Q does not correspond to an equilibrium, then there
                                                                                  bdx     +bdx                         bdx +bdx+1
must be a deviation at state x. Since from (10)                                          1
                                                                                         2                b1
                                                                                                           dx                2    , and also we have
b dx   1
        +bdx                 bdx +bdx+1                                                            bdx    1
                                                                                                           +bdx            ( )    bdx +bdx+1
       2            bdx           2     ,   under Assumption 3, we have                                   2              bdx           2     for any .
Therefore, there is no deviation that would make group dx better o¤. This implies that there is an
equilibrium with transition matrix Q, i.e., an equilibrium where democracy x is stable. This proves
that democracy is stable under M and, analogously, under M 0 .
       Suppose that democracy is asymptotically stable under M . Consider equilibrium                                                                . Denote
democracy by x and take y = x                        1; if y 2 G, then asymptotic stability implies that qyx > 0. This
                     (t)
means that          bdy    is nondecreasing: otherwise, Assumption 3 would imply that it is nonincreasing,
and then by Lemma A6, applied to matrix M , would imply that qyx > 0 is impossible.
                          0 > 0. Suppose not; then since x is stable, this is only possible if
       Let us prove that qyx                                                                                                                              0    y.
                                                                                                                                                          y
Now, applying Lemma A6 to matrix                              M 0,   we have             0
                                                                                         y         y; consequently, the only possibility is
  0    = fyg, so y is stable under           M 0.        If    0   = fyg in equilibrium, then Wd0 y (y)                        Wd0 y (x) by Part 2 of
  y                                                            y
                                                                                              ( )             0( )
Theorem 1. Now for matrix M , taking into account that bdy                                                bdy for every                  0, single-crossing
implies that Wdy (y; y; : : :)               Wdy (x), where the …rst term is the utility of members of dy if the
society stays in y forever. But this implies, by Lemma A4, that if the set of states is restricted to
fx; yg, then under M there is an equilibrium where both x and y are stable. On the other hand,
the same Lemma A4 implies that there is also an equilibrium                                                    jfx;yg , where x is stable, but y is
not. However, existence of such two equilibria would contradict Lemma A8 (which is applicable
                                      (t)         0(t)                                              (t)          (1)           ( )         ( +1)
because strict inequality bj < bj                         for some t implies that bj < bj                              , thus bj     < bj            for some
        t). This contradiction implies that the hypothesis that                                      0
                                                                                                    qyx                                  0 > 0.
                                                                                                              = 0 is wrong, and in fact qyx
            (t)
Now, bdy being nondecreasing implies that                              y     y, and since                 x   = fxg, we must have                y        fx; yg.
Consequently, with probability 1, starting from y there is convergence to x. The case of y = x + 1
is considered similarly.
       Finally, we prove that convergence to democracy is faster under M 0 than under M as claimed
in footnote 16. Consider convergence from y = x                                        1 (the case of convergence from z = x + 1 is
                                                                            0                                                                          (t)
considered similarly). We need to prove that                               qyx   > qyx . Since x is asymptotically stable, qxa > 0
           (t)
and qya > 0 are possible for a 2 fx; yg only. Therefore, we have (using the same calculus as in the
proof of step 1 in Theorem 2):
                                            1
                                            X                                      (t)              2                              (t)           2
                                                    t          (t)     (t)                                 (t)           (t)
                 (Wj (x)     Wj (y)) =                        qyx     qxx         bj         bdx        + qyy           qxy    bj          bdy        .
                                            t=1




                                                                             50
                     (t)                                           (t)          (t)                                               (t)
Notice that qyx = 1                    (1         qyx )t     1
                                                                 , qxx = 1, qyy = (1              qyx )t          1
                                                                                                                      , and qxy = 0; this implies
                                                                 1
                                                                 X                                         (t)               2            (t)               2
                     Wj (x)            Wj (y) =                        ( (1     qyx ))t     1
                                                                                                       bj             bdy               bj       bdx
                                                                 t=1
                                                                 1
                                                                 X                                     (t)
                                                        =              ( (1     qyx ))t     1
                                                                                                  2bj                 bdx        bdy      bdx         bdy
                                                                 t=1
                                                                                1
                                                                                X                                                (t)
                                                        =         bdx     bdy          ( (1            qyx ))t         1
                                                                                                                             2bj          bdx     bdy .
                                                                                t=1

      Let us denote               = qyx . In terms of notation of Lemma A8 we have
                                                                                           1
                                                                                           X                                            (t)
                 f ( ) = Wj (y)                   Wj (x) =                bdx    bdy             ( (1                  ))t   1
                                                                                                                                   2bj          bdx         bdy :
                                                                                           t=1

If, instead of transition matrix M we used matrix M 0 , but with the same probability                                                                             of transition
from y to x equal, we would obtain (similarly)
                                                                          1
                                                                          X                                           0( )
                                   0
                                  f ( )=                bdx        bdy          ( (1             ))t   1
                                                                                                                 2bj             bdx      bdy :
                                                                          t=1
                           0( )         ( )
Since we have bj                       bj     for all            with at least one strict inequality, we have f 0 ( ) < f ( ).
                      0 = 1, the result is proven (either q
      Notice that if qyx                                          0                    0
                                                            yx = qyx = 1 or qyx < 1 = qyx ), so assume
 0 < 1 from now on. Consider two cases. If q
qyx                                          yx < 1, then since qyx > 0 (as x is asymptotically
stable under M ),                 = qyx must satisfy f ( ) = 0. This implies f 0 (a) < 0. Now, since qyx
                                                                                                      0 2 (0; 1),

it must satisfy f 0 qyx
                     0  = 0, and then by Lemma A8 we must have qyx =                                                                               0 . Now consider
                                                                                                                                                < qyx
the second case, where qyx = 1. By Part 2 of Theorem 1, we must have f ( )                                                                                  0, in which case
f 0 (1) = f 0 ( ) < 0. By Lemma A8 and continuity of f 0 ( ), we must have f 0 ( ) < 0 for all                                                                         2 [0; 1],
and thus        f0    0
                     qyx     < 0. Again by Theorem 1 this is only possible if                                                 0
                                                                                                                             qyx   = 1.
                                                                         (1)
Proof of Theorem 5. Suppose that bdx                                            bdx (the opposite case is analogous). Since (10) does
                                            bdx   2
                                                      +bdx   1          (1)       (1)        bdx       1
                                                                                                        +bdx                                    bdx    2
                                                                                                                                                           +bdx   1     (1)
not hold, we have that                                2                bdx 1    bdx <                  2     .          In this case,                      2           bdx     1
                                                                                                                                                                                   <
bdx    1
         +bdx
       2        implies, using the existence of equilibrium with restricted transitions (similarly to the
proof of Theorem 4) and then Lemma A5, that under both M and M 0 there are equilibria where
state x         1 is stable. If so, democracy x is not asymptotically stable under either M or M 0 .
      Suppose, to obtain a contradiction, that democracy is not stable under M , but is stable under
M 0.    Denoting y = x                      1, Lemma A6 and the fact that y is stable implies that                                                 x         2 fx; yg. Then
since x is not stable under M , qxy > 0, furthermore, since x is stable under                                                                     0
                                                                                                                                                 M,          0 = 1. Since
                                                                                                                                                            qxx
 (1)                                                                                                                                                            (t)     0(t)
bdx     < bdx , the fact that mobility under M 0 is faster than under M implies that bdx                                                                               bdx for
all t      1, with at least one strict inequality. If so, taking the equilibrium under M and changing
transition probabilities so that x is stable would give another equilibrium under M (with the set
of states restricted to fx; yg), similarly to the proof of Theorem 4. However existence of two such
equilibria contradicts Lemma A8; thus if democracy is not stable under M , then it is not stable
under M 0 either.

                                                                                      51
Appendix B: Additional Proofs, Results, and Examples — Not for
Publication

B1     Proofs of Lemmas from Appendix A

Proof of Lemma A4. By construction, transition mapping Q0 is feasible under S 0 and F 0 . Further-
more, the continuation utilities under transition mapping Q0 , in particular, Wj0 (x; y; z; : : :) for any
group j and any path of states x; y; z; : : : are the same: Wj0 (x; y; z; : : :) = Wj (x; y; z; : : :). Therefore,
for every state s 2 S 0 , if x 2 S 0 is such that qsx
                                                   0 > 0, then transition to x maximizes the utility

of group dx among all feasible transitions: x 2 arg maxz2Fs0 Wd0 s (z); indeed, if for some y 2 Fs0 we
had Wd0 s (y) > Wd0 s (x), then, since y 2 Fs0 implies y 2 Fs0 , we would have y 2 Fs , qsx > 0, and
Wds (y) > Wds (x), which cannot be the case if               is an equilibrium, by Part 2 of Theorem 1. Given
that, we can repeat the argument in the proof of Theorem 1 to construct the strategy pro…le                0    that
gives rise to transition mapping        Q0   and is an equilibrium. This completes the proof.

Proof of Lemma A5. Suppose, to obtain a contradiction, that for any x; y 2 S such that
Wdx (y) > W~ d , Q0 given by (A6) is not monotone. Take x; y; a 2 S such that jy aj is minimal
              x
                                              ~ d and a 2 x (informally, we consider the shortest
among all tuples (x; y; a) such that Wd (y) > W  x           x

deviation). By our assertion, the corresponding Q0 is not monotone. Since Q is monotone and Q
and Q0 di¤er by the distribution Qx and Q0x only, there are two possibilities: either for some z < x
and some b 2      z,   y<b        x,   or for some z > x and some b 2         z,   x    b < y. Assume the former
(the latter case may be considered similarly). Let s be de…ned by

                       s = min (z 2 S : b > y for some b 2        z)   = min (z 2 S :    z   y) ;

in the case under consideration, the set of such z is non-empty (e.g., x is its member, and z found
earlier is one as well), and hence state s is well-de…ned. We have s < x; since Q is monotone,
 s      x.
     Notice that if we rede…ned          0 (s)   = fyg, we would get a monotone correspondence (in other
words, a deviation by the society in state s to y is monotone) Indeed, there is no state z~ such that
z~ < s and y          z~    s   by construction of s, and there is no state z~ > s such that         s     z~     y
as this would contradict that y < b for some b 2 s (indeed, the latter would imply z~ > y).
By hypothesis, Wds (y) W    ~ d , since this deviation cannot be pro…table for ds . Moreover, by the
                               s
             ~ d , for any b 2 s such that Wd (b) = W
de…nition of W                                           ~ d and, moreover, there is b 2 s such that
                  s                                     s           s

y < b (such b exists by de…nition of s). Since W satis…es increasing di¤erences and ds < dx , for this
b we have Wdx (y) < Wdx (b).
                                              ~ d . We therefore have
     On the other hand, recall that Wdx (y) > W  x


                                                                 ~d ,
                                             Wdx (b) > Wdx (y) > W x


             ~ d . Notice, however, that y < b a for all a 2 x , and strict inequality Wd (b) >
so Wdx (b) > W  x                                                                        x
 ~
Wdx = Wdx (a) implies a 6= b, so in fact y < b < a. This implies that jb aj < jy aj. This

                                                            B-1
contradicts the choice of x; y; a 2 S such that jy aj is minimal among tuples (x; y; a) such that
Wdx (y) > W~ d and a 2 x , as tuple (x; b; a) satis…es the same properties but has jb aj < jy aj.
              x

This contradiction proves that our initial assertion was wrong, and this proves the lemma.

                                                     (t)
Proof of Lemma A6. Suppose that bj is nondecreasing (the complementary case is considered
similarly). Suppose, to obtain a contradiction, that                            s        s. Denote x = min                             s,   then x < s. Notice
that for any y 2 S, we have


                                1
                                X             X              X
                                          t           (t)              (t)
                  Wj (y) =                           qya               jk uk        (bda )
                                t=1           a2S            k2G
                                X1            X              X         (t)
                           =              t           (t)
                                                     qya               jk       Ak            (bk          bda )2
                                t=1   a2S      k2G
                                 1
                                XX                                     1
                                                                       X                XX
                                         t (t)                                                                    (t)
                           =               jk Ak
                                                                                    t                      (t)
                                                                                                          qya     jk (bk           bda )2 .
                                t=1 k2G                                t=1              a2S k2G

Now take any two states y < z and consider the di¤erence Wj (z)                                                    Wj (y):
                         1
                                                                                                                                                      !
                         X           XX                                                               XX
                                t                      (t) (t)                            2                          (t) (t)                      2
 (Wj (z)    Wj (y)) =                                 qya  jk (bk                bda )                              qza  jk (bk               bda )
                         t=1         a2S k2G                                                          a2S k2G
                         X1         X                             X             (t)
                     =          t              (t)
                                              qya           (t)
                                                           qza                  jk (bk            bda )2
                         t=1        a2S                           k2G
                          1
                                                                                                                                                            !
                         X          X                                  X            (t) 2
                                                                                                          X        (t)
                                                                                                                                       X        (t) 2
                                t              (t)          (t)
                     =                        qya          qza                      jk bk             2            jk bk bda       +            jk bda
                         t=1        a2S                                k2G                                k2G                          k2G
                          1
                                                                                                  !                                                                     !
                         X                X          (t) 2
                                                              X                                               X                                       (t)
                                t                                        (t)             (t)                            (t)         (t)
                     =                               jk bk              qya             qza               +            qya         qza           2bj bda + b2da
                         t=1              k2G                 a2S                                             a2S
                         X1         X
                                t              (t)          (t)                 (t)
                     =                        qya          qza              2bj bda + b2da
                         t=1        a2S
                         1
                         X          X
                                t              (t)          (t)              (t) 2                (t)
                     =                        qya          qza             bj                 2bj bda + b2da
                         t=1        a2S
                         1
                         X          X                                   (t)                   2
                                t              (t)          (t)
                     =                        qya          qza         bj           bda           .
                         t=1        a2S

Applying this to x and s, we have
                                                           1
                                                           X           X                                         (t)               2
                                                                   t              (t)           (t)
                      (Wj (x)       Wj (s)) =                                    qsa           qxa            bj          bda          .                        (B1)
                                                           t=1         a2S

   Consider two cases. The …rst case is where                          s         s; this holds for generic parameter values, as
                                                                                                                    (t)
in Part 4 of Theorem 1 (indeed, x 2              s    and x < s). In that case, bj                                            bj           bda for all a        s, so



                                                                  B-2
 (t)                              (t)               2
bj       bda and thus bj                  bda           is decreasing in a for a                     s. Consequently, for each t,

                                           X                   (t)              2        X             (t)             2
                                                     (t)                                        (t)
                                                    qsa  bj              bda                   qxa  bj         bda         ,
                                            a s                                          a s

                                         (t)                                                                   (t)
because the distribution qs …rst-order stochastically dominates qx as the equilibrium is monotone.
This implies Wj (x)                 Wj (s). In fact, this inequality is strict. This can be seen for t = 1: the
                                          (1)                 (1)                                        (t)           2
probability distributions qs                        and qx           are di¤erent, and                 bj       bda            is strictly increasing in a.
Thus, Wj (s) > Wj (x), which contradicts Part 2 of Theorem 1 in that x 2                                                                s   does not maximize
                                                                                                                                                             (t)
the utility of group j = ds . Notice that for the proof in this case, we did not need that bj                                                                      is
                                          (t)
monotone in t, only that                 bj          bj for all t.
       Now consider the case where for some y 2                                     s,   y > s. This case is nongeneric, but the statement
holds here as well. Indeed, consider Wj (s); it is a linear combination of paths where the society
stays in s for               1 periods (including the current period ) and then departs either to lower or
higher states. All equilibrium paths fst g where the eventual departure is to lower states (starting
from some z such that x                         z         s) satisfy Wj (z j 8t : st                   z) > Wj (x), similarly to the previous
case. Now consider some path that eventually departs to higher states, and suppose that it stays in
z for exactly       periods, after which it departs to y > s. Let us denote the probability distribution
                                                                                                                           (t)
of states in period t                   1 if an immediate transition to x occurs by px , and that in the case an
                                                                  (t)
immediate transition to y occurs by qy ; then these are also distributions of states in period t +
if transition occurs in period . We know that the individuals in group j are indi¤erent between
transiting to x and to y, meaning that
                    1
                    X             XX                                                     1
                                                                                         X          XX
                                                           (t)                                                        (t)
                              t
                                                   p(t)
                                                    xa     jk (bk         bda )2 =              t               (t)
                                                                                                               qya    jk (bk        bda )2 ,
                    t=1           a2S k2G                                                t=1        a2S k2G

which, by increasing di¤erences, implies
                 1
                 X           XX                                                          1
                                                                                         X          XX
                                                        (t+ )                                                         (t+ )
                         t
                                           p(t)
                                            xa          jk    (bk         bda )2                t               (t)
                                                                                                               qya    jk    (bk             bda )2 ;
                  t=1        a2S k2G                                                     t=1        a2S k2G

                                    (t+ )            (t)                                                                                                     (t+ )
this follows from that bj                           bj for each t (as earlier in the proof, only the expectations of                                         j
matter). Now we have
        0            1
                                                     X            X                                      1
                                                                                                         X           XX
                                                                          (t)                                                               (t+ )
        Wj @s; : : : ; s; y; : : :A =                         t
                                                                          jk (bk          bj )2 +                t                (t)
                                                                                                                                 qya        jk    (bk   bda )2
            | {z }
                 times                               t=1          k2G                                    t=1         a2S k2G

                                                     X            X                                      1
                                                                                                         X           XX
                                                                          (t)                                                               (t+ )
                                                              t
                                                                          jk (bk          bj )2 +                t
                                                                                                                                 p(t)
                                                                                                                                  xa        jk    (bk   bda )2
                                                     t=1          k2G                                    t=1         a2S k2G
                                                              0                           1

                                               =          Wj @s; : : : ; s; x; : : :A .
                                                              | {z }
                                                                        times



                                                                                    B-3
Consequently, for each such path, we have
                         0             1                                                           0                            1

                                  Wj @s; : : : ; s; y; : : :A                             Wj @s; : : : ; s; x; : : :A > Wj (x) .
                                      | {z }                                                  | {z }
                                                    times                                                  times

Aggregating, we have that Wj (s) > Wj (x) holds in this case as well, and this contradicts Part 2 of
Theorem 1. This contradiction completes the proof.

                                                                         (t)
Proof of Lemma A7. Suppose that bj is nondecreasing (the complementary case is considered
similarly). By Lemma A6,                        s        s. Suppose, to obtain a contradiction, that                                                           s   6= fsg, then x 2                   s
for some x > s. Since the calculations from the proof of Lemma A6 are applicable, (B1) implies
(since     s      s)
                                                                                 1
                                                                                 X                 X                                  (t)                  2
                                                                                               t              (t)        (t)
                                  (Wj (s)                Wj (x)) =                                           qxa        qsa          bj             bda        .
                                                                                     t=1           a s

                                                                             (t)                                                                                   (t)        (1)
For any …xed t, consider the sequence bj    bda for a s. Since bds = bj   bj     bj , we have
                                     h   bd +bd
            (t)                 (t)                               (t)
arg minz2S bj    bdz = fsg, so bj 2 bds ; s 2 s+1 . This implies bj   bda is increasing in a for
                            (t)             2
a    s, and thus bj                 bda             is also increasing. Similarly to the proof of Lemma A6, this implies

                                            X                      (t)                     2        X                   (t)                 2
                                                         (t)                                                  (t)
                                                        qxa  bj                  bda                         qsa  bj                bda         ,
                                            a s                                                      a s

                                   (t)                                                                                         (t)
since the distribution qx …rst-order stochastically dominates qs , and for at least one such t (e.g.,
t = 1) the inequality is strict. This implies Wj (s) > Wj (x), but since we assumed x 2                                                                                                     s,   this
contradicts Part 2 of Theorem 1. This contradiction implies that                                                                          s     = fsg, which completes the
proof.

Proof of Lemma A8. Suppose that f ( ) = 0 and                                                                  0    >         (the case               0   <         is analogous). We
        ( )                  ( )                                                                                                                                                    (t+ )         (t)
have   Wj (s;          )<   Wj (x)          for all               > 1, because the sequence of expected bliss points bj                                                                          bj
for all , and for at least some t the inequality is strict. Therefore, we have

       0                                        0
 f             f ( ) = Wj s;                              Wj (s; )
                                                    0        (1)                 0             0       (1)                                    (1)                         (1)
                        =               1                Wj          s;               +            Wj        (x)        (1           ) Wj           (s; )                Wj     (x)
                                                              (1)                0                 (1)                          0                     (1)                     (1)           0
                        =           (1              ) Wj                s;                 Wj            (s; ) +                                    Wj        (x)        Wj          s;
                                                            (1)              0                 (1)
                        >         (1            ) Wj                s;                     Wj        (s; ) =
                                                                  (2)                                (2)
                        > ( (1                      ))2 Wj                s;          0
                                                                                                   Wj        (s; ) =
                                                                  ( )                 0                ( )
                        > ( (1                      ))      Wj            s;                       Wj        (s; )           for any                > 2.

           ( )         0)         ( )
Since Wj         (s;         Wj         (s; ) is bounded, we must have f ( 0 )                                                       f ( ) > 0. This proves that f ( )
satis…es the single-crossing condition.

                                                                                               B-4
B2        Omitted Proofs of From the Text

Proof of Theorem 6. Suppose not. Since one can always pick                                        0   = 0, it su¢ ces to prove existence
of    1   with desired properties. Suppose that such                   1    does not exist. Then for some pair of states
s; x 2 S there are values of           arbitrarily close to 1 for which (12) does not hold. Again, without loss
of generality, assume x > s. Multiplying both sides by (1                                    ) and taking limit as                     ! 1, we get,
                                               (1)                                      (1)  bds +bdx
again after simpli…cations, that (bdx bds ) 2bds      bds bdx      0, and since x > s, bds       2    .
                                    (1)  b +b                  (1)            (1)
    Consider two possibilities. If bds > ds 2 dx , then bds bds > bdx bds , which means that
                        (1)                                (1)
s2= arg maxz2S bdz bds . Take y 2 arg maxz2S bdz bds ; then by Assumption 2, dy belongs to
                                                                                      (1)   (1)
the same irreducible component of social mobility matrix M as ds , which means bdy = bds , and
                                   (1)
therefore y 2 arg maxz2S bdz bdy . By Lemma A7, it must be that y is stable in any equilibrium.
But then Step 2 of the proof of Part 2 of Theorem 2 implies that for some                                                 1   < 0, for all     >    0
state s cannot be stable, a contradiction.
                                             (1)        bds +bdx                                  (1)                               (1)
      The remaining possibility is bds              =       2    ,   in which case bds                        bds = bdx            bds ; however,
                                                                            (t)                               (t)                             (t)
Assumption 3 then implies that for all t                      1, 0         bds         bds        bdx     bds , and thus bds                 bds >
              (t)
bdx       bds . From this it immediately follows that (12) holds, contradicting the assertion that it
does not. This contradiction proves that slippery slope is impossible for high .
      Let us now prove that under the extra condition, one can take                                           0   > 0. Suppose not; then
it must be that for some pair of states s; x 2 S there are values of                                              arbitrarily close to 0 for
which (12) does not hold. Without loss of generality, assume x > s. Dividing by                                                        (so that the
term for t = 1 does not contain                ) and taking the limit as                         ! 0, we get, after straightforward
                                              (1)                                                                   (1)        bds +bdx
simpli…cation, that (bdx            bds )   2bds    bds       bdx          0, and since x > s, bds                                 2    .   Since we
                                                                                      (1)        bds +bdx
assumed that equality is impossible, it must imply that                              bds    >        2    .   However, this implies that
           (1)               (1)
bds       bds       > bdx   bds    , and if so, Part 1 of Theorem 2 implies that for some                                          0   > 0, for all
     <    0    state s cannot be stable. This contradicts the assumption of the theorem, thus proving
that slippery slope is impossible for low .
      Finally, Example B1 proves that for some values of                          the statement is not necessarily true, which
completes the proof of the theorem.

      The next example illustrates the second part of Theorem 6

Example B1 (The non-monotonic e¤ ect of beta on slippery slope) There are …ve groups
of identical size with political bliss points b = ( 4; 3; 0; 3; 4)0 , all Ai = 0, and the social mobility
matrix is given by                                  0                                        1
                                                      7        1      1
                                                      10       5      10         0      0
                                                    B1         3      1       1        1 C
                                                    B 10       5      10      10       10 C
                                              M=    B1         1      3       1        1 C
                                                    B 10       10     5       10       10 C .
                                                    @1         1      1       3        1 A
                                                      10       10     10      5        10
                                                                      1       1        7
                                                          0    0      10      5        10




                                                                B-5
For such M , the equilibrium is generically unique for any discount factor . Notice that this example
satis…es all the assumptions, in particular Assumption 3 (the simplest way to see this is to notice
that matrix M satis…es the conditions of Lemma B3).
   With this transition matrix, members of the middle group 3 expect, on average, to prefer policy
0 due to symmetry, and thus there is no transition out of state 3. For members of group 4, the
preferences of their future selves are the following. The expected political bliss policy of their
tomorrow’s self is 32 , the next day it is 34 , then 38 , etc. This means that tomorrow’s self is indi¤erent
between living under state 3 or 4, whereas all future selves strictly prefer state 3. This implies that
in equilibrium, group 4 must move from state 4 to state 3 with probability one. Similarly, group 2
would move out of state 2 to state 3 with probability one.
   Consider the incentives of groups 1 and 5 (they are symmetric). For members of group 5, the
                                           17          67
preferences of their future selves are:    5    = 3:4; 25 = 2:68; 1013         3733
                                                                  500 = 2:026; 2500 = 1:4932; : : : Thus,
ideally, members of this group would prefer to have state 4 in periods 2; 3; 4, and state 3 thereafter.
However, by the argument above, they can only enjoy state 4 in one period, for after that group 4
which is in power in that state would move to state 3.
   Thus, members of group 5 e¤ectively compare staying in state 5 versus spending one period
in state 4 and moving to 3 thereafter. Not surprisingly, if           is small, then they prefer to move,
discounting the disutility from moving to 3 too fast.
   The following describes the equilibrium:
   If 0 <     < 0:0282, then the equilibrium is         (1; 2; 3; 4; 5) = (2; 3; 3; 3; 4) (here, we used   to
denote a deterministic transition mapping).
   If 0:0282 <    < 0:0368, then the equilibrium involves mixing between transiting from 1 to 2 and
staying at 1, and, symmetrically, between transiting from 5 to 4 and staying at 5. Here, the slippery
slope e¤ects begin to kick in: members of group 5 are already unhappy about fast transition to 3,
and try to mitigate the problem by delaying this transition and staying at 5 with some probability.
The best response to staying in 5 is still moving to 4, especially because the third period, where
current members of group 5 are most willing to spend in state 4, is given su¢ cient weight; at the
same time, the best response to moving to 4 is now staying in 5, because it is much more preferable
to spend the third period in states 5 or 4 rather than 3. This leads to mixing.
   If 0:0368 <      < 0:5621, then the equilibrium is        (1; 2; 3; 4; 5) = (1; 3; 3; 3; 5). Here, slippery
slope considerations are in e¤ect: the decision-maker in state 5 are su¢ ciently concerned about
moving to state 3 too fast, and thus they prefer to stay in state 5. They are willing to stay in state
5 now even if this implies staying there forever.
   If 0:5621 <      < 1, then the equilibrium involves mixing between transiting from 1 to 2 and
staying at 1, and, symmetrically, between transiting from 5 to 4 and staying at 5 (for example, if
  = 0:9, then they stay with probability 0:69 and move with probability 0:31). For these values of
 , distant future is su¢ ciently important. Decision-makers in state 5 still prefer to stay in state 5
instead of moving to state 4 immediately; however, now the weight given to distant future is high,



                                                     B-6
and so if the society were to stay in state 5 forever, they would prefer to deviate immediately and
move to 4 (followed by 3).
       This example illustrates that slippery slope considerations may be important only for interme-
diate values of , but not for very low or very high ones.


       To prove Theorem 7 and Theorem 8, we need the following stronger version of Lemma A6. It
was, essentially, established in the proof of Lemma A6, but not formulated.


                                                                                (t)                                        (t)
Lemma B1 Suppose that for some j, for all t > 0, bj                                         bj (respectively, bj                  bj ). Suppose,
furthermore, that in state s 2 S such that j = ds , either                                    s          s or        s       s. Then      s      s
(respectively,       s      s).

                                                       (t)
Proof. Suppose that for all t > 0, bj                             bj (the complementary case is considered similarly).
Suppose, to obtain a contradiction, that                     s       s. In this case, by assumption, we must have                          s     s.
If so, the argument in the proof of Lemma A6 (…rst case in that proof) goes through as long as
 (t)
bj       bj for all t. We thus arrive at a contradiction that completes the proof.

                                                                                      ( )         0( )        0(1)          (1)
Proof of Theorem 7. Notice that for all , either bdx                              bdx         bdx          bdx       = bdx or the opposite
                                  bdx   1
                                         +bdx        (1)         bdx +bdx+1                         bdx   1
                                                                                                           +bdx             ( )    bdx +bdx+1
inequalities hold. Then                 2        < bdx <              2       implies that                2              < bdx <        2       for
all . We use this to prove that for each equilibrium                              under M , democracy is stable (the same
argument would apply to             M 0 ).   Suppose not, so for democracy x,                       (x) 6= fxg. Let s 2              n fxg and,
as in the proof of Lemma A6, consider the utility of decision-makers at x, group dx , if the society
stayed in x for          periods and then transitioned to s. Notice that for any                                 > 0,
                                            0               1

                                                Wdx @x; : : : ; x; s; : : :A > Wdx (s) .
                                                     | {z }
                                                             times

                                                                              (t+ )
Indeed, if s > x, then by monotonicity distribution qs                                (weakly) …rst-order stochastically domi-
          (t)
nates    qs     for any t     1, which in turn (weakly) …rst-order stochastically dominates the degenerate
distribution with an atom at s, which implies that for all t > , the future self with the expected
ideal point btdx would prefer to have stayed in x for                             times. Since for the …rst                         selves, such
preference is strict (they get their ideal point x as opposed to some other state), the inequality
is strict. Similar logic applies to the case s < x. This implies that for any s 2                                                 n fxg, staying
in x for any number of periods and eventually transitioning to s is preferred to transitioning to s
immediately. Aggregating this inequality over s 2                             n fxg, we …nd that Wdx (x) > Wdx (s) for any
such s. However, this contradicts Part 2 of Theorem 1. This contradiction proves that                                                 (x) = fxg
in each equilibrium under M and, similarly, under                        M 0.
       Denote y = x          1 and z = x + 1, and suppose for simplicity that both y; z 2 S (if not, then a
straightforward simpli…cation of the argument applies). Suppose that under M , x is asymptotically

                                                                      B-7
                                                                                                     (1)
stable in any equilibrium. Suppose, to obtain a contradiction, that bdy                                        bdy ; let us prove that
under M , there is some equilibrium               with         (y)        y (this would contradict asymptotic stability).
                                                                                   (t)
Since De…nition 2 applies to matrices M and M 0 , we have bdy                                 bdy for all t         1. Notice that if
the parameter values are generic (in the sense of Part 4 of Theorem 1), then by that result, in any
equilibrium, either        (y)      y or   (y)        y, and then Lemma B1 implies that                         (y)    y. In the case
of nongeneric parameter values, we need to take a sequence of generic ones that converges to the
original parameter values and …nd equilibria in those cases; taking the limit, we would again …nd
an equilibrium with         (y)       y. Existence of such equilibrium                   contradicts asymptotic stability of
                                         (1)                                                           (1)
x under M , which proves that           bdy    > bdy . We can similarly prove that bdz < bdz .
   Suppose that there is equilibrium              0   under M 0 where x is not asymptotically stable. This implies
that either     0 (y)   = fyg or there is some s < y with s 2                   0 (y)   or     0 (z)   = z or there is some s > z
with s 2      0 (z).   We consider the …rst and the second possibilities, while the third and the fourth
are completely analogous.
   Consider the case          0 (y)   = fyg. Take matrix M , and consider restricted transitions a 2 Fs
if either s       x or a         y (i.e., any transitions are possible, except if the origin is y or below
and destination is x or above). Consider equilibrium ~ under these restricted transitions. Since
  (y) y, Lemma B1 is applicable and implies ~ (y) = fyg. Notice that the same logic as above
implies that democracy is stable: ~ (x) = fxg. Let us remove the restriction on transitions; by
Lemma A5, we either get an equilibrium, or group dy prefers to deviate from staying in y to
moving to x. However, if they prefer to do so under M , single-crossing considerations would imply
that they would prefer to do so under M 0 , which means that there cannot exist an equilibrium                                       0

under M 0 such that         0 (x)   = fxg and          0 (y)   = fyg. This contradiction implies that removing the
restrictions results in an equilibrium                under M where y is stable. However, this contradicts that
y is asymptotically stable for all equilibria under M .
   Now consider the case where there is s < y with s 2                             0 (y).     If      0 (y)      y, we would get an
immediate contradiction with Lemma B1, thus, we must have that x 2                                     0 (y)   as well, and therefore
                                            (t)
Wdy (x) = Wdy (s). Since we have           bdy        bdy for all t        1, this means that all future selves of group dy
strictly prefer state y over state s or any state below. Thus, we have Wdy (y; y; y; : : :) > Wdy (s), and
therefore Wdy (y; y; y; : : :) > Wdy (x) = Wdy (x; x; x; : : :). Consequently, using an argument similar
to above, we can prove that for some equilibrium                      0   under M 0 , y is stable, as in that case group dy
would get a higher continuation utility than if they deviated to x or s or a state below s. But this
reduces this case to the previous one, and we can again get to a contradiction.
   The cases where          0 (z)   = z or there is some s > z with s 2                      0 (z)   are considered similarly and
lead to contradictions. This proves that for each equilibrium under                          M 0,    x is asymptotically stable.

                                                  (1)
Proof of Theorem 8. Suppose that bdx                       bdx (the opposite case is analogous). Then we can follow
an argument similar to one in the proof of Theorem 7 to show that state y = x 1 is stable in all equi-
libria under both M and M 0 , which implies that x is not asymptotically stable for any equilibrium.
   Suppose that democracy is not stable for any equilibrium under M . Under matrix M , restrict

                                                                B-8
transitions as follows: let a 2 Fs if either s < x or a
                                                      x (i.e., transitions from x to the left are forbid-
den). Then there is an equilibrium ~ with transition mapping Q. ~ Given the restriction on transitions,
it must be that ~ x x, and then Lemma B1 implies that ~ x = fxg. In addition, as before, it must
be that ~ y = fyg, so y is stable. Let us now lift the restriction on transitions; by Lemma A5, either
there is an equilibrium under M with transition mapping Q,     ~ or group dx would be better o¤ if the
society transited to y instead of staying in x. In the …rst case, however, we would get a contradiction
to the assertion that x is not stable under any equilibrium under M . In the second case, since social
mobility is faster under M 0 than under M , we get that there cannot be an equilibrium under M 0 such
that both x and y are stable, since in such equilibrium dx would be better o¤ if the society transited
to y instead of staying in x, which would contradict Part 2 of Theorem 1. Since, as we proved, y is
stable for all equilibria under M 0 , it must be that x is unstable for any equilibrium under M 0 .

Proof of Proposition 1.           With only two groups a¤ected by social mobility, within-person
monotonicity is automatically satis…ed, and the equilibrium is (generically) unique. If                       M   >   P,
then members in M prefer to be in democracy, where it rules, at any point in the future, and thus
democracy is stable. Given that, continuation payo¤s, starting in democracy, are given by:

                    VR (d) = AR          b2R + VR (d) ;
                   VM (d) =        ((1       ) VM (d) + VP (d)) ;
                                                                       M                      M
                    VP (d) = AP            b2P +          1                    VP (d) +            VM (d) :
                                                                       P                      P

Thus,

                                               AR        b2R
                              VR (d) =                         ;
                                                1
                                               AP        b2P
                             VM (d) =                                                          ;
                                                1              1           +      1+      M
                                                                                          P

                                               AP        b2P               1     +
                              VP (d) =                                                         :
                                                1              1           +      1+      M
                                                                                          P


So, VR (d) does not depend on d, whereas VM (d) is decreasing and VP (d) is increasing in , since
AP      b2P < 0.
     Now consider the case    M   <   P.    Here, the state with the poor in power (denote it l) is stable,
and starting from d, the society can start in d or transition to l, but not to the state where the rich
are in power, r (this follows from Lemma A6). The utility of the players from being in state l is
given by (similarly to previous)

                       VR (l) = AR           (bR         bP )2 + VR (l) ;
                       VM (l) =       b2P +        ((1         ) VM (l) + VP (l)) ;
                                                                   M                      M
                       VP (l) = AP +                 1                     VP (l) +           VM (l) :
                                                                   P                      P


                                                           B-9
and thus

                                                          AR           (bR           bP )2
                                 VR (l) =                                                    ;
                                                                       1

                                                               1       (1            )      b2P +              AP        M
                                                                                                                              b2P
                                                                                                                         P
                                 VM (l) =                                                                                              ;
                                                          1                          1           +         1+       M
                                                                                                                    P


                                                               1       (1            ) AP +               AP        M
                                                                                                                        b2P
                                                                                                                    P
                                 VP (l) =                                                                                         :
                                                          1                      1           +            1+    M
                                                                                                                P


Suppose the probability of transition from d to l equals q = qdl . In that case, the utilities being in
d are given as equations

        VR (d) = AR               b2R +       (1              q) VR (d) + qVR (l) ;
        VM (d) =            (1        ) (1        q) VM (d) +                    (1          ) qVM (l) +            (1        q) VP (d) +        qVP (l) ;
                                                                       M                                                      M
        VP (d) = AP               b2P +               1                         (1       q) VP (d) +            1                      qVP (l)
                                                                       P                                                      P
                                  M                                                  M
                        +              (1      q) VM (d) +                                qVM (l) :
                                  P                                                   P

                                                  1
One can check that for               <                    M
                                                                   , wM (d) > wM (l) for any q; for                                   > 21 , wM (d) < wM (l) for
                                          2    1+
                 "                                    #   P

                                 1                1
any q, and for      2                  M
                                              ;   2       , there is a unique q 2 [0; 1] such that wM (d) = wM (l), and this
                         2       1+
                                       P
q corresponds to a unique equilibrium; moreover, q is increasing in .
      This implies the result for preferences of R, as VR (d) depends on                                                               only through q, and is
                                                                                                               1
decreasing in q. Consider the middle class M . For                                                    <             M
                                                                                                                              , q = 0, so d is stable, and
                                                                                                          2    1+
                               "              #                                                                     P

                                                                   1
M prefers a smaller . For                     2                            M
                                                                                 ; 12 , wM (d) = wM (l), or in other words, VM (d) =
                                                          2     1+
                                                                           P
VM (l)+b2P ; similarly, for > 12 , there is an immediate transition from d to l, and VM (d) = VM (l)+b2P
also holds. But VM (l) is decreasing in                                         as follows from the formula, and therefore VM (d) is
monotonically decreasing in .
                                                                           1                                                  1
      Let us now consider P . For                                               M
                                                                                          , q = 0, and for                    2,      q = 1; in both intervals,
                                                               2           1+
                                                                                P
a marginal increase
               ! in                   only leads to more social mobility, and the poor are better o¤. If                                                      2
        1
            M
                ; 12 , let us rewrite the equation for VM (d) (by collapsing                                                          ((1    ) VM (l) + VP (l))
  2    1+
            P
into VM (l) + b2P ) as

                 VM (d) =            (1        ) (1            q) VM (d) +                       (1   q) VP (d) + q VM (l) + b2P :

Now, we can plug in VM (d) = VM (l) + b2P to obtain

            VM (l) + b2P =        (1          ) (1            q) VM (l) + b2P +                           (1   q) VP (d) + q VM (l) + b2P ;

                                                                                     B-10
rearranging and dividing by 1               q (which is nonzero in the interior of the interval), we get

                                        VM (l) + b2P (1                         +       )=          VP (d) ,

and thus
                              (1        +           )
                VP (d) =                                VM (l) + b2P
                                                    0                                                                                              1
                              1         +                   1     (1            )       b2P +                AP              M
                                                                                                                                 b2P
                         =                          @                                                                        P
                                                                                                                                               + b2P A
                                                        1                       1           +            1+         M
                                                                                                                    P


                              1         +            AP           1                     +           1+       M
                                                                                                                         b2P
                                                                                                             P
                         =                                                                                                       .
                               (1        )                        1             +            1+     M
                                                                                                     P

Di¤erentiating and simplifying, we get

                                    dVP (d)  b2
                                                                                    M
                                                                                        AP + b2P
                                            = P2                                    P
                                                                                                                    2,
                                      d
                                                                       1            +           1+       M
                                                                                                         P


which is positive, since AP +        b2P    < 0 by assumption. Thus, VP (d) is strictly increasing in                                                             for all
 , which completes the proof.

Proof of Proposition 2. If                  M    >          R   then, as in Theorem 1, democracy is stable for any .
Similarly to the proof there, one can easily show that R prefer a lower , M prefer a higher , and
P are indi¤erent.
   If   M   <   R,   then let q = qdr be the probability of transition from d to r in each period. Then,
                                                                                                                                                              1
once again as in Theorem 1, there is a unique equilibrium for each ; moreover, for                                                                                 M
                                                                                                                                                                        ,
                                                                                                                                                         2   1+
                "             #                                                                                                                                    R

                         1
q = 0, for      2             M
                                   ; 12 , q is monotonically increasing from 0 to 1, and for                                                                 1
                                                                                                                                                             2,   q = 1.
                     2   1+
                              R                           "               #
                                                                                        1
Accordingly, VP (d) is strictly increasing on                          2                     M
                                                                                                     ; 12       and constant outside of it, and
                                                                                2       1+
                                                                                             R
VM (d) is strictly increasing for all               (this may be proven analogously to Theorem 1). As for VR (d),
                                                1
it is strictly decreasing for       <                   M
                                                                 or        > 21 .
                                        2       1+
                                                        R                    "                              #
                                                                                        1
   To complete the proof, consider VR (d) for                              2                 M
                                                                                                     ; 12 . Here, VR (d) is given (similarly
                                                                                    2   1+
                                                                                             R
to Theorem 1) by

                                  1             +               AR          1                   +            1+         M
                                                                                                                                     b2R
                                                                                                                         R
                         VR (d) =                                                                                                          .
                                   (1            )                          1           +           1+       M
                                                                                                                R

Its derivative with respect to          equals

                                    dVR (d)  b2
                                                                                    M
                                                                                        AR + b2R
                                            = R2                                    R
                                                                                                                    2.
                                      d
                                                                      1             +           1+       M
                                                                                                         R



                                                                       B-11
This expression is di¤erent, because AR + b2R > 0, and the sign of this expression is potentially
ambiguous. More precisely, VR (d) locally increasing for
                                                                                 1
                                               <r                                                                =        ,
                                                                         AR
                                                                 M
                                                                         b2R
                                                                                 +1                     1+   M
                                                                 R                                           R


and is locally decreasing otherwise.
                                                           1                                                                  AR
   One can easily check that                                     M
                                                                             <         is equivalent to               M
                                                                                                                                + 1 < 4. If the latter
                                                                                                                              b2R
                                               2        1+                                                            R
                                                                 R                                                            "           #
                                                                                                                                    1
condition does not hold, then VR (d) is monotonically decreasing on                                                       2                 M
                                                                                                                                                    ; 21 , and thus
                                                                                                                                2   1+
                                                                                                                                            R
for all ; if it holds, there is an interval up to min                                              ; 12 where VR (d) is increasing.

Proof of Proposition 3. Consider the case                                              M   >        P.   By Theorem 1, M prefer a lower                        and
P prefer a higher . However, since M > P , any                                                     > 0 will be defeated in a plurality voting by
^ = 0. Thus, ^ = 0 is the unique core element.
                                                                                                    1
   Now consider the case              M        <       P.       Consider             <                   M
                                                                                                             ; such       will be defeated in a plurality
                                                                                           2       1+
                                                                                                         P
voting by ^ =         1
                              M
                                      , because R are indi¤erent, and the more numerous of the remaining
                  2   1+
                              P
groups, P , prefers   0
                          . If     >               1
                                                           M
                                                                     , then it will again be defeated by ^ =                                    1
                                                                                                                                                    M
                                                                                                                                                         , because
                                           2       1+                                                                                   2   1+
                                                           P                                                                                        P
R and M both prefer a slower social mobility on this interval, and together they constitute a
majority. Thus, ^ =  1
                        M
                            is the unique core element.
                          2      1+
                                       P


Proof of Proposition 4. Consider the case                                            M     >       R.   By Theorem 2, R prefer a lower                     and M
prefer a higher . However, since M > R , all , except for the maximum value, will be defeated
in a plurality voting. Thus, ^ is the maximal admissible value of ; in our case, Assumption 1 is
satis…ed whenever        1
                           M , so
                                  ^ = 1M .
                              1+                                1+
                                      R                                  R
   Now consider the case                       M       <          R.         Here, consider the following possibilities.                                 First, if
       AR
  M
       b2R
             +1    4, then the utility of R is monotonically decreasing in . Thus, any > 0 will
   R

be defeated, in a plurality voting, by ^ = 0 (M would favor > 0, but R, who are more numerous,
would vote for ^, and sometimes they would be joined by P ). Thus, ^ = 0 is the unique core
element in this case.
   More generally, it is easy to see that given the con‡ict of interest between M and P , ^ will
equal the value that maximizes VR (d). There are two candidate values for this value of : 0 and
min    ; 21 . Notice that           1
                                  1+ M
                                               >       1
                                                       2       in this case, so this value is necessarily admissible.
                                          R
   Compute …rst the values of VR (d) at                                      = 0 and               = 21 ; we have
                                                                     AR          b2R
                                  VR=0 (d) =                                           ;
                                                                      1

                                       = 12                          2            AR           b2R + b2R 1                M
                                                                                                                          R
                                  VR           (d) =                                                                           :
                                                                     1                         2         1       M
                                                                                                                 R



                                                                                     B-12
                     = 12                                                                                                         AR
We have VR                   (d) > VR=0 (d) if and only if (2                                  )        R
                                                                                                                 1        >       b2R
                                                                                                                                            1 . On the other hand,
                                                                                                       M
                                                               2
                                           2       +       M
         1                                                                  AR                                                                              1
     <   2       if and only if                        M
                                                           R
                                                                    <       b2R
                                                                                     +1 .              Let us show that                                 <   2     cannot hold if
                                                       R
                                     AR
(2       )       R
                            1 >      b2R
                                               1 . Indeed, if this is not the case, we must have
                 M


                                                                                                                                                2
                                                                                      AR                        2             +         M
                                                           R                                                                            R
                                     (2        )                   1 +2>                  +1>                                                       .
                                                           M                          b2R                                     M
                                                                                                                              R



Simplifying, we would get                       2       2 +             M
                                                                                2              +        M
                                                                                                                  < 0, which is impossible. Therefore,
                                                                        R                               R
                                       AR                               = 12
if (2        )       R
                              1 >      b2R
                                                   1 , then VR                  (d) maximizes VR (d) for all , and is thus the unique
                     M
core element.
                                                                               AR
     Consider the case (2                      )        R
                                                               1 <             b2R
                                                                                           1 . Here, we may get a core element other than
                                                        M
                         1
0 only if            <   2   and VR= (d) > VR=0 (d). We have, after simpli…cation,

                                                    1          +                AR             1                      +             1+              M
                                                                                                                                                            b2R
                                 =                                                                                                                  R
                            VR       (d) =
                                                     (1         )                              1            +             1+        M
                                                                                                                                        R
                                                                                0                                                       1
                                                           1                    @              AR +         b2R
                                           =                   +                                                                  b2R A
                                                                   1                  1
                                                                                               +  1+                  M
                                                                                                      R
                                                                                                q
                                                    AR + 1 +                M
                                                                                     b2R       2  M
                                                                                                     AR + b2R bR
                                                                            R                               R
                                           =                                                                                                .
                                                                                           1
                                                                                                   2
                                                                                     2+        M
             =                             =0 (d)                                                               AR
Then VR              (d) exceeds VR                        if and only if             4
                                                                                               R
                                                                                               M       >        b2R
                                                                                                                      + 1 . However, this is incompatible
                                                                                               R
with         < 12 . Indeed, if both were true at the same time, we would have
                                                               2                                                                    2
                                               2+          M
                                                                            AR                          2            +        M
                                                           R                                                                  R
                                                                   >            +1             >                                        ,
                                                4          M
                                                                            b2R                                       M
                                                           R                                                          R



which, after simpli…cation, implies (2                                      1) 1               M
                                                                                                       > 1. But this is impossible, which means
                                                                                               R

that VR= (d) > VR=0 (d) only if                             > 12 . Consequently, if (2 ) R 1 < Ab2R 1 , then the
                                                                                          M            R
utility of R is maximized for                                             ^
                                                       = 0. Consequently, = 0 is the unique core element in this case.

B3       Additional Examples

In this part of Appendix B we provide three additional examples.

Example B2 (Multiple equilibria) There are …ve groups with political bliss points b1;2;3;4;5 =
  21
  10 ;   1; 0; 1; 21
                  10 (there would be two equilibria even if the extreme political bliss points are                                                                            2



                                                                                     B-13
rather than       2:1, but this would be a knife-edge case). All Ai = 0, discount factor                    = 12 , and the
reshu- ing matrix M is given by
                                                 03     1                 1
                                                  4     4     0   0     0
                                                 B1     1     1
                                                                  0     0C
                                                 B4     2     4           C
                                            M =B
                                               B0
                                                        1
                                                        4
                                                              1
                                                              4
                                                                  1
                                                                  4
                                                                        1C
                                                                        4C .
                                               @0       0     1   1     1A
                                                              4   2     4
                                                              1   1     1
                                                 0      0     4   4     2

     One can show that the following two mappings,                          1 (1; 2; 3; 4; 5)     =     (1; 2; 3; 4; 4) and
 2 (1; 2; 3; 4; 5)   = (1; 2; 4; 4; 4), form an equilibrium.           To see why, consider the incentives of a
member of group 3. Today (in period 1), his political bliss point is 0. The next day, he will have
political bliss points      1; 0; 1; 21
                                     10 with equal probabilities. For quadratic utility functions, it is the
                                                                                   21             21
average that matters, and his expected political bliss point equals                40 .   Since   40   is closer to b4 = 1
than to b3 = 0, when players only care about the next period, an individual of group 3 would
choose     (3) = 4. For a more patient individual, the situation is more complicated. In period 3,
                                                         73       1
his expected political bliss point would equal          160   <   2,   and it would continue to decrease in the
subsequent periods, monotonically converging to zero. Thus, ideally, he would prefer state 4 in
period 2 and state 3 starting from period 3 on. But this is not feasible: once the society reaches
state 4, it will stay there forever, as the decision-makers there are not willing to move to state 3, as
one can easily show (more precisely, they would prefer to remain in state 4 for periods 3 through 8
and move to state 3 after that, but given the discount factor, this makes them willing to stay in 4
rather than move to 3). Consequently, he needs to decide whether to stay in 3 or move to 4 taking
into account the fact that 4, would be an absorbing state in equilibrium.
     This decision is ultimately made by taking the decisions of future members of group 3 into
account. If they would opt to stay in state 3, then in period 1 the e¤ective choice is between
staying in state 3 forever or moving permanently to state 4. In this case, current members of group
3 would prefer to stay, even if their short-term incentives are di¤erent. However, if future members
of group 3 would move to state 4, then staying in state 3 is for one period only (period 2), and it
so happens that this is the only period where members of group 3 would actually prefer to be in
state 4. Consequently, the best response today is to move to state 4 immediately. As a result, both
 1   and   2   are equilibria (verifying that other groups act as prescribed is straightforward).
     One can also verify that equilibrium         1   is preferred to       2   by individuals who start in groups
1; 2; 3, and the opposite is true for those in groups 4 and 5. In other words, today’s decision-makers
(group 3) are in favor of         1.    Given that the decision is made by a representative agent, one
could wonder what makes           2    an equilibrium. One way of interpreting equilibrium mapping                     2   is
coordination failure, but not by individuals living in one period, but rather by members of group 3
from di¤erent periods. At their respective time, they would all be better o¤ staying in 3. However,
if future decision-makers in state 3 move to 4, then it is a best response to do so immediately. (The
problem does not disappear if we truncate the future, i.e., consider a …nite number of periods:
then in the penultimate period, members of group 3 would move to 4, and this would ensure the

                                                        B-14
survival of the equilibrium corresponding to               2 ).
   As always, when there are two equilibria, there is also a third one, where starting in state 3,
group 3 decides to stay with probability                  0:5667 and move to state 4 with probability 1            .

Example B3 (Mixing between noncontiguous states) There are …ve groups; the weights of
the groups are    3     1     6    50 40
                 100 ; 100 ; 100 ; 100 ; 100 ,   and their political bliss points are b = (0; 0:9; 1; 2; 30)0 , respec-
tively. All Ai = 0, and the social mobility matrix is given by
                                      0 70    10    20             1
                                         100  100   100   0     0
                                      B 30    10    60
                                                          0     0 C
                                      B 100   100   100            C
                                      B   10  10    30    30
                                 M = B 100 100 100 100 100 C .  20 C
                                      @ 0      0 100 6    54    40 A
                                                         100   100
                                                          53    47
                                          0    0     0 100 100

Suppose that the discount factor               = 0:5.
   The unique equilibrium in the game has the following transition mapping:                     (2) = 3,    (3; 4; 5) =
4, and from state 1, the society moves to state 3 with probability z                     0:896 and stays in state 1
with the complementary probability 1                 z    0:104.
   The intuition for why the society does not …nd it even better to transit to state 2 is the following.
The transition matrix is such that individuals from group 1 prefer the society to stay in 1 tomorrow,
and be in state 4 thereafter. They know that from states 3; 4; 5 there will be an immediate transition
to 4, therefore, since staying in 1 forever is a bad idea in the long run, moving to state 3 is a reasonable
compromise. On the other hand, if future members of group 1 are su¢ ciently likely to move to state
3, then the current ones would rather prefer to spend an extra period in state 1, which would lead
to mixing between states 1 and 3. This mixing is a compromise between the desires to spend an
extra period in state 1 and to reach state 4 sooner rather than later.
   It would seem that moving to state 2, rather than mixing between states 1 and 3, is a rea-
sonable middle ground, enabling the accomplishment of both goals. It turns out, however, that it
accomplishes neither. Moving to state 2 does not allow members of group 1 to bene…t from being
in state 1 for an extra period. At the same time, since from state 2 the society moves to state 3
rather than 4, going to state 2 does not make state 4 any closer. The parameter values, where state
2 is “unimportant” (the group which rules there is small, and its bliss policy is very close to that
in state 3) make sure that the immediate utility of members of group 1 from moving to state 2 is
only marginally better than that from moving to state 3, but it delays transition to state 4. As a
result, the path initiated by moving to state 2 runs in-between the corresponding paths for staying
at 1 and moving to 3, but in the important few periods the payo¤ is closer to the path that yields a
lower payo¤ in that period. As a result, in equilibrium, the mixing is between staying and moving
to a non-neighboring state, even though all utility functions are concave and even quadratic.

Example B4 (Nonconvergence to long run ideal policy and slippery slope) There are four
groups, with weights     1 2 1 2
                        10 ; 5 ; 10 ; 5 ,   and their political bliss points are b = ( 5; 0; 1; 6)0 , respectively. All


                                                            B-15
Ai = 0, and the social mobility matrix is given by
                                             01 2                            1
                                                        3      3     0     0
                                                       B1      5
                                                                     0     0C
                                             M =@      B6      6
                                                                     1
                                                                             C
                                                                           2A .
                                                  0           0      3     3
                                                                     1     5
                                                  0           0      6     6

Suppose, however, that there are only three states: with the …rst, third, and fourth group ruling (so
there is no state where policy 0 is implemented).
     Notice that Assumption 2 does not hold in this example: in the long run, the ideal policy of
                                  1
                                      ( 5)+ 25 0
individuals from group 1 is      10
                                       1
                                          + 52
                                                   =     1, and the closest policy that can be implemented in
                                       10
some state is 1, which would happen if group 3 rules. However, individuals from group 1 can never
move to group 3.
     Consider any        2 (0; 1). Then the state where group 4 rules is stable, whereas from the state
where group 3 rules, there will be an immediate transition to the state where group 4 rules. Consider
the problem of group 1 in the state where it makes decisions. Its expected ideal point in the next
            5                                          10
period is   3,   in the following period it is         9 ,   etc, converging to       1; which implies that all future
selves prefer the state where group 3 rules. At the same time, they know that a transition to that
state would put group 4 in power in the following period, which they clearly dislike. Thus, if they
are su¢ ciently forward-looking (namely, if             > 0:103), then they would prefer to stay in the same
state where group 1 chooses policy, so this state is stable.
     Therefore, this serves as a counterexample both to Theorem 2 Part 2 (since from state 1 there
is no convergence to the state that the future selves prefer, even if                  is close to 1), and to Theorem
6 (since state 1 is stable, but very distant future selves would prefer that the society always stayed
in the state where group 3 is in charge.

B4     Conditions for mixed strategies

Our next results clarify the conditions under which we should see equilibria in mixed strategies.
Consider …rst the following de…nition.

De…nition 3 We say that social mobility is slow if the preferred state of each individual’s today’s
and tomorrow’s selves coincide. More formally, this property holds if for all states s,
                                                                    (1)
                                           bds 2 arg min bds                bdz .
                                                         z2S

     This property is guaranteed to hold, for example, if M is su¢ ciently close to diagonal.

Theorem B1 The following is true for any M , any b and A.
     (i) There is   0   > 0 such that for any 0 <             <     0.    Then there is an equilibrium which involves
pure transitions only and, generically, this is true for all equilibria;
     (ii) Suppose that social mobility is slow, but in at least one state s 2 S, bds                                2
                                                                                                                    =
            (1)
arg minz2S bds          bdz (this is guaranteed to hold for generic parameter values, provided that there

                                                             B-16
are at least two states). Then there is       1   < 1 such that for any        1   <   < 1, the equilibrium mapping
involves mixing.

Proof of Theorem B1. To establish (i), let us take generic parameter values, in the sense
of Part 4 of Theorem 1.          Notice that for such parameter values, for every x 2 S, the state
                     (1)
arg minz2S bdz      bdx    is a singleton. Thus, by Theorem 2, Part 1, the transition mapping is uniquely
de…ned and involves pure transitions only. Now, to show that there is such equilibrium for non-
generic parameter values, we can take a converging sequence of generic parameter values and use
upper-hemicontinuity of equilibria.
     To establish (ii), suppose not. Then there is a sequence of , f i g converging to 1 such that for
each      there is an equilibrium with deterministic transition mapping. Since there is only a …nite
number of such mappings, we can take a subsequence                     ik   for which there are equilibria with the
same deterministic transition mapping. Denote this mapping by                      : S ! S.
                                                                                              (1)
     If   (s) = s for all s, then take state x that satis…es bdx 2
                                                                 = arg minz2S bdx                     bdz (i.e., existence
of such a state is assumed). For       high enough, group dx would be better o¤ deviating and moving
                                                    (1)
to a state y that maximizes arg minz2S bdx                   bdz , which contradicts that such              occurs in an
equilibrium for arbitrarily high       . Now suppose that               (s) 6= s for some s. Monotonicity of
implies that there are x and y such that jx               yj = 1 and such that         (x) =        (y) = y. In this case,
however, the decision-makers at x, dx , would prefer to deviate and stay in x for an extra period.
This contradiction proves the statement of the theorem.
                                                                                         (1)
     Finally, let us prove that existence of a state with bds 2
                                                              = arg minz2S bds                      bdz holds for generic
                                                                                                           (1)     (1)
parameter values. Indeed, generically, all elements of M are positive, and therefore bdx = bdy                           for
                                                                                                           (1)
all x; y 2 S. Denote this value by   b(1) ;   notice that the only case where          b(1) 2 arg minz2S bds          bdz
for every s 2 S is where S consists of two elements (say x and y), and                    b(1) = 21 bdx + bdy .      This
however, is nongeneric, establishing the result.

     One can also prove that for any …xed                 , if M is su¢ ciently close to identity matrix then
the equilibrium is in pure strategies. Interestingly, with a …nite number of periods, there would
(generically) only be equilibria in pure strategies. A proof is available upon request.

B5        Conditions for monotonicity of MPE

We …rst provide an example of symmetric nonmonotone MPE.

Example B5 (Nonmonotone equilibrium) There are four groups, with identical weights. Their
political bliss points are b = ( 1; 0; 1; 40)0 , respectively. All Ai = 0, and the social mobility matrix
is given by                                         0                    1
                                                      1       1
                                                      2       2    0   0
                                                    B 3       3    2
                                                                       0C
                                          M=        B 10      10   5     C
                                                                       1A .
                                                    @1        1    2
                                                      5       5    5   5
                                                                   1   4
                                                        0     0    5   5


                                                            B-17
Furthermore, suppose that there are only two states: in state 1, the leftmost group (with bliss point
  1) is ruling, and in state 2, the second group (with bliss point 0) is ruling.
     This example with only two states is deliberately simple. For any                        2 (0; 1) it admits the
monotone equilibrium           (1) =      (2) = 2. (Members are group 1 are indi¤erent between staying at 1
and moving to 2, but staying at 1 with a positive probability is not an equilibrium, since then they
would strictly prefer to move to 2 because of a nonzero chance to stay in 1 in subsequent periods.)
This is the only monotone equilibrium.
     However, there is also a nonmonotone equilibrium,                 with   (1) = 2 and      (2) = 1, for   >
0:2174. It works as follows. Expecting that future decision-makers would alternate between states 1
and 2, the current decision-makers, at both states 1 and 2, e¤ectively choose between the following
two paths: 1; 2; 1; 2; 1; 2; : : :, and 2; 1; 2; 1; 2; 1; : : :. For   >   , the immediate considerations are not
too important, but what is important is when members of the group get a chance to move to the
group with radical preferences (group 4); strategically, members of either of the two groups 1 and 2
would want to be in state 2 at the time of …rst encounter. For members of group 2, this encounter
happens in two periods, hence they prefer the path 1; 2; 1; 2; 1; 2; : : : to 2; 1; 2; 1; 2; 1; : : : and are thus
willing to move to state 1, contrary to their immediate preferences. On the other hand, members
of group 1 prefer the latter path, which reinforces their incentives to move to state 2. As a result,
neither group wants to deviate, and mapping                  may arise in equilibrium.
     It should be noted that in this example, Assumption 3 (within-person monotonicity)is satis…ed:
the expected bliss points of current members of groups 1, 2, and 3 monotonically converge upwards
to b(1) = 10, and the expected bliss points of current members of group 4 monotonically converge
downwards to this value.

     The following theorem provides su¢ cient conditions for when all symmetric MPE are monotone
in the sense of De…nition 1.

Theorem B2 Every symmetric MPE is monotone for generic parameter values if either of the
following conditions holds:
     (i) The discount factor         is su¢ ciently low, provided that for any states s and x 6= y;
     (ii) There is su¢ ciently little social mobility, in the sense that the matrix M is su¢ ciently close
to the identity matrix.

Proof of Theorem B2. To establish (i), notice that if                      is low enough, then in any equilibrium
 ,   fWj (x)gx2S
             j2G    satis…es strict increasing di¤erences. Thus, the result of Part 2 of Theorem 1 holds,
and in any state s, the y 2          x   implies that y 2 arg maxz2S Wdx (z).
     Suppose, to obtain a contradiction, that there is a nonmonotone equilibrium. Then for some
states x; y; a; b 2 S such that x < y and a > b, we have a 2                       x,   b 2    b.   This means that
a 2 arg maxs2S Wdx (s) and b 2 arg maxs2S Wdy (s), in particular, this implies Wdx (a)                        Wdx (b)




                                                            B-18
and Wdy (b)     Wdy (a). Note that we have

                                               X
                        Wj (a)    Wj (b)                 j;k   (uk (a)               uk (b))         2U .
                                                                                               1
                                               k2G
                                              P
Taking j = dx , this implies that                  k2G         dx k   (uk (a)           uk (b)) cannot be negative, (other-
wise the inequality would not hold for      small enough, and taking j = dy , we get that
P                                                                         (1) bda +bdb  (1)
  k2G dy k (uk (a) uk (b)) cannot be positive. Since bda > bdb , we have bdx      2    bdy .
                                                       (1)          (1)                        (1)       bda +bdb      (1)
However, by Assumption 1, x < y implies bdx                     bdy , consequently, bdx =                    2      = bdy . And yet,
this equality does not hold for generic parameter values (in the sense of Part 4 of Theorem 1).
     To establish (ii), …x . Suppose that the statement is not true, then there are states x; y; a; b 2 S
such that x < y and a > b, and we have a 2                     x,     b2         b   for equilibria for matrices M arbitrarily
close to unity matrix. Since we can always choose a sequence of matrices fMi g that converges
to unit matrix such that corresponding equilibria matrices fQi g also converge to some Q (not
necessarily satisfying the conditions qxa > 0, qyb > 0), we …nd that under M equal to unity
matrix, there is an equilibrium where decision-makers in x (group dx ) weakly prefers transition
to state a to transition to state b, and group dy weakly prefer transition to state b. If matrix
Q has monotone transitions, then fWj (x)gx2S
                                         j2G satis…es strict increasing di¤erences by Lemma
A2, and thus a 2 arg maxs2S Wdx (s) and b 2 arg maxs2S Wdy (s) cannot hold together, which
is a contradiction. If matrix Q does not satisfy monotone transitions, then one can easily get a
contradiction as in Theorem 7 and 8 of Acemoglu, Egorov, and Sonin (2015); indeed, under M ,
there is no social mobility, and the argument in that paper straightforwardly generalizes the case
of nondeterministic transitions (details available upon request).

B6     Some results on social mobility matrices

We …rst formally state the result that if a social mobility matrix M satis…es (2) and (3), then there
is a probability distribution over permutations of individuals that induces transition probabilities
given by matrix M . In other words, any such matrix M is implementable, even with a …nite
number of individuals.

Lemma B2 (Corollary of Birkho¤ -von Neumann Theorem) If M is a g                                                      g matrix that
satis…es (2) and (3), then there exist n! nonnegative coe¢ cients f                            g   2Sn   that sum to 1 such that
for any j; k 2 N ,
                                                       X
                                           gj gk   =                                     ,                                     (B2)
                                                               2Sn : (j)2gk

where gi is the group containing individual i.

Proof. Consider n               ~ , with rows and columns numbered by individuals, and de…ned by
                       n matrix M
                                                                 1
                                                   ~ jk =                 jk ;
                                                                ngk


                                                             B-19
in other words, transition matrix M~ postulates that individual j has an equal chance of taking the
                                                          P
place of any individual from group k. Now, (2) implies nk=1 ~ jk = 1 for all j, and (2) implies
Pn                            ~ is a doubly stochastic matrix. By Birkho¤-von Neumann Theorem
  j=1 ~ jk = 1; consequently, M
                                                  ~ lies in the convex hull of permutation matrices
(see, e.g., Theorem A2 in Marshall et al., 2011), M
fP g 2Sn . This means that M~ may be represented as a convex combination of these matrices:
                                              X
                                       M ~ =             P .
                                                             2Sn
                            P
This implies that ~ jk =        2Sn : (j)=k       for any j; k 2 N . Since ~ jk = ~ jl for any k; l such that
                               P
gk = gl , we have ngk ~ jk =       2Sn : (j)2gk    , which immediately implies (B2).

   The next example illustrates that some matrices of social mobility may have multiple represen-
tations as a sum of permutation matrices.

Example B6 (Multiple representations of a mobility matrix as lottery over permuta-
tions) For a given A, the distribution            such that A =      ( ) need not be unique. E.g., take n = 3
and                                               0          1
                                                 1=3 1=3 1=3
                                            A = @1=3 1=3 1=3A .
                                                 1=3 1=3 1=3
It may be represented as
                               0     1   0     1   0      1
                                1 0 0     0 1 0     0 0 1
                             1         1         1
                          A = @0 1 0A + @0 0 1A + @1 0 0A ,
                             3         3         3
                                0 0 1     1 0 0     0 1 0

which corresponds to three equally likely permutations id, (123) and (132), and
                             0          1      0       1       0        1
                               0 0 1            0 1 0            1 0 0
                           1@                1               1
                      A=       0 1 0A + @1 0 0A + @0 0 1A ,
                           3                 3               3
                               1 0 0            0 0 1            0 1 0

which corresponds to three equally likely permutations (13), (12), (23).

   Note that if a matrix satis…es conditions (2) and (3), then it takes the form of a block-diagonal
matrix consisting of one or more blocks fKx g. Each Kx is a connected block determining the extent
of social mobility. (Assumption 1 requires that the blocks are connected.)

Lemma B3 (Characterization of matrices satisfying Assumption 3) Suppose a m                                m
matrix M satis…es all the assumptions for all b. Then it satis…es within-person monotonicity if and
only if it has the following structure: For each component Kx , corresponding to groups Hlx ; : : : ; Hrx ,
there is a number    x   2 [0; 1], such that the transition probabilities for all groups except for the two
extreme ones, i.e., for lx < j < ly , satisfy
                                                      nk
                                       jk   =   x Ply         + (1   x ) 1j=k .                         (B3)
                                                    i=lx ni


                                                           B-20
Proof. Su¢ ciency. Straightforward.
     Necessity. Take any group Hj such that lx < j < ly . Let us show that for any k1 ; k2 6= j, the
probabilities             jk1   and     jk2   are proportional to the sizes of the groups:                              jk1 nk2       =        jk2 nk1 .     Suppose,
to obtain a contradiction, the opposite, i.e., for some k1 and k2 this is not true. Without loss
of generality, we may assume k1 < j < k2 , and among such pairs, k2 k1 is the maximal. For
                                      Pk1      Ply         Ply       Pk1
such k2 and k1 , it is also true that  i=lx ji  z=k2 nz 6=   i=k2 ji    z=lx nz (denote the
di¤erence right-hand side and left-hand side by Y ).
     Consider the following vector b" for each " > 0:
                                  8 P
                                  >       ly
                                  <       z=k2 nz + " (i j) if lx i k1
                            "
                          (b )i =            " (i j)        if k1 < i < k2
                                  : Pk1 n + " (i j)
                                  >
                                                            if k2 i ly
                                         z=lx z

(outside of Kx , bi are de…ned arbitrarily, subject to monotonicity). We have (b" )j = 0 for every
". If we consider the (M b" )j , then as " ! 0, we have (M b" )j ! Y 6= 0. Take                                                                1   to be such that
(M b" )j > jY2 j for "  1.                    Now, observe that the sequence                          Mz     converges, as z ! 1, to a matrix
M 1 such that its elements                    satisfy
                                                                   1        nk
                                                                   jk   = Ply                .
                                                                                 i=lx   ni
                                                                                                                          Pk1
                                                                                                                                          nk        Ply
This means that as "                              !       0,   we have (M 1 b" )j                          !              P ly
                                                                                                                               k=lx
                                                                                                                                                         z=k2   nz      +
                                                                                                                               i=lx       ni
  Ply
              nk          Pk1                                                                                                      jY j
  P ly
      z=k2
                            z=lx   nz    = 0. Thus, there is                 2   such that (M 1 b" )j <                             2      for "             2.       Con-
      i=lx    ni
                                                                                                                        jY j
sequently, for " = max ( 1 ;                      2 ),   we have 0 = (b" )j < (M 1 b" )j <                               2     < (M b" )j . Since all
inequalities are strict, there is h : 1 < h < 1 such that this inequality holds if M 1 is replaced by
M h . This implies that the subsequence (b" )j ; (M b" )j ; M h b"                                       j
                                                                                                             is not monotone, a contradiction.
     We have thus proved that                        jk1 nk2   =   jk2 nk1   for all k1 ; k2 6= j, and thus there is                                 x   =      x;j   such
that      jk   are given by (B3). The fact that these numbers are the same for each j : lx < j < ly follows
from Assumption 1 that M is assumed to satisfy. Indeed, if                                            x;j1   <   x;j2    for j1 < j2 , we would have
 j1 l x   <    j2 lx ,    and thus (4) would be violated for q = lx ; similarly, if                                x;j1        >     x;j2      for j1 < j2 , then
 j1 l y   >    j2 l y ,   and thus (4) would be violated for q = ly                              1.

     Notice that Lemma B3 does not require the extreme groups in a given class to conform to
the same formula given by (B3). For example, the following matrices satisfy (2), (3), as well as
monotonicity across and within individuals:
                                                                         0     1
                                              0                     1
                                                                3=5 2=5 0   0
                                               2=3 1=3 0      B                C
                                              @1=3 1=3 1=3A ; B1=5 2=5 1=5 2=5C .
                                                              @1=5 1=5 2=5 1=5A
                                                0 1=3 2=3
                                                                 0   0 2=5 3=5




                                                                         B-21
