NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HAVE IRAS INCREASED U.S. SAVING?
EVIDENCE FROM CONSUMER
EXPENDITURE SURVEYS

Steven F. Venti

David A. Wise

Working Paper No. 2217

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 1987

The research was supported by the National Institute on Aging, through grant
P01 AGO5842-02 to the National Bureau of Economic Research. We are grateful
to William Brainard for his very helpful comments on the paper. We also
benefited from comments by participants in seminars at the London School of
Economics, Oxford University, the University of Bristol, the University of
Warwick, the Institute for Fiscal Studies, and the University of Delaware.
The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program in Taxation.
Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #2217
April 1987

Have IRAs Increased U.S. Saving?
Evidence from Consumer Expenditure Surveys

ABSTRACT

The vast majority of Individual Retirement Account
contributions represent net new saving, based on evidence from the

quarterly Consumer Expenditure Surveys (CES). The results are
based on analysis of the relationship between IRA contributions

and other financial asset saving. The data show almost no
substitution of IRAs for other saving. While the core of the
paper is based on cross—section analysis, important use is made of

the CES panel of independent cross-sections that span the period

during which IRAs were introduced. Estimates for the post 1982
period, when IRAs were available to all employees, are based on a
flexible constrained optimization model, with the IRA limit the

principle constraint. The implications of this model for saving
in the absence of the IRA option match very closely the actual

non—IRA financial asset saving behavior prior to 1982. IRA saving
does not show up as other financial asset saving in the pre—IRA
period.

Steven F. Venti
Assistant Professor
of Economics
Dartmouth College
Hanover, NH 03755

David A. Wise
John F. Stambaugh
Professor of Political Economy
J.F.K. School of Government
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138

January 1987
HAVE IRAS INCREASED U.S. SAVING?:
EVIDENCE FROM CONSUMER EXPENDITURE SURVEYS

by
Steven F. Ventj and David A. Wise
Individual retirement

accounts (IRA5) have become an
immensely popular and important form of saving in the United

States since 1982, when they became available to all
employees.
Any employee could Contribute
$2000 per year to an IRA account and
a non—working Spouse of an employee $250. Total
contributions to
these tax deferred
saving plans were $5 billion in 1981, $28
billion in 1982, and will be about $45 billion in
1986 or roughly
one—fourth of all personal saving. The net saving effect
of these
Contributions is the subject of this paper.
Possibly the most contentious issue in the recent tax
(1986)
reform discussions was the treatment of IRAs. While the
earlier
proposals Suggested substantial increases in the former
limits,
the Senate version of the bill would have eliminated
the tax

deductibility of all contributions and left the limits
unchanged.
The final bill leaves the limits as they were but
phases out the
tax deductibilIty of contributions for families
earning over
$40,000 and single persons earning over $25,000.
Two empirical questions played a central role in the
discussions: one was the income levels of IRA users, the
second
was the net effect of IRAs
on saving, the extent to which they
were simply a substitute for other forms of saving. Based
on the

—2—

reports of a few experts, it became the conventional wisdom among
the
many that the majority of IRA contributions were made by

wealthy. This is factually incorrect; 90 percent of contributions
are made by individuals earning less than $50,000 per year and 70
percent of contributions by families earning less than this

amount. The likelihood of contributing is much greater for high
than low income persons, however.

It also became conventional

wisdom among many that the net saving effect was negligible, again
based on the speculation of a few experts.

The saving effect,

however, is a much more difficult question to answer than the
distribution of contributions by income.

The much publicized

decline in the U.S. saving rate gives particular significance to
this question. Indeed, one of the primary motivations for the

Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981, that extended the availability
of IRAs to all employees, was to increase saving.
The approach of the paper is to compare individual IRA
contributions with changes in other forms of saving, in particular

liquid financial assets. To the extent that IRAs are funded by
transfers from previously accumulated assets, or are a substitute
for new saving that would have taken place anyway, other financial
assets are the most likely source of funds, at least in the short

run. It is important to keep in mind that the question is not
where the money was taken from at the time the IRA contribution
was made. Because most people don't carry $2000 in cash, when
asked where the money for an iRA contribution came from, they may
respond that it came from a saving account, for example. But this

—3—

is not an indication of the net saving effect. Rather the issue
is what would have happened to the money in the saving
account had
it not been used to make the IRA contribution.
We Concluded in previous work (Venti and Wise [1986a,
1986bfl, based on data available at that time, that only a very
small proportion of IRA contributions could have been funded by

substitution of one form of saving for another. Those data
were
from the 1983 Survey of Consumer
Finances (SCF). While that
survey provided data on IRA contributions, it

provided only

qualitative information on associated changes in other financial
assets, whether they were positive or negative. The analysis in

this paper is based on Consumer

Expenditure Surveys (CESs) for the

period 1980 through the first quarter of 1984. These data provide
not only accurate information on contributions to IRA accounts,
but also associated dollar changes in other asset balances, such
as conventional saving accounts.

In addition, through independent

quarterly cross sections, they provide aggregate time series
evidence on IRA contributions and
other saving, although there is
no time series data on the same individual that is useful for
our
purposes.

I.

Background and Dscriptjve Data
A.

The Incentive Effects of IRAs

The widespread promotion of IRAs may have been the most

important reason for their use. The advertisement has typically

—4—

emphasized the avoidance of current taxes through IRA
contributions, as well as the importance of prudent planning for

retirement. They are available through almost any bank and
through many other financial institutions.
Two aspects of IRAs provide a more traditional economic

incentive to save through their use: one is that the contribution
itself is tax deductible, the other is that the interest on the
contribution accumulates tax free, with taxes paid only when funds

are withdrawn from the account. A dollar of current consumption
foregone and deposited in a conventional account would yield
exp[r(l—t)T] after T years at an interest rate r and marginal tax
rate t, if the marginal tax rate does not change with age. A

dollar of foregone consumption placed in an IRA account would
yield l/(l-t)exp(rT](l-t) =

exp[rT].

Thus the ratio of the IRA to

the conventional yield would be exp[rtT], increasing with the
interest rate, the marginal tax rate, and the number of years that

the funds are left in the account. For example, at r =
t =

.3,

.1,

and T = 40, the ratio is 3.32. If T = 20 the ratio is

1.82 and at T = 10 it is 1.35, at the same r and t. If $2000 were
placed in an IRA account each year beginning at age 25, the after

tax value of the account by age 65 would be $789,000; placed in a
conventional saving account, the value would be only $320,000.
Some persons may also benefit from lower tax rates when funds are
withdrawn than when they are deposited.

On the other hand, once money is placed in an IRA account
there is a ten percent penalty for withdrawal before the age of 59

—5—

and 1/2. In this sense, the IRA is less liquid than
a
conventional account. If funds are to be withdrawn before

age 59
1/2, whether it would be better to save the money in
an IRA or a
conventional account again depends on r, t, and T. The
yield from
the two accounts would be the same at T = in

[(it)/(l-t-l))/rt

For example, at r

.1 and t =

years at r = .02 and t =

.3.

.3, T is 5.14 years. it is

25.68

Thus to the extent that these

considerations are important, the incentive to save
through IRAs
because of their higher return should be greater for
persons in
higher tax brackets, and the disincentive because they
are less
liquid should be less the higher the tax bracket.

Some persons of course may consider the illiquidity of
IRAs
an advantage; it may help to ensure behavior that
would not

otherwise be followed. it may be a means of self—control. The
fact that the opportunity is lost if a contribution is
not made in
the current year may serve the same purpose. One
cannot, as with
conventional saving, put it off--possibly a self delusion-—untli
the next year.1
In addition, because of the higher return on IRAs, to achieve
any given level of retirement income
requires less saving if funds
are placed in an IRA account
than if they are placed in a

1One might, for example, have a scheme in which the limit
for
the current year is added to next year's limit if
a contribution
is not made in the current year. Or, the contribution
limit could
cumulate more generally over time if contributions
are
not
made
during some period.

—6—

conventional account. For example, again at r = .1 and t =

.3,

to

achieve a million dollars in retirement saving at age 65 would

mean giving up $4,377 per year current consumption, beginning at
but only
age 25, if saving were through a conventional account,
$1,775 if saving were through an IRA. This "income" effect raises
the possibility that there could in fact be less saving with than
without IRAs.

The effect of IRAs on saving is the net result of all of
these factors, including their promotion, and it is thus important
that allows each to be
to choose an empirical specification
reflected in the estimation of their saving effects. It may be

tempting to think of IRAs and conventional saving accounts as
equivalent assets, or goods, simply with different prices, in

which case one might think of IRAs as only a price subsidy of
conventional saving with a limit on the quantity that can be had

at the subsidized price. But to the extent that consumers treat
because one is
them as different assets or goods——possiblY
intended for retirement and the other for short term saving or

because one is less liquid than the other--and to the extent that
the promotion has influenced their use, this view will not yield

an adequate representation or forecast of the saving effect of
IRAs. Indeed, the subsequent analysis indicates quite strongly
that the two are not treated as equivalent by consumers.
B.

Descriptive Data

The Consumer Expenditure Surveys are now conducted every
thi-ee months with a new cohort of families entering each quarter

—7—

and with each family

surveyed for five consecutive

quarters.2 For

the purposes of this

analysis, self—employed persons who are not
eligible for IRAs have been excluded from the
sample.
The percent of families that made IRA contributions
is shown
in table 1 for the first nine quarters
after all employees became
eligible. The data are presented for two
periods, five quarters
in the first and four in the second.
We refer to them as the
first and second
years respectively. The percents pertain to all
of the respondents in the

quarterly surveys for each period taken
together.3 The percent that contributed
increased substantially

between

the first and second years in each income interval.
In
addition, the percent
Contributing increases sharply with income,
from 3 or 4 percent in the lowest to 50
or 60 percent in the
highest income interval.
Nonetheless, the vast majority of
contributing families have family incomes less than
$50,000, 74
percent in the first and 70
percent jfl second year. About 90
percent of individual
contributors have incomes less than this
amount.
Overall about 16 percent of the second
year respondents
Contributed
It is shown below that
most Americans in the past

2The survey is weighted to
represent the national urban
population.

3me IRA data is

based on responses to the question: "During
the past 12 months, did
Ethe
unit] place any money in a
self-employed retirement plan household
such as an Individual Retirement
Account (IRA and Keogh)?" and "If yes — How
much?"

4See Venti and Wise [1985].

—8—

have saved very little, except

in the form of housing; they have

virtually no financial assets.

The 16 percent should be

tax
interpreted in this light. Now approximately 20 percent of
that about 30
filers contribute to iRAs and some reports indicate
percent of filers have accounts.
The aggregate relationship
other personal financial saving

between iRA contributions and

over time is shown in table 2. It

financial asset
shows iRA contributions and additions to other
balances among respondents to each of the quarterly surveys
of 1984.
between the first quarter of 1980 and the first quarter
While the percent making IRA

contributions increased from 2 or 3

in other
percent to 17 or 18 percent, the percent with an increase
bonds are
asset balances shows no trend at all, whether stocks and
shows
included or excluded.5 The mean level of other saving also
little trend, but because of outliers in the data, the averages

5'rhe data in the table come from two sets of questions in the
did ... place
CESs. The first asked: "During the past 12 months,
such
as
Individual
plan
any money in a self—employed retirement
much?" The
How
Retirement Account (IRA & Keogh)?" and "If yes had on
second set asked: "How does the amount your consumer unit
with the amount your consumer
—" and
the last day of (last month) compare
unit had on the last day of (last month, one year ago) in
"If more or less - How much more (less)?" in:
credit
a. Savings accounts in banks, savings and loans,
unions, and similar accounts.
accounts, and other similar
b. Checking accounts, brokerage
accounts.
c. U.S. Saving Bonds.
d. Securities such as stocks, mutual funds, private bonds,
government bonds, or treasury notes."
is
Other financial assets excluding stocks and bonds
including
stocks
comprised of a,b, and c. Other financial assets
and bonds includes d as well.

—9—

fluctuate widely from quarter to quarter. For this reason the
percent with an increase has been shown in the table.6 A simple
regression of the average of other financial saving on average IRA
contributions, and time, yields essentially a zero coefficient on
the IRA variable (.076 with a t-ratio of .117) when stocks and

bonds are excluded.7 Thus despite very large increases in IRA
contributions over this period, there seems on average to have
been no noticeable reduction in saving in other financial asset
forms.

A summary of the saving behavior of IRA contributors compared

to non—contributors is shown in table 3. It shows the percent of
IRA contributors with an increase in other saving compared to the

percent of non—contributors with an increase. The percent with an
increase in other saving is almost invariably higher among

contributors. Thus it is not possible to see in these data a
tradeoff between IRAs and other saving. Rather the data suggest
an individual specific saving effect with those that save in one

form also more likely to save in other forms as well. The
analysis below will show that this is largely explained by
differences in measured variables like age and education, with
little correlation between unmeasured determinants of IRA saving
and saving in other forms.

6The median is not used because it is almost always zero; a
large number of respondents report no change in asset balances.
7when stocks and bonds are included the coefficient is .769
with a t-ratio of .706.

—10—

To put in perspective the magnitude of IRA contributions, it

is helpful to have in mind the level of other asset balances. The
median of all financial assets, including stocks and bonds, was

$1125, based on the 1982:1 through 1984:1 panels. The median
excluding stocks and bonds was $1000. Because of an oversight in
the coding of collected data, it is not possible to calculate the
equity value of housing for CES respondents, and thus there is no

measure of nonliquid wealth, which is largely housing. The
approximate level of nonliquid wealth of CES respondents can be
inferred, however, from such data collected in the 1983 Survey of

Consumer Finances. The median level of all financial assets among
respondents to that survey was $1300. The median of total wealth
was $22,900, the large majority of which was housing.8 These data
confirm the low personal saving of American households documented

by others.9 Thus financial asset balances, and even total wealth,
are very low compared to the potential accrual from a $2000 or
more annual IRA contribution.
If, as table 3 shows, IRA contributors save more in all forms
than non—contributors, one would expect them to have accumulated

8See Venti and Wise {l986a, l986b]. Although the overall
medians in the SCF and the CESs are approximately the same, the
medians for the 50-100 thousand and the 100 thousand plus income
groups are substantially larger according to the SCF--about
$20,000 and $36,0000 respectively for all financial
assets,including stocks and bonds. We do not know the reason for
the difference in the two surveys, but the sample sizes of high
income families are quite small in both.
9See for example Hurd and Shoven [1983], Diamond and Hausman
[1984], and Kotlikoff [1984).

—11—

larger asset balances.

Table 4 confirms this.

But even among IRA

Contributors, other financial

asset balances are relatively low.
most contributors have not been
accumulating
financial assets at a rate close to the
potential from the maximum
family contribution to an IRA. The average
contribution of IRA
Contributor familjes-—$2048 in the 1982:1 to
1984:1 period—-is
large relative to past saving.

It is clear that

II. he Statistical Model
The spirit of the

statistical analysis is to consider the
relationship between IRA contributions and other
saving,
recognizing the effect of the
IRA limit, allowing for flexible
substitution between IRA and other forms of
saving, and Using a
specification that is commensurate with the cross
section nature
of the available data. it is important
that the analysis allow
for the Possibility
that individuals behave as if the two forms of

saving were different

"goods," but at the same time

reveal them to

be perfect Substitutes

if they are treated that way by
individuals. For purposes of exposition,
we begin with a simple

sty1ize version of the model to introduce the
main features of
the approach. Then the details of the
estimated model are set

forth.

A. Simp1e llustratjon
Because only cross section data are
available, we consider
the allocation of current Income Y to IRA
saving s1, to other

—12—

C. The
forms of financial asset saving S2, and to other uses
the
budget constraint is C = Y s2, ignoring for the moment

S

tax advantages of IRAs.

We need first to determine specifications

for saving functions that

fit unconstrained choices of S1 and S2.

with these
Then we select a decision function V that is consistent
we
saving functions. And finally, using this decision function,
constrained by
determine saving functions S2 for persons who are
the upper limit on S1. In this way the constrained and

unconstrained S2 functional forms are

consistent with each other.

matched by
Suppose that unconstrained i and s2 choices are
where b is the
the relationships S1 = abY and S2 = (l-a)bY,
that is
portion of income saved and a is the portion of saving
is chosen to allow easy
allocated to s1. This formulation
that
comparison with the estimated model. The decision function
is consistent with these functions is

v =

(1)

=

c(l_b)S1abS2(1_a)b

distinct
The two forms of saving are allowed to be treated as
alternatives since one is relatively illiquid and presumably
and may be
intended for retirement while the other is more liquid
of
intended for more short term purposes. In our case, the level

choice of S2 will depend on
S1 is limited by the maximum L and the

limit)0 We now
whether the choice of 1 is constrained by its

-°General discussions of demand with rationing are found in
Deaton [1981] and in Deaton and !4uellbauer [1981).

—13—

let S and S2 represent unconstrained "desired" levels of saving
in the two forms and S1 and
2 respectively, their realized
observed values. Then

r

=
Si

abY

ifS1<L

LL

ifS1>L

(2)

(

S2

(l—a)bY

if S1 < L

=
if S1 > L.

L [(1—a)b/(l—ab)J(y-L)

The last line is the optimal choice of
(1), given that S1 = L.

2' according to equation

Suppose finally that the desired levels

S1 and 2 are determined in part by random disturbances e1 and e2.
Assume that they are additive so that S1 = abY +
e1 and
S2 = (1-a)bY +

S1

=

e2.

Then the observed saving values are given by

abY+e

ifS1<L

if S1>L

(3)

(1—a)bY +

e2

if S1 < L

=

I (1—a)b
(1—ab)

(Y-L) +

(l—a)b
(1—ab)

e1

+

e2

if S1 > L

—14—

Stylized versions of these functions are graphed in figure 1. The

constrained choice of S2 is sometimes denoted by S2, and the
income at which it becomes effective by Y. The last line in (3)

is

*

obtained by writing S2 as

S2 = (l_a)bY*
and substituting Y =

+

[(1_a)b/(l_ab)](Y_Y*)

(L-e1)/ab,

from S1 =

÷ e2,

abY*+el = L.

The

disturbances are thus thought of as individual specific shift
parameters.

--Si

Si, S2

Si's2

Si

L

Figure 1

In the subsequent analysis, parameters analagous to a and b
are parameterized as functions of individual characteristics like

age. In this sense, the model may be thought of as the reduced
form of a more structural life cycle model. For our purposes,
however, the individual characteristics are used only to predict a
and b for different families.

To describe the effect of IRAs on saving, having estimated
the parameters of the model, we ask how saving would be affected

—15—

if the IRA

limit

L were increased. In

particular, what would
savings have been during the period of estimation
had the limit
been higher? it would have had no effect
on those not constrained
by the existing limit.

Persons at the limit would increase their
IRA contributions by one dollar if the limit
were increased by one
dollar, i.e., ds1/dL = 1. They would also reduce other
saving by

dS2*/dL

(l-a)b/(1—ab). More generally, the effect of
any limit
increase can be determined
by simulation. Given predicted a and
b, and e1 and e2 randomly chosen from their
estimated
distributions s and s2 are calculated Using
the unconstrained
functions if the estimated
s1 is less than L and by the
constrained functions if S1 is greater than L. This
procedure
does not require that the coefficients
on variables used to
predict a and b be unbiased in the usual

sense, only that the

predictions of a and b themselves be unbiased.
But it does assume
that the decision
function accurately fits individual choices.
And the extrapolations
of individual choices when the limit is
raised depend on the
assumed distribution of the disturbance terms
e1 and e2. Checks on these
assumptions can only be based on how
well the estimated
specification fits the observed
data points and
we will demonstrate that.
Using the panel of independent

cross—sections that the data

provide, however, we also

present alternative__and in this case
on the effect of IRAs on saving. If IRks

were not available, L = 0, this specification
predicts that the
proportion of the marginal
dollar of income devoted to saving--in

—16—

(l-a)b/(lab). To the extent that the
the S2 form only--Would be
should be
model is accurate, this estimated marginal saving rate
matched by the estimated marginal rate of non-IRA, s2, saving
to be explained,
prior to the availability of IRAs. With caveats
the constrained
such a marginal rate can be obtained by estimating
1980 and 1981 data, prior to the general
S2 equation using
will be
availability of IRA5. In addition, the complete model

the general
estimated separately for the first and second years of
comparison of estimated desired
availability of IRAs, allowing
IRAS
levels of saving, summarized by b, as knowledge about
their use increased, as shown in table 2.
apparently spread and
The Estimated SpecifiCatQfl
substitution between IRAs and
We concentrate on the potential
in the short
other liquid financial asset saving, assuming that
for non-liquid
run at least IRA5 are unlikely to be substituted
the
wealth like housing. aintaifling the prior definitions,
is expanded to include taxes T before
current budget constraint
of IRA saving in terms of current
saving, the price P1 = 1
of
consumption, and the price P2 = 1 of other saving in terms
B.

t

current consumption, where t is the marginal tax rate:
— T — (1—t)S1 — s2 •11
— T — P1S1 — P2S2 =
C =

I

I

in part
11In principle, the marginal tax rate is determined
But since the IRA limits narrowly restrict
by IRA contributions.
this influence, we treat t as exogenous.

—17—

At times Y - T is denoted by

Desired but not observed s1 and

desired as well as observed s2 are allowed to be negative. In
addition, the potential substitution between

S1 and S2 is allowed

to be quite flexible and distinct from the substitution between

either form of saving and current consumption. Given current
income, a decision function with these characteristics is
(4)

V =

fC]b{[a(Sl_a1)k

+ (1—a)
(S2_a2)k]1/k)b

This function has a tree structure with one branch current

expenditure and the other saving. These two components are
evaluated in a Cobb—Douglas manner with preference parameter b.
The two forms of saving are evaluated according to a constant
elasticity of substitution subfunction.12 The parameter a
indicates the relative preference for S1 versus S2; if a =

.5,

total saving is split equally between the two forms. The
elasticity of substitution between S1 and 2 is 1/(1-k). The
important feature of this functional form is that it allows
greater substitution between the two forms of saving than between
either of these and current consumption.
It also allows the IRA advantage to be reflected first in a
lower cost of saving in terms of current income, through the
current budget constraint, and in addition through different

12This specification turns out to be a variant of the "S—
branch" utility tree described by Brown and Heien [1972). See
also Sato [1967] and Blackorby, Boyce, and Russell [1978].

—18—
preferences for the two assets, possibly reflecting the different

rates of return. Although the illustrations in section I-A show
that the distinction between current cost and return may be an
artificial one in strict economic terms--that the ultimate
difference is one of yield only——Consumers may understand better,
and be influenced to a greater extent, by the current tax saving
than by the tax free compounding of interest, certainly the
promotion of IRAs has tended to highlight the former. In

practice, it is not possible to distinguish the quantitative
effect of one from that of the other. Indeed, in practice it is
not possible to distinguish with any

precision the effect of the

tax rate from the effect of other variables, income in particular.
Nonetheless, both features of IRAs, as well as any effects of
advertising or the contract—like nature of iRA saving provisions,

are allowed to determine individual choices.
Maximization of (4) subject to the budget constraint yields
unconstrained desired levels of S1 and S2

S1 = a1 + d1(Y—P1a1—P2a2)
S2 = a2 + d2(YT_Plal_P2a2)
(5)

(P1/a)h/(

d =

-

P1(P1/a)
d2 = (b-d1P1)/P2

+ P2[P2/(l—a))

-

—19—

In addition to saving behavior under the model as described,
two
limiting versions of this specification
are of special interest.
They are considered first.
1.

Ifk=o.

The limiting case of (4) as k goes to 0 is a much simpler
model than the general one and is much easier to estimate.
In
fact, the estimated value of k is close to zero and for
simplicity
many of the results are described
assuming that it is zero. This
case yields desired levels of
S1 and S2 given by

S1 = a1 +

ab

—[1T -

P1a1

-

P2a2)

(6)

S2=a2-f-

(l-a)b
2

[YT—Plal_p2a2]

and observed levels by13

1-3Although it is illegal to borrow against an IRA, funds
can
be withdrawn subject to the 10 percent penalty. But since
negative contributions are not observed in the data set, we adopt
the assumption of a zero lower limit.

—20—

ifS1<O

0

I

i =a1 +

ab

—

P1a1

—

P2a2]

if 0 < S1 < L

1

ifL<S1

L
(7)

a2 +

=

a2 +

a2 +

(l—a)b
[YT—P2a2)
(l—ab)P2

if S1 < 0
/

(1—a)b

_(YT_Plal—P2a2)

(1—a)b

(l_ab)P2[T

122

if 0 < S1 <

L

if L < S1

This specification is easily compared with the illustration in the
previous section.
2.

If k = 1 and a =

.5.

Under this assumption, the elasticity of substitution between
and 2 is infinite and they are given equal weight in the
preference function; they are perfect

substitutes and are treated

as a single asset. The decision function (4) becomes
(8)

V =

[C]-[Sl+S2

—

Because the price of iRA saving is lower, saving is only through

—21—

S1 if S1 < L and thereafter is through S2, with
0

S1

= (a1+a2)

+

ifS1<o

b

—T
1

—

P1(a1+a2)j

if 0 < S1 <

L

ifL<s1

(9)

1

0

ifS1<L

=)
(a1+a—L) +

L

b

- P1L

2

—

P2(a1+a2—Lfl

if L < S1

In this case, the IRA tax advantage simply creates a kink in the
intertemporal budget constraint describing the relationship
between foregone current consumption and future consumption, and
inframarginal arguments could be used to represent the incentive
effects of IRAs on persons who would in their absence save more

than the IRA limit. This possibility is clearly rejected by the
data, however.
3.

Other values of k

Unlike the k = 0 or k = 1 cases, there is no closed form
solution to the constrained s2 function for other values of k. In
this case, the constrained functions, S2*(O) when S < 0 and
S2*(L) when S2 > L, are defined only implicitly by the

relationship

(10)

+ (1—a)
(S2*_a2)k] —

(1—a) (S2*_a2)

*

—22—

where m is either 0 or L. It is derived by maximizing (4) subject
to the budget constraint and with the additional constraint that
S1 = m.

The observed levels of saving are

0

S1

=

a1 + dl(YT—Plal—P2a2)

ifS1<0
if 0 < S1 < L
.;F

(11)
S2*(O)
S2

=

a2 +

d2(YT_Plal—P2a2)
S2*(L)

C.

r. -

if S1 < 0
if 0 < S1 < 0

if L <

S1.

Parameterization of a and b and Stochastic Specification

To capture the wide variation in saving behavior among
individuals, a and b are allowed to depend on individual

attributes X. They are also restricted to be between 0 and 1 by
using the form

(10)

b =

F[Xk]

a =

F[X]

where F[j is the standard normal distribution function and a and
are vectors of parameters.
Finally, we allow the S1 and S2 functions to be shifted by

additive disturbances e1 and e2 respectively. A random preference

—23—

stochastic specification that makes each individual's
choices
formally consistent with the decision function (4) is
obtained if
a1 and a2 are assumed to be random, with
additive disturbances.
This specification is not tractable, however,

when S2 must be

solved for implicitly.

Experience with both forms in Vent! and
Wise [1986a, 1986b) shows that the results are not
appreciably
affected by this choice. The disturbances are
assumed to be

distributed bivariate normal with standard deviations

c1 and c2

respectively and correlation r. The disturbance term for the
constrained S2 equation is obtained as described for
the
illustration in section A above and is denoted
by e2*.

There are three Possibilities
S1: 0, between o and L, and L.

for the observed values of

In principle, a continuously
measured value of S2 is available for each person,
yielding three
possible joint outcomes for each observation. In
practice,
however, about 40 Percent of
the sample reports no non—IRA saving,
apparently reporting small changes as zero. Thus there is
a large
concentration of observations
at zero, which is inconsistent with
the normality assumption. To reflect the fact
that some of the
reported zeros are in fact Positive and others
negative, we
randomly assign them categorical
values, positive or negative.
This yields three Possible outcomes for
S2: the reported non—zero
value, less than zero, or greater than zero. Thus for
each of the
three possible s1 outcomes, there are three possible
s2 outcomes,
or nine Possibilities in all. Each of the associated

—24—

based on
probabilities is described in the appendix. Estimation,
these probabilities, is by maximum likelihood.

iii. Results
A.

The Data

The definitions of the variables used in the analysis,

5. only a
together with summary statistics, are reported in table
based
few need further explanation. The results reported here are
and bonds.
on a definition of other saving S2 that excludes stocks
to include stocks and bonds are
Results with other saving defined
virtually the same.14
The variable indicating whether a person has a private

pension plan is based on the response to a question that asks
"contribute(d)" in the past 12
whether any employer or union
months to a pension plan in which the respondent was enrolled.
Only 39 percent answered yes.

Other sources indicate that over 50

percent of employees are covered by private pension plans.
who were in fact covered by a plan
Apparently many respondents

in consumer debt in
141t is not possible to include changes
to borrow against an IRA,
non-IRA saving. Although it is illegal
to
fund an iRA contribution
for some persons it would be possible
debt. Based on the median
indirectly by increasing consumer quarterly surveys, however, we
levels of debt in each of the CES
believe that increases in debt could not explain the results auto
reported below. The medians of "total amount owed excluding
and mortgage loans" for 1980, 81, 82, and 83 were $552, $564, of
The median in the first quarter
$336, and $400 respectively.
consumer debt declined over this
1984 was $400. Thus if anything,
period.

—25—

indicated that there was no employer contribution. Under the
typical defined benefit plan, contributions to pension funds are
not associated with individual workers, and some respondents in
such cases may have been unaware of the employer contribution.
Others may be covered by defined contribution plans with no
employer contribution.
As mentioned above, although the CESs provide data on home

and property values, and on consumer debt, the public use files do
not report the amount of home mortgages. Thus it is not possible
to obtain an accurate measure of non—liquid wealth. In its place,
we use non—liquid assets--defined to include home and property

values, plus stocks and bonds, minus consumer debt——and a variable
indicating whether the respondent owns a home but has no mortgage.

There is no measure for Social
B

Security or private pension wealth.

Parameter Esi-imates

Results are reported for three time periods: (1) 1983:2 to
1984:1, the second year that IRAs were available to all employees;
(2) 1982:1 to 1983:1, the first year of general availability; and
(3) 1980:1 to 1981:4, before IRAs were generally available.15

15Respondents were asked how much they contributed to an IRA
account during the past 12 months. Contributions for a given tax
year can be made until April 15 of the following year, or, the
entire contribution for a year can be made on January 1 of that
year. Thus part of the contribution reported in surveys conducted
after 1982 could have been for the prior tax year and part for the
current tax year. No matter what the survey quarter, however, the
non—IRA saving always corresponds to the same 12 month period as
the IRA contribution, which could of course be zero.

—26—

The key parameters in determining the effect of a limit
change on saving are a, b, and k, together with the origin

parameters and the residual variances. The substitution parameter
k is the most difficult to estimate. Given the potential for the
other parameters to adjust to fit the data as k varies, the

likelihood function is quite flat with respect to k. The
estimated value is always close to zero, however, and often
slightly negative, indicating an elasticity of substitution
between S1 and S2 of about 1.

Results with C1

set

equal to c2, are shown in appendix table

1 (for the 1983:2 to 1984:1 period). In this case, the estimated
value of k is —0.15, with a standard error of 0.06. Estimates
with c1 again set equal to c2, but with k set to zero, are shown

in appendix table 2. These results are virtually the same as

those with k estimated. There would appear to be no appreciable
effect from assuming k = 0 instead of the small estimated value.

Simulations based on the two sets of estimates confirm this. Thus
the results discussed below were obtained setting k equal to zero.
The other parameters are affected somewhat, however, by
allowing the residual variances for the two equations to be

different. The estimated variances are different and both are
quite precisely measured.16 Results with separately estimated

variances but with k set to zero are shown in table 6. We take

16And, allowing the disturbance variances to be different
changes somewhat the estimated slope parameters, primarily because
of the tradeoff between the two when fitting the data subject to
the IRA limits.

—27—

these estimates as a base and discuss them first.
1.

1983:2 to l984J

The estimated correlation coefficient is essentially
zero,
.01, indicating that unmeasured determinants of IRA
and non-Ipx
saving are unrelated. In particular, it is not the
case that,
given measured attributes X, persons who make IRA
contributions
save less in other financial asset forms.
The averages of the predicted values of a and b
provide a
summary of the results. Recall that b is the proportion of
the
marginal dollar of after tax income that individuals
would like to
allocate to financial asset saving, both IRA and non-Ip.
The
proportion of this amount directed
to IRA saving is a. It is
important to keep in mind when interpreting these
parameters that
they represent rates of increase in the desired
saving functions.
Because of the negative
origin parameters, desired saving is
negative for a large portion
of the sample and actual saving zero
or negative, and this would still be true after
an increase in

income. And, the IRA limit restricts the realized effect
of an
income increase on IRA saving. Thus these marginal
rates are not
comparable to estimated marginal
saving rates where there are no
limit constraints or where the limits have not
been accounted for
in estimation. We call them latent increases
to distinguish them
from actual realized dollar
increases in saving with income
increases, the usual meaning of
marginal saving rates.
The mean of the estimated
total financial asset marginal
saving rates is .206. The vast
majority of this amount, 92.8

—28—

percent, would be allocated to IRAs. Thus there is a strong
in
preference for IRA versus non—IRA saving. The latent increase

non—IRA saving with a dollar increase in after tax income is only

estimated value of ab. The
1.5 cents, indicated by d2, the mean
latent increase in after tax income devoted to IRA saving is

ab/(l-t)the price of an iRA dollar is less than 1--about 24.6
cents averaged over the sample. These estimates are consistent
with the observation that many IRA contributors had accumulated

with
very little in non—IRA financial assets, and more generally
the finding that a large proportion of respondents had essentially

no saving at all, other than housing.
The results are virtually the same if stocks and bonds are
included in the definition of S2.17

Estimates were also obtained

under the assumption that some respondents included IRA balances

with bank saving accounts and other assets used to determine S2,
with little effect on the central conclusions.18

17In this case, the estimated b is .176, a is .906, r is
—.01, C1 is 5.91, c2 is 3.52, a1 is —14.49, and a2 is —.06.
3-8The key questions used in the analysis are reproduced in
footnote 5. Although it seems unlikely to us that the typical
respondent would have included "...self-emplOyed retirement plan
such as Individual Retirement Account •.." with "Savings accounts
A simple check
in banks, •..," some may have confused the two.
shows that almost a third of the respondents made IRA
contributions that were greater than their reported other saving
balances. In these cases, the IRA was clearly not included with
other saving, Of persons who reported beginning of year other
saving balances less than their reported IRA contribution——those
who would be most likely to have IRA contributions greater than
end of year other saving balances--almost 70 percent reported
year—end other saving balances less than their IR contributions.
obviously, this group did not confuse the two. (The 70 percent
would not be expected to be 100 percent because persons who make
IRA contributions are also likely to save in other forms as well.)
Finally, we assumed that 20 percent of those who had year—end did
saving balances greater than their reported IRA contributions

—29—

If the two forms of saving are close substitutes, the
proportion of marginal income devoted to S2 saving should increase

when the IRA limit is reached. Evidence on this question is
provided by estimated values of this proportion for families at
the IRA limit, before and after the limit is reached, d2 and d2*.
If there were no limit, these families would on average increase
non—IRA saving by 3.3 cents with a dollar increase in income.

After the IRA limit is reached, a dollar increase in income is
associated with an increase of 4.6 cents in non—IRA saving. The
difference of 1.3 cents is very small relative to their average
latent marginal propensity to save in the IRA form, 33.3 cents.
For comparison with estimates for years prior to the
availability of IRAs, we consider the marginal effect of income on
saving that is implied by these estimates, if there were no IRAs,

that is, if the limit were 0. From equation (7) above, the
marginal effect in this case is (1 -

a)b/(l

-

ab).

Its mean over

persons in the sample, based on the parameter estimates in table

6, is .015. A dollar increase in after tax income would be

include the IRA with other saving balances. The key parameter
estimates were changed very little; the principle effect was to
reduce somewhat the mean estimated S2 saving. The analysis in
Venti and Wise [1986bJ, based on the SCF in which the
interpretation of the other saving response was much more
ambiguous than in the CESs, was done using both interpretations
for all respondents. Considerable sensitivity analysis based on
the two interpretations of the responses to the key questions, as
well as other assumptions, is reported there.

—30—

associated with an increase of less than 2 cents in financial

asset saving.19
Finally, the relationship of individual attributes to the
predicted values of a and b are of some interest, although the
associated coefficients should not be assigned a behavioral

interpretation. Families who have in the past accumulated more
liquid financial assets are indeed more likely than others to
continue saving more in this form, as indicated by the positive
coefficient in the b equation, but liquid assets are in fact

negatively related to the proportion allocated to IRAs. Total
desired saving, as well as the desired proportion in IRAs, are

larger for older persons. The more highly educated also have a
greater propensity to save, suggesting that saving behavior varies

widely in the population, as others have found.2° Larger families
save less.
2.

1982:1 to 1983:1

Comparable estimates to those in table 6, but for the first

year that IRAs were generally available, are shown in appendix

table 3. The important difference between the two sets of
estimates is that estimated desired marginal IRA saving increased
from the earlier to the later period, apparently reflecting

19Although small, the estimate does not seem unrealistic
compared to the aggregate personal saving rate based on national
accounts, which is in the range of 5 percent. And a large portion
of this amount is in company pension plans, that are not included
in the analysis here.
20See, for example, the survey of King [1985].

increasing awareness of IRAs and their advantages. The estimated
total latent marginal saving rate in the earlier period is only
.120 compared to .206 in the later period; the estimated
proportion allocated to IRAs is about the same in the two periods,
.888 versus .928.
3.

1980:1 to 1981:4

Before 1982 only persons without private pension plans could

contribute to IRAs and the limit was lower. Only about 3 percent
of the CES respondents contributed in 1980 and 1981. As mentioned
above, the model estimated for the later years provides estimates

of implied saving behavior were IRAs not available. Other saving
S2 is given by the constrained saving function in equation (7),

with the limit L set to zero. In particular, marginal saving is
given by (l-a)b/(l-ab), with a mean of .015.
To check this prediction, a comparable estimate can be
obtained directly from the data for the pre-1982 years. The only

hindrance to exact comparability is that the earlier data do not
report whether a person had a private pension plan and was thus

ineligible for an IRA in these years. It is clear from the
summary data, however, that IRAs were essentially unused and quite
possibly most people who could have taken advantage of them were

unaware of their availability. Certainly they were not widely
advertised, as they were beginning in 1982. Thus we have
estimated the constrained S2 function for the 1981-1982 period,

—32—

assuming that the IRA option was not available at all.2' Because
there is only one equation to estimate, it is not possible to

estimate both a and b as functions of X; instead the marginal term

(l-a)b/(l-ab) is estimated as a single function of X. The results
are shown in table 7. The mean of the predicted marginal saving
terms is .013, compared to .015, the value implied by the full

model. Both of these estimates are consistent with the very low
levels of financial asset balances reported above and with the low
levels of total personal saving, currently in the 4 to 5 percent
range, most of which is comprised of contributions to employer

pension plans.22
These very low estimates compared to the much larger total

marginal saving term for the later period (b = .206) also suggest
that the IRA saving was not simply replacing other personal

financial asset saving, of which there was very little. If this
were the case, one would expect to see a relationship between
income and saving in this early period that approximates the

relationship for total saving in the post IRA period. It is clear
that IRA saving in the later period does not show up as non-IRA

financial asset saving in the pre-IPA period. Apparently desired

saving was much higher in the later period. The results are
summarized in the tabulation below:

21-The few persons who made contributions in those years were
deleted from the sample.

22See for example Bernheim and Shoven [1987].

—33—

Time Period

(l—a)b
(1—ab)

k

1. 1983:2—1984:1

.206

.928

—15.92

—.30

.015

2. 1982:1—1983:1

.120

.888

—9.68

—.27

.015

—.28

.013

3. 1980.1—1981:4

——

Not only are the implied non IRA marginal savings rates based on
the estimated model virtually the same as the actual observed
rates prior to IRA availability, but the estimated intercept terms

a2 are essentially the same as well. According to these
estimates, total desired marginal financial saving increased from
.013 in the pre IRA period to .120 in the first year after their
introduction, to .206 the following year.23
C.

The Model Fit

Predicted versus actual percents of the sample with S1 saving
greater than 0 and at L are shown in table 8, together with the

percents with positive S2 saving. In general, the predicted
values match the actual values very closely by income interval.24

23The estimated intercept in the IRA equation, a1 is much
lower in the first than in the second period, but the efror
variance is higher in the first period as well, 5.82 versus 3.86.
24To obtain the actual S2 values, the values reported at zero
were randomly assigned to be positive or negative. The percents
actually reported to be greater than zero ranged from 22 percent
in the lowest income interval to 47 percent in the highest,
compared with the range from 47 to 69 after random assignment of
zeros.

—34—

In particular, the conditional percents with positive S2 saving,
for persons who are at the IRA limits of 0 and L, are close to the

actual values. If anything, the model overpredicts positive S2
saving among persons at the IRA limit. If the model were not
adequately capturing actual substitution between S1 and S2, it
should underpredict non-IRA saving by those who exceed the IRA
limit. 25

D. Simulations of the Saving Effect of Proposed and Adopted
Legislation

For comparison, the effects of two plans are simulated. The
first is the so—called Treasury I proposal of November 1984 (U.S.
Department of Treasury, 1984) and the second is the recently

adopted 1986 tax reform legislation. The early proposal was to
increase the limit for an employed person from $2000 to $2500 and
the limit for the spouse of an employed person from $250 to $2500.

The new legislation maintains the previous provisions for persons

25The predicted versus actual average dollar amounts of S
saving are $348 and $366 respectively; S2 values are $261 versus
$226. For persons with S1 = L, the S2 values are $1670 versus
$1873. For those with s1 = 0, the S2 values are $82 versus —$6.
In some cases, the average dollar amounts are affected
substantially by extreme values of S2 saving. We therefore
eliminated the top 5% and the bottom 5% of the reported S2 values
and reestlinated the parameters in table 6. The estimated
parameters change very little. For example, b is .189 instead of
.206 and a is .964 instead of .928. As expected, the estimated
residual variances are smaller; c1 is 4.97 versus 5.82 and c2 is
1.53 versus 3.09. In this case, the predicted and actual average
S1 savings are $262 versus $272 and S2 $188 versus $153. For
those with s1 = L, the S2 values are $552 versus $335. For those
with s1 = 0, the S2 values are $152 versus $121.

—35—

without a private pension plan. For persons covered by a private
pension, it phases out the tax deduction of contributions by
single person at incomes between $25,000 and $35,000 and for
families filing joint returns at incomes between $40,000 and

$50,000. Returns continue to accrue tax free.
The initial simulations indicate what would have happened,

according to the model estimates, had these plans been in effect

during the period of estimation, 1983:2 to 1984:1. Simulation of
the effects of the first plan is straightforward. The second is

more complicated for two reasons. First, it depends on private
pension plan coverage, which is apparently underreported in the

CESs, as explained above. Second, for the approximately 10
percent of the tax filers who have private pensions and higher
incomes it eliminates the current tax deduction but not the tax—
free compounding of returns.

Our model specification incorporates the contribution tax

deduction in the budget constraint, in line with the promotion of

IRAs. The specification also recognizes that the IRA should be
preferred because the return accrues tax free. It does this by
letting the preference parameter a in particular, as well as b,

depend on income, age, and other individual attributes. The
estimated coefficients on these attributes capture not only the

direct effects of the attributes themselves but also any effect of
the marginal tax rate, which, during the period of estimation,

should be predicted well by these personal attributes. The
marginal tax rate determines the relative return advantage of the

—36—

IRA over a conventional account. But we found that it was not
possible to identify with any confidence the marginal tax rate
effect itself, in particular, as distinct from the effect of

income. The estimated effect is very sensitive to the
specification, especially the way that income enters the model.

Similar results are reported in Wise [1984 and 1985] and in Venti

and Wise [1985). King and Leape [1984) report little effect of
the marginal tax rate on asset choice.

Thus while we have considerable confidence in the simulated
effects of the limit increase proposal, the estimated effects of

the current legislation may be less accurate. We have simply
phased out the lower price, 1 —

t,

for persons with private

pensions and with incomes above the appropriate limits.26 To the
extent that pension coverage is underreported in the CESs, the

contribution reduction is underestimated. Simulations using the
new tax rates in the budget constraint were also performed, but
since the new rates have little effect overall the results are not
reported here.27

t

at $40,000 and to move
26The IRA price is assumed to be 1 linearly to 1 at $50,000 for married persons filing joint returns,
and similarly for single persons with incomes between $25,000 and
$35, 000.

271n this case, to the extent that the separate effect of the
greater IRA return is important in determining the greater
preference for them, it is not accurately reflected in the
preference parameters since the relationship between tax rates and
other parameters such as income has changed.

—37—

The simulated effects of the Treasury proposal and of the new
law are shown in table 9. Predicted saving under the current plan
is taken as a base for
comparison. The Treasury plan would have
increased iRA saving by 31 percent, with almost no reduction in

other saving. Persons at the current limit would have increased
their contributions by about 43 percent. The simulated changes in
consumption, taxes, and other saving associated with the IRA
increase are as follows:

Change
Change
Change
Change

in
in
in
in

IRA saving
other saving
consumption
taxes

Amount

Percent

+$1l99
-37
-793
-367

100.0
-3.1
—66.1
—30.8

By these estimates, almost two-thirds of the increase in IRA
saving is funded by reduced consumption and about one—third by

reduced taxes28 If stocks and bonds are included in S2, the
reduction in other saving is 5.7 percent, consumption is reduced
by 64.6 percent, and taxes by 29.7 percent.
The new law will reduce contributions by an estimated 13

percent. The decrease is Concentrated among families with incomes
of $40,000 and above. If it is assumed that the reported pension
coverage in the CES is correct for persons with incomes above this
level ($25,000 for single persons), an upper bound on the

28Very similar estimates are obtained using the parameters
reported in appendix table 1, in which the elasticity parameter k
was estimated, but the residual variances were constrained to be
the same.

—38—

reduction can be obtained by assuming that the upper income
families cannot contribute at all to IRAs if they have a private

pension plan. Under this assumption, the reduction is 19 percent.
With greater pension coverage than the CES reports, more persons
would be restricted by the new law and both of these estimates

would be somewhat larger. None of the simulated effects is
changed much if marginal tax rates from the new bill are assumed.

IV. Summary and Discussion
The evidence presented here suggests that the vast majority
of IRA saving represents net new saving, not accompanied by a

reduction in other financial asset saving. Thus increases in the
IRA limits such as those proposed in the November 1984 Treasury

plan would lead to substantial increases in IRA saving and very

little reduction in other saving. If the IRA limit were raised,
about two-thirds of the increase in IRA saving would be funded by
a decrease in current consumption and about one—third by reduced
taxes; only a very small proportion would come from other saving.
These conclusions are supported both by descriptive data and by
the formal statistical analysis developed in the paper.
Tabulations from the Consumer Expenditure Surveys show that:
— The sharp increase in IRA contributions beginning in 1983
was not accompanied by a reduction in other forms of
financial asset saving.

The financial asset holdings of 1982 and 1983 IRA
contributors were much lower than would have been accumulated
had prior saving been even a fraction of the typical IRA
contribution.
—

—39—

— IRA
contributors are much more likely than non-contributors
to save in other forms, suggesting that the larger
accumulated financial asset balances of contributors reflect
this greater saving propensity.

The formal analysis indicates that:
— Individuals
show a strong preference for IRA versus other
forms of saving.
—

Controlling for individual attributes like age and income,
there is essentially no correlation between IRA contributions
and other financial asset saving.
—

There s very little substitution of IRA for other

financial asset saving, consistent with the observation that
most potential contributors and a large proportion of actual
contributors had been saving very little before the advent of
IRAs.
The model, estimated on post-IRA data, predicts well the
actual relationship between income and financial asset saving

prior to the advent of IRAs. In particular, saving in IRA
accounts does not show up as other financial asset saving prior to

the general availability of IRAs. The cross-section results for
the 1983:2 to 1984:1 period correspond very closely to results

based on the 1983 Survey of Consumer Finances.29
The analysis, however, does not rule out the long run
substitution of IRAs for non-liquid assets, housing in particular.

Our implicit measure of current consumption includes expenditures

on housing and other durables. While we believe that there is
little possibility for substitution in the short run and thus
little effect on the results here, the substitution possibilities
are greater over time.

29See Venti and Wise (1986a,1986b].

—40—

The statistical analysis accounts for the important effects
of the IRA limits and for the effect of the IRA constraint on non-

IRA saving. In addition, it allows for flexible substitution
between IRA and other financial saving. The model also allows the
two forms of saving to be treated by individuals as distinct
goods, but also allows the data to reveal them to be equally

preferred and treated as perfect substitutes. In this case, the
IRA saving of a small proportion of contributors might be thought
of theoretically as inframarginal and thus having no new saving

effect. The data, however, strongly reject this view. One
explanation for this is simply that individuals think of IRA
contributions as saving for retirement and distinct from other
saving that might be intended for more short term purposes.

And

the intensive promotion of IRAs may have greatly increased the
allocation of current income to them and thus the strong
preference for them that is revealed by the data.

Indeed the

strong advertising of IRAs may have reshaped to some extent public

attitudes toward saving for retirement. In this sense, it may be
that an IRA, much like life insurance, is sold not bought.3°

Although the tax advantage of IRAs is surely part of the
explanation for their popularity, the net saving effect that

accompanies IRA contributions invites alternative explanations for
their growth.

30Such an argument was recently suggested by Summers [1985].

—41—

Saving schemes like IRAs have been available in Canada since
1956 and were greatly expanded and promoted in the early 1970's.
It was at this time that personal saving rates in the U.S. and
Canada, which until that time had been very similar, diverged,
with substantially higher rates in Canada thereafter.

Large

increases in Registered Retirement Saving Plan limits are now

contemplated in Canada. The United Kingdom has recently

established two new tax—deferred saving programs. One, the
Personal Pension Plan is directly patterned after the U.S. IRA,

but is billed as a substitute for firm pension plans. The other,
the Personal Equity Plan, has tax advantages equivalent to the
IRA, but limited to and intended to encourage more widespread

individual investment in the stock market. Similar plans are
available in France and Belgium. Both are reported to have had
substantial net saving effects, but we have seen no formal
analysis of this.

Table 1

Table 1. Percent with an IRA and Percent of All Contributors
By Income Interval and Time Period

Income
Interval
($1000's)

0—10

82:].

Percent
with IRA
2.3

1r_)r

Time Period
83:2 to 84:1
to 83:1
Percent of
Percent
Percent of
Contributors
with IRA
Contributors
5.4

4.3

5.7

ic A

Al

Q

20—30

7.8

17.2

14.3

19.7

30—40

13.7

21.7

20.5

17.1

40—50

20.5

14.9

34.2

19.8

50—100

25.7

24.1

46.8

24.6

100+

50.7

1.7

57.5

3.7

9.8

100.0

16.4

100.0

All

Table 2

Table 2. IRA Contributions and Changes in Other
Financial Assets by Year and Quarter

Year and
Quarter

1980:1
2
3

Proportion with Other
Financial Saving > 0

Mean IRA
Contribution

Proportion
with IRA > 0

75
48

.050
.029
.030
.020

.262
.290
.309
.299

.270
.277
.283
.264

.278
.277
.293
.248

.253
.258
.289
.221

Including
Stocks
and Bonds

Excluding
Stocks
and Bonds

4

42
33

1981:1
2

59

3
4

28
56

.031
.038
.019
.036

1982:1
2

89
145
192
237

.050
.105
.113
.116

.320
.321
.314
.313

.308
.304
.291
.287

187
465
362
333

.107
.189
.172
.159

.25].

2
3
4

.317
.337
.285

.222
.278
.310
.258

1984:1

344

.140

.299

.284

3
4

1983:1

30

Table 3

Table 3. Percent of Families with Increase in Financial Assets
By IRA Contributor Status, 1982:1 to 1984:1

Income
Interval
($l000's)

Excluding Stocks and Bonds
Non
IRA
Contributor Contributor

Including Stocks and Bonds
Non
IRA
Contributor Contributor

0—10

16.9

11.9

18.2

12.2

10—20

39.8

23.3

47.8

23.9

20—30

30.1

30.9

39.7

32.8

30—40

58.6

36.1

60.8

39.3

40—50

41.7

38.9

53]_

44.1

50—100

43.2

39.9

53.3

43.2

100+

57.1

30.9

72.6

45.3

All

41.9

26.2

50.1

27.8

Table 4

Table 4. Median Liquid Assets of Families, by IRA
Contributor Status, 1982:1 to 1984:1

Income
Interval
($l000's)

Excluding Stocks and Bonds Including Stocks and Bonds
IRA Con—
Noncon—
IRA ConNonconAll
tributor
tributor
All
tributor
tributor

0—10

85

3050

69

85

5200

69

10—20

391

2850

347

400

4563

350

20—30

1096

4225

1000

1287

5400

1050

30—40

2500

8020

1900

3250

14415

2500

40—50

3438

6500

3000

5277

11874

3850

50—100

6000

10500

4924

8967

19950

6000

10600

13500

3100

15856

25000

5600

1000

6000

797

1125

11000

812

100+

All

Tab]e 5

Table 5. Variable Definitions and Summary Statistics
for 1983:2 to 1984:1

Standard
Deviation

Variable

Definition

Mean

Age

Age in years

37.9

11.7

Income

After-tax family income
in $l,000's

24.4

16.0

Unmarried

One if single; zero otherwise 0.34

Education

Years of education

Family size
Liquid assets

0.47

13.2

3.3

Number of persons in family

3.0

1.6

Dollar value of U.S. savings
bonds, savings accounts,
checking accounts, brokerage
accounts, and other similar

4.9

11.3

35.3

51.9

accounts, in $].,000's.

Nonliquid
assets

Sum of value of homes
property and stocks and
bonds minus consumer debt,
in $1,000's.

No mortgage

One if family owns home and
has no mortgage; zero
otherwise

0.09

0.28

Pension

One if family is covered by
pension; zero otherwise

0.39

0.49

Table 6

Table 6. Parameter Estimates with k = 0, 1983:2 to 1984:1
Variable

Estimate (Asymptotic Standard Error)

Covariance terms:
5.82 (0.44)
3.09 (0.04)
0.01 (0.02)

Cl

r

C2

Origin parameters:
—15.92 (1.86)
—0.30 (0.12)

a1
a2

b

Determinants of b and a:

Income
Age
Unmarried
Education
Liquid Assets
Nonliquid Assets
No Mortgage
Pension
Family Size
Constant

—.0070
.0074
.0472
.0211
.0101
—.0000
.0730
.0281
—.0372
—1.1945

a

(.0008)
(.0014)
(.0341)
(.0053)
(.0008)
(.0002)
(.0439)
(.0254)
(.0102)

(.1576)

Predicted over sample:

Mean
Mean
Mean
Mean

b =
a =
d1 =
d2 =

0.206
0.928
0.246
0.015

For families predicted to be at the IRA limit:

Mean d1 = 0.333
Mean d2 = 0.033
Mean d2* = 0.046
Log-likelihood = -4591
Number of observations = 1872

—.0154
.0181
—.1702
—.0049
—.0135
.0013
—.4225
.1037
—.0291
1.4542

(.0025)
(.0040)
(.0783)
(.0173)
(.0017)
(.0007)
(.1059)
(.0613)
(.0219)
(.4074)

Table 7

Table 7. Parameter Estimates for Non—IRA Saving Prior
to Availability of IRAs, 1980:1 to 1981:4

Variable

Estimate
(Asymptotic Standard Error)

Disturbance covariance terms:

ci

r

C2

2.48 (0.02)

Origin parameters:
a1
a2

—0.28 (0.07)

Substitution parameter, k
Determinants of (1—a)b/(l-ab):

Income
Age
Unmarried
Education
Liquid assets
Nonliquid assets
No mortgage
Pension
Family size
Constant

Mean (1—a)b/(1-ab) = .013
Log—likelihood = -6487.1
Number of observations = 3441

—.0089
—.0199
—.5481
.0136
.0513
0008
.2445

.0035)
.0037)
.1031)
.0124)
.0036)
.0002)
.1015)

—.1409 (.0335)
—1.4659 (.2352)

Table 8

Table 8. Predicted versus Actual Values, by Income Interval
Based on Table 6 Parameter Estimatesa

Income
Interval
($10001s)b
0—10
10—20
20—30
30—40
40—50

u-r

TOTAL

Income
Interval
($lOOO's)'

0—10
10—20
20—30
30—40
40—50
50+

TOTAL

%s1>0

%s1=

>0

L

Number

P

A

P

A

P

A

294
574
472
274

4
8

2
3

47
49

16
30
30
'èø

8

134

16
27
34

1
4
8

51

'

2
8

20

16
16

55
58

o

54
54
55
57
ou

1872

16

16

9

9

52

55

jq

15

i

2 >0
= 0

%s2>0L

given s1

given s1 =

Number

pC

Ad

51

Number

pe

Ad

5

54

50

20
39

53

36

63
64
74

283
531
398
199
85
72

46
48
50
54
56
65

51
54

40
27

48
59
60
45
69

168

63

58

1571

50

54

57

53
53

59
57

a. Based on 50 draws per sample observation. P is predicted,
and A is actual.

b. T in thousands of dollars.
c. Predicted s2 > 0, given predicted s = L.
d. Observed in the sample.

e. Predicted s2 > 0, given predicted i < 0.

Table 9

Table 9. Simulated Responses to Alternative Schemes
Based on Table 6 Parameter Estimates

Previ ous Law
S2
S1

Family Type

Treasury Plan

New Law
S1
S2

S

S2

459
+31

270
-1

306
-13

274

-—

3953
+43

1611
-2

2438
-11

1659
0

—213
— 54
145
480
874
2326

60
151
402
822
1151
1486

—214
— 54
143
474
867
2311

50

123
306
617
683
668

—213
— 54
145

All families
351
--

274

2754

1647

Avg. contribution
% change

--

0

Families at IRA Limit*

Avg. contribution
% change

-—

By Income Interval
($1, 000s)

0—10

10—20
20—30
30—40
40—50
50+

50
123
309
633
833
1090

480
875
2337

*Families predicted to be at the limit under the previous law.

References

Bernheim, B. Douglas and John Shoven. 1987. "Pension Funding and
Saving," forthcoming in Zvi Bodie, John Shoven, and David

Wise (eds.), Pensions in the U.S. Economy, University of
Chicago Press.
Blackorby, Charles, Richard Boyce, and R. Robert Russell. 1978.

"Estimation of Demand Systems Generated by the Gorman Polar
Form; A Generalization of the S-Branch Utility Tree."
Econometrica, vol. 46, no. 2, March, pp. 345-363.

Brown, Murray and Dale Helen. 1972. "The S-Branch Utility Tree: A
Generalization of the Linear Expenditure System."
Econometrica, vol. 40, no. 4, July, pp. 737—747.

Deaton, Angus. 1981. "Theoretical and Empirical Approaches to
Consumer Demand Under Rationing," in A. Deaton, Essays in the
Theory and Measurement of Consumer Behavior, Cambridge
University Press.

Deaton, Angus and John Muellbauer. 1981. "Functional Forms for
Labor Supply and Commodity Demands With and Without Quantity

Constraints." Econometrica, vol. 49, no. 6, November, pp.
1521—1532.

Diamond, Peter and Jerry Hausman. 1984. "Individual Retirement and

Savings Behavior." Journal of Political Economy, vol. 23,
June, pp. 81-114.

Hurd, Michael and John Shoven. 1983. "The Economic Status of the
Elderly," in Zvi Bodie and John Shoven (eds.), Financial
Aspects of the United States Pension System, University of
Chicago Press.

King, Mervyn A. 1985. "The Economics of Saving: A Survey of Recent
Contributions." in Kenneth Arrow and S. Honkapohja (eds.),
Frontiers of Economics, Oxford: Basil Blackwell.

King, Mervyn A. and Jonathan I. Leape. 1984. "Wealthand Portfolio
Composition: Theory and Evidence," NBER Working Paper #1648,
September.

Kotlikoff, Laurence J. 1984. "Taxation and Savings: A Neoclassical

Perspective." Journal of Economic Literature 22, pp. 15761629.

Sato, Kazuo. 1967. "A Two-Level-Constant-Elasticity-of—

Substitution Production Function." Review of Economic
Studies, vol. 34, no. 98, April, pp. 201—218.

Summers, Larry. 1986. "Issues in National Saving Policy," in F. G.
Adams and S. Wachter (ed.), Savings and Capital Formation,
Lexington Books.

U.S. Department of Treasury. 1984. Tax Reform for Fairness,

Simplicity, and Economic Growth. USGPO.
Venti, Steven F. and David A. Wise. 1985. "The Determinants of IRA
Contributions and the Effect of Limit Changes," NBER Working
Paper #1731, and forthcoming in Zvi Bodie, John Shoven, and

David Wise (eds.), Pensions in the U.S. Economy, University
of Chicago Press.

Venti, Steven F. and David A. Wise. 1986a. "IRAs and Saving," NBER
Working Paper #1879, and forthcoming in Martin Feldstein
(ed.), Taxes and Capital Formation, University of Chicago
Press.

Venti, Steven F. and David A. Wise. 1986b. "Tax—Deferred Accounts,
Constrained Choice, and Estimation of Individual Saving,"
Review of Economic Studies 53, pp.579-601.

Wise, David A. 1984. "The Effects of Policy Changes on RRSP

Contribution." Prepared for the Tax Policy and Legislation
Branch of the Canadian Department of Finance, March.

Wise, David A. 1985. "Contributors and Contributions to Registered

Retirement Savings Plans." Prepared for the Tax Policy and
Legislation Branch of the Canadian Department of Finance,
April.

Appendix Page 1
Appendix on Estimation

We adopt a stochastic specification that allows additive
disturbances e1 and e2 associated with S1 and S2 respectively.

They are assumed to be distributed bivariate normal within

standard deviations c1 and c2 and correlation r. The joint
distribution of S1 and S2* is the relevant distribution if IRA

contributions are either zero or at the upper limit. The
disturbance associated with S2*, denoted by e2*, is a linear
function of e1 and e2 so the joint distribution of S1 and S2* is

also bivariate normal. Derivation of e2* and the covariance
paramenters (c2* and r*) of the joint S1, S2* distribution is
straightforward, but tedious.

There are nine possible outcomes. Define S1 = S1 +
=

2

+ e2, and S2* = S2* + e2*. With f the unit normal density

function , F the corresponding distribution function, and F2 the

bivariate distribution function, the probabilities associated with
each outcome are given by:

1. s1 =
P1 =

0 and S2 observed

(1/c2)

f(s2—S2*/c2*) {1_F[S1+r*(c1/c2*) (S2_52*)/(c1i1_r*2) ]

Appendix Page 2

2. S1 observed, 2 observed
P2 =

(2pc1c2ul_r211

x exp{—1/2(1—r2)[((s1—1)/c1)2 — 2r(s1—S1)(s2—2))/c1c2
+

((s2—S2)/c2)2])

3. S1 = L and S2 observed
P3 =

(1/c2*)f((s2—2*)/c2*)

F[(1—L+r* (c1/c2*)(S2_2*))/(c1/1_r*2)]

4. s1=OandS2>O
P4 = F2 [-S1/c1, S2*/c2*; —r*)

5. S1 observed S2 > 0
P5 =

(1/c1) f((S1—1)/c1) F[2 + r(c2/c1)(S1_1)/(c2i1_r2)]

6. s1=LandS2>0
P6 = F2[—(L—S1)/c1, S2*/c2*; r*]

7. s1=OandS2<O
P7 =
8.

P8 =

F2[-S1/c1,

-S2*/c2*; r*]

S1 observed and 2 < 0

(1/c1) f((S1—1)/c1) x(1_F(2+r(c2/c1)(S1_1)/(c2/1_r2fl)

Appendix Page 3

9. s1=LandS2<O
P9 = F2[—(L—S1)/c1, —S2*/c2*; —r*]

The likelihood function is the product of the P over the relevant
subsets of observations.

Appendix Table 1

Appendix Table 1. Parameter Estimates with k Estimated and
C1 = C2, 1983:2 to 1984:1

Variable

Estimate (Asymptotic Standard Error)

Covariance terms:
3.36 (0.05)
3.36 (——)
0.03 (0.02)

c1

r

c2

—0.15 (0.06)

Elasticity parameter,k
Origin parameters:

—8.36 (0.51)
—0.77 (0.17)

a1
a2

Determinants of b and a:

Income
Age
Unmarried
Education
Liquid Assets
Nonliquid Assets
No Mortgage
Pension
Family Size
Constant

—.0052
.0040
.0583
.0091
.0119
—.0002
.0585
.0118
—.0247
—1.2153

(.0007)
(.0011)
(.0304)
(.0043)
(.0005)
(.0002)
(.0380)
(.0226)
(.0090)
(.1157)

Predicted over sample:

Mean
Mean
Mean
Mean

b =
a =
d1 =
d2 =

0.147
0.820
0.149
0.032

For families predicted to be at the IRA limit:

Mean d1 = 0.220
Mean d2 = 0.055
Mean d2* = 0.063
Log-likelihood = -4617
Number of observations = 1872

—.0116
.0239
—.1640
.0366
—.0141
.0007
—.1627
.0658
—.0622
.1258

(.0024
(.0036
(.0835
(.0107
(.0019
(.0006
(.0801
(.0600
(.0263
(.0483

Appendix Table 2

Appendix Table 2. Parameter Estimates with k = 0, and c1 =
1983:2 to 1984:1

Variable

c2,

Estimate (Asymptotic Standard Error)

Covariance terms:
3.40 (0.05)

C1
C2
r

3.40

0.02 (0.02)

Origin parameters:
—8.67 (0.55)
—0.52 (0.17)

a1
a2

Determinants of b and a:

Income
Age
Unmarried
Education
Liquid Assets
Nonliquid Assets
No Mortgage
Pension
Family Size
Constant

—.0067
.0057
.0633
.0124
.0108
—.0000
.0548
.0458
—.0245
—1.3020

(.0007)
(.0012)
(.0312)
(.0047)
(.0006)
(.0002)
(.0376)
(.0242)
(.0087)
(.1289)

Predicted over sample:

Mean
Mean
Mean
Mean

b =
a =
d1 =
d2 =

0.147
0.831
0.157
0.025

For families predicted to be at the IRA limit:

Mean d1 = 0.223
Mean d2 = 0.045
Mean d2* = 0.056
Log-likelihood = -4621

Number of observations = 1872

—.0106
.0190
—.2093
.0327
—.0132
.0008
—.1792
—.0210
—.0718
.4456

(.0021)
(.0040)
(.0973)
(.0141)
(.0016)
(.0006)
(.0855)
(.0688)
(.0318)
(.2699)

Appendix Table 3

Appendix Table 3. Parameter Estimates with k = 0,
1982:1 to 1983:1

Variable

Estimate (Asymptotic Standard Error)

Covariance terms:
3.86 (0.29)
2.92 tO.06)
—0.02 (0. 02)

ci

r

C2

Origin parameters:
—9.68 (1.02)
—0.27 (0.12)

a1
a2

a

Determinants of b and a:

Income
Age
Unmarried
Education
Liquid Assets
Nonliquid Assets
No Mortgage
Pension
Family Size
Constant

—.0082
.0077
—.0076
.0189
.0086
.0007
—.0219
.1185
—.0812
—1.4172

(.0010)
(.0014)
(.0405)
(.0063)
(.0008)
(.0003)
(.0442)
(.0242)
(.0130)
(.1670)

Predicted over sample:

Mean b =
Mean a =
=
Mean
Mean d2 =

0.120
0.888
0.136
0.015

For families predicted to be at the IRA limit:

Mean d1 = 0.197
Mean d2 = 0.035
Mean d2* = 0.041
Log-likelihood = -5001
Number of observations = 2141

—.0149
.0137
—.0391
.0113
—.0174
.0004
.0716
—.4939
.1643
.7748

(.0033)
(.0047)
(.0980)
(.0182)
(.0026)
(.0009)
(.0935)
(.1055)
(.0472)
(.3885)

