NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

IMPACTS OF THE AFFORDABLE CARE ACT ON HEALTH INSURANCE COVERAGE
IN MEDICAID EXPANSION AND NON-EXPANSION STATES
Charles Courtemanche
James Marton
Benjamin Ukert
Aaron Yelowitz
Daniela Zapata
Working Paper 22182
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22182

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2016

We would like to thank Kitt Carpenter, Chad Cotti, Amanda Kowalski, and seminar participants
at the 2015 Southern Economic Association Annual Meeting for their valuable comments. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Charles Courtemanche, James Marton, Benjamin Ukert, Aaron Yelowitz, and Daniela
Zapata. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Impacts of the Affordable Care Act on Health Insurance Coverage in Medicaid Expansion
and Non-Expansion States
Charles Courtemanche, James Marton, Benjamin Ukert, Aaron Yelowitz, and Daniela Zapata
NBER Working Paper No. 22182
April 2016
JEL No. I13
ABSTRACT
The Affordable Care Act (ACA) aimed to achieve nearly universal health insurance coverage in
the United States through a combination of insurance market reforms, mandates, subsidies, health
insurance exchanges, and Medicaid expansions, most of which took effect in 2014. This paper
estimates the causal effects of the ACA on health insurance coverage using data from the
American Community Survey. We utilize difference-in-difference-in-differences models that
exploit cross-sectional variation in the intensity of treatment arising from state participation in the
Medicaid expansion and local area pre-ACA uninsured rates. This strategy allows us to identify
the effects of the ACA in both Medicaid expansion and non-expansion states. Our preferred
specification suggests that, at the average pre-treatment uninsured rate, the full ACA increased
the proportion of residents with insurance by 5.9 percentage points compared to 3.0 percentage
points in states that did not expand Medicaid. Private insurance expansions from the ACA were
due to increases in both employer-provided and non-group coverage. The coverage gains from
the full ACA were largest for those with incomes below the Medicaid eligibility threshold, nonwhites, young adults, and unmarried individuals. We find some evidence that the Medicaid
expansion partially crowded out private coverage among low-income individuals.
Charles Courtemanche
Georgia State University
Andrew Young School of Policy Studies
Department of Economics
P.O. Box 3992
Atlanta, GA 30302-3992
and NBER
ccourtemanche@gsu.edu
James Marton
Georgia State University
Andrew Young School of Policy Studies
Department of Economics
P.O. Box 3992
Atlanta, GA 30302-3992
marton@gsu.edu
Benjamin Ukert
Georgia State University
Andrew Young School of Policy Studies
Department of Economics
P.O. Box 3992
Atlanta, GA 30302-3992
bukert1@student.gsu.edu

Aaron Yelowitz
University of Kentucky
Department of Economics
335 Business and Economics Building
Lexington, KY 40506-0034
aaron@uky.edu
Daniela Zapata
Impaq International
1101 Vermont Avenue
11th Floor
Washington, DC 20005
dzapata@impaqint.com

I. INTRODUCTION
The goal of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA) of March 2010 is to
achieve nearly universal health insurance coverage in the United States through a combination of
insurance market reforms, mandates, subsidies, health insurance exchanges, and Medicaid
expansions (Gruber, 2011). These major components of the ACA all took effect in 2014, with the
Medicaid expansion being optional for states.1 This paper uses data from the American
Community Survey (ACS) to evaluate the first-year impacts of the ACA on health insurance
coverage levels and sources in both states that expanded Medicaid and those that did not.
The first component of the ACA’s “three-legged stool” involves reforms designed to
improve the functioning of the non-group insurance market for consumers who did not have
access to employer-provided or public coverage (Gruber, 2011). Insurance market regulations
implemented in 2014 such as community rating, guaranteed issue, and minimum coverage
requirements aim to ensure the availability of adequate insurance for those with pre-existing
conditions.2 The law also established a Health Insurance Marketplace, commonly referred to as
the “Federal Exchange”, to facilitate insurance purchases for individuals and small businesses
and stimulate competition among insurance plans.3 Each state was given the option of
establishing their own insurance exchange and 15 states did so in 2014 (KFF, 2014).
These reforms alone would likely lead to an adverse selection death spiral, as an influx of
high-cost beneficiaries would drive up premiums for those remaining in the insurance pool
(Gruber, 2011). This concern motivated the second leg of the three-legged school: the individual

1

The June 2012 U.S. Supreme Court ruling in NFIB v. Sebelius rendered the ACA Medicaid expansion optional for
states (NFIB v. Sebelius, 567 U.S. ___ (2012), 132 S.Ct 2566). As of September 2015, 30 states and the District of
Columbia have expanded their Medicaid program (MACPAC, 2015).
2
For more on the timing of various components of the ACA, see: http://kff.org/interactive/implementation-timeline/
3
For further details, see http://www.hhs.gov/healthcare/facts-and-features/key-features-of-aca-by-year/index.html

2

mandate.4 Beginning in 2014, individuals deemed to be able to afford coverage but electing to
remain uncovered were penalized. The penalty varies with income but can reach as high as the
total annual premium for the national average price of a Bronze exchange plan.5
Mandating insurance coverage leads to concerns about affordability, which the third leg
of the three-legged stool aims to address through subsidies and Medicaid expansions. Sliding
scale subsidies in the form of tax credits are available to consumers in every state with incomes
between 100 and 400 percent of the Federal Poverty Line (FPL) who do not qualify for other
affordable coverage. 6 In states that opted to expand Medicaid via the ACA, those with income
below 138 percent FPL are eligible for Medicaid coverage. Previously, Medicaid eligibility was
typically tied to those with low income among specific groups, such as children, single mothers,
pregnant women, and the elderly. This suggests a major expansion of Medicaid eligibility via the
ACA for low income childless adults and married adults with children.
We estimate the effects of the ACA both with and without the Medicaid expansion using
a difference-in-difference-in-differences model with the differences coming from time, state
Medicaid expansion status, and local area pre-treatment uninsured rate. This last source of
variation, which arises because universal coverage initiatives provide the most intense treatments
in areas with high baseline uninsured rates, allows us to disentangle the causal effect of the ACA
from the underlying time trend while also accounting for the possible endogeneity of state
Medicaid expansion decisions. Finkelstein (2007) uses a similar “bite” strategy to identify the

4

There is also an employer mandate which will impose a financial penalty on employers with more than 50
employees that have at least one full-time employee who receives a premium tax credit. Implementation of this
mandate was delayed until January 1, 2015 for businesses with more than 100 employees and January 1, 2016 for
those with 50 to 99. More information is available at http://kff.org/interactive/implementation-timeline/
5
Specifically, in 2014 the penalty was the greater of 1) 1% of household income up to a maximum of the national
average annual premium for a Bronze plan, or 2) $95 per adult plus $47.50 per child up to a maximum of $285. The
$285 maximum increased to $975 in 2015 and $2,085 in 2016. For more information, see:
https://www.healthcare.gov/fees/fee-for-not-being-covered/
6
See http://www.hhs.gov/healthcare/facts-and-features/key-features-of-aca-by-year/index.html#2014

3

impact of Medicare on health care spending. Miller (2012) also uses this approach to estimate the
impact of the Massachusetts reform on emergency room utilization without control states.
The ACS is well suited for our study for several reasons. First, it includes multiple
categories of health insurance coverage, allowing for an examination of how the ACA affected
both private and public coverage (e.g. via exchanges and Medicaid expansions). The ACS also
precisely measures income, allowing us to finely distinguish how the statutory ACA rules
changed public and private eligibility. Additionally, with approximately 3,000,000 observations
per year and relatively narrow geographic identifiers, the ACS is large enough to precisely
estimate the effects for states and many localities. Finally, the ACS is a mandatory survey,
greatly reducing concerns about sample selection amongst respondents.
In our full-sample regressions, we estimate that the ACA including the Medicaid
expansion increased insurance coverage by 5.9 percentage points at the sample mean pretreatment uninsured rate, with the effect reaching as high as 15.4 percentage points in the area
with the largest uninsured rate. The effect of the ACA without the Medicaid expansion was only
3.0 percentage points at the mean uninsured rate, reaching as high as 7.8 percentage points.
Coverage gains in non-Medicaid expansion states came entirely from private insurance, split
between employer-provided and non-group coverage. Gains from the Medicaid expansion are
exclusively attributable to increased Medicaid coverage. These results all remain similar across a
range of robustness checks and pass falsification tests for differential pre-treatment trends. We
also conduct subsample analyses and find that the increases in coverage from the full ACA were
largest for those with incomes below the ACA’s Medicaid eligibility threshold, non-whites, 1834 year olds, and unmarried individuals. In non-Medicaid-expansion states, coverage gains
among low-income individuals were no larger than those for middle-income individuals. Among

4

the low-income subsample, some evidence suggests that a portion of the gain in Medicaid
coverage from the Medicaid expansion was crowded out by reduced private coverage.

II. LITERATURE REVIEW
There is an extensive literature spanning several decades examining the impact of
policies designed to increase insurance coverage on the receipt of both public and private
insurance coverage. Buchmueller et al. (2015) provides a thorough review of studies that focus
on the impact of expansions of the Medicaid program over time, as well as other Medicaid policy
changes that may impact public and / or private insurance coverage.7 A large part of this
literature examines the impact of Medicaid expansions of the late 1980s and early 1990s on
coverage gains for children. As summarized by Buchmueller et al. (2015), estimates of the
marginal Medicaid take-up rate among children made newly eligible for Medicaid are
characterized as being fairly modest, ranging between 15 and 24 percent.8 There is less
agreement on the magnitude of “crowd out” in this literature, but even the largest estimates of
the marginal loss of private coverage caused by increased Medicaid eligibility are generally
below 10 percent. Rescaling this marginal crowd out estimate by the Medicaid take-up rate leads
to estimates of the crowd out rate between 42 percent (= .10 /.24) and 67 percent (= .10 /.15).9
A recent state expansion of coverage that has received a great deal of attention in the
literature is the Massachusetts insurance market reform of 2006, which served as the model for
the ACA. Long, Stockely, and Yemane (2009) find that by 2008 the uninsured rate decreased by
6.6 percentage points for the overall nonelderly population in Massachusetts. Courtemanche and
7

We will not focus on these other Medicaid policy changes, but they include outreach (Aizer, 2007), application
process changes (Mishra et al., 2014), waiting periods (Wolfe and Scrivner, 2005), premiums and other forms of
cost sharing (Kenney et al., 2006; Marton, 2007; Marton et al., 2015), citizenship verification (Sommers, 2010;
Marton, Snyder, and Zhou, 2016), and managed care implementation (Marton et al., 2014; Marton et al., 2016).
8
Cutler and Gruber (1996) is the seminal paper in this literature.
9
There is also a smaller literature (Busch and Duchovny, 2005 and Hamersma and Kim, 2013) that studies the
national impact of public coverage expansions on non-elderly adults, primarily parents.

5

Zapata (2014) estimate that the Massachusetts reform led to an increase in coverage of 5.6
percentage points for the nonelderly population over a longer time period (July 2007 – December
2010) beginning after the final major component of the reform (the individual mandate) took
effect. Yelowitz and Cannon (2010) explore the possibility that the reform’s impact was
mitigated by crowd-out among the low-income and find evidence supporting this view.
Most prior research on the ACA focuses on the only substantial component of its
coverage expansion to be implemented before 2014: the 2010 mandate for private insurers to
allow young adults to stay on their parents’ insurance until turning 26. Several studies suggest
that the dependent coverage provision increased insurance coverage among 19-25 year olds by
3–5 percentage points, with the effect being largest among those at the high end of this age range
(Akosa Antwi et al., 2013; Sommers et al., 2013; Barbaresco, Courtemanche, and Qi, 2015).
There is much less evidence on the effects of the ACA’s insurance expansions for the
broader population of non-elderly adults, since these did not take effect until 2014. A few recent
studies have conducted simple before-and-after comparisons of insurance status. Long et al.
(2014) compare coverage rates in September 2013 to September 2014 and find an overall
increase in coverage of 5.3 percentage points among nonelderly adults using data from the Urban
Institute Health Reform Monitoring Survey. Within Medicaid expansion states, they estimate the
increase in coverage to be 5.8 percentage points, compared to 4.8 percentage points in nonexpansion states. Smith and Medalia (2015) use the Current Population Survey Annual Social
and Economic Supplement to examine changes in insurance coverage between 2013 and 2014
for everyone in the US, including both children and the elderly. They estimate an overall 2.9
percentage point increase in coverage, which is a combination of a 3.4 percentage point increase
in expansion states and a 2.3 percentage point increase in non-expansion states. Courtemanche et

6

al. (2016) find a similar 2.8 percentage point increase in insurance coverage nationally across all
ages using data from the American Community Survey.
A major limitation of these descriptive studies is that, since insurance coverage rates
naturally fluctuate over time, the extent to which their estimates reflect causal effects of the ACA
as opposed to other factors is unclear. For instance, the unemployment rate dropped from 8
percent to 5.6 percent between the start of 2013 and the end of 2014.10 We might therefore have
expected increases in employer-provided and overall coverage and a drop in Medicaid coverage
in 2014 if the ACA had not occurred. Other confounding factors might include demographic
shifts and the underlying upward trend in health insurance premiums.
We are aware of only one study, a newly released working paper written concurrently to
ours (Kaestner et al., 2015), that aims to identify the causal effect of a 2014 component of the
ACA on health insurance coverage. However, Kaestner et al. (2015) focus only on the ACA’s
Medicaid expansion, as opposed to the law in general. They utilize difference-in-difference and
synthetic control methods and a sample of individuals with no further than a high school
education from the American Community Survey and Current Population Survey. Among this
sample, they find that the Medicaid expansion increased Medicaid coverage by approximately 4
percentage points, decreased the proportion uninsured by approximately 3 percentage points, and
decreased private health insurance coverage by 1 percentage point.
Our paper offers several contributions relative to Kaestner et al. (2015). First, Kaestner et
al. (2015) only develop a causal framework for the Medicaid expansion portion of the ACA and
consequently only include individuals with no more than a high school education in their sample.
In contrast, we utilize the full sample of non-elderly adults and develop an identification strategy
designed to estimate the causal effect of not only the Medicaid expansion but also the law’s
10

See http://data.bls.gov/timeseries/LNS14000000

7

private portion (combination of insurance market reforms, exchanges, mandates, and subsidies).
This means we are also the first to estimate the overall causal effect of the fully implemented
ACA as well as what share of the coverage gains can be attributed to the private versus Medicaid
components. Next, our triple-difference approach offers an alternative identification strategy for
the Medicaid expansion effect that relies on weaker assumptions than a difference-in-differences
model. Specifically, we do not need to assume that Medicaid expansion and non-expansion states
shared common counterfactual trends; we instead only need to assume that, to whatever extent
such differential trends exist, the difference is not correlated with pre-treatment uninsured rates.
The fact that we ultimately find similar Medicaid effects to Kaestner et al. (2015) adds further
robustness to their findings. Third, while they consider only two types of coverage – Medicaid
and private – we further distinguish whether the gains in private coverage were from employerprovided or private insurance coverage. Finally, we consider heterogeneity along several new
dimensions, as Kaestner et al. (2015) do not stratify by income, gender, or race.11

III. DATA
Our primary data source is the American Community Survey (“ACS”), a nationwide
survey administered by the Census Bureau asking detailed questions about population and
housing characteristics. The ACS samples approximately one percent of the U.S. population.
Like the decennial Census, participation is mandatory, and the survey can be completed online or
by mailing in a paper questionnaire.12 The ACS identifies all 50 states and the District of

11

Note that one way in which Kaestner et al. (2015) go further than our paper is that they consider effects of the
ACA’s Medicaid expansion on labor supply while we do not. This is because we do not think our identification
strategy – which relies on variation in pre-ACA uninsured rates – is appropriate to study labor market outcomes. Our
approach implicitly assumes that the effects are limited to those who lacked insurance coverage prior to the ACA,
and labor supply effects may occur along several other dimensions (e.g. those who have always been insured but cut
back their work hours due to the availability of subsidized insurance in the exchanges).
12
In-person interviews are done with respondents in group quarters, such as college dormitories, nursing homes, and
prisons. See https://www.census.gov/content/dam/Census/programs-surveys/acs/about/ACS_Information_Guide.pdf

8

Columbia, and additionally identifies localities known as Public Use Microdata Areas (PUMAs)
– approximately 2,300 areas of at least 100,000 people nested entirely within a state.13
The ACS is appealing for our study because its large number of observations, over
3,000,000 individuals per year, allows us to precisely estimate the effects of different aspects of
the ACA. This is important since only a fraction of the total population is affected by the changes
resulting from the ACA, limiting plausible effect sizes. Our main sample consists of 18-64 year
olds from calendar years 2011 to 2014. We exclude individuals older than 64 since the ACA was
not intended to affect the health care coverage of seniors. We selected 2011 as the first year of
our sample because we did not want the relatively smaller pieces of the ACA implemented in
2010, such as the dependent coverage mandate, the removal of copays on preventive services,
and the review of health plan premium increases, to confound our estimates of the major
components of the ACA that were implemented in 2014.
For each individual, the ACS asks: “Is this person CURRENTLY covered by any of the
following types of health insurance or health coverage plans?” where choices include “insurance
though a current or former employer or union”, “insurance purchased directly from an insurance
company”, “Medicare”, “Medicaid, Medical Assistance, or any kind of government-assistance
plan for those with low incomes or a disability”, “TRICARE or other military health care”, “VA
(including those who have ever used or enrolled for VA health care)”, “Indian Health Service”,
and “any other type of health insurance or health coverage plan.” An individual may choose
more than one source of coverage, and only those answering “no” to every type of insurance are
considered uninsured. Using these responses, we create several binary outcome variables: any
insurance, any private insurance (either employer-sponsored or directly purchased), employer-

13

For more information, see: https://www.census.gov/geo/reference/puma.html

9

sponsored insurance, directly purchased insurance, Medicaid, and any other coverage. These
categories are not mutually exclusive due to the possibility of multiple sources of coverage.
The structure of this ACS question was constant for the entire period between 2011 and
2014. In contrast, as noted in Smith and Medalia (2014), the Current Population Survey Annual
Social and Economic Supplement (CPS ASEC) was redesigned in 2013, leading to difficulties in
comparing estimates of health insurance coverage over time. In addition, the ACS has the
advantage of explicitly asking about current coverage. As Swartz (1986) notes, the CPS question
is widely misinterpreted as asking about current coverage, when in fact, it asks about coverage at
any point during the previous calendar year.
A critical variable for our identification strategy is the uninsured rate in the respondent’s
“local area” in the last pre-treatment year of 2013. Due to new boundaries arising from the 2010
Census, the PUMA classification system changed during our sample period in a way that makes
it impossible for us to simply use PUMAs as the local areas. 14 Instead, we use both the old and
new PUMA classification systems to identify core-based statistical areas (CBSAs), which we
then use to define our local areas.15 If a CBSA spans multiple states, we define a different local
area for the parts of the CBSA in each state; e.g. the Missouri and Illinois portions of the St.
Louis region are classified as separate areas. To prevent respondents who do not live in a CBSA
from being dropped, we create additional local areas for the non-CBSA portion of each state (e.g.
rural Georgia). In total, this process yields 630 local areas that each contain between 364 and

14

The new 2010 Census boundaries generate 2,351 unique PUMAs, whereas the pre-2010 boundaries generated
2,071 unique PUMAs. These new boundaries are applicable to the 2013 ACS and beyond. For more on these
geographic constructs, see: https://ask.census.gov/faq.php?id=5000&faqId=1673
15
For each PUMA, both before and after the 2010 boundary change, we associated it with the CBSA that had the
largest share of population within the PUMA. More than 99 percent of PUMAs map into at least one CBSA. Each
PUMA is associated with up to 6 CBSAs, however approximately 80 percent of PUMAs, containing 79.1 percent of
the US population, map into precisely one CBSA. Nearly 11 percent of PUMAs map into two CBSAs, with the
remaining 8.5 percent mapping into 3 to 6 CBSAs.

10

80,505 respondents in the 2013 wave, with a median of 1,036 and a mean of 2,864. Pre-treatment
uninsured rates are therefore computed from a reasonably large sample for all areas.
Our state-level ACA variables come from the Kaiser Family Foundation, a non-profit
organization that collects a vast array of health policy information. This information includes
whether a state implemented the Medicaid expansion as well as whether this expansion was done
through private insurance via a Section 1115 waiver. Expanding under the Section 1115 waiver,
as done by Arkansas, Iowa, and Michigan, introduced cost sharing and premiums for enrollees
and could therefore have had different effects than expanding via traditional Medicaid. We
attempted to test for such differences but were unable to draw clear conclusions; we therefore
simply classify the Section 1115 waiver states as being Medicaid expanders. All states’ Medicaid
expansions were effective on January 1, 2014 except Michigan’s, which took effect in April. Our
results remain virtually identical if we drop Michigan from the sample.
We include a wide range of control variables. The controls from the ACS reflect
demographic characteristics (dummy variables for age groups, gender, and race/ethnicity),
family structure (marital status and dummies for number of children in the household), and
economic/labor force characteristics (dummies for education and household income category,
whether the respondent reports her primary occupation as student, and whether the respondent is
unemployed). We also control for the Bureau of Labor Statistics’ seasonally adjusted monthly
state unemployment rate. Finally, we control for interactions of the post-treatment dummy with
indicators of whether states set up their own private insurance exchanges (as opposed to using
the federal exchange) and whether these exchanges experienced glitches. These controls aim to
address the possible concern that the decision to expand Medicaid might be correlated with
other, harder-to-measure aspects of state involvement with the ACA (e.g. degree of outreach)

11

that could separately influence insurance coverage or health-related outcomes. This information
comes from the Kaiser Family Foundation and Kowalski (2014).
Tables 1 and 2 provide pre-treatment means and standard deviations of the dependent
variables and controls, respectively. We also report the summary statistics stratified by state
Medicaid expansion status and local area pre-treatment uninsured rate. Residents of Medicaid
expansion states and areas with pre-ACA uninsured rates below the median were more likely to
be insured, had higher incomes, and were also more educated. Our econometric design will
account for these baseline differences.
Figure 1 presents changes in our insurance variables of interest during the sample period.
The pre-ACA trends do not appear to differ by Medicaid expansion status or pre-treatment
uninsured rate, providing preliminary support for the use of these variables as sources of
identification. Increases in the probabilities of having any coverage, privately purchased
coverage, any private coverage, and Medicaid are evident in 2014. We next turn to regression
analyses to identify the extent to which these increases represent causal effects of the ACA.

IV. FULL-SAMPLE ANALYSES
A. Baseline Models
For each insurance coverage outcome, our econometric objectives are to estimate the
effects of both the fully implemented ACA (including the Medicaid expansion) and the ACA
without the Medicaid expansion. We begin with a simple but likely naïve difference-indifferences (DD) specification:
‫ݕ‬௜௔௦௧ = ߚ଴ + ߚଵ ܱܲܵܶ௧ + ߚଶ (‫ܦܫܣܥܫܦܧܯ‬௦ ∗ ܱܲܵܶ௧ ) + ࢼ૜ ࢄ࢏ࢇ࢙࢚ + ߙ௔௦ + ߝ௜௔௦௧

(1)

where ‫ݕ‬௜௔௦௧ is the outcome for individual i in local area a in state s in year t, ܱܲܵܶ௧ is an
indicator for whether period t is in the post-treatment year of 2014, ‫ܦܫܣܥܫܦܧܯ‬௦ is an indicator
12

for whether state s participated in the ACA’s Medicaid expansion, ࢄ࢏ࢇ࢙࢚ is a vector of control
variables, ߙ௔௦ is a local area fixed effect, and ߝ௜௔௦௧ is the error term. Note that we do not need to
separately include ‫ܦܫܣܥܫܦܧܯ‬௦ in the model since it would be perfectly collinear with the local
area fixed effects (recall that local areas are nested within states); our results are very similar if
we drop the area fixed effects and include ‫ܦܫܣܥܫܦܧܯ‬௦ instead. Standard errors are
heteroscedasticity-robust and clustered by state.
In equation (1), ߚଵ represents the effect of the non-Medicaid components of the ACA
(insurance market reforms, individual mandate, subsidies, exchanges) while ߚଶ is the effect of
the Medicaid expansion. ߚଵ + ߚଶ , therefore, gives the impact of the fully implemented ACA,
whereas ߚଵ is the impact of the ACA without the Medicaid expansion. ߚመଶ has a causal
interpretation under the usual difference-in-differences identifying assumption that, conditional
on the other covariates, changes in the outcomes in 2014 would have been the same in expansion
and non-expansion states if the expansion had not occurred. Interpreting ߚመଵ as causal, however,
requires the more problematic assumption that there would have been no changes in the
outcomes in 2014 in the absence of the ACA, conditional on the controls. This assumption seems
unlikely to hold since patterns of insurance coverage would be expected to change from year to
year for many reasons, such as macroeconomic conditions and the upward trend in premiums.
Our preferred specification is therefore a difference-in-difference-in-differences (DDD)
design that aims to disentangle these year-to-year changes from the causal effect of the nonMedicaid portions of the ACA. We do this by exploiting variation in the intensity of treatment
arising from differential pre-treatment (2013) uninsured rates across local areas, following the
Finkelstein (2007) and Miller (2012) studies of the effects of the introduction of Medicare and
the Massachusetts health care reform, respectively. Adding this layer of geographic variation in

13

the effect of the non-Medicaid portion of the ACA allows us to include time period fixed effects
to capture nationwide changes in the outcomes that would have occurred if the ACA had not
been implemented. Assuming that the extent of an area’s treatment is proportional to its baseline
uninsured rate, the DDD model is:
‫ݕ‬௜௔௦௧ = ߛ଴ + ߛଵ (ܷܰ‫ܦܧܴܷܵܰܫ‬௔௦ ∗ ܱܲܵܶ௧ ) + ߛଶ (‫ܦܫܣܥܫܦܧܯ‬௦ ∗ ܱܲܵܶ௧ ) + ߛଷ (ܷܰ‫ܦܧܴܷܵܰܫ‬௔௦ ∗
‫ܦܫܣܥܫܦܧܯ‬௦ ∗ ܱܲܵܶ௧ ) + ࢽ૝ ࢄ࢏ࢇ࢙࢚ + ߬ఛ + ߙ௔௦ + ߝ௜௔௦௧

(2)

where ܷܰ‫ܦܧܴܷܵܰܫ‬௔௦ is the 2013 uninsured rate in local area a in state s and ߬ఛ is a year fixed
effect. Note that ܱܲܵܶ௧ is no longer included in the model since it is perfectly collinear with the
year fixed effects, while ‫ܦܫܣܥܫܦܧܯ‬௦ , ܷܰ‫ܦܧܴܷܵܰܫ‬௦ , and ܷܰ‫ܦܧܴܷܵܰܫ‬௦ ∗ ‫ܦܫܣܥܫܦܧܯ‬௦ are not
separately included since they are perfectly collinear with the area fixed effects.
In equation (2), the effect of the ACA without the Medicaid expansion is given by
ߛଵ *ܷܰ‫ܦܧܴܷܵܰܫ‬௔௦ , which means it is assumed to be 0 in a (hypothetical) area with a 0 percent
uninsured rate at baseline and to increase linearly as the pre-ACA uninsured rate rises.16 The
identifying assumption for the impact of the non-Medicaid expansion components of the ACA is
therefore that, in the absence of the treatment, any changes in the outcomes that would have
occurred in 2014 would not have varied differentially by state uninsured rates, conditional on the
controls. This strikes us as a more defensible assumption than the one from equation (1) that
there would have been no changes at all in 2014.
Similarly, the effect of the Medicaid expansion is given by ߛଷ ∗ ܷܰ‫ܦܧܴܷܵܰܫ‬௔௦ . As is
the case with the private portion of the ACA, the impact of the Medicaid expansion is now
assumed to vary linearly with the state’s baseline uninsured rate. Since it seems reasonable that

16

Local area pre-ACA uninsured rates reach as low as 3 percent in our data, so we do observe areas that are
reasonably close to the hypothetical 0 percent. We have experimented with non-linear functional forms (e.g.
quadratic, including a series of dummy variables) for the uninsured rate and found that they do not reveal any
meaningful new information.

14

the Medicaid expansion should not impact insurance coverage in areas with a 0 percent baseline
uninsured rate, we consider ߛଶ to capture unobserved confounders rather than representing part
of the expansion’s causal effect.17 Our identifying assumption for the impact of the Medicaid
expansion is therefore that, to whatever extent insurance would have changed differently in
expansion versus non-expansion states in the absence of the ACA, these differences were not
systematically correlated with pre-ACA uninsured rates (conditional on the controls). This is a
weaker assumption than that of the difference-in-differences model from equation (1), which
requires no differential changes between expansion and non-expansion states.
B. Robustness Checks
We also estimate a number of variants of equation (2) as robustness checks. Most of these
checks experiment with dropping certain sets of control variables since many – such as income,
unemployment, student status, marital status, and possibly even number of children – could be
endogenous to the ACA and therefore lead to an over-controlling problem. Our sparsest model
includes only the most obviously exogenous controls, which are the demographic characteristics
age, gender, and race/ethnicity. To isolate the influence of each of the other categories of
controls, we also estimate models with demographic and family characteristics, demographic and
economic characteristics, and demographic characteristics plus the state exchange variables.
Our final robustness check addresses the issue of whether it is appropriate to interact both
ܱܲܵܶ௧ and ‫ܦܫܣܥܫܦܧܯ‬௦ ∗ ܱܲܵܶ௧ with the same uninsured rate variable since the Medicaid
expansion and non-Medicaid expansion components of the ACA applied to different populations.
Specifically, the Medicaid expansion was for those below 138 percent of the Federal Poverty
Line (FPL) while the exchanges and subsidies were for those above 100 percent FPL. We
17

Not considering our estimate of ߛଶ to be interpretable as a causal effect is consistent with the interpretation used
by Miller (2012) in her study that used a pre-treatment uninsured rate-based strategy to estimate the effects of the
Massachusetts health care reform.

15

therefore interact ܱܲܵܶ௧ with the pre-ACA uninsured rate for respondents in our dataset above
100 percent FPL and ‫ܦܫܣܥܫܦܧܯ‬௦ ∗ ܱܲܵܶ௧ with the rate for those below 138 percent FPL. We
prefer to use this as a robustness check rather than our main model for three reasons. First, our
income variable is self-reported and could therefore be subject to measurement error. Second, we
observe gross income whereas the ACA cutoffs are based on modified adjusted gross income, so
the delineations are not exact.18 Third, some components of the ACA – such as the individual
mandate – could affect uninsured individuals throughout the income distribution. In any event,
the baseline uninsured rates for those above 100 percent FPL and below 138 percent FPL have a
very high correlation of 0.8 so we expect the results to remain similar.
C. Results
The discussion of our regression results begins with an examination of the estimated
effects of the ACA on the probability of respondents having any insurance coverage reported in
table 3. The top panel presents the coefficient estimates for the treatment variables. The bottom
panel uses these estimates to compute the implied effects of the private (non-Medicaid
expansion) and Medicaid expansion components of the ACA, as well as the full (private plus
Medicaid expansion) ACA, at the sample mean pre-treatment uninsured rate. For the DDD
specifications, the estimated effects of the private portion, Medicaid portion, and full ACA at the

തതതതതതതതതതതതതതതത௔௦ , ߛଷ ∗ തܷܰ‫ܦܧܴܷܵܰܫ‬
തതതതതതതതതതതതതതതത௔௦ and (ߛଵ + ߛଷ ) ∗ തܷܰ‫ܦܧܴܷܵܰܫ‬
തതതതതതതതതതതതതതതത௔௦ ,
mean are ߛଵ ∗ തܷܰ‫ܦܧܴܷܵܰܫ‬
തതതതതതതതതതതതതതതത௔௦ = 0.203 or 20.3 percent.19
respectively, where തܷܰ‫ܦܧܴܷܵܰܫ‬
The first column of table 3 provides the estimates from our “naïve” difference-indifferences specification represented by equation (1). Our coefficient estimate for the post-

18

For further detail, see http://laborcenter.berkeley.edu/pdf/2013/MAGI_summary13.pdf
We have also computed the average effects across all individuals in the sample (using each individual’s local area
pre-treatment uninsured rate) and found them to be very similar to the effects at the mean. We therefore do not
report both numbers.
19

16

reform indicator (ߚଵ ) suggests that the 2014 implementation of the non-Medicaid expansion
components of the ACA was associated with a 2.7 percentage point increase in the probability of
having insurance. The coefficient estimate for the Medicaid expansion / post-reform interaction
(ߚଶ ) suggests that the choice to expand Medicaid in 2014 was associated with an additional 0.9
percentage point increase in insurance coverage for the typical expansion state. Taken together,
these coefficient estimates (ߚመଵ + ߚመଶ ) suggest that full implementation of the ACA was associated
with a 3.6 percentage point increase in coverage among non-elderly adults, which represents a
4.5 percent increase relative to the pre-2014 average coverage rate of 80.4 percent.
As discussed previously, we are hesitant to give these estimates a causal interpretation.
We therefore report in the second column of table 3 the results from our preferred DDD
specification with a complete set of controls. In an area with the average pre-treatment uninsured
rate, we estimate that the non-Medicaid expansion components of the ACA increased the
coverage rate by 3.0 percentage points while the Medicaid expansion added another 2.9
percentage points. Thus, fully implementing the ACA increased insurance coverage by 5.9
percentage points (or 7.3 percent). The naïve DD model therefore appears to substantially
understate the effect of the Medicaid expansion, and consequently the effect of the full ACA as
well. It is interesting, and perhaps surprising, that switching from the DD to the DDD
specification leads to a more substantial change in the estimate for the Medicaid expansion than
that for the non-Medicaid part of the ACA. Omitting ܷܰ‫ܦܧܴܷܵܰܫ‬௦ ∗ ܱܲܵܶ௧ in equation (1)
therefore appears to lead to a downward bias in the estimated Medicaid effect. This occurs
because states with high baseline uninsured rates were less likely to adopt the Medicaid
expansion: the correlation between ܷܰ‫ܦܧܴܷܵܰܫ‬௔௦ and ‫ܦܫܣܥܫܦܧܯ‬௦ is -0.113.

17

The next five columns in table 3 present the results from the robustness checks. Our
estimates remain similar and are statistically significant in all cases. At the mean pre-treatment
uninsured rate, the estimated effect of the full ACA effect on the probability of having any
insurance coverage varies from 5.7 to 6.2 percentage points across these different specifications.
The estimated effects of the non-Medicaid and Medicaid components range from 2.9 to 3.3
percentage points and 2.3 to 3.0 percentage points, respectively.
Table 4 shows the estimated effects of the ACA on the sources of health insurance
coverage using our preferred DDD specification with a complete set of controls. Tables A1 to A5
in the online appendix present the results from the other specifications for these outcomes. The
first column of table 4 shows the results for private health insurance, regardless of whether the
coverage is provided by the employer (ESI) or individually purchased. The second and third
columns show the effects of the ACA on these two types of coverage separately. The fourth
column shows the results for Medicaid coverage, and the fifth shows the effect on any other
sources of coverage. Recall that these sources of coverage are not mutually exclusive, so we
should not expect, for instance, the sum of the effects on all these sources to be exactly equal to
the overall increase in coverage estimated in table 3. This is also the reason why we do not
consider econometric models for mutually exclusive choices such as multinomial logits.
Our results suggest that the full implementation of the ACA is predicted to increase
private insurance coverage by 2.4 percentage points (from the base of 67.2 percent reported in
table 1) in an area with the mean pre-treatment uninsured rate. Surprisingly, this increase in
private health insurance coverage is mainly due to an increase in ESI rather than additional
privately purchased coverage via the exchanges. On average, ESI increased 1.6 percentage points
(from a base of 59.8 percent), while individually purchased insurance increased 0.9 percentage

18

points (from a base of 9.6 percent). One possible explanation for the relatively large increase in
ESI is the individual mandate, which could increase take-up among employees, their spouses, or
their dependents. The employer mandate is not a likely explanation since it had not yet taken
effect in 2014, though voluntary early compliance is possible. Another interesting result from the
regressions for private sources of coverage is that we find no evidence of crowd-out from the
Medicaid expansion. The effects of the Medicaid expansion on having any private coverage, ESI,
and individually purchased insurance are all very small and not statistically significant (-0.0004
percentage points for any private coverage, 0.003 for ESI, and -0.002 for individually purchased
insurance at the mean uninsured rate).
Results from the fourth column of table 4 suggest that the ACA Medicaid expansion
increased Medicaid enrollment by 3.2 percentage points (28 percent of the base of 11.4 percent)
at the mean pre-treatment uninsured rate. In addition, our results show that the fully implemented
ACA increases the probability of having Medicaid coverage by 3.8 percentage points, with the
remaining 0.6 percentage points coming the private portion (though the estimate for the private
portion is not quite statistically significant). It seems plausible that the ACA could have induced
modest increases in Medicaid take-up – due to the individual mandate or simply heightened
awareness of coverage options– even in states that opted out of the Medicaid expansion.20
The last column of table 4 shows that there is no evidence that the ACA affected the
probability of having other sources of coverage (e.g. Medicare, Tricare, VA). The estimated
effects of the Medicaid expansion and non-Medicaid expansion components, as well as the full
ACA, are all very small and insignificant. These null results are not surprising since the ACA
deliberately aimed to not disrupt these other types of health insurance coverage.
20

Sonier et al. (2013) discusses the potential for this “woodwork” or “welcome-mat” effect. Marton and Yelowitz
(2015) highlight that non-participating eligibles may view themselves as “conditionally covered” and the individual
mandate then compels such participation.

19

Tables 3 and 4 only compute impacts of the ACA at the mean pre-treatment uninsured
rate of 20.3 percent. This approach masks considerable heterogeneity in the law’s effects since
local area pre-treatment uninsured rates varied widely, ranging from 3 to 53 percent with a
standard deviation of 7 percent. Figure 2 therefore shows how the predicted changes in coverage
vary across this range of uninsured rates in both Medicaid expansion and non-expansion states.
We see that for practically every type of coverage the larger the proportion of population
uninsured in 2013 in the state, the larger the gain in coverage. The only exception is the “other
source of coverage” category for the ACA without a Medicaid expansion, and this is highly
statistically insignificant.
More specifically, the top left graph on figure 2 shows that the predicted impact of the
full ACA on the probability of having any insurance coverage reached as high as 15.4 percentage
points at the highest pre-treatment uninsured rate (53 percent) observed in our sample. In
contrast, without the Medicaid expansion the maximum effect was only 7.8 percentage points.
Not surprisingly, this difference in maximum impacts is due entirely to differences in the
increases in Medicaid coverage. The “Medicaid coverage” graph predicts increases in Medicaid
coverage that reach as high as 9.7 and 1.4 percentage points in Medicaid expansion and nonexpansion states, respectively.
In the cases of any private, employer provided, individually purchased and other
coverage, the coverage effects may appear slightly different in Medicaid expansion versus nonexpansion states, but these differences are never statistically significant at any level of uninsurance. We therefore focus on the results for the full ACA, including the Medicaid expansion.
At the highest uninsured rate of 53 percent, we estimate that the full ACA increased private

20

coverage by 6.3 percentage points, increased ESI by 4.1 percentage points, increased individual
coverage by 2.3 percentage points, and had no significant effect on other coverage.

V. FALSIFICATION TESTS
As discussed previously, identification of the parameters of interest in our models from
section IV relies on two key assumptions. Conditional on the controls, if the ACA had not
occurred 1) changes in insurance coverage in 2014 would not have been correlated with pretreatment uninsured rates, and 2) any differential changes in insurance coverage in 2014 between
Medicaid expansion and non-expansion states would not have been correlated with pre-treatment
uninsured rates. Of course, it is not possible to directly test these assumptions since we cannot
observe the counterfactual. However, we can indirectly assess the likelihood of these
assumptions holding by evaluating changes in the pre-treatment years. If “placebo” interventions
during the pre-treatment period are associated with significant changes in coverage, this would
suggest that significant changes may have also occurred in 2014 even in the absence of the ACA,
in which case our main results cannot be given a causal interpretation.
We conduct these placebo analyses by running the baseline DDD model given by
equation (2) using only the pre-treatment portion of the sample (2011-2013) and pre-dating the
intervention. The first test defines 2011 to be a pre-treatment year and 2012-2013 to be posttreatment years, while the second defines 2011-2012 as pre-treatment years and 2013 as the posttreatment year. Table 5 presents the results for the coefficients on ܷܰ‫ܦܧܴܷܵܰܫ‬௔௦ ∗ ܱܲܵܶ௧ and
ܷܰ‫ܦܧܴܷܵܰܫ‬௔௦ ∗ ‫ܦܫܣܥܫܦܧܯ‬௦ ∗ ܱܲܵܶ௧ from the DDD specification with the full set of controls.
With twelve regressions and two coefficients of interest in each, there are a total of 24
falsification tests. We observe only one statistically significant result: ܷܰ‫ܦܧܴܷܵܰܫ‬௔௦ ∗ ܱܲܵܶ௧
in the regression for individually purchased coverage. In other words, 1/24 tests, or 4.2 percent,
21

yield significant “effects” at a 5 percent significance level, which is essentially what we would
expect by chance even for true null hypotheses. In sum, these results provide reassurance about
the validity of our model to estimate causal effects for the “true” ACA.
Another way we evaluate the assumption of common pre-treatment trends is with an
event study model that interacts the treatment variables with the full set of year fixed effects,
leaving 2013 as the base year. The regression takes the form
‫ݕ‬௜௔௦௧ = ߠ଴ + ߠଵ (ܷܰ‫ܦܧܴܷܵܰܫ‬௔௦ ∗ ܻ2011௧ ) + ߠଶ (ܷܰ‫ܦܧܴܷܵܰܫ‬௔௦ ∗ ܻ2012௧ ) +
ߠଷ (ܷܰ‫ܦܧܴܷܵܰܫ‬௔௦ ∗ ܻ2014௧ ) + ߠସ (‫ܦܫܣܥܫܦܧܯ‬௦ ∗ ܻ2011௧ ) + ߠହ (‫ܦܫܣܥܫܦܧܯ‬௦ ∗ ܻ2012௧ ) +
ߠ଺ (‫ܦܫܣܥܫܦܧܯ‬௦ ∗ ܻ2014௧ ) + ߠ଻ (ܷܰ‫ܦܧܴܷܵܰܫ‬௔௦ ∗ ‫ܦܫܣܥܫܦܧܯ‬௦ ∗ ܻ2011௧ ) +
ߠ଼ (ܷܰ‫ܦܧܴܷܵܰܫ‬௔௦ ∗ ‫ܦܫܣܥܫܦܧܯ‬௦ ∗ ܻ2012௧ ) + ߠଽ (ܷܰ‫ܦܧܴܷܵܰܫ‬௔௦ ∗ ‫ܦܫܣܥܫܦܧܯ‬௦ ∗
ܻ2014௧ ) + ࣂ૚૙ ࢄ࢏ࢇ࢙࢚ + ߬ఛ + ߙ௔௦ + ߝ௜௔௦௧

(3)

where ܻ2011௧ , ܻ2012௧ , and ܻ2014௧ are indicators for whether year t is 2011, 2012, and 2014,
respectively. The falsification tests are whether the coefficients on the “treatment” variables in
the pre-treatment years (ߠଵ , ߠଶ , ߠ଻ , ߠ଼ ) are equal to zero.
Table 6 presents the event study results for each of the six outcomes using the full set of
controls. The top panel presents the coefficient estimates of interest. There are again 24
falsification tests (one for each parameter of interest related to 2011 and 2012) and only one
significant result at the 5 percent level. The bottom panel of the table uses the results from the
2014 interaction terms to compute the effects of the ACA without the Medicaid expansion, the
Medicaid expansion, and the full ACA. The estimated impacts of the “true” ACA, shown in the
bottom panel, are very similar to those from tables 3 and 4.

22

VI. SUBSAMPLE ANALYSES
Our baseline DDD model described in equation (2) does not allow our estimates of the
impact of the ACA to vary by any of the demographic characteristics contained in ࢄ࢏ࢇ࢙࢚, such as
income, race/ethnicity, age, gender, or marital status. Because we expect the impact of the ACA
to differ in a meaningful way across demographic groups, we estimate a series of subsample
regressions in order to assess the magnitude of these differences. In general, we expect that
demographic groups with the highest pre-treatment uninsured rates generate the largest gains in
coverage in 2014. For example, table 1 shows that non-whites makes up 36.8 percent of our
sample, but 44.2 percent of those whose baseline uninsured rate is above the median. Thus,
everything else equal, we would expect larger gains in coverage for non-whites as compared to
non-Hispanic whites. Similarly, pre-ACA uninsured rates were highest for low-income
individuals, young adults, men, and unmarried individuals. Additionally, the design of the
subsidies for exchange coverage and the fact that several states opted out of the Medicaid
expansion generates the potential for further differential gains in coverage across certain
demographic characteristics, such as income and age.
For each subsample, we re-compute the pre-treatment uninsured rate using only
individuals within that particular subsample. Since each subsample must therefore contain
enough respondents in the 2013 to precisely compute uninsured rates at the local level, we are
constrained to a maximum of two or three subsamples for each of our demographic
stratifications. For instance, we might ideally prefer to stratify our sample into four race/ethnicity
subsamples – non-Hispanic white, non-Hispanic black, Hispanic, and other – but some of our
local areas have such a low proportion of blacks or Hispanics that the 2013 ACS sample size

23

from those areas is insufficient to credibly compute pre-treatment uninsured rates. Consequently,
we only separate the sample into non-Hispanic whites versus others.
Table 7 presents the results of a stratification of our sample into three groups based on
income: those under 138 percent FPL, those between 138 and 400 percent FPL, and those above
400 percent FPL. As discussed in Courtemanche et al. (2016), non-elderly adults below 100
percent FPL are eligible for Medicaid in expansion states, but not in states that opted out of the
expansion. Those with income between 100 and 137 percent FPL are also eligible for Medicaid
in expansion states and for subsidized exchange coverage in non-expansion states.21 In all states,
those with incomes between 138 and 400 of the FPL are eligible for subsidized exchange
coverage with a sliding-scale subsidy. Finally, those with incomes above 400 percent FPL are
not eligible for a subsidy, but do face the individual mandate.22
A potential complication with stratifying by income is that income could be endogenous
to the ACA. For this reason, Kaestner et al. (2015) defined the sample based on education levels
rather than income levels in their analysis of the effects of the ACA’s Medicaid expansion on
low socio-economic status individuals. However, our interpretation of the recent literature is that
any such selection issues are likely to be minor. Kaestner et al. (2015) found no evidence that the
ACA Medicaid expansion affected employment or work hours, while results from the
randomized Oregon experiment suggest no effect of Medicaid on employment or earnings
(Baicker et al., 2014). Early evidence on the ACA dependent coverage mandate suggested a
reduction in labor supply among young adults after becoming eligible for parental coverage
(Akosa Antwi et al., 2013), but this result has been challenged on methodological grounds

21

We did not further separate those under 100 percent FPL from those between 100 and 138 percent due to
insufficient numbers of pre-treatment individuals in the 100 to 138 FPL range in some local areas.
22
Note that our income stratifications might not exactly match to these eligibility cutoffs, both because of reporting
error and the fact that we observe gross income whereas eligibility is based on modified adjusted gross income.

24

(Slusky, 2015). Nonetheless, we have verified that if we stratify by education rather than income
(e.g. high school education or less, some college, and college degree or more), we observe the
same general pattern of results. These results are available upon request.
Our results reported in table 7 suggest that, in expansion states, the largest effects on
insurance coverage occurred among those with incomes below 138 percent FPL. Full
implementation of the ACA is predicted to increase coverage by 10.3 percentage points for this
group, from a base of 61 percent. This can be primarily attributed to an increase in Medicaid
coverage of 8.8 percentage points. As mentioned, individuals (not already eligible) within this
income range in expansion states were made newly eligible for free Medicaid coverage.
Another interesting result for the low-income subsample is that, in contrast to the fullsample results, we find some evidence of crowd out: the Medicaid expansion reduced private
coverage by 1.8 percentage points, split roughly evenly between ESI and individually purchased
coverage. This is a non-trivial magnitude, as it represents 23 percent of the 8 percentage point
increase in Medicaid coverage from the Medicaid expansion. Kaestner et al. (2015) estimated a
very similar Medicaid crowd-out rate in their sample of adults with relatively low education
levels. They found a 4 percentage point increase in Medicaid coverage and a 1 percentage point
reduction in private coverage, for a crowd-out rate of 25 percent. Nonetheless, both our estimate
and that of Kaestner et al. (2015) are statistically insignificant, so these results should not be
taken as definitive evidence of crowd-out.
Among those with incomes between 138 and 400 percent FPL, full implementation of the
ACA is predicted to increase coverage by 6.3 percentage points (from a base of 76.3 percent).
An increase in private coverage appears to be the main driver of coverage gains for this group, as
full implementation of the ACA increased private coverage by 5 percentage points, accompanied

25

by a smaller increase in Medicaid coverage (1.5 percentage points). This increase in private
coverage comes from both gains in the take up of employer-provided coverage, perhaps
encouraged by the individual mandate, and new access to subsidized exchange coverage.
Interestingly, in states that did not expand Medicaid, overall coverage gains among those in the
138 to 400 percent range (4.6 percentage points) are essentially the same as those among
individuals below 138 percent (4.8 percentage points).
In both expansion and non-expansion states, by far the smallest gains in coverage are
among those with incomes above 400 percent FPL. We estimate that full implementation of the
ACA increases coverage by 1.6 percentage points (from a base of 93.3 percent). The majority of
this effect comes from an increase in private insurance coverage (1.1 percentage points).
Next we stratify the sample by age into three categories, those 18-34, those 35-49, and
those 50-64. Table 8 reports pre-treatment uninsured rates that decline with age, falling from
25.7 percent for the youngest group to 14.5 percent for the oldest group. The reason for being
uninsured likely differs by age, with the relatively young possibly viewing health insurance as an
unnecessary expense given their good overall health, while older individuals may have trouble
finding affordable coverage due to poor health. Given the individual mandate, both groups may
find exchange coverage attractive for different reasons, such as the potential for a premium
subsidy (benefiting the young) and the presence of a more diverse risk pool (benefiting the old).
Table 8 shows that the largest gains in coverage are for the 18-34 year old group. Full
implementation of the ACA is predicted to increase coverage by 7.3 percentage points among
this group, by 4.9 percentage points among 35-49 year olds, and by 5.3 percentage points among
50-64 year olds. For all age groups, increases in Medicaid coverage account for more than half of

26

the increase in coverage. In addition, the full effect of the ACA on individually purchased
insurance for 18-34 and 50-64 year olds is larger than for 35-49 year olds, as predicted.
Table 9 reports results based on a stratification of our sample by race/ethnicity. We group
individuals into two categories: non-Hispanic white or non-white. The pre-treatment uninsured
rate among non-whites (30.3 percent) is roughly twice that for non-Hispanic whites (14.4
percent), so we expect bigger gains in coverage for non-whites. Our results support this
hypothesis, as non-whites experience an estimated increase in coverage of 7.9 percentage points,
whereas non-Hispanic whites experience an estimated 5.7 percentage point increase in coverage
from full ACA implementation. For both groups the increase in Medicaid coverage was larger
than the increase in private insurance coverage.23
Table 10 presents results stratifying by marital status. Full implementation of the ACA
increased coverage by 8.3 percentage points (from a base of 73.3 percent) among the unmarried
compared to just 4.1 percentage points (from a base of 85.9 percent) among the married. Among
the married, full implementation of the ACA is predicted to increase Medicaid coverage by 2.4
percentage points and private insurance coverage by 1.9 percentage points (roughly split between
increases in individually purchased insurance and ESI). Among the unmarried, full
implementation of the ACA is predicted to increase Medicaid coverage by 5.5 percentage points
and private insurance coverage by 3.0 percentage points (with the majority of this increase
coming from gains in ESI).
Finally, we stratified the sample by gender but did not observe evidence of any
noteworthy differences in the effects of the ACA between men and women. We therefore do not
discuss the results further and relegate them to table A6 of the online appendix.
23

For non-Hispanic whites, the increase in Medicaid coverage from full ACA implementation is 4.9 percentage
points and the increase in private coverage is 1.6 percentage points. For non-whites, these values are 4.3 and 3.4
percentage points, respectively.

27

VII. DISCUSSION
Overall, our results suggest that, at the average local area pre-treatment uninsured rate,
the Medicaid expansion component of the ACA increased coverage by 2.9 percentage points in
2014, while the implementation of the other components of the ACA increased coverage by 3.0
percentage points. Thus fully implementing all of the 2014 provisions of the ACA is predicted to
increase coverage by 5.9 percentage points. Since the 2013 non-elderly uninsured rate was 20.3
percent, our estimates imply that if the ACA had been fully implemented in all states, the nonelderly uninsured rate would have fallen by 29 percent. In contrast, the actual effect of the ACA
– computed by taking the population-weighted average of the effects in Medicaid expansion and
non-expansion states – has been just 22.55 percent.24
These results for overall coverage alone extend the literature in several important ways.
First, a simple comparison of the difference in coverage gains between Medicaid expansion and
non-expansion states reported in the descriptive literature (Long et al., 2014; Smith and Medalia,
2015; Courtemanche et al., 2016) suggests merely an additional 1-1.5 percentage point coverage
gain in expansion states in 2014. Our results suggest that the causal impact of the Medicaid
expansion at the mean pre-treatment uninsured rate is roughly two to three times as large as these
descriptive estimates. This highlights the value of our approach, which allows us to control for
observed and unobserved confounders. An accurate estimate of the share of the increase in
coverage that can be attributed to the Medicaid expansion is information of crucial importance to
state policymakers considering such an expansion.
Second, our use of an alternative identification strategy allows us to separately estimate
the causal impact of the Medicaid expansion and the casual impact of the other components of
24

54.37 percent of our sample lives in states that expanded Medicaid while 45.63 percent lived in non-expansion
states. The weighted average effect is therefore 5.9 percentage points * 54.37 percent + 3.0 percentage points *
45.63 percent, which comes to 4.58 percentage points, or 22.55 percent of the 20.3 percent baseline uninsured rate.

28

the ACA. Our estimate of the impact of the Medicaid expansion (2.9 percentage points) on any
form of coverage among non-elderly adults is similar to Kaestner et al.’s (2015) estimate of 3
percentage points, though their sample only included adults with no further than a high school
education. 25 However, their approach does not allow them to estimate the causal impact of the
other components of the ACA, which we estimate to be roughly equal in magnitude (3.0
percentage points) to the impact of the Medicaid expansion on any form of coverage.
Third, we evaluate the impact of the ACA on a relatively detailed set of sources of
insurance. Two of the descriptive studies we described, Long et al. (2014) and Smith and
Medalia (2015), do not differentiate between different sources of coverage at all, while Kaestner
et al. (2015) only considers two sources of coverage, Medicaid and private coverage. We
differentiate between private coverage coming from the employer-provided group market and
that coming from the non-group market (such as exchange coverage) and discover that a slightly
larger share of the increase in private coverage resulting from the ACA is attributable to ESI as
opposed to individually purchased plans. This is a surprising and interesting result for two
reasons. First, we might have expected a smaller effect on ESI, since the ACA deliberately did
not try to alter the employer-provided market, and the employer mandate had not yet taken effect
in 2014. One possible explanation is that the individual mandate may have increased take-up of
ESI, either among employees or their spouse or dependents. Second, we might have expected a
larger effect on individually purchased insurance since 8 million people enrolled in the
exchanges in 2014 (HHS, 2014). Multiplying our results (1.1 percentage point increase in private
coverage) by the number of US residents (199 million; Colby and Ortman, 2015) in the 18-64
25

In addition, our results from table 4 suggest that the Medicaid expansion increased Medicaid enrollment by 3.2
percentage points at the mean pre-treatment uninsured rate. This result is slightly lower than Kaestner et al.’s
estimated 4 percentage point effect of the Medicaid expansion on Medicaid coverage among individuals with low
education levels.

29

age range in 2014 and dividing by 8 million, we compute that only 27.36 percent of people who
purchased a plan through the exchanges were newly covered. In other words, our results imply
that most individuals in the exchanges in 2014 already had some form of insurance in 2013. This
can be considered a form of crowd-out since most exchange plans were subsidized. Of course,
even if individuals participating in the exchanges already had some sort of insurance prior to the
ACA taking effect, the quality of their coverage may have improved with regard to deductibles,
copayments, and range of services covered.
Another contribution of our paper is to present several new results related to
heterogeneity in the ACA’s impacts. We found that the coverage gains from the full ACA were
largest for those with incomes below the Medicaid eligibility threshold, non-whites, young
adults, and unmarried individuals. These results have important implications for disparities. For
instance, our estimates imply that the fully implemented ACA reduced the difference in
uninsured rates between the lowest (under 138 percent FPL) and highest (over 400 percent FPL)
income groups by 8.7 percentage points, or 27 percent.26 However, the ACA without the
Medicaid expansion only lowered this gap by 11 percent.27 Similarly, the fully implemented
ACA lowered the coverage disparity between whites and non-whites by 2.2 percentage points, or
14 percent, whereas the ACA without the Medicaid expansion actually increased this disparity.28

26

These calculations are based on the results from table 7. The 2013 uninsured rates for the low and high income
groups were 39 percent and 6.7 percent, respectively, for a difference of 32.3 percentage points. Subtracting the
estimated effects of the full ACA for the two groups (10.3 and 1.6 percentage points) reduces this difference to 23.6
percentage points. Therefore, the full ACA reduced the disparity by 8.7 percentage points, or 27 percent of 32.3.
27
This calculation is based on the same process discussed in the previous footnote, but replacing the 10.3 and 1.6
percentage point effects from the full ACA with the 4.8 and 1.3 percentage point effects among the low and high
income groups from the ACA without the Medicaid expansion.
28
These calculations are based on the results from table 9. The 2013 uninsured rates for non-whites and whites were
30.3 percent and 14.4 percent, for a difference of 15.9 percentage points. Subtracting the estimated effects of the full
ACA for the two groups reduces this difference to 13.7 percentage points, for a 2.2 percentage point reduction,
which represents 14 percent of 15.9. The claim that the ACA without the Medicaid expansion increased the disparity
is based on the finding from table 8 that the non-Medicaid portions of the ACA led to larger coverage gains among
whites than non-whites.

30

Our income stratifications also contribute to the debate surrounding the potential for
Medicaid to crowd-out private insurance among low-income individuals. We estimate that,
among adults with incomes below the ACA’s Medicaid eligibility threshold, the Medicaid
expansion increased Medicaid coverage by 8 percentage points while decreasing private
coverage by 1.8 percentage points, for a crowd out rate of 23 percent. This is very similar to the
25 percent crowd-out rate obtained by Kaestner et al. (2015) in their sample of low-education
adults. While these magnitudes seem sizeable, the effects in both studies are statistically
insignificant and therefore should be deemed inconclusive.
Our final contribution is methodological: our identification strategy for the non-Medicaid
expansion portion of the ACA can potentially be used in future research to identify the impacts
of the ACA on other outcomes such as health care utilization, health, and personal finances. It
should be noted, though, that identifying off of pre-treatment uninsured rates implicitly assumes
that the extensive margin of coverage is the only pathway through which the ACA affects the
outcome. We find this assumption reasonable in the context of health insurance coverage, but it
may be more problematic for outcomes such as health care utilization and health. In these cases,
other mechanisms such as the quality of coverage (intensive margin) and the income
redistribution caused by the ACA’s subsidies and community rating might be expected to play a
role as well, so the identification strategy would need to be adjusted accordingly.
An obvious caveat of our work is that, due to data availability, we only estimate the
effects in the first year of full ACA implementation, 2014. As future waves of the ACS become
available, it would be worthwhile to revisit our estimates. The number of people who purchased
a plan through the ACA’s exchanges rose from 8 million in 2014 to 8.8 million in 2015, and 12.7
million have selected a marketplace plan in 2016. The impacts on individually purchased

31

coverage and overall coverage may therefore have become stronger over time. 29 Additionally,
the employer mandate had not yet taken effect in 2014.30 Nonetheless, our paper provides
important evidence about the ACA’s early effects that can help guide ongoing policy debates.

REFERENCES
Aizer, Anna. (2007). Public Health Insurance, Program Take-up, and Child Health. The Review
of Economics and Statistics, 89 (3), 400-15.
Akosa Antwi, Yaa, Asako S. Moriya, and Kosali Simon. (2013). Effects of Federal Policy to
Insure Young Adults: Evidence from the 2010 Affordable Care Act Dependent Coverage
Mandate. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 5, 1-28.
Baicker, Katherine, Amy Finkelstein, Jae Song, and Sarah Taubman (2014). The Impact of
Medicaid on Labor Market Activity and Program Participation: Evidence from the Oregon
Health Insurance Experiment. American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings, 104(5),
322-328.
Barbaresco, Silvia, Charles Courtemanche, and Yanling Qi. (2015). Impacts of the Affordable
Care Act Dependent Coverage Provision on Health-related Outcomes of Young Adults. Journal
of Health Economics, 40, 54-68.
Buchmueller, Thomas, John C. Ham, Lara D. Shore-Sheppard. (2015). Medicaid. Means-Tested
Transfer Programs in the United States, II. Robert Moffitt, editor. Forthcoming.
Busch, Susan H. and Noelia Duchovny. (2005). Family Coverage Expansions: Impact on
Insurance Coverage and Health Care Utilization of Parents. Journal of Health Economics, 24 (5),
876-90.
Colby, Sandra L. and Jennifer M. Ortman, U.S. Census Bureau, Current Population Reports,
P25-1143, Projections of the Size and Composition of the U.S. Population: 2014 to 2060, U.S.
Government Printing Office, Washington, DC, 2015.
Courtemanche, Charles and Daniela Zapata. (2014). Does Universal Coverage Improve Health?
The Massachusetts Experience. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 33 (1), 36-69.

29

For more information on exchange enrollment, see the following Kaiser Family Foundation websites:
http://kff.org/health-reform/state-indicator/marketplace-enrollment-as-a-share-of-the-potential-marketplacepopulation-2015/, http://kff.org/health-reform/state-indicator/state-marketplace-statistics/
30
See the Kaiser Family Foundation ACA implementation timeline for more information:
http://kff.org/interactive/implementation-timeline/

32

Courtemanche, Charles, James Marton, and Aaron Yelowitz (2016). Who Gained Insurance
Coverage in 2014, the First Year of Full ACA Implementation? Health Economics, forthcoming
Cutler, David M and Jonathan Gruber. (1996). Does Public Insurance Crowd out Private
Insurance? The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111 (2), 391-430.
Finkelstein, Amy. (2007). The Aggregate Effects of Health Insurance: Evidence from the
Introduction of Medicare. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122 (1), 1-37.
Gruber, Jonathan. (2011). The Impacts of the Affordable Care Act: How Reasonable Are the
Projections? National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 17168. Cambridge, MA:
National Bureau of Economic Research.
Hamersma, Sarah and Matthew Kim. 2013. Participation and Crowd Out: Assessing the Effects
of Parental Medicaid Expansions. Journal of Health Economics, 32 (1), 160-71.
Kaiser Family Foundation. State decisions on health insurance marketplaces and the Medicaid
expansion, 2014.
Kenney, Genevieve, R. Andrew Allison, Julia F. Costich, James Marton, and Joshua McFeeters.
(2006). Effects of Premium Increases on Enrollment in SCHIP: Findings from Three States.
INQUIRY: The Journal of Health Care Organization, Provision, and Financing, 43 (4), 378-92.
Kowalski, Amanda. (2014).The Early Impact of the Affordable Care Act State-by-State.
National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 20597. Cambridge, MA: National
Bureau of Economic Research.
Long, Sharon K., Michael Karpman, Adele Shartzer, Douglas Wissoker, Genevieve M. Kenney,
Stephen Zucherman, Nathanial Anderson, & Katherine Hempstead. (2014). Taking Stock: Health
Insurance Coverage under the ACA as of September 2014. Washington, DC: Urban Institute.
Long, Sharon K., Karen Stockley, & Alshadye Yemane. (2009). Another Look at the Impacts of
Health Reform in Massachusetts: Evidence using New Data and a Stronger Model. American
Economic Review, Papers & Proceedings, 99 (2), 508-511.
Marton, James. (2007). The Impact of the Introduction of Premiums into a SCHIP Program.
Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 26 (2), 237-55.
Marton, James, Patricia G. Ketsche, Angela Snyder, E. Kathleen Adams, and Mei Zhou. (2015).
Estimating Premium Sensitivity for Children's Public Health Insurance Coverage: Selection but
No Death Spiral. Health Services Research, 50 (2), 579-598.
Marton, James, Angela Snyder, and Mei Zhou. (2016). Enhanced Citizenship Verification and
Children’s Medicaid Coverage. Economic Inquiry, forthcoming.
Marton, James and Aaron Yelowitz. (2015). Health Insurance Generosity and Conditional
33

Coverage: Evidence from Medicaid Managed Care in Kentucky. Southern Economic Journal,
82(2), 535-555.
Marton, James, Aaron Yelowitz, and Jeffery C. Talbert. (2014). A Tale of Two Cities? The
Heterogeneous Impact of Medicaid Managed Care. Journal of Health Economics, 36, 47-68.
Marton, James, Aaron Yelowitz, Jeffery C. Talbert, and Meredith Shores. (2016). Does Medicaid
Managed Care Help Equalize Racial and Ethnic Disparities in Utilization? Health Services
Research, forthcoming.
Medicaid and CHIP Payment and Access Commission. (2015). Expanding Medicaid to the New
Adult Group through Section 1115 Waivers. MACPAC Fact Sheet.
Miller, Sara. (2012). The Effect of Insurance on Emergency Room Visits: An Analysis of the
2006 Massachusetts Health Reform. Journal of Public Economics, 96, 893–908.
Mishra, Abhay N., Patricia Ketsche, James Marton, Angela Snyder, and Susan McLaren. (2014).
Examining the Potential of Information Technology to Improve Public Insurance Application
Processes: Enrollee Assessments from a Concurrent Mixed Method Analysis. Journal of the
American Medical Informatics Association, 21 (6), 1045-1052.
Slusky, David (forthcoming). Significant Placebo Results in Difference-in-Differences Analysis:
The Case of the ACA’s Parental Mandate. Eastern Economic Journal.
Smith, Jessica C. and Carla Medalia, U.S. Census Bureau, Current Population Reports, P60-250,
Health Insurance Coverage in the United States: 2013, U.S. Government Printing Office,
Washington, DC, 2014.
Smith, Jessica C. and Carla Medalia, U.S. Census Bureau, Current Population Reports, P60-253,
Health Insurance Coverage in the United States: 2014, U.S. Government Printing Office,
Washington, DC, 2015.
Sommers, Benjamin D. (2010). Targeting in Medicaid: The Costs and Enrollment Effects of
Medicaid's Citizenship Documentation Requirement. Journal of Public Economics, 94 (1-2),
174-82.
Sommers, Benjamin D., Thomas Buchmueller, Decker, S.L., Carey, C., Richard Kronick. (2013).
The Affordable Care Act has led to Significant Gains in Health Insurance and Access to Care for
Young Adults. Health Affairs 32, 165-174.
Sonier, Julie, Michel H. Boudreaux, Lynn A. Blewett. (2013). Medicaid “Welcome-Mat” Effect
of Affordable Care Act Implementation Could be Substantial. Health Affairs 32: 71319-71325.
Swartz, Katherine. (1986). Interpreting the Estimates from Four National Surveys of the Number
of People without Health Insurance. Journal of Economic and Social Measurement, 14 (3), 233242.
34

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning
and Evaluation. (2014). Health Insurance Marketplace: Summary Enrollment Report for the
Initial Annual Open Enrollment Period. ASPE Issue Brief. Washington, DC. [HHS, 2014]
Wolfe, Barbara and Scott Scrivner. (2005). The Devil May Be in the Details: How the
Characteristics of SCHIP Programs Affect Take-Up. Journal of Policy Analysis and
Management, 24 (3), 499-522.
Yelowitz, Aaron, & Michael F. Cannon. (2010). The Massachusetts Health Plan Much Pain,
Little Gain. Policy Analysis, 657, 1-16.

35

Figure 1 – Changes in Insurance Coverage over Time by State Medicaid Expansion Status and Pre-Treatment Uninsured Rate

Employer Sponsored Coverage

.9

.6

.7

.55

.75

.65

.8

.6

.7

.85

.65

Any Private Coverage
.75

Any Insurance Coverage

2012

2013

2014

2011

2012

2013

2014

2011

2012

2013

year

year

year

Individually Purchased Coverage

Medicaid Coverage

Other Coverage

2014

.025

.08

.09

.1

.095

.03

.1

.12

.035

.105

.14

.11

.04

.16

2011

2011

2012

2013
year

2014

2011

2012

2013

2014

year

Expanded Medicaid
Not expanded Medicaid
Below median uninsured rate
Above median uninsured rate

36

2011

2012

2013
year

2014

Figure 2 – ACA Effect on Insurance Coverage at Pre-Treatment Uninsured Rate

.05 .1 .15 .2 .25 .3 .35 .4 .45 .5 .55

0

2013 Uninsured Rate

Other Coverage

-.001

-.0005

Coverage Change in 2014

0

.0005

.1
.08
.06
.04

Coverage Change in 2014

.02
0

Full ACA

.05 .1 .15 .2 .25 .3 .35 .4 .45 .5 .55

Medicaid Coverage

.03
.02
.01
0

2013 Uninsured Rate

.03

.05 .1 .15 .2 .25 .3 .35 .4 .45 .5 .55
2013 Uninsured Rate

Individually Purchased Coverage

.05 .1 .15 .2 .25 .3 .35 .4 .45 .5 .55

.02

Coverage Change in 2014

0
0

2013 Uninsured Rate

0

.01

.06
.04
0

.02

Coverage Change in 2014

.1
.05

Coverage Change in 2014

0
0

Coverage Change in 2014

Employer Sponsored Coverage
.04

Any Private Coverage

.15

Any Insurance Coverage

0

.05 .1 .15 .2 .25 .3 .35 .4 .45 .5 .55

0

.05 .1 .15 .2 .25 .3 .35 .4 .45 .5 .55

2013 Uninsured Rate

ACA Without Medicaid Expansion

37

2013 Uninsured Rate

Table 1 – Pre-Treatment Means and Standard Deviations of Dependent Variables by State
Medicaid Expansion Status and Pre-Treatment Uninsured Rate

Any insurance coverage
Any private
Employer-sponsored
Individually purchased
Medicaid
Other

0.779
(0.414)
0.658
(0.474)
0.582
(0.493)

Below
Median
Baseline
Uninsured
Rate
0.854
(0.353)
0.723
(0.448)
0.649
(0.477)

Above
Median
Baseline
Uninsured
Rate
0.752
(0.432)
0.619
(0.486)
0.544
(0.498)

0.095
(0.294)

0.098
(0.297)

0.098
(0.297)

0.096
(0.294)

0.130
(0.336)
0.025
(0.158)

0.094
(0.293)
0.039
(0.194)

0.118
(0.323)
0.028
(0.160)

0.110
(0.313)
0.036
(0.186)

Full
Sample

Medicaid
Expansion
States

Medicaid
NonExpansion
States

0.804
(0.396)
0.672
(0.459)
0.598
(0.490)
0.096
(0.295)
0.114
(0.318)
0.032
(0.176)

0.825
(0.379)
0.684
(0.464)
0.611
(0.487)

Notes: Standard deviation in parentheses.

38

Table 2 – Pre-Treatment Summary Statistics for Control Variables
Above
Below
Full
Medicaid
Medicaid
Median
NonMedian
Sample
Expansion
Baseline
Baseline
States
Expansion
States
Uninsured Uninsured
Rate
Rate
Demographic controls
Age dummies (18-24 is omitted base category)
Age 25-29
0.108
0.109
0.107
0.109
0.109
(0.311)
(0.312)
(0.309)
(0.311)
(0.312)
Age 30-34
0.107
0.107
0.106
0.106
0.108
(0.309)
(0.309)
(0.308)
(0.308)
(0.310)
Age 35-39
0.101
0.101
0.102
0.100
0.104
(0.302)
(0.301)
(0.302)
(0.300)
(0.305)
Age 40-44
0.108
0.108
0.108
0.108
0.109
(0.310)
(0.310)
(0.310)
(0.309)
(0.311)
Age 45-49
0.110
0.110
0.109
0.112
0.109
(0.313)
(0.313)
(0.312)
(0.315)
(0.311)
Age 50-54
0.115
0.116
0.115
0.119
0.113
(0.319)
(0.320)
(0.319)
(0.324)
(0.316)
Age 55-59
0.107
0.107
0.107
0.110
0.104
(0.309)
(0.309)
(0.309)
(0.313)
(0.306)
Age 60-64
0.094
0.093
0.094
0.095
0.093
(0.292)
(0.291)
(0.292)
(0.294)
(0.290)
Female
0.508
0.507
0.510
0.509
0.509
(0.499)
(0.499)
(0.499)
(0.500)
(0.499)
Race/ethnicity dummies (non-Hispanic white is omitted base category)
Non-Hispanic black
0.122
0.094
0.154
0.114
0.131
(0.327)
(0.292)
(0.361)
(0.317)
(0.338)
Hispanic
0.166
0.184
0.144
0.101
0.236
(0.372)
(0.388)
(0.351)
(0.300)
(0.425)
Other
0.080
0.104
0.053
0.087
0.075
(0.272)
(0.305)
(0.224)
(0.281)
(0.281)
Family controls
Married
0.508
0.502
0.514
0.514
0.502
(0.499)
(0.499)
(0.499)
(0.500)
(0.500)
Dummies for number of children in home (none is omitted base category)
One child
0.159
0.160
0.158
0.158
0.162
(0.366)
(0.367)
(0.365)
(0.364)
(0.368)
Two children
0.132
0.134
0.130
0.133
0.132
(0.339)
(0.341)
(0.336)
(0.339)
(0.338)
Three children
0.052
0.051
0.052
0.050
0.055
(0.222)
(0.221)
(0.223)
(0.217)
(0.227)
39

Four children
Five children or more

Full
Sample

Medicaid
Expansion
States

Medicaid
NonExpansion
States

0.015
(0.123)
0.006
(0.077)

0.014
(0.120)
0.006
(0.077)

0.016
(0.126)
0.006
(0.078)

Below
Median
Baseline
Uninsured
Rate
0.014
(0.119)
0.006
(0.077)

Economic controls
Education dummies (less than high school degree is omitted base category)
High school degree
0.269
0.254
0.286
0.264
(0.443)
(0.435)
(0.452)
(0.441)
Some College
0.325
0.323
0.328
0.321
(0.468)
(0.467)
(0.469)
(0.467)
College graduate
0.282
0.301
0.260
0.319
(0.450)
(0.458)
(0.439)
(0.466)
Unemployed
0.066
0.068
0.063
0.062
(0.248)
(0.253)
(0.243)
(0.242)
State unemployment rate
7.667
8.071
7.189
7.350
(1.693)
(1.735)
(1.506)
(1.594)
Student
0.122
0.123
0.120
0.122
(0.327)
(0.329)
(0.325)
(0.327)
Income dummies (less than 10k is omitted base category)
Income 10k to 15k
0.033
0.030
0.036
0.029
(0.178)
(0.172)
(0.186)
(0.168)
Income 15k to 20k
0.036
0.033
0.039
0.031
(0.186)
(0.179)
(0.195)
(0.174)
Income 20k to 25k
0.041
0.037
0.044
0.035
(0.198)
(0.190)
(0.206)
(0.185)
Income 25k to 35k
0.084
0.077
0.093
0.074
(0.278)
(0.267)
(0.291)
(0.263)
Income 35k to 50k
0.127
0.118
0.138
0.118
(0.333)
(0.323)
(0.345)
(0.323)
Income 50k to 75k
0.192
0.186
0.200
0.191
(0.394)
(0.389)
(0.400)
(0.393)
Income more than 75k
0.433
0.468
0.391
0.472
(0.495)
(0.498)
(0.488)
(0.499)
Exchange controls
State set up own exchange
0.344
0.636
0.298
0.398
(0.475)
(0.481)
(0.497)
(0.490)
State exchange had glitches
0.084
0.155
0.073
0.123
(0.277)
(0.362)
(0.259)
(0.329)
Notes: Standard deviation in parentheses.

40

Above
Median
Baseline
Uninsured
Rate
0.017
(0.127)
0.006
(0.079)

0.275
(0.446)
0.331
(0.471)
0.244
(0.429)
0.071
(0.256)
8.005
(1.730)
0.123
(0.328)
0.037
(0.188)
0.041
(0.198)
0.046
(0.210)
0.094
(0.292)
0.137
(0.343)
0.194
(0.395)
0.394
(0.488)
0.274
(0.446)
0.033
(0.178)

Table 3 – Effect of ACA on Probability of Having Any Insurance Coverage
Difference-inDifference-in-Difference-in-Differences
Differences
All Controls
All Controls Demographic
Include
Include
Include
Controls
Family
Economic
Exchange
Only
Controls
Controls
Controls
Coefficient Estimates of Interest
Post
0.027***
-----(0.003)
Medicaid Expansion *
0.009*
-0.011
-0.004
-0.005
-0.007
-0.007
Post
(0.004)
(0.007)
(0.007)
(0.007)
(0.006)
(0.008)
Uninsured Rate * Post
-0.147***
0.163***
0.165***
0.145***
0.163***
(0.026)
(0.030)
(0.029)
(0.027)
(0.030)
Uninsured Rate * Medi-0.144***
0.140***
0.141***
0.148***
0.132***
caid Expansion * Post
(0.034)
(0.036)
(0.035)
(0.033)
(0.038)
Implied Effects of ACA at Mean Pre-Treatment Uninsured Rates
ACA without Medicaid
0.027***
0.030***
Expansion
(0.003)
(0.005)
Medicaid Expansion
0.009*
0.029***
(0.004)
(0.007)
Full ACA (with
0.036***
0.059***
Medicaid Expansion)
(0.003)
(0.004)
Area Fixed Effects
Time Fixed Effects
Demographic Controls
Family Controls
Economic Controls
Exchange Controls

YES
NO
YES
NO
NO
NO

YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES

Use FPLSpecific
Uninsured
--0.006
(0.008)
0.192***
(0.025)
0.061**
(0.022)

0.033***
(0.006)
0.028***
(0.007)
0.062***
(0.004)

0.034***
(0.006)
0.029***
(0.007)
0.062***
(0.004)

0.029***
(0.005)
0.030***
(0.007)
0.060***
(0.004)

0.033***
(0.006)
0.027***
(0.008)
0.060***
(0.005)

0.033***
(0.004)
0.023**
(0.009)
0.057***
(0.007)

YES
YES
YES
NO
NO
NO

YES
YES
YES
YES
NO
NO

YES
YES
YES
NO
YES
NO

YES
YES
YES
NO
NO
YES

YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES

Notes: Standard errors, heteroscedasticity-robust and clustered by state, are in parentheses. *** indicates statistically significant at 0.1% level; ** 1% level; * 5%
level. Sampling weights are used. All regressions have a sample size of 7,147,602.

41

Table 4 – Effect of ACA on Sources of Insurance Coverage
Any Private
EmployerIndividually
Sponsored
Purchased
Coefficient Estimates of Interest
Uninsured Rate * Post

0.120***
(0.019)
Uninsured Rate * Medicaid Expansion * Post
-0.002
(0.029)
Implied Effects of ACA at Mean Pre-Treatment Uninsured Rates
ACA without Medicaid Expansion
0.024***
(0.004)
Medicaid Expansion
-0.0004
(0.006)
Full ACA (with Medicaid Expansion)
0.024***
(0.005)

Medicaid

Other

0.061*
(0.024)
0.017
(0.032)

0.053
(0.038)
-0.009
(0.041)

0.027
(0.021)
0.157***
(0.038)

-0.001
(0.004)
0.002
(0.006)

0.012*
(0.005)
0.003
(0.006)
0.016***
(0.004)

0.011
(0.008)
-0.002
(0.008)
0.009**
(0.003)

0.006
(0.004)
0.032***
(0.008)
0.038***
(0.007)

-0.0003
(0.001)
0.001
(0.001)
0.0002
(0.001)

Notes: Standard errors, heteroscedasticity-robust and clustered by state, are in parentheses. *** indicates statistically significant at 0.1% level; ** 1% level; * 5%
level. Sampling weights are used. All regressions have a sample size of 7,147,602 and include area and time fixed effects and the full set of controls.

Table 5 – Falsification Tests
Any
Any Private
EmployerInsurance
Sponsored
Pre-Treatment 2011 v. Post-Treatment 2012-2013
Uninsured Rate * Post
0.017
-0.005
-0.014
(0.010)
(0.016)
(0.022)
Uninsured Rate * Medicaid Expansion
-0.011
0.040
0.042
* Post
(0.020)
(0.020)
(0.027)
Pre-Treatment 2011-2012 v. Post-Treatment 2013
Post * Uninsured Rate
-0.018
-0.032
-0.004
(0.020)
(0.026)
(0.004)
Uninsured Rate * Medicaid Expansion
0.013
0.034
0.003
* Post
(0.033)
(0.032)
(0.007)
Notes: All regressions have a sample size of 7,147,602. See other notes for table 4.

42

Individually
Purchased

Medicaid

Other

0.002
(0.013)
0.015
(0.020)

0.019
(0.019)
-0.046
(0.029)

0.002
(0.007)
-0.004
(0.008)

-0.033**
(0.011)
0.021
(0.018)

0.009
(0.010)
-0.023
(0.023)

0.002
(0.005)
0.003
(0.006)

Table 6 – Event Study Results
Any
Any
EmployerInsurance
Private
Sponsored
Coefficient Estimates of Interest (2013 is Base Year)
Uninsured Rate * Year 2011

Individually
Purchased

Medicaid

Other

0.0002
(0.015)
0.032
(0.025)
0.158***
(0.037)
-0.00002
(0.033)
-0.027
(0.026)
0.135**
(0.045)

0.030
(0.029)
0.038
(0.026)
0.143***
(0.032)
-0.045
(0.034)
-0.018
(0.036)
-0.023
(0.040)

0.024
(0.031)
0.021
(0.022)
0.076***
(0.012)
-0.054
(0.038)
-0.030
(0.031)
-0.010
(0.022)

0.025
(0.016)
0.042***
(0.011)
0.074
(0.042)
-0.022
(0.020)
-0.019
(0.025)
-0.023
(0.045)

-0.022
(0.021)
-0.001
(0.006)
0.020
(0.015)
0.044
(0.035)
-0.001
(0.017)
0.171***
(0.036)

-0.003
(0.008)
-0.0005
(0.003)
-0.002
(0.003)
0.001
(0.009)
-0.007
(0.006)
0.001
(0.006)

Implied Effects of ACA at Mean Pre-Treatment Uninsured Rates
ACA without Medicaid Expansion
0.032***
(0.008)
Medicaid Expansion
0.027**
(0.009)
Full ACA (with Medicaid Expansion)
0.060***
(0.005)

0.029***
(0.006)
-0.005
(0.008)
0.024***
(0.005)

0.016***
(0.003)
-0.002
(0.005)
0.013***
(0.004)

0.015
(0.009)
-0.005
(0.009)
0.011***
(0.003)

0.004
(0.003)
0.035***
(0.007)
0.039***
(0.007)

-0.001
(0.001)
0.0001
(0.001)
-0.0004
(0.001)

Uninsured Rate * Year 2012
Uninsured Rate * Year 2014
Uninsured Rate * Medicaid Expansion * Year 2011
Uninsured Rate * Medicaid Expansion * Year 2012
Uninsured Rate * Medicaid Expansion * Year 2014

Notes: See notes for table 4.

43

Table 7 – Income Subsamples
Any
Any
Employer- IndividInsurance
Private
Provided
ually
Purchased
Under 138% FPL (Pre-Treatment Uninsured Rate = 0.390)
ACA w/o
0.048***
0.032**
0.022**
0.013
Medicaid
(0.016)
(0.011)
(0.007)
(0.014)
Medicaid
0.055*
-0.018
-0.010
-0.010
Expansion
(0.026)
(0.015)
(0.010)
(0.015)
Full ACA (w/
0.103***
0.014
0.012
0.003
Medicaid)
(0.021)
(0.010)
(0.007)
(0.006)
Sample Size
1,382,395 1,382,395 1,382,395 1,382,395

Medicaid

Other

0.009
(0.011)
0.080***
(0.022)
0.088***
(0.019)
1,382,395

0.005
(0.004)
-0.002
(0.005)
0.002
(0.003)
1,382,395

138%-400% FPL (Pre-Treatment Uninsured Rate = 0.237)
ACA w/o
0.046*** 0.041*** 0.022***
0.018*
Medicaid
(0.007)
(0.006)
(0.005)
(0.008)
Medicaid
0.016
0.009
0.014
-0.0004
Expansion
(0.011)
(0.010)
(0.009)
(0.010)
Full ACA (w/
0.063*** 0.050*** 0.036*** 0.017***
Medicaid)
(0.008)
(0.008)
(0.007)
(0.005)
Sample Size
2,827,034 2,827,034 2,827,034 2,827,034

0.006
(0.005)
0.010
(0.008)
0.015*
(0.006)
2,827,034

0.0002
(0.001)
-0.0003
(0.002)
-0.0001
(0.002)
2,827,034

Over 400% FPL (Pre-Treatment Uninsured Rate = 0.067)
ACA w/o
0.013*** 0.013***
0.007
Medicaid
(0.001)
(0.002)
(0.006)
Medicaid
0.004
-0.002
-0.004
Expansion
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.008)
Full ACA (w/
0.016*** 0.011***
0.003
Medicaid)
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.004)
Sample Size
2,946,751 2,946,751 2,946,751

-0.001
(0.001)
0.006**
(0.002)
0.006**
(0.002)
2,946,751

0.0002
(0.001)
0.0002
(0.002)
0.0004
(0.001)
2,946,751

0.004
(0.005)
0.0002
(0.006)
0.004
(0.003)
2,946,751

Notes: Standard errors, heteroscedasticity-robust and clustered by state, are in parentheses. *** indicates statistically
significant at 0.1% level; ** 1% level; * 5% level. Sampling weights are used. All regressions include area and time
fixed effects and the full set of controls.

44

Table 8 – Age Subsamples
Any
Any
Employer- IndividInsurance
Private
Provided
ually
Purchased
Ages 18-34 (Pre-Treatment Uninsured Rate = 0.257)
ACA w/o
0.036*** 0.024*** 0.016***
0.006
Medicaid
(0.006)
(0.005)
(0.004)
(0.007)
Medicaid
0.037***
-0.003
-0.005
0.005
Expansion
(0.009)
(0.008)
(0.007)
(0.008)
Full ACA (w/
0.073***
0.021**
0.011
0.011*
Medicaid)
(0.006)
(0.007)
(0.006)
(0.004)
Sample Size
2,274,699 2,274,699 2,274,699 2,274,699

Medicaid

Other

0.010*
(0.005)
0.044***
(0.010)
0.054***
(0.009)
2,274,699

0.002
(0.002)
0.001
(0.002)
0.003
(0.001)
2,274,699

Ages 35-49 (Pre-Treatment Uninsured Rate = 0.201)
ACA w/o
0.028*** 0.026***
0.014**
Medicaid
(0.006)
(0.004)
(0.005)
Medicaid
0.021**
-0.005
0.001
Expansion
(0.007)
(0.006)
(0.006)
Full ACA (w/
0.049*** 0.021*** 0.016***
Medicaid)
(0.005)
(0.004)
(0.004)
Sample Size
2,238,724 2,238,724 2,238,724

0.010
(0.006)
-0.004
(0.007)
0.006*
(0.003)
2,238,724

0.004
(0.005)
0.024**
(0.009)
0.028***
(0.007)
2,238,724

-0.002**
(0.001)
0.004*
(0.001)
0.001
(0.001)
2,238,724

Ages 50-64 (Pre-Treatment Uninsured Rate = 0.145)
ACA w/o
0.025*** 0.022***
0.006
Medicaid
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.007)
Medicaid
0.029***
0.007
0.011
Expansion
(0.005)
(0.005)
(0.008)
Full ACA (w/
0.053*** 0.029*** 0.017***
Medicaid)
(0.004)
(0.005)
(0.004)
Sample Size
2,634,179 2,634,179 2,634,179

0.014
(0.009)
-0.001
(0.009)
0.013***
(0.003)
2,634,179

0.003
(0.003)
0.025***
(0.005)
0.028***
(0.004)
2,634,179

0.0001
(0.001)
-0.002
(0.002)
-0.002
(0.002)
2,634,179

Notes: See notes for table 7.

45

Table 9 – Race/Ethnicity Subsamples
Any
Any
Employer- IndividInsurance
Private
Provided
ually
Purchased
Non-Hispanic White (Pre-Treatment Uninsured Rate = 0.144)
ACA w/o
0.016***
0.009**
0.003
0.002
(0.003)
(0.006)
Medicaid
(0.003)
(0.005)
Medicaid
0.041***
0.007
0.007
0.003
(0.005)
(0.008)
Expansion
(0.006)
(0.006)
0.009*
0.005
Full ACA (w/
0.057***
0.016**
(0.005)
Medicaid)
(0.005)
(0.004)
(0.003)
4,856,738 4,856,738 4,856,738 4,856,738
Sample Size
Non-White (Pre-Treatment Uninsured Rate = 0.303)
ACA w/o
0.037**
0.036*** 0.020***
0.018
(0.012)
Medicaid
(0.010)
(0.004)
(0.011)
Medicaid
0.042**
-0.002
0.002
-0.001
(0.013)
Expansion
(0.013)
(0.009)
(0.012)
Full ACA (w/
0.079*** 0.034***
0.022**
0.017**
(0.007)
Medicaid)
(0.008)
(0.007)
(0.005)
Sample Size
2,290,864 2,290,864 2,290,864 2,290,864

Medicaid

Other

0.010***
(0.002)
0.038***
(0.008)
0.049***
(0.007)
4,856,738

-0.002
(0.001)
-0.001
(0.002)
-0.003
(0.001)
4,856,738

-0.001
(0.005)
0.044***
(0.012)
0.043***
(0.010)
2,290,864

0.0001
(0.002)
0.004
(0.003)
0.004*
(0.002)
2,290,864

Medicaid

Other

0.003
(0.003)
0.021***
(0.004)
0.024***
(0.003)
3,993,448

-0.001
(0.001)
0.0005
(0.001)
-0.0002
(0.001)
3,993,448

0.009
(0.006)
0.046***
(0.013)
0.055***
(0.011)
3,154,154

0.0004
(0.002)
0.001
(0.003)
0.002
(0.001)
3,154,154

Notes: See notes for table 7.

Table 10 – Marital Status Subsamples
Any
Any
Employer- IndividInsurance
Private
Provided
ually
Purchased
Married (Pre-Treatment Uninsured Rate = 0.141)
ACA w/o
0.021*** 0.020***
0.008**
0.012*
Medicaid
(0.005)
(0.002)
(0.005)
(0.003)
Medicaid
0.020***
-0.0003
0.003
-0.002
Expansion
(0.005)
(0.004)
(0.005)
(0.004)
Full ACA (w/
0.041*** 0.019*** 0.011*** 0.009***
Medicaid)
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.002)
(0.003)
3,993,448 3,993,448 3,993,448 3,993,448
Sample Size
Unmarried (Pre-Treatment Uninsured Rate = 0.267)
ACA w/o
0.038*** 0.026***
0.019*
0.006
(0.007)
(0.010)
Medicaid
(0.006)
(0.008)
Medicaid
0.045***
0.004
0.003
0.004
(0.010)
(0.010)
(0.011)
Expansion
(0.010)
Full ACA (w/
0.083*** 0.030***
0.022**
0.010*
(0.007)
(0.007)
(0.004)
Medicaid)
(0.008)
Sample Size
3,154,154 3,154,154 3,154,154 3,154,154
Notes: See notes for table 7.

46

Appendix Table A1 (online publication only) – Additional Specifications for Employer-Provided Insurance
Difference-inDifference-in-Difference-in-Differences
Differences
All Controls
All Controls Demographic
Include
Include
Include
Use FPLControls
Family
Economic
Exchange
Specific
Only
Controls
Controls
Controls
Uninsured
Coefficient Estimates of Interest
Post
0.005
------(0.003)
Medicaid Expansion *
-0.000
-0.007
0.001
0.001
-0.005
0.003
-0.003
Post
(0.003)
(0.005)
(0.005)
(0.005)
(0.005)
(0.006)
(0.006)
Uninsured Rate * Post
-0.062*
0.086***
0.088***
0.059*
0.086***
0.061*
(0.025)
(0.023)
(0.024)
(0.023)
(0.023)
(0.024)
Uninsured Rate * Post *
-0.019
-0.004
-0.002
0.022
-0.009
0.017
Medicaid Expansion
(0.015)
(0.026)
(0.027)
(0.029)
(0.030)
(0.032)
Implied Effects of ACA at Mean Pre-Treatment Uninsured Rates
ACA without Medicaid
0.005
0.011*
Expansion
(0.003)
(0.004)
Medicaid Expansion
-0.002
0.007
(0.003)
(0.006)
Full ACA (with
0.003
0.018***
Medicaid Expansion)
(0.002)
(0.004)
Area Fixed Effects
Time Fixed Effects
Demographic Controls
Family Controls
Economic Controls
Exchange Controls

YES
NO
YES
NO
NO
NO

YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES

0.017***
(0.008)
-0.001
(0.009)
0.017***
(0.003)

0.018***
(0.005)
-0.001
(0.005)
0.017***
(0.003)

0.012*
(0.005)
0.004
(0.006)
0.017***
(0.003)

0.017**
(0.0085
-0.002
(0.006)
0.016***
(0.004)

0.013*
(0.005)
0.004
(0.006)
0.016***
(0.005)

YES
YES
YES
NO
NO
NO

YES
YES
YES
YES
NO
NO

YES
YES
YES
NO
YES
NO

YES
YES
YES
NO
NO
YES

YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES

Notes: Standard errors, heteroscedasticity-robust and clustered by state, are in parentheses. *** indicates statistically significant at 0.1% level; ** 1% level; * 5%
level. Sampling weights are used. All regressions have a sample size of 7,147,602.

47

Appendix Table A2 (online publication only) – Additional Specifications for Individually Purchased Insurance
Difference-inDifference-in-Difference-in-Differences
Differences
All Controls
All Controls Demographic
Include
Include
Include
Use FPLControls
Family
Economic
Exchange
Specific
Only
Controls
Controls
Controls
Uninsured
Coefficient Estimates of Interest
Post
0.019***
------(0.002)
Medicaid Expansion *
-0.010***
-0.006
-0.008
-0.008
-0.007
-0.007
-0.006
Post
(0.003)
(0.007)
(0.008)
(0.008)
(0.008)
(0.008)
(0.008)
Uninsured Rate * Post
-0.063
0.057
0.057
0.052
0.057
0.053
(0.035)
(0.040)
(0.039)
(0.033)
(0.040)
(0.038)
Uninsured Rate * Post *
--0.004
0.003
0.003
-0.004
-0.004
-0.008
Medicaid Expansion
(0.018)
(0.043)
(0.043)
(0.042)
(0.042)
(0.041)
Implied Effects of ACA at Mean Pre-Treatment Uninsured Rates
ACA without Medicaid
0.019***
0.011
Expansion
(0.002)
(0.006)
Medicaid Expansion
-0.010***
-0.001
(0.003)
(0.007)
Full ACA (with
0.009***
0.010**
Medicaid Expansion)
(0.002)
(0.004)
Area Fixed Effects
Time Fixed Effects
Demographic Controls
Family Controls
Economic Controls
Exchange Controls

YES
NO
YES
YES
YES
YES

YES
YES
YES
NO
NO
NO

0.012
(0.007)
0.001
(0.009)
0.012***
(0.004)

0.012
(0.008)
0.001
(0.009)
0.012***
(0.003)

0.011
(0.008)
-0.001
(0.009)
0.010**
(0.003)

0.012
(0.008)
-0.001
(0.009)
0.011***
(0.003)

0.011
(0.008)
-0.002
(0.008)
0.009**
(0.003)

YES
YES
YES
YES
NO
NO

YES
YES
YES
NO
YES
NO

YES
YES
YES
NO
NO
YES

YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES

YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES

Notes: Standard errors, heteroscedasticity-robust and clustered by state, are in parentheses. *** indicates statistically significant at 0.1% level; ** 1% level; * 5%
level. Sampling weights are used. All regressions have a sample size of 7,147,602.

48

Appendix Table A3 (online publication only) – Additional Specifications for Any Private Insurance
Difference-inDifference-in-Difference-in-Differences
Differences
All Controls
All Controls Demographic
Include
Include
Include
Controls
Family
Economic
Exchange
Only
Controls
Controls
Controls
Coefficient Estimates of Interest
Post
0.026***
-----(0.003)
Medicaid Expansion *
-0.011***
-0.012*
-0.004
-0.005
-0.010
-0.001
Post
(0.003)
(0.006)
(0.007)
(0.006)
(0.006)
(0.006)
Uninsured Rate * Post
-0.126***
0.147***
0.148***
0.119***
0.119***
(0.019)
(0.020)
(0.019)
(0.020)
(0.020)
Uninsured Rate * Post *
-0.015
-0.010
0.009
0.011
0.011
Medicaid Expansion
(0.014)
(0.030)
(0.028)
(0.029)
(0.029)
Implied Effects of ACA at Mean Pre-Treatment Uninsured Rates
ACA without Medicaid
0.026***
0.022***
Expansion
(0.003)
(0.003)
Medicaid Expansion
-0.011***
0.006
(0.003)
(0.005)
Full ACA (with
0.0150***
0.027***
Medicaid Expansion)
(0.002)
(0.005)
Area Fixed Effects
Time Fixed Effects
Demographic Controls
Family Controls
Economic Controls
Exchange Controls

YES
NO
YES
YES
YES
YES

YES
YES
YES
NO
NO
NO

Use FPLSpecific
Uninsured
--0.006
(0.0076
0.120***
(0.019)
-0.002
(0.028)

0.030***
(0.004)
-0.002
(0.006)
0.028***
(0.006)

0.030***
(0.004)
-0.002
(0.007)
0.028***
(0.004)

0.024***
(0.004)
0.002
(0.006)
0.026***
(0.005)

0.030***
(0.004)
-0.005
(0.006)
0.025***
(0.005)

0.025***
(0.004)
-0.001
(0.006)
0.024***
(0.005)

YES
YES
YES
YES
NO
NO

YES
YES
YES
NO
YES
NO

YES
YES
YES
NO
NO
YES

YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES

YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES

Notes: Standard errors, heteroscedasticity-robust and clustered by state, are in parentheses. *** indicates statistically significant at 0.1% level; ** 1% level; * 5%
level. Sampling weights are used. All regressions have a sample size of 7,147,602.

49

Appendix Table A4 (online publication only) – Additional Specifications for Medicaid
Difference-inDifference-in-Difference-in-Differences
Differences
All Controls
All Controls Demographic
Include
Include
Include
Controls
Family
Economic
Exchange
Only
Controls
Controls
Controls
Coefficient Estimates of Interest
Post
0.002
-----(0.001)
Medicaid Expansion *
0.030***
0.017
-0.001
0.001
0.002
-0.010
Post
(0.004)
(0.009)
(0.008)
(0.006)
(0.006)
(0.008)
Uninsured Rate * Post
-0.062*
0.017
0.017
0.0266
0.017
(0.028)
(0.020)
(0.020)
(0.021)
(0.020)
Uninsured Rate * Post *
-0.057*
0.155***
0.155***
0.142***
0.168***
Medicaid Expansion
(0.028)
(0.033)
(0.033)
(0.034)
(0.037)
Implied Effects of ACA at Mean Pre-Treatment Uninsured Rates
ACA without Medicaid
0.002
0.011*
Expansion
(0.001)
(0.005)
Medicaid Expansion
0.030***
0.022*
(0.004)
(0.009)
Full ACA (with
0.022***
0.032***
Medicaid Expansion)
(0.004)
(0.008)
Area Fixed Effects
Time Fixed Effects
Demographic Controls
Family Controls
Economic Controls
Exchange Controls

YES
NO
YES
YES
YES
YES

YES
YES
YES
NO
NO
NO

Use FPLSpecific
Uninsured
--0.008
(0.008)
0.027
(0.021)
0.157***
(0.038)

0.003
(0.004)
0.032***
(0.007)
0.035***
(0.006)

0.003
(0.004)
0.032***
(0.007)
0.035***
(0.005)

0.005
(0.004)
0.029***
(0.007)
0.034***
(0.006)

0.003
(0.004)
0.034***
(0.008)
0.038***
(0.006)

0.006
(0.004)
0.032***
(0.008)
0.038***
(0.007)

YES
YES
YES
YES
NO
NO

YES
YES
YES
NO
YES
NO

YES
YES
YES
NO
NO
YES

YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES

YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES

Notes: Standard errors, heteroscedasticity-robust and clustered by state, are in parentheses. *** indicates statistically significant at 0.1% level; ** 1% level; * 5%
level. Sampling weights are used. All regressions have a sample size of 7,147,602.

50

Appendix Table A5 (online publication only) – Additional Specifications for Other Insurance
Difference-inDifference-in-Difference-in-Differences
Differences
All Controls
All Controls Demographic
Include
Include
Include
Controls
Family
Economic
Exchange
Only
Controls
Controls
Controls
Coefficient Estimates of Interest
Post
0.001
-----(0.001)
Medicaid Expansion *
-0.001
0.002
-0.001
-0.001
-0.001
-0.001
Post
(0.001)
(0.002)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.002)
(0.002)
Uninsured Rate * Post
-0.004
0.002
-0.002
-0.001
-0.002
(0.004)
(0.004)
(0.004)
(0.004)
(0.004)
Uninsured Rate * Post *
--0.004
0.001
0.006
0.005
0.004
Medicaid Expansion
(0.004)
(0.006)
(0.006)
(0.006)
(0.006)
Implied Effects of ACA at Mean Pre-Treatment Uninsured Rates
ACA without Medicaid
0.001
0.001
Expansion
(0.001)
(0.001)
Medicaid Expansion
-0.000
-0.001
(0.001)
(0.001)
Full ACA (with
0.001
-0.001
Medicaid Expansion)
(0.001)
(0.001)
Area Fixed Effects
Time Fixed Effects
Demographic Controls
Family Controls
Economic Controls
Exchange Controls

YES
NO
YES
YES
YES
YES

YES
YES
YES
NO
NO
NO

Use FPLSpecific
Uninsured
--0.001
(0.002)
-0.001
(0.004)
-0.003
(0.006)

-0.001
(0.001)
0.001
(0.001)
0.001
(0.001)

-0.001
(0.001)
0.001
(0.0021
0.001
(0.001)

-0.001
(0.001)
0.001
(0.001)
0.001
(0.001)

-0.001
(0.001)
0.001
(0.001)
0.000
(0.001)

-0.001
(0.001)
0.001
(0.001)
0.001
(0.001)

YES
YES
YES
YES
NO
NO

YES
YES
YES
NO
YES
NO

YES
YES
YES
NO
NO
YES

YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES

YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES

Notes: Standard errors, heteroscedasticity-robust and clustered by state, are in parentheses. *** indicates statistically significant at 0.1% level; ** 1% level; * 5%
level. Sampling weights are used. All regressions have a sample size of 7,147,602.

51

Appendix Table A6 (online publication only) – Gender Subsamples
Any
Any
Employer- IndividMedicaid
Insurance
Private
Provided
ually
Purchased
Women (Pre-Treatment Uninsured Rate = 0.185)
ACA w/o
0.028*** 0.020***
0.010*
0.008
0.006
Medicaid
(0.006)
(0.003)
(0.004)
(0.006)
(0.005)
Medicaid
0.031***
0.001
0.003
-0.002
0.033***
Expansion
(0.007)
(0.006)
(0.006)
(0.007)
(0.009)
Full ACA (w/
0.059*** 0.022***
0.013**
0.007*
0.040***
Medicaid)
(0.005)
(0.005)
(0.004)
(0.003)
(0.007)
Sample Size
3,700,757 3,700,757 3,700,757 3,700,757 3,700,757

0.001
(0.001)
0.001
(0.001)
0.001
(0.001)
3,700,757

Men (Pre-Treatment Uninsured Rate =0.222 )
ACA w/o
0.033*** 0.030***
0.016**
Medicaid
(0.005)
(0.005)
(0.005)
Medicaid
0.026***
-0.003
0.003
Expansion
(0.007)
(0.006)
(0.007)
Full ACA (w/
0.059*** 0.027*** 0.019***
Medicaid)
(0.004)
(0.005)
(0.004)
Sample Size
3,446,845 3,446,845 3,446,845

-0.001
(0.001)
0.001
(0.002)
0.0003
(0.002)
3,446,845

0.013
(0.009)
-0.002
(0.010)
0.011***
(0.003)
3,446,845

0.004
(0.003)
0.029***
(0.007)
0.034***
(0.006)
3,446,845

Other

Notes: Standard errors, heteroscedasticity-robust and clustered by state, are in parentheses. *** indicates statistically
significant at 0.1% level; ** 1% level; * 5% level. Sampling weights are used. All regressions include state and time
fixed effects, demographic and economic controls, and the interactions of the controls with post.

52

