                           NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         THE UNITED STATES AND FOREIGN
                          COMPETITION IN LATIN AMERICA




                               Sebastian Edwards




                            Working Paper No. 2218




                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                           1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   April 1987




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program in Inter-
national Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                NBER Working Paper #2218
                                                April 1987



        The United States and Foreign Competition in Latin America




                                 ABSTRACT


     This paper analyzes the evolution of the U.S. trade relations with

Latin America, investigating the possible path that these relations will

take in the future. The data analyzed show that during the last 15 years or

so there has been no significant loss in the U.S. aggregate competitive

position in Latin America. However, there has been a significant change in

the composition of U.S. exports to the Latin American nations. The paper

also deals with issues related to direct foreign investment in Latin

America, comparing the importance of the U.S. and other nations. Finally,

the role of international trade in the solution of the current Latin

American debt crisis, and in the reassuinption of sustained growth in the

region is discussed.




                                                  Sebastian Edwards
                                                  Department of Economics
                                                  UCLA
                                                  405 Hilgard Avenue
                                                  Los Angeles, CA 90024
                                                  (213) 825-5304
                                    1




        The United States and Foreign Competition in Latin America

                                    by
                            Sebastian Edwards

                  University of California, Los Angeles

                                   and

                   National Bureau of Economic Research



I. Introduction

    The purpose of this paper is to analyze the role of the U.S. in the

development of Latin America's international trade relations. In particular

the paper investigates the behavior of trade flows between the U.S. and the

Latin American nations in the last 15 years or so, and analyzes the possible

path that these trade relations will take in the future. In doing this,

special emphasis is placed on any possible changes in the directions of

trade in Latin America, scrutinizing whether there has been or will possibly

be, a significant increase in south-south trade, and if new trade partners

such as Japan and the newly industrialized countries of Southeast Asia have

displaced the more traditional Latin American trade partners (i.e., the

U.S). The paper also deals with issues related to direct investment in

Latin America, comparing the importance of the U.S. and other nations.

Finally, the role of international trade in the solution of the current

Latin American debt crisis, and in the resumption of sustained growth in the

region is also discussed. An important, indeed crucial, issue relates to

the future evolution of the current protectionist mood in the U.S. and much

of the developed world.

     As we enter the final years of the l980s, policy issues related to the

volume and direction of U.S. international trade have become increasingly
                                          2




important. In particular, a number of special interest lobbies have argued

with alarming insistence that the "increased competition" by other countries

to capture foreign markets, and unfair trade practices such as dumping and

export subsidy schemes not sanctioned by the GATT, have been responsible for

the mounting trade deficits and for the "loss of jobs" in the U.S. Several

important questions emerge here: the first is:           What is exactly meant by

                                                                          answer to
"loss of U.S. international competitiveness?" Second, given an

the above question, has the U.S. indeed lost competitiveness? Third, what

are the future prospects for the U.S. trade relations? And finally, what

and to whom will the U.S. export in the future, and from which countries

will U.S. imports come from? The present paper will deal with these ques-

tions from the perspective of the U.S. trade relations with Latin America.

     The future evolution of the volume and directions of trade is also of

paramount importance for the Latin American countries. In the early 1980s,

after two decades of sustained economic growth averaging approximately six

percent per annum, Latin America entered a period of severe adjustment. The

need for this adjustment resulted, to a large extent, from a series of major

 shocks -   - both   exogenous and policy-induced - -   that   greatly disturbed the

 region's economy. The principal exogenous shocks were the oil price

 increases of 1973-74 and 1979-80, the drastic deterioration of the terms of

 trade experienced after 1980, and the steep rise of world interest rates in

 1980-82 which provoked a major increase in the debt service burden. At the

 policy level, the substantial increases in government expenditure and fiscal

 deficits, and the economic liberalization reforms attempted by some of these

 countries, as well as general and very significant increases in external

 indebtedness, constituted the most important events. Some countries went

 from being highly praised "economic miracles" to "international pariahs."
                                          3




Others, which in the mid- to late-1970s were flooded with abundant foreign

exchange - -   obtained   mainly through the exportation of petroleum -- have

experienced very severe difficulties servicing their foreign debt. The

region is at this moment still struggling to overcome the worst recession

since the l930s. As it slowly emerges from the crisis, it finds a substant-

ial portion of its export earnings mortgaged for the foreseeable future to

service the accumulated external debt, and a general scarcity of additional

external funds.

     There is little doubt that a permanent solution of Latin America's

current crisis, and the resumption of sustained growth will require a major

effort to increase exports and to enhance the role of the external sector as

a source of foreign exchange earnings. In that regard, it is especially

important to determine whether the Latin American countries efforts to

increase their exports will be frustrated by protectionist policies

implemented by the industrialized nations. Indeed, the Latin American

countries' efforts to adjust and put the crisis behind them would receive a

severe blow if the current protectionist lobby scores victories in the U.S.

and European countries. Increased protectionism could take two forms: the

enactment of protective legislation, or the stepping up the already

significant non-tariff barriers existing in these countries.

     Some of the sections of this paper are largely descriptive; this has

been deliberate, since an important purpose of this study is to scrutinize

the data, and document and interpret the recent history of the Latin Ameri-

can trade relations with the U.S. In spite of the descriptive tone of some

sections, the paper as a whole makes a number of analytical points related

to the nature of these external relations. The plan of the paper is as fol-

lows: In Section II some of the main current characteristics of the Latin
                                    4



American economies are briefly discussed, and the way in which the region's

external sector policies have evolved is discussed. Section III deals with

Latin American imports. Here we investigate the recent behavior of the

region's degree of openness, aggregate imports, and origin of imports at the

disaggregated level. In this section it is shown that much of the region's

efforts to cope with the debt crisis have been translated in a very

substantial drop in the real value of imports. This section contains

massive amounts of data on how much, what and from whom 16 Latin American

countries import. Emphasis is placed on analyzing the evolution of the U.S.

share of the value of Latin America's imports, and of the changing composi-

tion of the region's imports from the U.S. It is shown here that when the

constant-market-share criterion is used there is no support for the

contention of a recent loss of aggregate U.S. competitiveness in Latin

America. The data, however, do show that there has been a change in the

composition of Latin America's imports from the U.S. The share of

traditional manufacturing has declined, while primary products and

technology intensive manufactures have experienced an increased presence

among the region's imports.

     Section IV deals with Latin America's exports, and investigates their

recent behavior and composition. It is shown that in spite of a series of

corrective measures taken by these countries since the debt crisis, for the

region as a whole the recent evolution of the (real) value of exports has

been very disappointing. An important issue analyzed in this section is

related to the role of protectionism in the industrialized countries on the

possible access of Latin American products to those markets. Using recent

data on nontariff barriers it is shown that the extent of these nontariff

impediments to trade are much more generalized than previously thought. It
                                       5




is then argued that only to the extent that there is a drastic change in the

protectionist mood in the industrial world will it be possible for Latin

America's trade to gain in prominence.

     Section V deals with commercial policy and protectionism in Latin

America. Here it is shown how in the late 1960s and l970s, after the hey-

days of the import substitution development strategy, most of the Latin

American countries slowly began to reduce their impediments to trade. This

trend, which was particularly marked in the Southern Cone countries in the

late l970s, was reversed in the l980s when, as a consequence of the debt

crisis, most of these countries resorted to the imposition of controls to

reduce imports. In this section we also discuss the role of nontariff

barriers in Latin America. Section VI deals with exchange rate policies.

Here two main issues are addressed. First, we look at the behavior of real

exchange rates in these nations and argue that the fairly generalized

tendency towards overvaluation in the late 1970s and early 1980s greatly

contributed to the poor behavior of the region's external sector. Second,

we point out how the existence of multiple nominal exchange rates and of

pervasive parallel markets for foreign exchange have played an important

protective role in these countries. Section VII deals with direct invest-

ment. Here the historical evidence is analyzed and it is argued that in the

next few years direct investment will probably be one of the more important

sources of external financing that these countries will have. This, of

course will require some creative rethinking of the current regional policy

on direct foreign investment and related issues. Finally, Section VIII

deals with possible future evolution of U.S. -Latin American trade relations,

and contains the concluding remarks.
                                    6




II. The Latin American Economies: A Brief Overview

    Table 1 contains data on a number of economic indicators for 16 Latin

American countries.1 As may be seen there are very marked differences

across the countries of the region, both in terms of income per capita,

recent growth performance and inflation. This, of course, makes generaliza-

tions very difficult; in fact there isn't such a thing as "the representa-

tive" Latin American country. For this reason, in the rest of this paper

the analysis will generally provide data on these 16 countries.

     Although today the countries of Latin America are economically very

diverse, and stand at different junctions of their development paths, they

do share a common evolution of their policies towards the external sector.

In the rest of this section, and in order to put things in perspective, we

provide a very brief description of the role of the external sector in the

development of the Latin American countries.

11.1 Latin American Development and External Sector Policies

     Until the 1930s the external sector in the great majority of the Latin

American countries was highly opened; exchange controls were almost

nonexistent, import tariffs were very low, and the "rules of the game" were

strictly followed. The great depression, with its devastating effect on the

region's economies, put an end to all of that; it marked the beginning of an

epoch of import substitution and protectionism.2

     During the l95Os and 1960s, under the intellectual leadership of the

United Nations Economic Commission for Latin America (ECLA), and its charis-

matic Secretary General Raul Prebisch, most of the Latin American countries

embarked on ambitious industrialization programs based on import

substitution. This strategy was based on the idea that high import tariffs

and other impediments to international trade would provide temporary protec-
                                                   7




tion   to the local industries and help them develop. In theory, according to

this approach after some time the domestic firms would have "learned", and

protection would not be necessary any more (Prebish 1984). Things, however,

did not work out as predicted by the theory, and protection became a

permanent feature in the region. As a result, in most of these countries

the industrial sector that was developed under the barriers of protection

was largely inefficient, using highly capital intensive techniques (Krueger

1983).

       During the 1950s and first half of the l960s it became apparent that

the import substitution strategy was losing dynamism. Although the easier

and more obvious imports had already been substituted, these countries

remained highly "dependent" on imported intermediate inputs and capital

goods. At the same time the highly overvalued domestic currencies conspired

against the development of a dynamic export sector, with the consequent

scarcity of foreign exchange.3

       During the late l960s a reaction against excessive protectionism

started to take place, and a number of countries - -                   Colombia being the

premier example - - moved towards export promotion schemes (Diaz Alejandro

1976). Also during this period some serious efforts were made to create

common markets comprising subgroups of Latin American countries. In that

respect the creation of Andean group and the Central American Common Market

were particularly important. Although in some regards these integrationist

schemes were successful, they did not turn around the region's economies,

and in many cases the external sector -- and the excessive protectionism --

was still seen as the "weak link" by most analysts.4

       During the second half of the l970s a fairly generalized recognition of

the benefits of export promotion had developed, and most countries tended to
                                     8




rationalize their external sector. In the countries of the Southern Cone

(Argentina, Chile and Uruguay) massive reforms aimed at opening up these

economies were implemented: tariffs were reduced, and exchange controls

disappeared. After an initial successful period these opening reforms fal-

tered, and in the early l980s these countries, as the rest of Latin America,

entered into a major recession.5 The 1980 crisis forced the Latin American

countries to greatly reduce their imports and to improve their current

account balances. As is discussed in Section V, most countries resorted to

increased import controls in their attempts to improve their foreign

accounts.


III. The Structure and Evolution of Imports in Latin America

     The purpose of this section is to analyze the recent evolution of

imports in Latin America, placing special emphasis on the role of the U.S.

as a trade partner. An important question addressed here is whether the

available data show any trend in the value of Latin America's imports from

the U.S. The analysis focuses on three important aspects of this problem.

We first look at the historical evolution of the dollar value of interna-

tional trade (imports and exports) in Latin America. Second, we analyze the

evolution of the degree of openness of the countries in the region, and we

also look in detail at the behavior of the trade and current account

balances. And third, we analyze the distribution of Latin American imports

both across countries and across productive sectors, looking in detail at

the U.S. and other countries shares of the value of Latin American imports.


111.1 Imports. Exports and the Degree of Openness

     Tables 2 and 3 contain data on the dollar value of imports and exports

for fourteen Latin American countries between 1965 and 1985. In Table 4 the
                                            9




current account balances for these countries are presented. Table 5

presents the evolution of an indicators of openness defined as the ratio of

total trade - -   imports   plus exports --to CDP.

     Table 2 on imports is extremely revealing, showing that for most

countries the (nominal) dollar value of imports peaked between 1980 and

1982, only to experience a dramatic fall in the years following the eruption

of the debt crisis. As can be seen, in every single country the (nominal)

dollar value of imports in 1985 was well below its 1980 level. For these 14

countries as a whole the (nominal) dollar value of imports was in 1985 36%

below its 1980 value. Moreover, when expressed in real dollar terms, 1985

total imports are 45 percent below their 1980 value!6 0 course, this

mainly reflects the reduction in imports required by the adjustment programs

implemented by these countries after the 1982 debt crisis.7 Table 3 on the

value of exports also reflects the effects of the adjustment programs. In a

number of these countries --       Argentina,   Brazil, Ecuador and Mexico --    the
value of exports was in 1985 significantly above its 1980 value. This was

achieved in spite of the fact that for most of the countries in the region

the international prices of their exports declined quite substantially

during the period (see Section IV of this paper).

     Table 4 on the current account balances also portrays in a very vivid

way the impact of the crisis on the region's external sector, and the

substantial efforts the region has made to adjust to the new post-1982

reality. In 11 out of the 14 countries the current account balance experi-

enced a quite substantial improvement between 1980 and 1985. Moreover, five

of these countries --       Argentina,   Brazil, Chile, Mexico and Uruguay - -   turned
trade deficits into fairly large trade surpluses during this period.
                                    10



    Table 5 contains data on an indicator of these economies degree of

openness: the ratio of total trade (imports plus exports) to GDP. Although

the behavior of this index differs from country-to-country, it is still

possible to draw some general pattern of behavior. According to this index

there was a fairly significant increase in the degree of openness in the

l970s. This general move towards greater openness is revealed both when

1975 is compared with 1970 as when 1980 is compared with 1970. For example,

between 1970 and 1975 the index of total trade to GDP experienced signifi-

cant increases in 12 of the 13 countries that have data. During this period

in 9 out of the 13 countries that have data, the ratio of total trade to GDP

increased by at least 5 percentage points, and in two other countries it

increased by more than two percentage points. Only in the cases of Bolivia

and Costa Rica did this index decline. Moreover, the ratio of imports to

GDP tells very much the same story. Only for the cases of Bolivia, Costa

Rica and Ecuador it declined between 1970 and 1980.8 Generally speaking the

available evidence strongly indicates that the 1970s was a decade where most

of the nations of Latin America became more open to the rest of the world.

In fact, as is shown in Section V below, this is reflected by the evolution

of the level of import tariffs and other impediments to trade during this

period.

     As Table 5 very clearly shows, during the first half of the l980s the

trend towards greater openness was drastically reversed, with the openness

index exhibiting a sharp drop for most countries. This, of course, was

partially the consequence of the crisis and adjustment policies that

required a significant cut in imports. As can be seen in Table 5, in the

case of the total trade ratio, in 9 of the 14 countries there was a decline

between 1980 and 1985. The imports ratios also experienced significant
                                    ii




declines in 12 of the 14 countries; in most of these countries the 1985

imports ratios were significantly below their 1970 and 1975 values.


111.2 The Composition of Imports

     In this section we look at the evolution of different countries shares

of the value of Latin America's imports both at an aggregate and disaggre-

gate level. This analysis is particularly important to assess whether the

U.S. has experienced a loss in its competitive position in the region. In

fact, according to the so-called constant-market-share criterion, a

country's degree of competitiveness in a particular market will remain

constant (decrease) if its share of that region's imports remains constant

(decreases).1° However, the discussion that follows should be interpreted

with some caution, since these are shares of the U.S. dollar value of

imports, and are thus influenced by changes in the real value of the dollar.

In particular, a real appreciation of the dollar will result in an increase

in these market shares, even if the quantities imported from the U.S. and

other countries remain constant. Naturally, a real depreciation of the

dollar will have the opposite effect: it will increase the market shares

even if quantities imported are not affected.11 In spite of this

shortcoming, however, the analysis of the evolution of market shares is

quite revealing. Moreover, these shares are the only indicators on the

distribution of Latin American imports that can be constructed with the

available data.

     111.2.1 Aggregate Trends

     Tables 6, 7, and 8 contain data on the percentage distribution of the

value of imports for 16 Latin American countries for 1977-85. These data

give us information on what fraction of the U.S. dollar value of each of

these countries' imports came from industrialized countries, what share caine
                                         12




from oil exporting LDCs and what share from nonoil exporting LDCs. For the

case of industrialized countries an additional refinement has been made by

explicitly identifying the U.S. and the Japanese shares. Since a few minor

trade partners - -   mainly   from the Soviet bloc - -have been excluded, the sum
                                                                          1, 2 and
of these shares doesn't necessarily add up to one hundred. Figures

3 depict the U.S. share of these countries' imports for the same period.

     Several facts emerge from these tables and figures. First, the

distribution of imports varies significantly across countries.        For example,

while in some of them the U.S. share in total imports is in the 20 to 25

                                              Bolivia), in others it is
percent range (i.e., Argentina, Chile,

approximately 40 to 50 percent (or more), while still in others it is below
                                                                these tables -- and
10 percent (i.e., Uruguay). Second, and more important,

in particular these diagrams - -    show very clearly that for the great major-

ity of the Latin American countries there have been no perceptible changes

in the proportion of imports coming from the U.S.12 Third, even a very

detailed analysis at the country level reveals that there is no clear common

pattern in the shares behavior during the years immediately following the

debt crisis. However, in some of the large and medium size countries either

in 1982 or 1983 there is a slight drop in the share of imports coming from

the industrialized countries (Argentina, 1982; Brazil, 1982; Chile 1982 and

1983; Mexico, 1983). In Argentina, Mexico and Venezuela there is also a

decline in the U.S. share in either 1982 and 1983. Finally (fourth), in 11

 of these countries' there was a slight increase in the industrialized

 countries market share in 1985 (Argentina, Brazil, Mexico, Uruguay,

Venezuela, Colombia, Costa Rica, Ecuador, El Salvador, Honduras and

 Bolivia). Moreover in the cases of Brazil, Mexico, Colombia, Ecuador, El

 Salvador, Honduras and Bolivia the U.S. share of imports experienced some
                                       13




increase between 1984 and 1985.

     An important question is whether this lack of trend in the U.S. share

of the Latin American imports market is only a recent phenomenon (i.e.,

post-1977), or if it reflects a longer run phenomenon. In order to investi-

gate this issue, trend regressions for 1970-83 were estimated both for the

region as a whole and for each of the 16 countries in Table 1. The results

obtained were quite definitive, showing that for the region as a whole there

has been no statistically significant change in the U.S. market share of

aggregate Latin American imports. At the individual country level there

were no changes in nine cases, while in two countries (Mexico and Peru)

there has been an increase in the U.S. share; with 5 countries showing a

decline (Brazil, Colombia, Paraguay, Honduras and Nicaragua). Naturally,

the Nicaraguan trend responding mainly to political reasons.13 Surprisingly

perhaps, according to this statistical analysis the U.S. market share of

these 16 Latin American countries was not sensitive to contemporaneous or

lagged fluctuations in the real value of the dollar. In Appendix A, we

present the detailed results from this regression analysis.

     This aggregate market share analysis, then, suggests quite categori-

cally that for the vast majority of these countries the popular contention

that the U.S. has experienced a major loss of its degree of competitiveness

in the region is not supported by the data. What has happened is something

very different: the value --   both   nominal and real --of the U.S. exports to

Latin America has declined quite severely since 1980. This, however, has

little to do with loss of aggregate competitiveness; it is simply the result

of the debt crisis and the accompanying monumental fall in Latin America's

total imports during the period. The region still gets (approximately) the

same proportion of its much reduced imports from the U.S.
                                        14




      111.2.2 What Does Latin America Import from the U.S.?

      In the preceding subsection we looked at aggregate imports shares, and

found that in most cases the share of the dollar value of imports coming

from the U.S. has not exhibited a trend. In this subsection we deal with

the question "What do these countries import from the U.S.?" Tables 9

through 14 show, for six of the larger Latin American countries how their

imports from the U.S. were distributed across ten "categories", or sections

numbered from zero to 9, for years 1970 through 1983.14 Each cell in each

of these tables indicate what proportion of that particular country's

imports from the U.S. correspond to that specific "category". Consequently,

except for rounding errors, these percentages add up to gne hundred across

each category for each year. These tables, constructed from data provided

by the U.N.'s Economic Commission for Latin America (ECLA) also contain the

dollar value of total yearly imports for each country (column 1) as well as
                                                   15
total yearly imports from the U.S. (column 2).          Categories 0 through 9

correspond to the SITC one digit classification and are defined in the

following way:

- Category     0:   Food Stuffs and Live Animals

-
    Category   1:   Beverages and Tobacco

-
    Category   2:   Raw Non-Food Materials, except Fuel

-
    Category   3:   Fuel and related products

-
    Category   4:   Oil, greases and waxes of vegetable and animal origins

-
    Category   5:   Chemical products

-
    Category   6:   Manufactured products

-
    Category   7:   Machinery and transport equipment

-
    Category   8:   Other manufactured goods

-
    Category   9:   Other commodities
                                    15




     Two important patterns emerge from these tables. First, with almost no

exceptions, the bulk of these countrys' imports from the U.S. have been

concentrated throughout the period on the manufacturing sector (Categories

5, 6, 7 and 8) with capital goods (section 7) being in almost every country

the most important single item.

     Second, in spite of the dominating role of manufacturing, there is a

clear decline through time in the relative importance of Category 7, in

almost every country. At the same time Categories 0 (Foodstuffs and live

animals) and 5 (Chemical) have increased their relative shares. This change

in the composition of Latin American imports from the U.S., away from

traditional labor intensive manufacturing industries and into natural

resources and capital (including human capital) intensive products (includ-

ing food, farm products, and chemicals), reflects a change in the U.S.

pattern of comparative advantage, which has been observed for some years

n9w. In fact, Learner (1984) has recently shown that, according to the

predictions of the Heckscher-Ohlin theory of international trade, the U.S.

exports have shifted from being concentrated on relatively more labor

abundant commodities to more capital and resources abundant product.16

     111.2.3 U.S. and Foreign Competition: Disaggregated Trends

     In subsection 111.2.1 we looked at the Latin American aggregate imports

and their distribution across countries of origin. Subsection 111.2.2 dealt

with the question of "What do these countries import from the U.S.?" This

section tackles the equally important question of how the Latin American

import shares of different categories of imports are distributed among the

U.S. and other cauntries. Tables 15 through 18 provide disaggregated

information on the distribution of imports for the 12 upper middle income

and middle income Latin American countries for which these data are
                                     16



available. The disaggregation used here distinguishes between primary

products and manufactured goods. These tables contain data for the years

1970, 1975, 1980, 1983 on the share of each of these categories that have

been imported from:   (a) the rest of Latin America and the Caribbean;

(b) the U.S.; (c) Japan;      (d) Rest (i.e., other than U.S. or Japan) of

the OECD;    (e) Soviet bloc (CAME); and (f) Rest of the World. In order

to know whether a given share represents a low or high dollar value, on each

of these tables data on the dollar value of imports of each category is also

included (first column). These tables contain the most recent data

available and have been constructed from raw information obtained from the

U.N's Economic Commission for Latin America (ECLA).17

      The two commodities categories in these tables are defined in the

following way)8
-
    Primary Products: Foodstuffs; live animals; beverages; tobacco; raw non-
    food materials except fuel; oil, greases and waxes of vegetable and animal

    origins (that is, Categories 0, 1, 2 and 4 as defined in subsection

    111.2.2 above).

-   Manufactured Goods: Categories 5, 6, 7 and 8.
       From these tables it is possible to detect some common patterns across

countries. First, perhaps with the exception of intra-Latin American

imports of manufactured goods, there are no drastic changes in the

distribution of imports between 1970 and 1983. A second interesting pattern

is that in Argentina, Chile and Uruguay a majority of imports of primary

products came for all these years, from other Latin American countries.

Third, the increased importance of imports of primary products from the U.S.

has been such that in Brazil, Mexico, Colombia, Peru, Nicaragua, El Salvador

and Honduras the U.S. has displaced other Latin American and Caribbean
                                    17




countries as the main providers of this type of goods. Moreover, by 1983

most of these countries imported almost half of their primary products from

the U.S.

     The distribution of the imports of fuels has not been shown in these

tables, but behave as expected: The majority of the region's non-oil

producing countries import most of the fuel from oil producer Latin American

countries, with the rest of the world (mainly OPEC countries in this

instance) also being important.

     The data on manufacturing imports are particularly revealing. They

show that in the majority of the cases the OECD as a whole (U.S., Japan and

the rest of OECD) lost ground to competitors from the south, and in parti-

cular to other Latin American suppliers)9 As can be seen from Tables 17

and 18 imports from other Latin American and Caribbean countries have

increased very significantly. Although Japan has in many cases made some

progress, its presence in the region is far from overwhelming. Moreover in

many countries the share of Japanese manufactured imports in 1983 was

substantially lower than its 1980 or even 1975 share (i.e., Argentina,

Chile, Mexico, Uruguay, Venezuela, Paraguay, Guatemala, Ecuador, Nicaragua,

El Salvador, Honduras and Bolivia). With regard to the U.S., in many of the

countries there is a decline in the share of manufactured imports, with

Mexico being the major exception.


IV. Latin American Exports and Protectionism in the Industrialized
     Countries

     In this section we deal with the behavior of exports in Latin America

during the last 15 years or so. As already noted, after the 1982 debt

crisis most Latin American countries implemented major adjustment programs

aimed at reducing the magnitude of their balance of payments problems. In
                                    18




the majority of cases these adjustment efforts have been largely successful;

in fact, as documented in Section III above in most countries both the cur-

rent account and trade balances have experienced drastic improvements

between 1980 and 1985. However, a fact many times overlooked is that for

the region as a whole more than 100% of the improved external situation has

been the consequence of the decline in imports; in many cases exports have

even declined in real terms between 1980 and 1985. For example, for the 14

countries in Table 2 real value of imports declined in 45% between 1980 and

1985 when the U.S. WPI is used as the relevant price index. On the other

hand, for the 13 countries for which there are data, the total real value of

exports declined by almost 10% during the same period.20 Of course, in

those countries where the real value of exports dropped, this was mainly the

result of the fall in prices of many of their countries principle exports.

The extent of this decline in relative export prices is captured in Table 19

on the evolution of the terms of trade.

     There is little doubt that a definitive solution to the Latin America

pressing economic problems, and the resumption of growth in the region will

require a significant increase in exports.21 Moreover, only to the extent

that exports exhibit significant growth in the next few years will the

region be able to increase its imports.22 A crucial question, then, is what

and to whom will Latin American export in the next decade or so. The

analysis that follows aims at providing some information that will help

answer this important question.

IV.l The Destination of Latin American Extorts

     Table 20 contains data on the regional distribution of aggregate

exports for our 16 countries for 1970 through 1983. Tables 21 and 22, on

the other hand, contain more disaggregated data on the sectoral distribution
                                     19




of exports destination for the 16 countries. Finally, Tables 23 through 24

provide information for the upper middle income countries on the distribu-

tion of exports destination of primary products and manufactured goods.23

    A number of interesting facts emerge from these tables. First at the

aggregate level for the region as a whole (i.e., the 16 countries) there is

a decline in the proportion of exports going to the OECD. Exports to the

U.S., however, have not exhibited that much of a trend. It is also clear

from these tables that intra Latin American exports declined in a quite

substantial way in 1982 and 1983. Finally, another interesting trend

captured in Table 20 is the steady increase in Latin America's exports going

to Rest (i.e., non-Japan) of Asia and the Soviet bloc co,,tntries.

     The data in Table 21 describe the evolution of the composition of

regional exports. Several facts emerge from this table. First, exports of

foodstuffs and agricultural products (Section 0) have declined steadily

throughout the period. Second, exports of fuel increased in importance both

as a result of the increases in the price of oil and of the increased gas

and oil production in the region. Third, manufactured exports corresponding

to sections 5 (chemicals), 8 (various manufactured products) and 7 (machin-

ery and transportation equipment) experienced an important increase. This

trend is captured in an even cleaner way in Table 22 that excludes full

fuel: whereas in 1970 Sections 5, 7 and 8 represented no more than 8

percent of nonfuel exports, in 1983 they accounted for 23 percent. Fourth,

these data also show that Section 6 (manufactures) has approximately

retained its relative importance accounting for around 19 percent of nonfuel

exports. The disaggregated information on the destination of exports in

Tables 23 and 24 shows that in the majority of the cases exports of primary

products go to the OECD.
                                    20




    Table 24 shows that the proportion of the larger countries' exports of

manufactured goods that go to the U.S. has increased through time. In most

cases this higher share of exports to the U.S. has come out of declining

shares of exports to the rest of Latin America.

     Table 25 contains data at an even more disaggregated level on the

percentage distribution of the 16 countries exports to the U.S. For each

year this table gives information on how Latin American exports to the U.S.

are distributed across the 10 one-digit section of the SITC (see Section III

for a detailed definition of these categories). By and large, this table

confirms the patterns observed for total disaggregated exports reported in

Table 22. First, the relative importance of food product exports (section

0) has declined steadily during the period. This, of course, is nothing but

another reflection of the changing pattern of comparative advantages discus-

sed above. As the production of food has become more capital intensive, the

industrial countries and in particular the U.S., have tended to produce and

export more and more food, while the poorer countries have exported less and

less of it (Learner, 1984).24

IV.2 Protectionism in the Industrial Nations and the Future Evolution of
      Latin American ExDorts

     While most Latin American nations have been going through serious

efforts aimed at improving their external balance, the industrial countries

have been invaded with protectionist sentiments. In fact, already in the

past few years the industrial countries have used a series of nontariff

mechanisms to impede a freer flow of Latin American goods. According to the

GATT (1984) industrial countries currently use more than forty nontariff

measures to impede international flows of commodities.25
                                    21




    A few authors have dealt with the issue of nontariff barriers,

analyzing the extent of these practices, their coverage across countries and

products, and their evolution through time.26 For example, in a comprehen-

sive recent study Nogues et al. (1986b) analyzed the use of nontariff

barriers in 16 industrialized countries.27 For the purpose of their

analysis they defined the following practices as nontariff barriers: prohi-

bitions, quotas, discretionary import authorization, conditional import

authorizations, "voluntary" export restraints, variable levies, minimum

price systems, "voluntary" price restraints, tariff-quotas, seasonal

tariffs, price and volume investigations, and antidumping and counterveiling

duties. Table 26 contains data on an index of the coverage of these non-

tariff barriers, defined as the proportion of these countries imports of a

particular product that are subject to the NTBs.28 As can be seen, the

coverage of this type of impediments is quite broad, affecting more than

one-fourth of all these countries imports, with textiles being the industry

most severely affected. An important question is whether imports from all

countries or regions are affected in the same way by the NTBs. Nogues et.

al. (1986) have shown that this is not the case; imports from the developing

world are more severely affected by this type of "semi-disguised"

protectionism than those from the industrialized world.

     Once the effects of the NTBs are taken into account the degree of

protection the industrialized countries grant to some product can be quite

remarkable. Table 27, for example, provides estimates of the total average

rate of protection to which some Argentinian and Brazilian exports to the

EEC, Japan and the U.S. were subject in 1980. These figures are in many

ways staggering, indicating that in many cases the NTBs more than double the

tariff protection.
                                       22




    What   is   even more serious is that the existing evidence clearly

indicates a slow but steady increase in the degree of coverage of the NTBs.

For example Nogues et al. (l986a) found that the NTB5 coverage for all goods

in the 16 industrial countries increased by 1.5 percentage points between

1981 and 1983. To the extent that these NTBs increase, or even if they are

maintained at their current level, it will become very difficult if not

plainly impossible, for the Latin American countries to increase their

exports at the rate required to solve the current debt crisis. While the

main responsibility for increasing exports rests with the Latin American

countries, their efforts, no matter how serious, can be easily frustrated by

the protectionist policies of the industrialized world.29


V. Commercial Policies. Protectionism. and Latin American Trade

V.1 Historical Perspective

     As noted in Section II, during the 1940s most of the Latin American

countries embarked on ambitious industrialization programs based on an

import substitution development strategy. This inward looking development

program was based on the idea that small developing economies would only

grow sufficiently rapidly if they were able to develop a large and diversif-

ied industrial sector. This, in turn, could only be achieved if

sufficiently high protection in the form of import tariffs or quotas was

granted to the incipient domestic industries. Most proponents of the import

substitution strategy also pointed out that the high degree of protection

would only be necessary as a temporary measure; after an initial learning

period these "infant industries" would move into their "adolescence," and

would not require tariffs (Prebish, 1984). Reality, however, showed this

view to be wrong. In a way protectionism became a semi-permanent feature of
                                    23




the Latin American economies.

     During the first years of the industrialization process, in a number of

the larger countries important heavy industries were created, as the bases

for a manufacturing sector were set. However, alongside with the indust-

rialization process an impressive array of restrictions, controls and often

contradictory regulations evolved. It was, in fact, thanks to these import

restrictions that many of the domestic industries were able to survive. For

example, a number of comparative studies have indicated that some of the

Latin American countries (i.e., Chile) had for a long time one of the high-

est, and more variable, structures of protection in the developing world.

As a consequence, many (if not most) of the industries created under the

import substitution strategy were quite inefficient. In an empirical study

directed by Krueger (1980), it was found that in Colombia, Chile and Uruguay

this inward looking strategy resulted in the use of very capital intensive

techniques, which hampered the creation of employment, among other

inefficiencies.

     As in most historical cases, the Latin American import substitution

strategy was accompanied by an acute overvalued domestic currency which

precluded the development of a vigorous non-traditional export sector. In

particular in many of these countries the agricultural sector was seriously

harmed by the real exchange rate overvaluation. In fact in many cases the

lagging of agriculture became one of the most noticeable symptoms of Latin

America's economic problems of the 1960s. During the early and mid-1960s

the import substitution strategy began to run out of steam. At that time

most of the easy and obvious substitutions of imported goods had already

taken place, and the process was rapidly becoming less dynamic (Furtado

1969).
                                       24




     Starting in the late 1960s, and during most of the 1970s, most

countries made some movements towards rationalizing their external sectors
                                                                and reduction in
via the reduction in coverage of quantitative restrictions,

the average level of tariffs. In many cases these liberalization efforts
                                                           exports. In a number
were accompanied by active policies aimed at promoting

of countries these export promotion schemes were based on an active manage-
                                                         overvaluation, and thus
ment of the nominal exchange rate, aimed at avoiding

help maintain a steady growth in exports.
                                                                After decades of
     The Colombian experience is particularly interesting.

an almost chaotic external sector policy - -    where exchange rate crises were

the norm rather than the exception -   - in   1967 the Colomb.an government imp-

lemented a series of measures aimed at encouraging exports and at reducing

the extent of protectionism. The exchange rate was devalued significantly

and a crawling peg system based on periodic adjustments of the nominal

exchange rate was adopted. At the same time the percentage of commodities

subject to prior import licensing was drastically reduced, as were the

average levels of tariffs. The exchange rate and import liberalization

policies were supplemented with a dynamic export subsidies scheme (the so-

called CATs). The Colombian experience was in many ways a big success.

Exports soared, new efficient industries were developed and the external

 sector stayed extremely healthy, to the extent that Colombia was the only

 country among the large and medium Latin American nations not affected in a

 traumatic way by the debt crisis.30

      Undoubtedly, the most ambitious attempts to liberalize the external

 sector took place in the Southern Cone during the late l970s. Starting

 around 1975 Argentina, Chile and Uruguay embarked on major programs to

 reform their economies. These cases were particularly interesting since the
                                         25




reforms implemented corresponded closely to what many economists have been

advocating for a long time: quantitative restrictions on trade were elimin-

ated, tariff levels and dispersion were reduced, domestic capital markets

were developed, and restrictions on international capital movements were

lifted. The main objective of these reforms was to transform these

countries into open export-oriented economies.

    A decade after these reforms were first implemented, the evidence

indicates that they were to a large extent failures. In all three countries

the liberalization reforms have been partially reversed. Tariffs have been

raised, so that these economies are tending once again to become less inte-

grated with the rest of the world. Severe financial crises resulted in the

collapse and virtual nationalization of the banking sectors. Although this

is still an area of debate, it is possible to argue that the failure of

these liberalizations was, to a large extent (but not exclusively) due to

the implementation of inappropriate macroeconomic policies, including wage

rate and exchange rate policies. Also, the way in which the financial

reforms were implemented - -   with   little or no supervision on behalf of the

authorities --   played an important role in the final disappointing outcome.
     A major indirect negative effect of the failure of the Southern Cone

experiences is that they have generated a bad press for import liberal-

ization and market-oriented policies in the rest of the region. The

collapse of these economies, the financial scandals, and the reversal of the

policies have given ammunition to those who, on political or other grounds,

oppose economic liberalization and tariff reform as a development strategy.


V.2 Tariffs and tiTrue Protection"

     Table 28 contains data on nominal and effective import rates for

selected Latin American countries.31 Although these data refer to only a
                                    26




handful of countries, and in some cases to quite a few years back, they do

give a flavor on the extent and evolution of protectionism in the region.

First, the effective rates of protection (or protection to value added) are

extremely high. This is especially the case in the 1960s and 1970s.

Second, for the cases of Argentina, Chile, Colombia, Peru and Uruguay these

figures reflect quite vividly the move towards tariff liberalization that

took place towards the late 1970s and early 1980s.

     What is not reflected in this table, however, is the post-debt crisis
                                                         protection in the
(i.e., post 1982) generalized movement towards greater

region. As these countries were forced to reduce imports, and improve their

external balance, they hiked their tariffs in a fairly significant way and

imposed other forms of import controls. Even Chile, under the super-open

economy approach of Pinochet responded to the crisis by (temporarily?)

increasing tariffs by more than 50% in 1983.32

     Tariffs, of course, constitute only one form of protection, and

countries in fact use a large number of other mechanisms to introduce

 facto wedges between domestic and world prices. As discussed in Section III

 above, nontariff barriers can take many different forms ranging from prior-

 deposits to outright quotas. The history of nontariff barriers in Latin

 America is long. As a number of authors have pointed out, import licenses,

 prior import deposits, and quotas have been quite generalized, in these

 countries. Not surprisingly the use of nontariff barriers mechanism

 increased significantly after the debt crisis.33 In Colombia, for example,

 the proportion of imports subject to an import license increased from 47% in

 1980 to 66% in l983.
      Unfortunately the data available on NTBs in the developing countries,

 and in particular in Latin America are exceedingly sketchy. In fact, as far
                                    27




as this author knows it is not possible to find for Latin America data on

the coverage of NTBs, which would be equivalent to that presented in Section

IV. However, a recent study by ALADI (1984) provides some indication of the

coverage of two forms of NTBs: outright prohibitions and prior import

licenses. Table 29 summarizes these data. As can be seen from this table

NTBs in Latin America are as prevalent, if not more, than in the developed

countries.

     Multiple exchange rates are another mechanism used quite extensively by

the Latin American nations to impede trade flows. Interestingly enough,

studies on NTBs have not focused on this protective tool. In Section VI

below, however, we look into this problem in more detail.

     The lack of reliable data on NTBs has generally frustrated analysts

that have tried to assess with some degree of rigor the extent of protection

in the developing world. For this reason in a recent massive cross country

study undertaken at the World Bank, an effort to construct subjective "in-

dexes of liberalization" was made. These indexes are supposed to capture

the extent of trade impediments, including tariffs and other NTBs. They are

subjective, in the sense that they don't combine actual objective measures.

Although there are some shortcomings related to this subjectivity, including

the nonverifiability and noncomparability across countries, their construc-

tion has been extremely useful, helping understand the evolution of "true

protectionism" in some of these countries. For the five Latin American

nations included among the 18 countries covered by the study, the indexes

reflect both the protectionist history of these countries, as well as the

efforts toward liberalization implemented in the late l970s and early 1980s

(see Michaely, Papageorgiou and Choksi, 1986).
                                    28




VI. Latin America's Exchanze Rate Policies and the External Sector

     The purpose of this section is to briefly analyze the exchange rate

policies of the Latin American countries, placing especial emphasis on two

issues:   (a) real exchange rate overvaluation, and (b)   the protective

role of multiple and parallel (or black) market exchange rates.    The

evolution of the external sector can be affected in several ways by the

evolution of the real exchange rate.35 For example, real exchange rate

misalignment, and especially an overvalued real exchange rate greatly harms

                                                                  and encou-
export performance (and in particular nontraditional exports),

rages capital flight. On the other hand a highly volatile real exchange

rate enhances uncertainty tending to reduce and even mislocate investment.36


VI.l Exchange Rate Policies. The Dollar and Real Exchange Rates

     During the last 13 years or so the Latin American countries have

followed the most diverse nominal exchange rate policies, including fixed to

the dollar, crawling peg (i.e., periodic adjustments approximately deter-

mined by differential between domestic and world inflation), periodic

devaluations, preannounced declining rate of nominal devaluation and so on.

Surprisingly perhaps, in spite of these different policies, during the late

1970s and early 1980s a large number of countries experienced significant

real appreciations, which led to acute overvaluation of their currencies.37

     In general, it is possible to single out three main causes for these

fairly generalized movements toward real overvaluation:   (1) many of these

countries pursued expansive monetary and fiscal policies that became incom-

patible with the nominal exchange rate regime chosen (i.e., Mexico, Peru,

Argentina). In this case, the loose macropolicies result in expansions of

 aggregate demand which exercise upward pressure on domestic prices. As

 prices increased at a rate higher than the nominal rate of devaluation
                                    29




(which under fixed nominal rates is zero), the real exchange rate

appreciated and the country's exports became less competitive in

international markets.   (2) A second cause for real appreciation, which

affected mainly the Southern Cone countries, was the adoption of

preannounced declining devaluation schedules, which started at rates below

the ongoing rate of inflation (i.e., the "Tablitas"). The combination of

these tablitas with other policies such as backward wage indexation in Chile

and relaxation of capital controls in Argentina, Chile and Uruguay conspired

to generate significant real appreciations in these three countries.38 (3)

A final and important factor that contributed to the loss in the region's

competitiveness was the significant appreciation of the dollar in

international financial markets between 1980 and 1985. Most of the Latin

American countries either peg their nominal exchange rate to the U.S. dollar

or use the dollar as a term of reference to conduct their exchange rate

policy. Consequently, as the dollar appreciated in the international

financial markets with respect to other industrial countries' currencies, so

did most of the Latin American currencies.39

     Figures 4 through 7 depict the behavior of two indexes of real exchange

rate for Brazil, Chile, El Salvador, Paraguay, Peru and Mexico. These

indexes were constructed using quarterly data and in most cases cover up to

mid-1983 or early 1984. The average for 1980 is equal to 100.40 In these

diagrams an increase in the indexes reflect real depreciation, while a

decline in the index denotes real appreciation on loss of international

competitiveness. The first index is the traditional bilateral real exchange

rate computed with respect to the U.S. dollar, and is called "off bilateral"

in the diagrams. The second index, called "off.multilateral" was construc-

ted taking into account, for each country, the changes in international
                                        30




competitiveness relative to a group of its ten most important trade

partners. In this way this multilateral real exchange rate index is able to

take into account the way in which fluctuations among the partners' exchange

rates affect international competitiveness.

       These diagrams neatly reflect some of the features of real exchange

behavior discussed above. First in all countries we observe that in the

mid- to late l970s a process of real appreciation, which entailed a

reduction in the countries degree of international competitiveness, took

place. While in some cases this declining trend in the RER was reversed in

the early l980s (Brazil, Chile, Peru, Mexico) via nominal devaluations, in

others (Paraguay, El Salvador) it continued until at least 1984. These

diagrams also reflect in a nice way the differences between bilateral and

multilateral real exchange rates, as well as the effects of the dollar

appreciation in the first half of the 1980s. Notice that in all countries

after 1980 the multilateral index declines (i.e., appreciates) much faster

than the bilateral rate, indicating that the degree of "true" overvaluation

-   - which   takes into account changes in the degree of competitiveness

relative to all trade partners - -    was much greater than that computed with

respect to the U.S. dollar only.

VI.2 Multiyle Exchange Rates. Parallel Markets and Protectionism in Latin
      America

        In many   cases non-unified exchange rates play an important protective

role. To the extent that two types of international transactions are

 subject to different rites of exchange, a wedge between their prices, that

 acts in the same way as a tax, will be imposed.41 Moreover, multiple

 exchange rates for commercial transactions, will have an effect equivalent

 to import tariffs (or export taxes), since the domestic public will have to
                                          31




pay a higher price for those imports subject to a higher exchange rate.

         It is important to note that in order for the exchange rate system to

play a protective role, it is not necessary that the authorities officially

adopt multiple rates. In fact, a parallel market for foreign exchange will

most times also have a protective effect. Generally speaking in many cases

marginal imports will be brought into the country at the higher parallel

market (or free) exchange rate.42

         The Latin American countries have had a long tradition with multiple

exchange rates. In many cases - -    as   in Argentina and Colombia for example

-   -a   lower rate has been applied to traditional exports as an implicit way

of taxing them. Also, in many countries, and for long periods of time,

different rates have been applied to commercial and financial transactions.

Perhaps the most extreme case is that of Chile in 1972, when 15 different

"official" exchange rates were in effect.

         In fact in the 1980s multiple rates have become such a common place,

that in 1983 all but 3 of the Latin American countries for which there are

data had two or more official exchange rates. while in many of these

countries multiple rates have been a long term feature (Argentina, Colombia,

Paraguay, Ecuador), in many others they have only made an appearance (or

reappearance) in the early l980s, usually as part of the packages aimed at

dealing with the debt and economic crisis (i.e., Chile, Venezuela, Dominican

Republic). This profusion of multiple official rates, as well as the

significant parallel market premia observed in many of these countries

indicate that the extent of protection in Latin America is generally higher

than what data on tariffs, or even import licenses and quotas would suggest.
                                      32




VII. Direct Foreign Investment in Latin America

     For many years direct foreign investment has been a controversial issue

in Latin America. Most countries in the region have carefully regulated the

conditions under which direct foreign investment can take place, and have

determined with even greater care regulations that govern profits

repatriations, reinvestment, transfer pricing and so on. Moreover, in a

number of countries regulations establish a time limit after which any

foreign investment should be "nationalized", with at least 51% of the equity

belonging to locals. Perhaps the most severe of these regulations regarding

direct foreign investment was contained in Article 24 of the Cartagena

Agreement which governed the functioning of the Andean Pact.43 According to

this regulation any foreign investment had to be nationalized before 15

years.
     Latin America's attitude towards foreign investment has in many

instances been discriminatory and sector specific; while direct foreign

 investment is welcomed in some sectors it is completely kept out of other

 so-called "strategic areas". Good examples of this type of policy are the

 Brazilian and Mexican rejections of recent proposals to develop U.S. owned

 computer manufactures in those countries.44 Also the incorporation in the

 Chilean constitution of the state ownership of all major copper (and other)

 mines is quite striking.45

      In spite of the "suspicious" attitude with which many of the Latin

 American countries have faced the subject, the direct foreign investment in

 the region has continued to be quite substantial, with the U.S. being the

 principal actor. Table 30 contains the latest available data on the

 accumulated value of direct foreign investment in Latin America by country

 of origin, Although these data - -   as   much of the information on direct
                                       33




foreign investment in the region -   - are   highly incomplete, they reflect two

interesting facts. First, the U.S. has a very dominant role in the area.

Second, as far as this information can tell, the relative importance of the

U.S. declined between 1976 and 1981. In fact according to the data the U.S.

share in the accumulated value of foreign direct investment fluctuated

around 63-64 percent between 1967 and 1978; in 1981 the last year for which

there are data, this share was only 54 percent.

     It is interesting to note that between 1982 and 1984 there was no

change in the value of U.S. investments in the region. However, 1983 was a

year of a fairly important net disinvestment, concentrated almost exclusive-

ly in Venezuela. In 1984 there was a net positive investment of almost the

same value as the drop of 1983. However, the geographical, as well as

sector composition changed quite drastically. While investments in Venez-

uela were minimum in 1984, they surged in Brazil. Also, oil saw a big dip

in 1984, with manufactures and commerce experiencing important increases.

     Undoubtedly, the economic and political uncertainties of the last few

years in Latin America have dictated the relative stagnation of U.S. invest-

ment flows into the region. On the other hand the existence of abundant

natural resources and of substantial labor cost differentials still makes

the region a very attractive place for U.S. and other multinationals to

locate. For example, the data in Figure 8 suggests that the relative

differential between U.S. and local labor costs has widened since the mid-

l970s.46

     In the aftermath of the debt crisis, direct foreign investment will

probably become very important for the Latin American countries. It is

clear that for a number of years to come the region will not be able to

obtain abundant (or even meager) funds from the international banking
                                      34




community, nor from the flotation of bonds. Consequently, additional funds

to finance increased capital accumulation and the resumption of growth will

have to come from other sources. Of course, the natural alternative sources

of funds to finance investment are:    (a) increased domestic savings (both

private and public);   (b) reversal of the massive capital flight that took

place in the early 1980s;47 (c) increased funds obtained from multilateral

organizations such as the World Bank and the Interamerican Development Bank;

and (d) increased direct investment.

     Whether these potential sources of additional foreign funds will

actually become available will depend on a series of factors, including the

countries domestic policies. It is clear, however, that.with respect to

direct foreign investment, substantial increases in the flow of funds will

require fairly creative policies by the Latin American countries that would

encourage these additional funds from abroad, while at the same time would

allow these countries to maintain their main development and "national

objectives". In that regard, an interesting possibility would be to link

any efforts to attract new direct foreign investment to the opening up of

the "services sector". For example, in 1984 the U.S. accumulated direct

investment in the commercial banks, finance, insurance and real estate

sectors was only 11.9% of the total of these investments.48


VIII. Concluding Remarks

     In this paper we have analyzed in detail a number of different aspects

related to the evolution and recent behavior of the U.S. trade relations

with the Latin American countries. In this section we wrap up the analysis

by summarizing our findings and by discussing the possible future evolution

of the U.S. -Latin American trade relations. The main conclusions of this
                                         35




study are the following:

     (1) When market import shares (computed using U.S. dollar values of

imports) are used as an indicator of competitiveness, there is no evidence

of a loss in the U.S. degree of competitiveness in Latin America in the last

15 years or so. In fact, the statistical analysis of the existing empirical

evidence shows that there has been no significant change in the U.S. share

of the aggregate Latin American imports markets since 1970.

     (2) At the individual country level, however, there have been some

changes. In 9 countries the U.S. share of imports has not changed

significantly, in two it has increased, while in 5, including Nicaragua,

there has been a decline.

     (3) Although at the overall aggregate level, there have been no

significant changes in the degree of U.S. competitiveness in Latin America,

there have been substantial changes in what the U.S. exports to these count-

ries. There has been a very important increase in Latin American imports of

primary products and of chemicals from the U.S., with a decline in imports

of other (traditional) manufactured goods. Thus, there has been an increase

in the "degree of competitiveness" of U.S. primary products and chemicals in

Latin America, accompanied with a loss in competitiveness of traditional

manufacturing sectors.

     (4) Although the share of the U.S. in total Latin American imports has

not changed, the (real) dollar value of U.S. exports to the region has

declined very significantly in the last 3 or 4 years. This is because, as a

result of the debt crisis, every country in the region has gone through

major - -   and   in some cases highly innovative - -   adjustment   programs, which

have resulted in very important reductions in total imports. For the region

as a whole the real value of aggregate imports declined by more than 45
                                      36




percent between 1980 and 1985.

     (5) The reduction in the real value of Latin America's imports in the

last years was a result of the contractionary demand policies implemented in

many countries, of important (real) exchange rate adjustments, and of the

imposition in many cases of fairly massive import controls. These import

controls --   which take many forms, including higher tariffs, more general-

ized NTBs, multiple exchange rates, and parallel exchange rates -- mark an

important turn from a liberalizing trend observed, since the mid-l970s in

most countries in the region. It is clear that this mode of Latin American

adjustment is not sustainable in the long run. The resumption of growth

will require a rationalization of the external sector, increase in imports

and in exports.

     (6) In terms of foreign competition, Japan has not experienced any

significant increases in its presence in the Latin American imports market.

At the manufactured goods level the drop in the U.S. share has been picked

up by other NICs (i.e., Korea, Taiwan) and especially by intra-Latin

American trade. In fact, CEPAL/ECLA projects a substantial increase in

overall intraregional trade for the next years.49 For example, in July of

1986 CEPAL/ECLA projected that the share of intra-Aladi imports would

increase from 16% in 1985 to 18.6% in 1990 and to 22.2 in 1994. Naturally,

if this happens other countries shares, including the U.S.'s, would decline.

Although we cannot discard ECLA's projections lightly, their numbers are

possibly on the high side, since their are based on the (fairly unlikely)

assumption of "desdollarization" of the interregional trade.

     (7) A remarkable fact, and surprisingly not widely known, is that

practically all of the recent adjustment has come through a reduction in

imports, with the real value of exports having declined in many of these
                                      37



countries,   mainly as a result of the reduction of prices of commodity

exports.

     (8) There is little doubt that the recovery of the Latin American

economy will require an increase in exports and a rationalization of these

nations import sector, via reduced protection and increased efficiency.

This rationalization and easing of the current high levels of import

restrictions will probably come about slowly, and it is highly likely that

these countries, will proceed cautiously avoiding this time around, the

errors and mistakes of the recent Southern Cone liberalization. In that

regard, special care will be placed on avoiding exchange rate overvaluation.

     (9) A sustained increase in Latin America's exports -- which is, of

course, a prerequisite for an increase in its imports - -   requires   a number

of conditions. First, there has to be a steady increase in the demand for

these goods by the developed world. In fact, it has been recently estimated

that an average increase in industrial countries GDP of approximately 3% per

annum will be "required" during the next years (Balassa, et al. 1986).

(b) Increased efficiency in the regional productive process. This could be

achieved via a generalized increase in efficiency, including the rational-

ization of the external sector. (c) Avoiding real exchange rate

overvaluation and (d) More important, it is absolutely crucial that the

current protectionist trend in the industrial countries is reversed.

     (10) The data presented in this paper indicate that at this time the

extent of nontariff barriers, as a form of protection in the industrial

countries, is very significant. Moreover, the data show that these NTBs are

particularly important for goods originating in the developing nations, and

that their tariff equivalents are in many cases very significant.
                                        38




     (11) Although the U.S. is still the most important country regarding

direct investment in Latin America, its relative importance has declined in

the recent years. Since 1981 the accumulated value of U.S. investment in

Latin America did not change. However its sectoral and geographical compo-

sition did change, with oil and commerce being negatively affected.       Both

from a point of view of resources and labor costs, Latin America continues

to be an attractive region for foreign investors. Moreover, in the after-

math of the debt crisis, direct foreign investment has become one of the few

possible sources of foreign funds to finance capital accumulation and growth

in the region. Whether significant investments will in fact materialize

will depend on expected economic and political stability, and on innovative

changes in local regulations.

     To sum up, then, the evidence examined in this paper suggests that the

U.S. overall competitive position in Latin America has not changed

significantly in the last 15 years or so. At the sectoral level, however,

the composition of U.S. exports to Latin America has changed, reflecting a

changing pattern of U.S. comparative advantage: chemicals and primary

products have increased their shares with traditional manufactures hurting.

Foreign competition in Latin America is not coming from Japan but from other

NICs, and more importantly from intra-Latin American trade. As a result of

the debt crisis the value of Latin American imports has greatly declined,

bringing down with it the value of U.S. exports to the region. As imports

recover, and move towards their peak (real) value, the U.S. will also

increase its exports to the region. A crucial point here is how will the

recovery of imports be financed? The answer is that possibly, in part by

higher exports - -   this   in turn requires steady growth in the industrial

world and an end to the protectionist mood - -    and   partially through new
                                    39




funds that will possibly be made available by increased direct foreign

investment. Naturally this increased foreign investment will only be

possible if existing legislation and regulations are reformed in an

innovative way.
                                      40



                                 Footnotes



    *j paper has been prepared for presentation at the NBER Conference

The U.S. in the World Economy, March 6-7, 1987. Comments by Alejandra Cox

Edwards, Arye Hiliman and the participants of the pre-conference meeting

held in Cambridge, December 1986, have been very useful. The help obtained

from Dr. Rolando Sanchez during the author's visit to CEPAL (Santiago,

Chile) to gather data for this paper, is gratefully acknowledged. David

Gould provided able research assistance. This research was supported by the

NSF (Grant SAS 84 19932) and by UCLA's Academic Senate.

     1. These are the countries for which disaggregated data on directions

of trade are available.

     2. On the evolution of Latin America's external sector see, for

example, Furtado (1969). On Latin America and the great depression see Diaz

Alejandro (1982, 1983) and Maddison (1985). On the development strategies

in Latin America, see Corbo (1986).

     3.   See, for example, the discussion in Furtado (1969).

     4. See Blejer (1984).

     5. On the Southern Cone see, for example, Calvo (1986), Corbo (1985),

Hanson and de Melo (1985), Edwards (1985) and Edwards and Edwards (1987).

     6. An important issue refers to which external price index should be

used to compute the evolution of the real value of imports and exports. The

figure quoted above was calculated using the U.S. CPI. If instead the

wholesale price index for the industrialized countries as a whole, as com-

puted by the IMF, is used, Latin American imports declined by 49% on real

terms between 1980 and 1985.
                                        41




      7. In some of these countries imports had also grown at a

fantastically high pace between 1975 and 1980 (i.e., the Southern Cone

Countries). Notice, however, for the 14 countries as a whole, the real

value of imports grew at a slower rate during 1975-80 than in the period

1965-75.

     8. It should be noted, however, that both the trade-GDP and the

import-GDP ratios exhibit quite a bit of fluctuation from year-to-year. In

order to get a sense of the general trend in the degree of openness,

regressions of the log of both of these indexes on time were run for period

1960-83. The results show that in the great majority of these countries

openness increased during this period.

     9. The decline of the trade ratio, however, is less marked than that

of the imports ratio. The reason for this is that as a result of the

adjustment program in some of these countries exports increased during the

period.

     10. On the constant market-share criterion for assessing the degree of

international competitiveness see Learner and Stern (1970).

     11. This can be illustrated using the following example. Assume that

a particular Latin American country imports goods from the U.S. and the rest

of the world. The Quantities imported are MUS and MR respectively. The

price of imports from the U.S. is pUS          while the price of imports from R,

expressed in U.S. dollars, is EPR, where E is the nominal exchange rate

between the U.S. and the rest, and R is the price of MR in the rest of

the world currency. Our market share then is equal to s = [PUSUS USUS
                                                             M /(P M
+ PREMR)]   This can be rewritten as:        s = (MUS/(MUS + (EPR/PUS)MRfl.

Notice that (EPR/PUS) is the real value of the dollar. Clearly, then,

even if MUS and MR - -   the   quantities imported - -   remain   constant, changes
                                           42



          R US    will   affect s.
in (EP /P )
     12. In Argentina, Chile, Venezuela, Peru, and El Salvador the U.S.

share exhibited a slight increase between 1977 and 1982; in Brazil, Paraguay

and Nicaragua there was somewhat of a decline during the same period. In

the other countries the U.S. share fluctuated around a fairly stable value

during 1977-81.

     13. The coefficient for the time trend turned out to be -0.004 with a

t-statistic of -1.2. In fact, Nicaragua is the only country with a signifi-

cant increase in imports from the Soviet bloc during the l980s.

     14. Due to space considerations, detailed data for the rest of the

countries are not provided here. However, these data are available from the

author on request.

     15. Given the different sources (IMF and ECLA) there are some (minor)

divergences between these figures and those in Tables 2.1 through 2.4. See

CEPAL Origen y    Destino   del Comercio Exterior de los Paises de la Asociacion

Latinoamericana de Integracion y     del   Mercado Comun Centroamericano, Cuader-

nos Estdisticos de la CAPAL 9, Santiago, Chile, 1985 and "Origen y Destino

del Comercio Exterior en 1983," CEPAL, Santiago Chile, 28 August 1986.

     16. The Heckscher-Ohlin theory predicts that, in general, a country

will tend to export those goods whose production process is intensive in the

factor that the country has a relative abundance (see Learner (1984)). Not-

ice that Learner's study covers only up to 1975. The data presented here,

then, confirms that Learner's results are also valid for the more recent

period.

     17. See "Origen y Destino del Comercio Exterior, 1983,", CEPAL,

Santiago de Chile, 28 August 1986 (LC.L. 395).

     18. This classification corresponds to ECLA.
                                     43




     19. This of course is consistent with the shift in U.S. comparative

advantage detected above and documented in Section 111.2.2.

     20. Not in every country, however, did the real value of exports

decline during this period. In Brazil, Ecuador and Mexico, for example, the

real value of exports was significantly higher in 1985 than in 1980. In

both cases the real values of imports and exports were computed using the

data in Tables 2 and 3 and the U.S. WPI as a price deflator for the nominal

dollar values. If, however, the wholesale price index for the industrial-

ized countries as a whole is used as the deflator, real exports of these 13

countries have declined by almost 18 percent.

     21. For a comprehensive discussion on the role of exports in the

recovery of Latin America see the analysis in Balassa, Bueno, Kuczynski and

Simoensen (1986). Even in those quarters where there has traditionally been

skepticism regarding the role of trade, there is now agreement on the

importance of exports expansion in the next decade or so.

     22. See, however, Section VII below for a discussion on alternative

possible sources of financing of new imports.

     23. As in the case of imports these shares have been computed by

dividing the dollar value of exports to a particular country by the total

dollar value of exports.

     24. Another interesting regularity is that the relative importance of

fuels exports (category 3) increased very dramatically during the period.

This rapid growth, of course reflects both increases in the prices of oil

prices (notice for example the jump of this share in 1979) and in oil

production. Naturally, the recent decline in the price of oil has had the

opposite effect on these shares.
                                      44



        25. See CATT "Report of the Group on Quantitative Restrictions and

Other Non-Tariff Measures," Geneva, 1984.

        26. See Balassa and Balassa (1984), Cline (1985), Jones (1983) and

Nogues, Olechowski and Winters (1986a,b).

        27. Denmark, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands,

U.K., Australia, Austria, Finland, Japan, Norway, Switzerland, and the U.S.

        28. Since the numerator in this index is actual imports, its value

will tend to be biased downward. For this reason Nogues et al. construct

alternative indexes, which is pretty much the same story as that presented

here.

        29. In fact, in their recent blueprint for Latin Azuerican recovery

Balassa et al. (1986) stress that it is crucial that the industrialized

countries avoid any new import protection or export subsidization, "indeed

[what is required is] a renewal of trade liberalization" (p. 34). In that

regard it should be noted that the U.S. 1984 Trade and Tariff Act allows for

the possibility of implementing a series of protectionist measures. For an

analysis of the act from a Latin American perspective see Rodriguez Mendoza

(1986).

        30. Of course, the coffee boom of 1975-79 and the boom in illegal

drug-related trade also helped. On coffee and the Colombian economy see

Edwards (l986a). On the Colombian external sector see Diaz Alejandro (1976)

and Thomas (1986).

        31. The effective rate of protection is a measure of the relative

degree of inefficiency of domestic production relative to international pro-

duction. A positive value means that domestic value added for that

particular activity exceeds value added at international prices. The

effective tariff for good i (ri) is computed as          =
                                                             (t   -
                                         45




(l-Ea..), where t.        is   the nominal tariff, a.. is the input/output

coefficient between input j        and good i, and t        is   the nominal tariff

on input j.       Notice that if the good and ]J inputs     have the same nominal

tariff, then the effective and nominal rates of protection are the same (r.

= t.).
   1
        32.   See Edwards and Edwards (1987, pp. 126-29).

        33. See, for example, CEPAL "Reorientacion del Comercio Exterior de

Productos Basicos Hacia America Latina," LC/R.506 (Santiago, Chile, 25 June

1986)

        34. See Edwards (1983).

        35. The real exchange rate is a measure of the international

competitiveness of a country, and is defined as RER = EP*/P;           where E is
the nominal exchange rate, and P* and P are foreign and domestic price

levels. An increase in RER represents a real depreciation and reflects an

increase in competitiveness.

        36. On the effects of real exchange rate overvaluation in the

developing countries see, for example, Pfefferman (1985). On overvaluation

and capital flight see Cuddirigton (1985). A series of essays on exchange

rates in developing countries can be found in Edwards and Ahamed (1986).

        37. Notice that since overvaluation is defined as a (significant)

discrepancy between the actual and equilibrium real exchange rate, not all

real appreciation necessarily reflect a situation of overvaluation. It is

possible that the equilibrium real exchange rate appreciates. For a fuller

discussion see Edwards (1987).

        38. See Edwards (1984).

        39. Balassa et al. (1986) for example, considers the dollar apprecia-

tion episode of 1982-85 as an important determinant of the debt crisis.
                                    46




    40. For a detailed discussion on the construction of these indexes see

Edwards and Ng (1985).

    41. There is an extensive technical literature on multiple exchange

rates. See, for example, Dornbusch (1986a).

     42. For a general discussion on the role of multiple and parallel

rates in the developing countries see Dornbusch (1986a,b) and Edwards

(1987).

     43. Even the ultra free market oriented Pinochet government in Chile

showed apprehension regarding direct foreign investment when the Mining Law

was enacted. (See Estudios Publicos, Summer 1986.)

     44. On the Brazilian computer industry see Evans (1986).

     45. The constitution allowed the state to grant concessions to foreign

firms. The nature of these concessions was regulated by the Mining Law of

1979, which included an ingenious system for calculating indemnization in

case of early termination of the concessions. See Pinera (1986.)

     46. Of course these comparisons are highly sensitive to the exchange

rate used. To the extent that the Latin American countries succeed in

avoiding real overvaluation their real wages will remain relatively low by

international comparisons.

     47. On the extent of capital flight see, for example, Cuddington

(1986).

     48. This is significantly below its 1977 share of 25 percent.

     49. CEPAL "Cooperacion Comercial y Negociaciones Regionales,"

LC/R.513; Santiago de Chile, 28 July 1986.
                                       47



                                  References



ALADI, 1984. "Elementos de Juicio para el Establecimiento de un Programa

   Para la Elimiriacion de Restricciones no arancelarias," Caracas,

   Venezuela.

Balassa, B. and C. Balassa, 1984. "Industrial Protection in the Developing

   Countries," The World Economy, June, 179-96.

_________    G.M. Bueno, P.P. Kuczynski and M.H. Simoensen, 1986. Toward

   Renewed Economic Growth in Latin America, Washington D.C.: Institute of

   International Economics.

Blejer, M., 1984. "Economic Integration: An Analytical.Overview" in

   Economic and Social Progress in Latin America, Interamerica Development

   Bank.

Calvo, G., 1986. "Fractured Liberalism: Argentina Under Martinez de Hoz,"

   Economic Development and Cultural Change, April.

Carvalho, J. and C. Haddad, 1981. "Foreign Trade Strategies and Employment

   in Brazil" in A.O. Kraeger et al. (eds.) Trade and Emlovment in

   Developing Countries, Chicago: U. of Chicago Press.

Cavallo, D. and J. Cotani, 1986. "The Timing and Sequencing of Economic

   Liberalization: The Case of Argentina," Unpublished, The World Bank.

CEPAL, 1985. Origen y Destino del Comercio Exterior de los Paises de la

   Asociacion Latinoamericana de Integracion y   del Mercado Comun
   Centroamericano, Cuadernos Estadisticos de la Cepal 9, Santiago, Chile.

__________   l986a.   Anuario Estadistico de la Ceal, Santiago, Chile.

_________    l986b.   "Origen y Destino del Comercio Exterior en 1983,"

   Santiago, Chile, 28 August, 1986.
                                      48




__________   1986c.   "Reorientacion del Comercio Exterior de Productos

   Basicos Hacia America Latina," Santiago, Chile, 25 June, 1986.

_________    1986d.   "Cooperacioi Comercial y Negociaciones Regionales,"

   Santiago, Chile, 28 July, 1986.

__________   1986e.   "Relaciones Ecoriomicas Internacionales y Cooperacioii de

  America Latina y el Caribe," Santiago, Chile, May, 1986.

__________   1986f.   "Banco de Datos Sobre Inversiones Extranjeras Directa en

  America Latina y el Caribe," September, 1986.

Cline, W., 1985. Imports of Manufactures from Deve1oin Countries:

   Performance and Prospects for Market Access, Washington D.C.: Brookings

   Institution.

Corbo, V., 1985. "Chilean Economic Policy and International Economic

   Relations Since 1970" in G.M. Walton (ed.) The National Economic Policies

   of Chile, Greenwich CT: JAI Press.

__________   1986.    "Problems, Development Theory and Strategies of Latin

   America," DRD Working Paper No. 190, The World Bank.

Cuddington, J., 1986. "Capital Flight from the Developing Countries,"

   Unpublished Paper, The World Bank.

Diaz-Alejandro, C.F., 1976. Colombia, New York: Columbia U. Press.

__________   1982.    "Latin America in Depression, 1929-1939" in M. Gersovitz

   et al. (eds.) The Theory and Experience of Economic Development, London:

   Allen & Unwin.

__________   1983.    "Stories of the l930s for the 1980s" in P. Aspe Armella,

   et al. (eds.) Financial Policies and the World Capital Market, Chicago:

   U. of Chicago Press.

Dornbusch, R., 1986a. "Multiple Exchange Rates for Commercial Transactions"

   in S. Edwards and L. Ahamed (eds.) Economic Adjustment and Exchange Rates
                                       49




   in Developing Countries, Chicago: U. of Chicago Press.

__________   1986b.    "Special Exchange Rates for Capital Account

   Transactions," World Bank Economic Review, September, 3-34.

Edwards, S., 1983. "The External Sector in Columbia," Paper prepared for

   The World Bank.

__________   1984.    "The Order of Liberalization of the External Sector in

Developing Countries," Princeton Essays in International Finance No. 156.

__________   1985.    "Stabilization With Liberalization: An Evaluation of the

   Years of Chile's Experience With Free Market Policies, 1973-1983"

   Economic Development and Cultural Change, January.

_________    1987.    "Exchange Rate Misalignment in Developing Countries,"

   NBER Working Paper.

Edwards, S. and L. Ahamed (eds.), 1986. Economic Adiustment and Exchange

   Rates in Developing Countries, Chicago: U. of Chicago Press.

Edwards, S. and A. Cox-Edwards, 1987. Monetarism and Liberalization: The

   Chilean Experiment, Cambridge, MA: Ballinger Publishing Co.

Edwards, S. and F. Ng, 1985. "Trends in Real Exchange Rate Behavior in

   Selected Developing Countries," CPD Working Paper, The World Bank.

Evans, P.R., 1986. "State, Capital, and the Transformation of Dependence:

   The Brazilian Computer Case," World Development, 191-800.

Favaro, E. and P. Spiller, 1986. "The Timing and Sequencing of Economic

   Liberalization: The Case of Uruguay," Unpublished Paper, The World Bank.

Furtado, C., 1969. La Economia Latinoamericana, Santiago, Ed.

  Universitaria.

Gatt, 1984. "Report of the Group of Quantitative Restrictions and Other Non

  Tariff Barriers," Geneva.
                                        50




Hanson, J. and J. de Melo, 1985. "External Shocks, Financial Reforms, and

   Stabilization Attempts in Uruguay during 1974-1983," World Development,

  August, 134-46.

International Monetary Fund, International Financial Statistics (Various

   Issues).

_________     Directions   of Trade (Various Issues).

Jones, C.D., 1983. "Visible Imports Subject to Restraint," Government

   Economic Services WP No. 62.

Krueger, A.O., 1980. Trade and Employment in Developing Countries. Vol. I,

   Chicago: U. of Chicago Press.

_________     1983.   Trade and Employment in Developing Countries: Synthesis

   and Conclusions, Chicago: U. of Chicago Press.

Learner, E.E., 1984. Sources of International Comparative Advantage,

   Cambridge: MIT Press.

Learner, E. and R. Stern, 1973. Quantitative International Economics,

  Boston: Bycon Press.

Maddison, A., 1985. Two Crises: Latin America and Asia. 1929-38 and 1973-

   1983, Paris: OECD.

Michaely, M., D. Papageorgiou and A. Choksi "The Phasing of A Trade

  Liberalization Policy: Preliminary Evidence," Paper Presented at AEA

  Meeting, New Orleans.

Nogues, J., 1986. "The Timing and Sequencing of Liberalization: Peru,"

  Unpublished, The World Bank.

Nogues, J., A. Olechowski and L.A. Winters, 1986a. "The Extent of Non

  Tariff Barriers to Imports of Developing Countries," World Bank Staff

  Working Paper 789.
                                      51



__________   l986b.   "The Extent of Non Tariff Barriers to Industrial

   Countries' Imports," The World Bank Economic Review (September): 181-199.

Pfefferman, G., 1985. "Overvalued Exchange Rates and Development," Finance

   and Develoiment, 22 (March) 17-19.

Pinera, J., 1986. "La Ley Minera," Estudjos Publicos, 21, Summer.

Prebisch, R., 1984. "Five Stages in My Thinking on Development" in G.M.

   Meier and D. Seers (eds.) Pioneers in Develotment, Oxford: Oxford U.

   Press.

Rodriguez-Mendoza, M., 1986. "Latin America and the U.S. Trade and Tariff

   Act," Journal of World Trade Law, February, 47-60.

Thomas, V., 1986. Linkinz Macroeconomic and Agricultural Policies for

  Adjustment With Growth, Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.

World Bank, 1986. World Develoiment Report, Washington, D.C.

World Currency Yearbook (Various Issues).
                                          TABLE 1

             Basic Indicators for Selected Latin American Countries



                                                                  1984
                                                     (%)       Total Long
                    GNP      Average Rate        Average       Term Gross
                Per Capita    Growth GDP          Yearly       Foreign      Manufacturing
                   1984             (%)         Inflation        Debt         Production
                (1984 USS)   65-73 73-84         1973-84        As % GNP    As % GDP 1984

TTnir Midd1 Tncom

Argentina         2,230       4.3         0.4       180.8          46.8          30

Brazil            1,720       9.8         4.4        71.4          44.0          27
Chile             1,700       3.4         2.7        75.4         100.2          21
Mexico            2,040       7.9         5.1        31.5          54.2          24

Uruguay           1,980       1.2         2.0        50.0          54.5          n.a.

Venezuela         3,410       5.1         1.9        11.7          52.7          18


                                                           .
Middle Income
Colombia          1,390       6.4         3.7        23.8          25.7          18

Paraguay          1,240       5.1         7.5        12.9          36.2          17

Costa Rica        1,190       7.1         2.8        24.1         114.0          n.a.

Guatemala         1,160       6.0         3.1         9.4           7.0          n.a.
Ecuador           1,150       7.2         4.8        17.8          75.1          19

Peru              1,000       3.5         1.5        56.7         162.0          25



Lower Income
Nicaragua           860       3.9     -1.1           13.0           7.0          25

El Salvador         710       4.4     -0.3           11.3           9.0          16

Honduras            700       4.5         3.8         8.6           4.0          15

Bolivia             540       4.4         0.8        54.5           n.a.         20




Source: World Bank.
                                      TABLE 2

           Evolution of Imports in Selected Latin American Countries:

                           1965-1985 (Millions U.S.$)



                        1965   1970 1975        1980   1982   1983   1984   1985

Argentina               1199   1694 3946 10541         5337   4504   4585   3814

Bolivia                  134    159     575      678    578    545    474    582

Brazil                  1096   2849 13592 24961 21069 16801 15210 14346

Chile                    604    941 1338        5123   3528   2968   3191   2742

Colombia                 454    843 1495        4663   5478   4968   4498   4141

Costa Rica               178    317     694     1540    889    988   1094   1098

Dom. Rep.                 97    304     889     1640   1444   1471   1446   1487

Ecuador                  151    274     987     2253   1989   1465   1716   1606

Guatemala                229    284     733     1598   1388   1135   1277   1175

Mexico                  1560   2461 6571 19460 15127          8023 11788 13994
Panama                   208    357     892     1449   1569   1412   1984   1423

Peru                     729    622 2551        2500   3601   2548   2212   1835

Uruguay                  151    231     557     1680   1110    788    777    788

Venezuela               1393   1869 6004 11827 12944          8709   7594   8178




Source: International Monetary Fund.
                                       TABLE 3

           Evolution of Exports in Selected Latin American Countries:

                           1965-1985 (Millions U.S.$)



                        1965    1970 1975        1980   1982   1983   1984   1985

                        1493    1773 2961        8021   7624   7836   8107   8396
Argentina

Bolivia                 n.a.    190      444      942    828    755    725    673

Brazil                  1596    2739 8670 20132 20175 21899 27005 25639

Chile                    637    1248 1552        4671   3710   3836   3657   3797

Colombia                 539     736 1465        3945   3095   3080   3461   3551

Costa Rica               112     231     493     1002    870    882   1006    962

Dom. Rep.                126     249     894      961    767    785    868    735

Ecuador                   164    190     974     2481   2128   2224   2583   2905

                                         641     1557   1153   1180   1127      -
Guatemala                 187    298

Mexico                  1120    1403 2904 15570 21214 21818 24407 22108

Panama                     79    110     286      361    375    321    276    335

Peru                      685   1034 1291        3898   3293   3015   3147   2966

Uruguay                   191    233     384     1059   1023   1045    925    855

Venezuela                2455   2627 8800 19221 16499 15159 13971 12272




Source: International Monetary Fund.
                                        TABLE 4

          Current Account Balance in Selected Latin American Countries:

                           1965-1985 (Millions U.S.$)



                         1965    1970 1975        1980     1982    1983   1984     1985

Argentina                 222    -163 -1287       -4774   -2353   -2436   -2495    -954

Bolivia                   -24       4 -130         -118     -94    -151    -179    -282

Brazil                    284    -837 -7008 -12806 -16312         -6837      42    -273

Chile                     -43     -91 -490        -1971   -2304   -1117   -2060   -1307

Colombia                  -21    -293 -172         -206   -3054   -3003   -1401   -1390

Costa Rica                -68     -74 -218         -664    -278    -317    -253    -374

Dom. Rep.                  43    -102     -73      -671    -443    -418    -163    n.a.

Ecuador                   -19    -113 -220         -642   -1195    -104    -248     -85

Guatemala                 -35      -8     -66     -163     -399    -224    -377    -246

Mexico                   -352   -1068 -4042     -8162     -6218   5328    3966      540

Panama                   -100     -64 -169        -311      -51    247      -70      21

Peru                       -      -22 -1541         62    -1612    -875   -223       53

Uruguay                   72      -45 -190        -709     -235     -60   -124    -108.1

Venezuela                 35     -104 2171        4728    -4246   4427    5418    2923




Source: International Monetary Fund.
                                       TABLE 5

                Openness Index in Selected Latin American Countries:
                                                 *
                                      1965- 1985

                               1965         1970     1975       1980   1985

Argentitia
                                -            -       33.8       12.8   184a

Bolivia                        40.2         33.6     41.4       30.9   146b

Brazil                         12.5         13.7     19.3       21.0   20.2b

Chile                          18.6         29.2     61.1       35.5   38.0

Colombia                       22.0         22.5     23.8       27.2   21.0

Costa Rica                     48.9         55.6     60.5       52.6   56.8

Doni. Republic                 23.3         37.2     49.5       39.2   47.7

Ecuador                        28.6         33.1     45.5       40.3   334b

Guatemala                      31.3         30.6     37.1       40.0   256b

Mexico                         13.0         10.9     10.81      18.9   13.3

Panama                         43.6         45.7     64.0       50.8   37.4

Peru                           33.0         26.6     31.4       41.9   31•6b

Uruguay                        34.8         19.3     29.3       29.0   348b

Venezuela                      45.2         38.3     53.7       52.4   516b




        *This
           index was constructed as the ratio of total trade (imports plus
exports) to GDP.

Source: Constructed from data from the International Monetary Fund.
                                        TABLE 6

                      Upper Income Latin American Countries:

         Distribution of Total Imports by Origin, 1977-1985 (percent)*



                 1977     1978   1979      1980   1981   1982   1983   1984   1985

Argentina

From:
Industrialized   65.8     67.5   65.0     68.2    69.1   62.8   65.0   58.1   62.7
  - U.s.         18.8     18.6   21.1     22.6    22.2   35.1   20.2   18.5   17.5
  - Japan         -        -      -         -      -     12.8    6.7    8.2    6.6
Oil Exporting     5.9      2.4    3.0       5.6    4.5    3.3     .7   n.a.   n.a.
Non-Oil LDCs     26.5     27.1   30.2     24.6    24.4   32.2   33.2   n.a.   n.a.
Brazil
From:
Industrialized   53.4     56.1   48.9     46.6    41.8   38.6   38.5   39.7   46.7
  - U.S.         19.6     21.1   18.3     18.6    16.3   15.0   15.6   16.6   21.2
  - Japan         7.1      8.9    6.0      4.8     5.7    4.6    3.7    4.0    4.4
Oil Exporting    30.2     29.1   33.1     36.4    41.4   41.9   40.9   n.a.   n.a.
Non-Oil LDCs     14.8     13.4   16.9     16.0    15.8   17.2   17.4   n.a.   n.a.
Chile
From:
Industrialized   53.4     57.4   54.2     60.1    60.7   57.0   50.1   52.2   52.1
  - U.S.         20.5     27.0   22.6     28.5    25.6   26.0   25.5   21.5   21.1
  - Japan        11.0      7.5    7.6      7.2    10.6    6.5    5.9    9.0    6.0
Oil Exporting    13.7     10.3   12.7      5.2     7.6    7.7   11.3   n.a.   n.a.
Non-Oil LDCs     31.8     28.5   28.9     30.9    26.0   21.8   38.5   n.a.   n.a.
Mexico
From:
Industrialized   92.8     93.1   92.0     85.8    87.1   88.2   84.1   84.9   89.9
  - U.S.         63.7     60.4   62.6     61.6    63.8   59.9   60.3   62.2   68.5
  - Japan         5.4      8.1    6.5      5.1     5.0   5.7     4.4    4.2    5.6
Oil Exporting     0.3      0.4    0.4      0.2     0.2   0.3     0.2   n.a.   n.a.
Non-Oil LDCs      6.6      6.2    6.9      5.6     6.6   6.6    15.3   n.a.   n.a.

                                                                       (continued)
Table 6 (cont.)


                  1977   1978   1979   1980   1981   1982   1983   1984   1985

Uruguay
From:
Industrialized 38.5      36.8   34.9   35.9   35.8   34.7   29.8   31.8   36.8
  - U.S.           9.6    8.7    9.3    9.8    9.7   12.3    8.3    8.5    9.3
  - Japan          2.4    2.0    2.5    4.1   4.9     2.8    2.4    1.8    2.4
Oil Exporting     25.5   26.0   22.0   25.4   21.4   27.8   29.7   n.a.   n.a.
Non-Oil LDCs      34.8   31.0   41.5   36.4   41.4   36.5   38.2   n.a.   n.a.

Venezuela
From:
Industrialized    85.5   86.2   85.3   86.3   86.1   84.6   85.2   84.7   86.9

  - U.S.          39.6   41.5   46.1   47.8   48.3   43.5   46.0   50.1   49.5
  - Japan         11.0    9.6    8.2    8.0    8.0    9.8    5.7    5.2    5.2

Oil Exporting      -      0.1    -      0.4    0.1    -      -     n.a.   n.a.

Non-Oil LDCs      12.7   12.7   13.7   12.6   13.1   14.2   n.a.   n.a.   n.a.


        *These
            indexes were constructed as the ratio of the dollar value of
each year's imports from a particular country (or group of countries) to
total imports.


Source: Constructed from Data reported by the International Monetary Fund.
                                        TABLE 7

                     Middle Income Latin American Countries:

           Distribution of Total Imports by Origin, 1977-1985 (percent)



                   1977   1978   1979      1980   1981   1982   1983   1984   1985

Colombia

From:


   - U.s.          35.2   35.2   39.6     39.5    34.4   34.6   34.5   34.2   39.3
   - Japan         10.4    9.9    9.1      9.3     9.6   11.1   11.3    9.6   11.5
Oil Exporting       4.6    3.9    3.3      4.2     7.9    6.5    7.2   n.a.   n.a.
Non-Oil LDCs       17.5   19.0   19.5     18.4    19.7   21.7   19.3   n.a.   n.a.
Paraguay
From:
Industrialized     44.1   44.9   40.3     36.8    38.9   34.5   34.0   38.8   30.4
  - U.S.           12.2   11.0   11.5      9.9     9.9    9.0    6.4    8.7    7.9
  - Japan           9.0    7.9    8.2      8.1     8.3    5.5    4.2   11.9    4.6
Oil Exporting       9.3   10.9   12.0      7.4     7.4   13.0   13.7   n.a.   n.a.
Non-Oil LDCs       45.4   42.4   46.2     54.3    52.0   51.3   52.1   n.a.   n.a.
Costa Rica
From:
Industrialized     65.6   68.0   62.4     63.7    60.9   56.3   58.8   61.7   65.1
  - U.S.           33.7   34.3   30.4     34.3    33.3   35.6   40.2   36.3   37.2
  - Japan          13.4   14.4   12.4     11.6     9.8    4.2    5.6    7.5    8.7
Oil Exporting       3.5    1.0    3.8      5.8     7.6   12.1    6.8   n.a.   n.a.
Non-Oil LDCs       30.2   30.2   32.9     29.4    30.6   30.8   34.2   n.a.   n.a.
Guatemala
From:
Industrialized    67.4    63.3   60.3     59.4    60.6   57.6   53.6   52.7   55.4
  - U.S.          34.5,   30.0   32.2     34.5    33.8   31.1   32.9   32.5   35.3
  - Japan         11.4    10.6    8.2      8.0     7.7    5.2   4.6     5.1    4.5
Oil Exporting      8.2     7.4    7.3      9.9     6.8    5.9    7.0   n.a.   n.a.
Non-Oil LDCs      22.2    27.9   29.1     29.0    30.4   34.7   37.2   n.a.   n.a.

                                                                       (continued)
Table 7 (cont.)


                  1977   1978   1979   1980   1981   1982   1983   1984   1985

Ecuador
From:
Industrialized 83.1      83.1   79.1   73.8   73.5   78.8   74.3   69.9   76.3
  -   U.S.        37.9   38.3   38.8   35.5   33.7   37.3   39.7   29.9   33.1
  -
      Japan       18.4   16.1   11.3   11.8   11.7   12.4    6.9   13.6   11.9

Oil Exporting     0.6    0.4     0.6    1.1    1.1    1.0   0.8    n.a.   n.a.
Non-Oil LDCs      14.4   13.9   16.6   22.2   22.3   17.2   23.6   n.a.   n.a.

Peru
From:
Industrialized 67.0      74.9   63.7   62.0   66.7   67.7   64.8   61.5   57.4
  -   U.S.        28.9   36.3   31.0   29.7   33.1   32.0   34.1   29.5   24.6
  - Japan          7.4    7.2    6.0    8.0    8.6    8.8    6.9    6.3    7.0
Oil Exporting      9.4    3.4    1.4    1.1    1.1    0.9    1.1   n.a.

Non-Oil LDCs      23.0   14.8   12.5   12.7   15.2   17.2   33.7   n.a.   n.a.




Source: See Table 3.7.
                                    TABLE 8

                     Lower Income Latin American Countries:

          Distribution of Total Imports by Origin, 1977-1985 (percent)



                  1977   1978   1979   1980   1981   1982     1983   1984   1985

Nicaragua

From:
Industrialized    58.9   56.4   43.7   42.0   40.2   39.9     37.0   44.4   42.3
  - U.S.          28.8   31.4   25.3   27.4   25.2   18.9     20.8   17.1    7.3
  - Japan         10.1    6.9    3.8    3.2    1.6    1.4      1.4    2.0    4.1
Oil Exporting     11.4   11.6   18.5   16.7   11.4   11.3     10.0   n.a.   n.a.
Non-Oil LDCs      29.3   31.3   37.5   40.7   47.7   47.7     49.5   n.a.   n.a.
El Salvador
From:
Industrial        60.2   60.6   54.9   35.9   46.9   49.3     50.8   50.0   59.0
  - U.S.          29.3   30.8   28.4   19.9   25.5   33.6     38.5   36.0   42.8
  - Japan         11.0   11.8    7.9    3.9    3.4    2.8      3.3    4.3    4.2
Oil Exporting      9.3    7.6   11.1   25.2    4.1    3.6      3.0   n.a.   n.a.
Non-Oil LDCs      29.6   31.2   32.9   37.8   40.4   35.4     46.1   n.a.   n.a.
Honduras
From:
Industrialized 67.7      66.5   66.0   67.0   64.8   60.2     69.3   65.0   68.3
  - U.s.          42.9   41.9   43.3   42.4   41.5   39.5     47.5   40.6   43.3
  - Japan         11.0    8.8    7.7    9.9    6.7    6.5      6.2    4.6    6.6
Oil Exporting      5.4    6.2    8.4   10.4    4.4    1.9      1.8   n.a.   n.a.
Non-Oil LDCs      25.6   25.8   24.3   21.3   29.7   36.7     28.8   n.a.   n.a.
Bolivia
From:
Industrialized    58.7   66.2   61.0   61.1   57.9   59.8     55.7   38.2   47.5
  - U.S.          23.0   27.2   28.4   28.5   22.9   28.9     26.4   16.9   22.0
  - Japan         13.4   13.3    9.7    9.7   11.9   11.0      3.6    3.4    8.7
Oil Exporting      0.1    0.1    0.1    0.1    0.1    -         -      -      -
Non-Oil LDCs      35.9   28.9   33.2   32.6   38.6   36.1     44.2   n.s.   n.s.
Sources: See Table 6.
                                                Table 9



                                         ARGENTINA
                                   Imports From The U.S
                            As A Fraction of Total U.S. Imports*

           Total     Total                                    category
             $         $
yearlworld           U.s.         0         1     2       3        4     5    6       7      8       9

1970       1688.8     420.4      .006   .001 .041 .045 0               .173 .262     .408 .062 0

1971       1844.7    416.2       .008   .001 .057 .069          .008   .207 .13      .462 .059 0

1972       1903.6     388.2      .007 0          .075 .037 .001        .23    .12    .489 .042 0

1973       2234.7    479.9       .19    0        .078 .058 0           .206   .14    .284 .043 0

1974       3634.3     616.6      .008 0          .108 .065 0           .331   .148 .293     .046 0

1975       3942.3    643.8       .012 0          .159   .111 0         .294   .107 .274 .042 0

1976       3027.6    544.1       .003   .001 .083       .09    0       .315   .109   .365   .034 0

1978   I   3831.7    712.2       .009   .002 .036 .058 0               .246 .077     .503 .067 0

1979 I     6691.7    1413.7      .01    .001 .042 .074 0               .208 .079     .52    .065 0

1980   I   10535.2   2378.1      .016   .003 .031 .034 0               .179 .106     .521   .11 0
1981   j   9426.0    2092.4      .014 .004 .028 .04            0       .188 .112     .498 .114 0

1982       5335.2    1176.3      .008   .003 .037 .07           .001 .269 .089       .456 .068 0

1983       4503.0    986.2       .005   .001 .046 .038          .001 .328 .101       .413 .068 0




  Data for 1977 not available

Source: CEPAL
                                              Table 10



                                           BRAZIL
                                   Imports From The U.S
                            As A Fraction of Total U.S. Imports

       I Total       Total                                category
       I     $         $
year       World     U.S.         0       1     2     3      4    5     6      7     8         9

1970       2829.5     915.9      .075 0        .036   .08 .003 .196     .129   .43   .05   0

1971 I     3657.7     1040.6     .093 0        .044 .064 .007 .2        .106 .435    .05   0


1972 I     4715.1     1320.4     .049 0        .044 .0457.003 .223 .095 .463 .063 .002

1973       6917.4     1982.4     .137   .001 .038     .039 .004 .191 .128 .408 .053 .001

1974 I     14061.5    3401.6     .081 .001 .047       .038 .011 .237 .179 .364 .042 0

1975       13575.8    3379.1     .093 0        .039   .056 .004 .234 .108 .42        .045 0

1976 I     13748.2    3102.7     .088 0        .039 .057 .002 .266 .081 .42          .047 0

1977       13567.3    2758.5     .041 0        .042 .067 .001 .286 .09         .422 .051 0

1978 I     15630.9    3423.5     .161 0        .037 .043 0       .262 .079 .369 .048 0

1979       20568.0    3994.3     .123 0        .044 .062 .007 .279 .084 .35          .05   0

1980       25601.2   4922.9      .141 0        .034 .06 .006 .294 .084 .334 .047 0

1981       24768.5   4362.9      .215 0        .033 .056 0       .195   .079 .386    .045 0

1982       21958.5   3719.7      .149 0        .038 .088 .001 .188 .084 .398 .052 0

1983       17293.1   2834.9      .179 0        .032 .099 0       .192 .068     .371 .058 0




Source: CEPAL
                                              Table 11




                                          CHILE
                                  Imports From The U.S
                           As A Fraction of Total U.S. Imports

           Total    Total                                   category
       I     $        $
year I World        U.S.         0     1        2     3       4      5      6      7      8        9


1970 I     930.5     344.4      .051 .01       .019   .034 .018 .117        .163 .547     .041 .001

1971       979.4     267.2      .029 .014 .03         .04     .021   .136   .135   .537 .058 0

1972       944.8     165.3      .069 .007 .103 .04            .006   .189   .118   .421 .048 0

1973   I 1102.0      183.8      .13    .003    .056 .068 .004 .209          .102   .388 .039   .0


1974   I 1910.0      415.6      .307   .005    .056 .065      .052   .163 .067     .255 .03    0

1975   I 1533.2      446.7      .265   .001 .032 .022         .006 .155 .084 .406 .031 0

1976   I 1642.6      522.7      .316   .003 .038 .036         .005 .091 .095       .376   .041 0

1977       2034.1    468.3      .14    .013 .045 .051 .022 .145             .1     .407   .075 0

1978       2594.9    698.1      .28    .012 .026 .031 .024 .121             .098   .342   .064 0

1979       4229.1    955.4      .236   .014 .026 .012         .025 .152     .114 .355     .067 0

1980       5122.7    1302.0     .227   .016    .023 .041 .006 .15           .118   .354 .066 0

1981   I 6276.7      1530.3     .222   .012    .027 .017      .011 .148 .123       .358 .082 0

1982       3526.5    898.7      .273 .028      .024 .033 .005        .138 .105     .308 .086 0

1983       2694.6    689.1      .269   .003 .032      .03     .01    .206 .096 .266 .068 0


Source: CEPAL
                                              Table 12



                                           MEXICO
                                   Imports From The U.S
                            As A Fraction of Total U.S. Imports

           Total     Total                                 category
       I     $         $
yearWorld            U.S.         0       1     2    3        4       5    6      7      8        9


1970 I     2461.2     1567.8     .053   .001 .1      .04     .005 .117 .115 .494         .075 0

1971 I     2406.1     1479.0     .045 0        .09   .048 .003      .133   .103 .495     .083 0

1972 I     2934.0     1774.3     .084 .002 .07       .045 .001      .127   .107 .477     .088 0

1973       4144.5     2609.2     .098   .001 .087 .045       .013   .114 .117 .453       .072 0

1974       6051.8     3778.6     .154 .001 .109 .042         .023 .143 .130       .357   .041 0

1975       6571.8     4131.9     .116 .001 .081      .051 .007 .125 .119          .46    .041 0

1976 I     5885.3     3686.4     .043 .001 .09       .042 .005 .139 .132          .5     .048 0

1977 I     5525.2     3505.3     .111 .001 .107      .035 .009 .153 .118          .421   .044 0

1978 I     8048.2     4864.3     .092 .001 .111 .034 .013 .143             .125   .437   .044 0

1979       12196.4    7681.9     .086 .002 .097 .025 .006           .126   .144 .464     .051 0

1980 I     17788.7    12004.6    .144 .001 .074 .027 .008           .115   .158   .420   .044 0

1981 I     23743.5    15668.3    .133 .001 .067      .034 .003      .102   .165   .454   .05   0

1982       14420.2    9312.1     .089 .003 .078      .043 .012 .123        .134 .468 .05       0

1983       10651.4    7808.0     .2     .002 .103    .026 .011 .133 .107          .368 .05     0



Source: CEPAL
                                              Table 13




                                         COLOMBIA
                                  Imports From The U.S
                           As A Fraction of Total U.S. Imports

       I Total      Total                                   category
             $        $
year       World    U.S.         0     1        2      3       4       5     6    7       8      9


1970       836.4     397.3      .042   .023    .05    .013 .01       .182 .12     .515   .042   .002

1971       917.0     390.2      .092   .009    .054 .01       .02    .167 .093    .51    .038   .006

1972       853.1     333.9      .09    .002    .058 .005      .019 .19      .09   .504   .04    .002

1973       1059.4    430.4      .156   .005 .077 .004 .021 .223 .084 .376                .052   .002

1974       1593.8    640.4      .141   .004 .064 .003         .028 .266 .11       .334   .048   .002

1975   I
           1494.5    644.8      .114 .003 .05         .007    .022 .225 .106      .431   .04    .002

1976       1707.7    725.1      .117   .002    .046 .006      .049 .168 .119      .451 .041     .002

1977       2028.0    753.1      .107   .009    .041 .006 .058        .22    .085 .428    .043   .003

1978       2836.0    999.3      .149 .011      .033   .01     .048   .207   .09   .41    .04    .003

1979 I 3232.9       1278.7      .103   .012 .039      .093 .065 .174 .081 .386           .043 .003

1980       4662.3   1839.8      .133   .014 .036      .081 .046 .186 .085         .374   .04    .004

1981       5198.8   1787.4      .087   .013    .028 .051      .054 .193 .109      .399 .052     .014

1982       5477.3   1884.9      .112   .012    .039 .033 .041 .181 .103 .424 .047               .008

1983       4950.6   1761.8      .131 .011      .046   .018 .04       .182   .099 .413    .051   .009


Source: CEPAL
                                             Table 14



                                        VENEZUELA
                                  Imports From The U.S
                           As A Fraction of Total U.S. Imports

         Total     Total                                 category
           $         $
year     World      U.S.         0       1     2     3      4       5     6     7    8     9

1970     1902.6     924.8       .1   0        .058   .021   .009 .12      .119 .509 .063 .001

1971     2124.9     945.3       .104 0        .053   .011 .016 .119       .115 .52   .059 .003

1972 I   2485.4     1107.6      .112 0        .047   .005   .011   .109   .1l9 .534 .062 .001

1973 I   2844.2     1194.1      .123 0        .041 .004 .017 .106 .132 .516 .06           .001

1974     4307.6     2448.2      .11 0         .073   .003 .016     .128   .156 .464 .049 .001

1975     5806.7     2821.8      .097 0        .043   .004 .021     .093   .146 .542 .053 .001

1976 I   6905.2     3098.9      .086 .001 .036 .004 .009 .099 .118 .595 .051 .001

1977     11200.0    4340.5      .091 0        .032   .009 .012     .101 .135 .572 .048 0

1978 I   11667.9    4829.4      .077 .001 .037 .007 .017 .094 .125 .581 .061 0

1979     11037.0    5085.7      .094 0        .044 .009 .02        .108 .131 .53     .062 .001

1980     12257.7    5898.3      .125 .001 .047 .014 .023 .122 .13 .474 .036 0

1981     13555.9    6555.0      .142 .001 .033 .012 .028 .104 .123 .494 .063 0

1982     13389.8   6128.8       .106 .001 .038 .009 .017 .108 .131 .515 .076 0

1983     6146.5    2849.6       .202 .001 .048 .012 .037 .157 .104 .385 .054 0


Source: CEPAL
                                             Table 15


                             Upper Middle Income Countries : Imports
                                       of Primary Products
                                    Selected Years, 1970-1983


                       Total       L.A &      U.S.      Japan    Rest of CAME     Rest of
            year I       $       Caribbean                        OECD             World


Argentina

            1970 I 287.4           0.693     0.071      0.002    0.166   0.001    0.067
            1975   600.1           0.616     0.185      0.004     0.14   0.004    0.051
            1980 I 499.0           0.181     0.319      0.011    0.462   0.015    0.012
            1983   530.5           0.646     0.113      0.007    0.133   0.001      0.1
Brazil
            1970 I 391.8            0.38     0.267      0.009    0.302   0.006    0.036
            1975 I 1209.3          0.243     0.381      0.019    0.267   0.008    0.082
            1980 I 3141.3          0.333     0.283      0.003    0.317   0.003    0.061
            1983   1857.7          0.252     0.323      0.004    0.33    0.031    0.06
Chile
            1970   I 188.3         0.628      0.178     0.002    0.169   0.011    0.012
            1975   I 353.8         0.418      0.383     0.005    0.158   0.023    0.013
            1980   I 1080          0.412      0.327     0.011    0.212       0    0.038
            1983   I 611.6         0.451      0.377     0.002    0.129   0.002    0.039
Mexico
            1970   I 374.7         0.082      0.661      0.002   0.222        0    0.033
            1975   I
                       1286.1      0.191      0.657      0.001   0.098    0.002    0.051
            1980   I
                       3528        0.041      0.775      0.001   0.112    0.036    0.035
            1983   I
                       2816.7      0.029      0.876      0.001    0.06    0.009    0.025
Uruguay
            1970   I 51.5         0.671      0.071      0.005    0.164   0.003    0.086
            1975   I
                       90.7       0.463      0.181      0.006    0.207   0.001    0.142
            1980       208.9      0.642      0.097      0.009    0.159   0.002    0.091
            1983   I
                       99.4       0.655      0.087      0.002    0.197   0.002    0.057
Venezuela
            1970   I 281.3        0.079      0.549      0.014    0.294   0.011    0.053
            1975   I
                       879.6      0.098      0.515      0.012    0.282   0.005    0.088
            1980   I
                       2182.3     0.089      0.529      0.006    0.246   0.006    0.124
            1983   I
                       1514.1      0.21      0.542      0.001    0.191   0.005    0.051

Source: CEPAL
                                           Table 16


                               Middle Income Countries : Imports
                                      of Primary Products
                                   Selected Years, 1970-1983


                       Total     L.A &      U.S.      Japan    Rest of CAME     Rest of
            year I       $     Caribbean                        OECD             World



Colombia
            1970   105            0.321     0.472     0.006    0.167    0.001    0.033
            1975 I 224.9          0.241     0.539     0.041     0.13    0.002    0.047
            1980 I     733.3      0.218     0.578     0.009    0.151    0.003    0.041
            1983 I     705.5      0.218     0.568     0.008     0.17    0.001    0.035
Paraguay
            1970   I   17.1      0.313     0.426      0.004    0.246       0    0.011
            1975   I   32.2      0.237     0.198      0.004    0.552       0    0.009
            1980   I   75.7      0.333     0.216      0.004    0.436       0    0.011
            1983   I   55.1      0.635     0.084      0.004     0.27   0.003    0.004
Costa Rica
          1970         40.2      0.546     0.331      0.003    0.093       0    0.027
            1975   I
                       80.9      0.437     0.394      0.015    0.122   0.001    0.031
            1980   I
                       172.4     0.313     0.457      0.003    0.142       0    0.085
            1983   I
                       123.5     0.262     0.553          0    0.093       0    0.092
Guatemala
            1970   I 37.1        0.341     0.463      0.026    0.142       0    0.028
            1975   I
                       80.1      0.262     0555       0.028    0.137       0    0.018
            1980   I
                       160.7     0.219     0.556      0.035     0.16   0.001    0.029
            1983   I
                       129.9     0.299     0.545      0.008    0.122       0    0.026
Ecuador
            1970 I     29.5      0.113     0.565      0.124    0.166   0.002     0.03
            1975 I     102.1     0.059     0.688      0.041    0.182   0.001    0.029
            1980       227.5       0.1     0.631      0.008    0.208   0.008    0.045
            1983 I     204.9     0.221     0.555      0.012    0.184   0.001    0.027
Peru
            1970 f 151.2          0.496     0.183      0.013   0.271    0.012    0.025
            1975   452.7          0.101     0.479       0.01   0.313    0.003    0.094
            1980 I 670.3          0.217      0.52      0.015   0.162    0.001    0.085
            1983 I 613            0.246     0.527      0.002   0.174    0.016    0.035

Source: CEPAL
                                            Table 17


                         Upper Middle Income Countries : Imports
                                   Manufactured Goods
                                Selected Years, 1970-1983


                       Total      L.A &      U.S.      Japan    Rest of CAME       Rest of
            year I       $      Caribbean                        OECD               World


Argentina

            1970 I     1320.7      0.108     0.288      0.064    0.499    0.011       0.03
            1975 I     2822.9       0.12     0.164      0.170    0.517    0.029       0.00
            1980   8311.4          0.132     0.262      0.117    0.424    0.011      0.054
            1983 I 3509              0.2     0.249      0.097     0.41    0.018      0.026
Brazil
            1970   I 2058.5        0.047     0.358      0.084    0.463    0.027      0.021
            1975   I
                       8812.4      0.042      0.31       0.14    0.472    0.016       0.02
            1980       11659.7     0.093      0.32      0.099    0.421    0.018      0.049
            1983       6020.3      0.083     0.325      0.109    0.426    0.036      0.021
Chile
            1970   I 682.8        0.069     0.438       0.04    0.441    0.003      0.009
            1975       875.8       0.16     0.344      0.085    0.396    0.005       0.01
            1980   I
                       3097.6     0.156     0.289      0.124    0.311    0.002      0.118
            1983   I
                       1503.5     0.155     0.291      0.103    0.368    0.002      0.081
Mexico
            1970   I 2007.1        0.017     0.626      0.042    0.301    0.003      0.011
            1975       4923.4      0.026     0.625      0.062    0.274    0.012      0.001
            1980   I
                       13898.3     0.042     0.644      0.064    0.229    0.004      0.017
            1983       7585.9      0.013     0.677      0.052     0.21    0.002      0.046
Uruguay
            1970       147.2     0.254      0.168      0.022    0.471    0.055       0.03
            1975 I     264.6     0.298      0.136      0.044    0.481    0.018      0.023
            1980 I     932.8     0.362       0.14      0.066    0.349    0.031      0.052
            1983 I     323.9     0.361      0.134      0.046    0.368    0.044      0.047
Venezuela
            1970 I 1597.5         0.034       0.47      0.092    0.378   0.011       0.015
            1975 I 4871.4         0.052      0.483       0.09     0.35   0.003       0.022
            1980   9871.7         0.071      0.472      0.097    0.313   0.002       0.045
            1983   4454.5         0.085      0.448      0.077     0.35         0      0.04



Source: CEPAL
                                              Table 18


                                 Middle Income Countries : Imports
                                         Manufactued Goods
                                     Selected Years, 1970-1983


                        Total       L.A &      U.S.      Japan    Rest of CAME      Rest of
             year   I     $       Caribbean                        OECD              World


Colombia
             1970   I 720.8        0.063      0.474      0.072    0.355    0.023     0.013
             1975       1249       0.084      0.414      0.096    0.375    0.012     0.019
             1980   I 3338.1       0.107      0.378      0.128    0.329    0.024     0.034
             1983   I 3562.9       0.111      0.299      0.153    0.368    0.034     0.035
Paraguay
             1970   I 47.2         0.226      0.195      0.106    0.439    0.006    0.028
             1975   I 134.8        0.494      0.133      0.082    0.268    0.005    0.018
             1980   I 367.9        0.472      0.113       0.15    0.215    0.008    0.042
             1983 J     341.4      0.486      0.315      0.077    0.091    0.003    0.028
Costa Rica
            1970    I   263.8      0.218       0.36      0.108    0.292    0.004    0.018
            1975    I   534.9      0.223      0.376      0.112    0.246     0.01    0.033
            1980    I   1094.2     0.227      0.369      0.153     0.21    0.007    0.034
            1983    I   670.3      0.228      0.211      0.078    0.425    0.003    0.055
Guatemala
            1970        240.5      0.265      0.332      0.117    0.277    0.002    0.007
            1975 I 553.9           0.223      0.372      0.115    0.277    0.003     0.01
            1980 I 1020.5          0.188      0.416      0.121    0.238    0.004    0.033
            1983 I 828.7           0.305       0.21      0.071     0.38    0.005    0.029
Ecuador
            1970 I 224.1           0.079      0.444      0.097    0.348    0.021    0.011
            1975   859.1           0.122      0.363      0.167    0.316    0.009    0.023
            1980 I 1790.3          0.119      0.362      0.147    0.295    0.024    0.053
            1983 I 1267.7          0.172      0.314      0.108    0.336    0.017    0.053
Peru
            1970 I 456.4             0.06      0.369      0.102    0.448    0.004    0.017
            1975 I 1638.6           0.103      0.314      0.109    0.444    0.018    0.012
            1980 I 1948.6           0.122      0.339      0.125    0.362    0.021    0.031
            1983   1545.4            0.14      0.375      0.133    0.316    0.003    0.033




Source: CEPAL
                                  TABLE 19

                           Terms of Trade Index:

               Selected Latin American Countries (1970'=lOO)



                    1975             1980             1982          1984

Argentina          100.7             94.2             82.0          86.4

Bolivia            111.0            143.6            132.1         138.1

Brazil              85.4             67.4             54.2          59.5

Chile               53.2             49.0             35.4          34.5

Colombia            81.5            126.3            109.9         115.4

Costa Rica          85.5             97.3             90.0          84.7

Ecuador            159.0            237.6            196.9         177.7

Guatemala           70.8             94.2             72.1          70.1

Mexico             105.7            164.3            134.7         127.7

Peru               104.0            131.1             93.8          93.0

Uruguay             75.4             81.4             71.6          74.7

Venezuela          335.3            509.9            492.1         500.5



Source: CEPAL: Anuario Estadistico de America Latina y El Caribe

(Santiago, Chile, August 1986).
                                      TABLE 20

       Destination of Exports: 16 Latin American Countries - - 1970-1983

                                      (percent)



           1970    1975   1976    1977    1978    1979    1980    1981    1982    1983

Latin    13.4      16.5   15.8    16.1    15.6    16.4    16.2    15.9    14.3    10.5
America
& Caribbean
• ALADI   9.3      12.5   12.1     12.7   12.1    13.4     13.2   12.8    11.8     8.2

OECD       75.0    63.6   66.1     66.4   67.5    66.2     63.6   58.4    62.8    69.0
• U.s. 30.4        28.5   28.9     29.8   32.3    31.1     29.4   26.8    29.5    37.1
• Japan 5.8         4.8    4.8     4.5     4.4     4.5     4.9     4.6     6.0     5.5
CAME        2.5     5.2    4.9      4.6    3.9      3.3    4.6      6.1    4.3     4.5
Rest of     1.1     2.9     2.1     3.4     3.6     3.8     3.7     3.1    4.8     7.1
Asia
REST        8.0    11.8    11.1     9.5     9.4    10.3    11.9    16.5    12.0     8.9

TOTAL     100.0   100.0   100.0   100.0   100.0   100.0   100.0   100.0   100.0   100.0



*The countries included here are Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Colombia, Costa

 Rica, Chile, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Mexico, Nicaragua,

 Paraguay, Peru, Uruguay and Venezuela.

Source: United Nation's Economic Commission for Latin America.
                                           TABLE 21

        Sectoral Composition of Exports for 16 Latin American Countries:

                                      1970-1983 (percent)



Section 1970       1975    1976         1977    1978    1979    1980    1981        1982    1983

   0       38.9    30.9    34.0         38.0    35.4    30.2    26.0    23.4        22.3    25.6

   1        0.6     0.9     0.9          0.9     1.0     0.9     0.7     0.8         1.0     0.9

   2       15.1    14.0    13 .   3     11.8    11.9    11.4    10.6    10.1         9.1     8.5

   3       22.5    31.6    28.4         25.5    24.7    30.2    37.9    42 .   6    45.0    40.3

   4        1.7     1.3     1.6          2.0     2.0     1.9     1.5     1.5         1.3     1.4

   5        2.2     2.8     2.6          2.5     2.8     2.8     2.9     3.0         3.1     3.4

   6       15.2    10.5    11.8         11.3    12.1    13.8    11.4     9.7         9.8    11.5

   7        2.4     5.3     4.7          5.2     6.8     6.0     6.2     6.5         6.1     7.8

   8        1.4     2.6     2.6          2.9     3.4     3.0     2.7     2.5         2.4     2.8

   9        0.0     0.0     0.0          0.0     0.0     0.0     0.0     0.0         0.0     0.0

Total     13648   32124   37398        44732   48744   65454   83096   89718       81893   85828

(Millions U.S.



Source: CEPAL.
                                 TABLE 22

                Sectoral Composition of Non-Fuel Exports of
                                                       *
                 16 Latin American Countries: 1970-1983

                                 (percent)



Section             1970             1975             1980        1983

    0               50.1             45.2             41.9        39.6

    1                0.7              1.4              1.1         1.5

    2               19.5             20.1             17.4        14.2

    4                2.2              2.0              2.5         2.3

    5                2.8              4.0              4.7         5.7

    6               19.7             15.4             18.4        19.3

    7                3.1              7.7             10.0        13.0

    8                1.8              3.8              4.3         4.4

    9                0.0              0.0              0.0         0.0


*
 Due to rounding the sum across sections may not add up to 100.

Source: CEPAL
                                                 Table 23


                                 Upper Middle Income Countries : Exports
                                           of Primary Products
                                        Selected Years, 1970-1983


                           Total       L.A &       U.S.     Japan   Rest of   CAME    Rest of
            year       I     $       Caribbean                       OECD              World


Argentina

            1970       I 1517.2         0.16       0.07      0.07    0.61     0.044    0.045
            1975           2223         0.17       0.06      0.05    0.43      0.15     0.14
            1980       I
                           5737        0.176      0.074      0.02    0.34       0.3     0.09
            1983           6136.1      0.094       0.05     0.054   0.257     0.292    0.253
Brazil
            1970   I 2329             0.062       0.261     0.055   0.507     0.054   0.061
            1975   I
                           6068       0.051       0.137     0.096   0.448     0.119   0.149
            1980   I
                           11906      0.047       0.174     0.079    0.45     0.098   0.152
            1983   I
                           11465.3    0.042        0.15     0.079   0.477     0.113   0.139
Chile
            1970 J 214.7              0.196       0.133     0.306    0.33     0.014   0.018
            1975   454                0.305       0.133     0.202   0.255     0.008   0.097
            1980   1713               0.237       0.057     0.226   0.302     0.014   0.164
            1983 p 1548.8             0.119       0.159     0.182   0.336     0.024    0.18
Mexico
            1970   I 682              0.021       0.77      0.085     0.1     0.003   0.021
            1975   I 1337             0.025       0.72      0.078   0.118     0.008   0.051
            1980   I 2688             0.022      0.667      0.064   0.176      0.02   0.051
            1983   I 2579.2            0.02      0.744      0.052   0.122     0.022    0.04
Uruguay
            1970   192                0.098      0.057      0.001   0.583     0.145   0.116
            1975 I 265                0.228      0.012      0.021   0.509     0.088   0.142
            1980   657
                   I
                                      0.317      0.043      0.014   0.328     0.11    0.188
            1983   253
                   I
                                      0.058      0.032      0.031   0.334     0.198   0.347
Venezuela
            1970 I 231.4              0.006      0.588      0.021   0.337     0.007   0.041
            1975   I
                           378.4      0.016      0.621      0.004   0.286      0.03   0.043
            1980   I
                           423.8      0.034      0.413      0.009   0.459     0.019   0.066
            1983   I
                           97.5       0.026      0.189      0.047   0.219     0.064   0.455


Source: CEPAL
                                            Table 24


                          Upper Middle Income Countries : Exports
                                    Manufactured Goods
                                 Selected Years, 1970-1983


                   I
                       Total      L.A &       U.S.     Japan    Rest of   CAME       Rest of
            year I       $      Caribbean                        OECD                 World


Argentina

            1970   I 248           0.499      0.205     0.003   0.231      0.031       0.031
            1975   I
                       722.3       0.546      0.084     0.022   0.157      0.185       0.006
            1980   I   1995.3      0.415      0.155     0.042   0.248      0.058       0.082
            1983   I
                       1363.8      0.281      0.276     0.024   0.204      0.049       0.166
Brazil
            1970   I 368.5        0.403       0.169     0.04    0.279'    0.014       0.095
            1975   I
                       2209.9     0.369       0.201    0.036    0.263     0.019       0.112
            1980       7546.7     0.377       0.182    0.038    0.227     0.019       0.157
            1983   I
                       8987.3     0.173       0.222    0.059    0.258     0.016       0.272
Chile
            1970 I     1104.1     0.143      0.137     0.074    0.622            0    0.024
            1975 1     1180.4     0.204      0.069     0.081    0.601     0.004       0.041
            1980       2807       0.244      0.129     0.041    0.527         0       0.059
            1983 I     2010.1     0.132      0.343     0.021    0.457     0.012       0.035
Mexico
            1970       454.1      0.213      0.596     0.022    0.126     0.005       0.038
            1975 I     1062.2     0.297      0.416      0.01      0.2     0.027        0.05
            1980 I     2156.9     0.231      0.541     0.026    0.153     0.007       0.042
            1983 I     6194.9     0.067      0.782     0.022    0.086     0.006       0.037
Uruguay
            1970   41             0.259       0.22         0    0.466     0.014       0.041
            1975 I 114.2          0.424      0.198     0.001    0.292      0.05       0.035
            1980 I 401.8          0.463      0.135     0.001     0.34      0.02       0.041
            1983 I 313.3          0.319      0.236     0.006    0.279     0.069       0.091
Venezuela
            1970 I 39             0.623      0.126     0.001     0.09         0        0.16
            1975   103.4          0.428       0.32         0    0.118         0       0.134
            1980 I 692.8          0.213      0.124     0.375    0.177     0.003       0.108
            1983   564.5          0.128      0.244     0.371     0.18     0.004       0.073

Source: CEPAL
                                        TABLE 25

                  Sectoral Distribution of 16 Latin American

                         Exports to the U.S.: 1970-1983

                                        (percent)



Cate-
gory    1970    1975    1976    1977     1978       1979    1980    1981    1982 1983

  0      44.3    30.1    36.4    36.5     35.7       30.8    26.2    22.1   19.7 17.3

  1       0.4     1.0     0.9    0.9       0.9        0.9    0.8      1.1    1.4   0.6

  2      10.9     9.5     8.0     5.4      5.9        5.2    4.7      5.4    4.0   4.0

  3      25.6   44.3     37.6    39.4     36.0       44.6    52.0    51.5   55.0 48.5

  4       0.6     0.4     0.4     0.5      0.3        0.2     0.2     0.2    0.1   0.1

  5       1.6     1.8     1.8     1.8       1.7       1.8     2.1     3.3    2.4   2.4

  6      12.5     6.6     8.6     8.9      10.2       9.0     6.9    16.2    8.5 11.5

  7       2.8     2.7     2.9     3.1       5.0       4.4     4.3     2.5    5.4 11.4

  8       1.4     3.4     3.4     3.5      4.3        3.2     2.8     0.2    3.3   4.4

  9       0.0     0.0     0.0     0.0       0.0       0.0     0.0     0.0    0.0   0.0



Source: United Nations Economic Commission for Latin America.
                                      TABLE 26

            Coverage of NonTariff Barriers in 16 Developed Countries:
                                          *
                                   1983       (percent)

                                                          Coverage %

           All Products                                      27.1

            Fuel                                             43.0

           Agriculture                                       36.1

           Manufactures                                      16.1

            • Textiles                                       44.8

            • Footwear                                       12.6

            • Iron and Steel                                 35.4

            • Electrical Machinery                           10.0

            • Vehicles                                       30.4

            • Other Manufactures                              8.8



*
 This   coverage index is defined as the proportion of these countries imports

 subject to the following nontariff barriers: Prohibitions, Quotas, Discre-

 tionary Import Authorization, Conditional Import Authorizations,

    "Voluntary" Export Restraints, Variable Levies, Minimum Price Systems,

    "Voluntary" Price Restraints, Tariff Quotas, Seasonal Tariffs, Price and

Volume Investigations, and Andi-Dumping and Counterveiling Duties.



Source: Nogues, Olechowski and Winters (1986).
                                   TABLE 27

                 Estimated Total Rates of Protection For Some

                   Argentinian and Brazilian Exports: 1980

                                   (percent)

                                                       EEC      Japan     USA

Argentina

Fresh meat (011)                                       118       328       46

Wheat (041)                                            120       145       0

Corn (044)                                              63      n.a.       10

Textile Fibers (26)                                     59        13       68

Hides (611)                                             18        25           5


Steel (67)                                              43         8       35

Garments (84)                                           59        18       79

Brazil

Fresh Meat (011)                                       118       328       46

Sugar and Honey (061)                                  160        44       27

Coffee and Derivatives (071)                            93       161       39

Cocoa (072)                                             12       173        4

Textiles (65)                                           59        13       68

Footwear (851)                                          27        16        9



*
 The numbers in parentheses refer to the SITC classification. Total rate of

 protection is defined as tariff rate plus tariff equivalent of NTBs.



Source: Economic Commission for Latin America 'tRelaciones Economicas

Internacionales y Cooperacion Regional de America Latina y el Caribe,'t

Santiago de Chile (22 May 1986).
                                   TABLE 28

                   Nominal and Effective Rates of Protection

                     In Selective Latin American Countries

                                              Nominal Rate     Effective Rate
                                       Year   of Protection    of Protection

Argentina
   Manufacturing                       1969        51.1            97.4
   All Industries                      1969        35.5            46.9

   Manufacturing                       1976        94.0            n.a.

   Manufacturing                       1980        53.4            n.a.
Brazil
   Consumer Goods (Manufactured)       1967         n.a.            66

   Capital Goods                       1967         n.a.            52
Chile

   Manufacturing                       1974         n.a.            10.1

   Manufacturing                       1979         n.a.            13.6
Colombia
   All Industries                      1979         n.a.           47.6
   All Industries                      1981         n.a.            38.7
Peru
  All Industries                       1973        80.1            n.a.

  Manufacturing                        1975        n.a.            198
  All Industries                       1980        37.0            n.a.

Uruguay
  All Industries                       1974       452              n.a.
  All Industries                       1982        53              n.a.




Sources: Argentina: Cavallo and Cottani (1986)

            Brazil: Carvalho and Haddad (1981)

            Chile: Edwards and Edwards (1987)

            Colombia: Edwards (1983)

            Peru: Nogues (1986)

            Uruguay: Favaro and Spiller (1986).
                                   TABLE 29

                Coverage of Some NonTariff Barriers in Selected

                       Latin American Countries: 1983



                                      Percent of Import   Percent of Import
                                      Items Subject To      Items Subject
                                     Outright Prohibition To Import Licenses

Argentina

   • All Products                              23                  29

Brazil

   • All Products                             42                  n.a.

   • Textiles                                  93                 n.a.

   • Agriculture                               86                 n.a.

   • Wood                                      80                 n.a.

Chile

   • All Products                              0                   0

Colombia

   • All Products                             n.a.                 60

Ecuador

   • All Products                             30                  n.a.

   • Agriculture                              71                  n.a.

Mexico

   • All Products                             n.a.                 82



Source: ALADI tElementos de Juicio Para el Estable cimiento de un Programa

de Negociaciones Para la Eliminacion de Restricciones No Arancelarias,"

ALADI/SEC/dt. at 60, 1984.
                                    TABLE 30

         Accumulated Value of Direct Foreign Investment In Latin America

                   (by Country of Origin): Millions of U.S. $



                  1967    1976    1977    1978    1979    1980     1981    1984

U.S.A.           11,777 23,934 27,514 32,662 35,056 38,882 38,864 28,094

Japan              403    3,301   3,757   4,373   5,000   6,168   n.a.     n.a.

Germany (FR)        753   3,494   4,381   4,674   n.a.    n.a.    n.a.     n.a.

U.K.             1,228    n.a.    n.a.    1,995   n.a.    n.a.    n.a.     n.a.

Canada            1,093   2,287   n.a.    n.a.    n.a.    n.a.    n.a.     n.a.

OECD Total       18,453 37,740 43,293 50,550      n.a.    n.a.    71,800   n.a.

ALADI            n.a.     n.a.    n.a.    n.a.    n.a.      590      654   n.a.



Source: CEPAL, "Banco de Datos Sobre Inversion Extrangesan Directa en

America Latina y el Caribe," LC/L.386, Santiago de Chile, 9 September 1986.
                                       APPENDIX

                                     TABLE A.l

             Regression Results for U.S. Import Market Shares in

                   16 Latin American Countries: 1970-1983



                                           Log U.S.
                                             Real      Log U.S.
                             Time          Exchange       RER
               Constant      Trend           Rate       Lagged     D.W.
Country


                 0.626         0.013        -0.044      -0.439     1.229    0.222
Argentina
                (0.292)       (1.088)       (-0.066)   (-0.571)

                              0.046*          0.387     -0.470     2.572    0.975
Brazil           3.O6lQ*
                (4.678)     (-12.469)        (1.824)   (-1.890)

Chile            1.487        -0.009         -1.383      1.003     1.238    0.132
                (0.398)      (-0.442)       (-1.143)    (0.706)

Mexico           2.999*        0.009*        -0.171     -0.059     2.173    0.598
                (4.973)       (2.603)       (-0.877)   (-0.258)

                 0.613        -0.009         -0.232      0.131     2.010    0.159
Uruguay
                (0.246)      (-0.677)        (0.281)    (0.971)
                       *                                           1.521    0.211
Venezuela        4.271        -0.005         -0.569      0.657
                (3.798)      (-0.887)       (-1.564)    (1.537)
                       *               *                 0.287     1.805    0.647
Colombia         4.354        -0.021         -0.176
                (4.008)      (-3.462)       (-0.501)   (-0.696)

                -1.659        0.061*          0.354     -1.331     1.377    0.814
Paraguay
               (-0.557)      (-3.608)        (0.367)    (1.175)
                       *                                                    0.388
Costa Rica       1.984         0.001         -0.389      0.065     1.475
                (2.521)       (0.305)        (1.525)    (0.219)

Guatemala        3.453        -0.004         -0.577      0.560     1.749    0.278
                (3.742)      (-0.676)       (-1.929)    (1.598)
                       *                                                    0.144
Ecuador          3.023        -0.005         -0.179      0.043     1.041
                 (2.758)     (-0.757)        (0.505)     (0.103)
                        *              *      0.395      -0.359    1.254    0.658
Peru              3.480        0.027
                 (2.521)      (3.469)        (0.882)     (0.684)


                                                                       (continued)
Table A.l (continued)


                                         Log U.S.
                                           Real     Log U.S.
                           Time          Exchange      RER
                                                                                    2
Country       Constant     Trend           Rate      Lagged      D.W.           R



Nicaragua       7.534      0.045*         0.063        0.182    2.674       0.901
               (6.311)    (-6.680)        (1.627)     (0.402)

El Salvador     3.017      -0.002         0.680       -0.753    1.091       0,378
               (2.334)    (-0.232)        (1.625)    (-1.532)

Honduras        5.211      -0.0ll'         0.067       0.227    1.539       0.435
               (5.816)    (-2.147)        (0.237)     (0.665)

Bolivia        -1.365       0.009          0.274      -1.238    1.940       0.428
              (-0.760)     (0.904)        (0.470)    (-1.813)


Notes: The regression run was the following log sharer = a      +           +
                                                                   a1TIME       a2
log USRERt + a3 log USRERt 1 +         The data on real exchange rates
correspond to (the inverse) of the IMF MERM indexes.
The numbers in parentheses are t-statistics, D.W. is the Durbin-Watson
statistic, R2 is the coefficient of determination. All asterisks mean
that the coefficient is significant.
                                       Figure   1




                 U.S. SHARES OF L.A. IMPORTS:
                              UPPER iNCOME COUNTEIES
    70


    60


    50


    40


    30


    20


    10


    0
        1977    1978   1979     1980      1981           1982      1983        1984       1985

D   AIGENT1NA            +    B1AZL                 c,    C1fILE          tL     MEItCO

                         X     URUGUAY              v     VENEZUElA
                                                        Figure .2

                             U.S. SHARES OF L.A. IMPORTS:
                                              MIIJDLE INCOME COUNTRIES
                45


                40

                35


                30

                25

                20


                15


                10


                 5
                     1977   1978      1979       1980      1981          1982    1983   1984      1985

El   COLOMBIA                ÷     PARAGUAY               G         COSTA RICA           1     GUATRMAIA


                             X     EQUADOR                 V    PERU
                                                 Figure 3


                            U.S. SHARES OF L.A. IMPORTS:
                                           LOWERINCO}IE   COUNTRI
            50


            45


            40

            35

            30

            25

             20

             15


             10

                 5
                     1977   1978    1979      1980        1981       1982    1983   1984       1985

fl   NICAPAGUA                 +   EL SALVADOI                   0     HONDURAS            L   BOLIVIA
                                                  Figure   4




                                             BRAZI.L
                                RøI   Ex. Rate :E*CPI(worId)/CPI(hm)
                                                                             (1980=100)
170

160

150

140

130

120

110
100

90
80

70
 60

50
40
      1963     1965      1967    1969      1971       1973     1975      1977      1979   1981   1983


      0      Off   BIIatrøt                                    Off., MuItFIatrdI
                                            Figure 5


                                            CHILE
                             Real Ex. Rate eE*CPl(wrld)/CPI(home) (1980=100)
150

140

130

120

110

100

 90

 80
 70

 60

 50
 40

 30
 20
 10
      1972            1974           1976              1978             1980   1982


      D      Off Bilateral                                Off   MuitFlateral
                                           Figure 6

                                              PERU
                               Real Ex. RatceE*CPl(world)/CPl(homa)        (1980=100)
130



120


110


100


90


 80


 70


 60


 50
      1962     1964     1966    1968   1970   1972        1974    1976    1978     1980   1982

                                              years
      0      Ott. BIlateral                           0     OfL Multilateral
                                              Figure   7



                                             MEXICO
                              RiI   Ex.   Rot!E*CPI(wrId)/CPI(hOm)            (1980=100)
160



150


140



130


120


110


100


 90


 80
                   1971        1973          1975          1977        1979          1981   1983
      1969

                                                             Off. MutfflcitrciI
      0      Off. BIkJtYCJI
                                                 yr 0
                                          Figure   8


                    WAGES IN MANUFACTURING
                              SELECTED      EAPS 1975      —   1983
      9

      8

      7

      B


      5

      4

      3

      2

      1


      0
          1975                  1977                              1980                1983

-I-       ECUAD0I         0     NEIICO                 .       PERU          x   us
                      0       COLOMBL4.                    V     VENEZuElA
