                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     THE 'REAL' EXPLANATION OF THE PPP PUZZLE

                                         Nicholas Ford
                                      Charles Yuji Horioka

                                      Working Paper 22198
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22198


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2016




The authors are indebted to Neil Gorman and Gerry Mulligan for their valuable advice and
comments. This work was supported by JSPS (Japan Society for the Promotion of Science)
KAKENHI Grant Number 15H01950, an Asian Growth Research Institute project grant, and a
grant from the MEXT Joint Usage/Research Center for Behavioral Economics, Institute of Social
and Economic Research, Osaka University. Any remaining errors are the authors’. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Nicholas Ford and Charles Yuji Horioka. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The 'Real' Explanation of the PPP Puzzle
Nicholas Ford and Charles Yuji Horioka
NBER Working Paper No. 22198
April 2016
JEL No. E40,F21,F31,F32,F36,G15

                                            ABSTRACT

This article shows that global financial markets cannot, by themselves, achieve net transfers of
financial capital and real interest rate equalisation across countries and that the integration of both
global financial markets and global goods markets is needed to achieve net transfers of capital
and real interest rate equalisation across countries. Thus, frictions (barriers to mobility) in one or
both of these markets can impede the net transfer of capital between countries, produce the
Feldstein and Horioka (1980) finding of high saving-investment correlations, and prevent real
interest rates from being equalised across countries. Moreover, frictions in global goods markets
can explain why real exchange rates deviate from PPP (purchasing power parity) for extended
periods of time and can therefore also explain the PPP puzzle. Thus, we are able to resolve 2 of
Obstfeld and Rogoff’s (2000) “6 major puzzles in macroeconomics” with essentially the same
explanation.


Nicholas Ford
Wolfson College
Cambridge University
Cambridge, England, U.K.
nicholassford@hotmail.co.uk

Charles Yuji Horioka
Asian Growth Research Institute
11-4, Ohtemachi, Kokurakita-ku
Kitakyushu City, Fukuoka 803-0814
JAPAN
and NBER
horioka@iser.osaka-u.ac.jp
1. Introduction

In much of the academic literature on international economics, it is assumed that global
financial markets can, by themselves, divert “financial capital” between countries and the
tendency for saving to remain in the country of origin is cited as evidence of frictions
(barriers to mobility) in global financial markets. However, Ford and Horioka (2016) show
that global capital markets cannot, by themselves, achieve net transfers of financial capital
between countries and that the integration of both global financial markets and global goods
markets is needed to achieve net transfers of financial capital between countries. They
further argue that frictions (barriers to mobility) in one or both of these markets can impede
net transfers of financial capital between countries and produce the Feldstein and Horioka
(1980) results (viz., high cross-country correlations between domestic saving and domestic
investment) (see Apergis and Tsoumas, 2009, for a useful survey of this literature).
Moreover, they cite evidence from Eaton, Kortum, and Nieman (2015) that barriers to the
mobility of goods and services (e.g., transport, marketing, and distribution costs, technical
standards, certification procedures, tariffs and non-tariff trade barriers, etc.) are an important
obstacle to international capital mobility.

In our opinion, Ford and Horioka (2016) effectively resolve the so-called Feldstein-Horioka
paradox or puzzle by showing that high saving-investment correlations can arise not only if
there are frictions in global financial markets but also if there are frictions in global goods
markets, which makes it far more likely for high saving-investment correlations to arise.

Many studies (such as Mishkin, 1984, and Chung and Crowder, 2004) have found that real
interest rates are not equalised across countries. In this companion piece to Ford and Horioka
(2016), we argue that because financial markets cannot, by themselves, achieve net transfers
of financial capital between countries, the integration of both global financial markets and
global goods markets is also needed to achieve real interest rate parity across
countries. Indeed, the same frictions in global goods markets that inhibit the net transfers of
financial capital between countries also inhibit real interest rates from being rapidly
equalised. We therefore argue that expected returns are equalised across countries not via
adjustments in real interest rates but via adjustments in real exchange rates, thereby causing
them to deviate from PPP (purchasing power parity). It follows that by preventing real
interest rate equalisation, frictions in global goods markets can explain the PPP puzzle
pointed out by Rogoff (1996), MacDonald (1999), and Obstfeld and Rogoff (2000)—this
being that real exchange rates are volatile and deviate from PPP for extended periods of time.

Obstfeld and Rogoff (2000) suggest that barriers to the mobility of good and services may be
behind the PPP puzzle but fail to acknowledge that global financial markets cannot, by
themselves, achieve net transfers of capital (real or financial) between countries and so
cannot equalise real interest rates across countries. By contrast, Niehans (1986) is the first
economist to have made the point that global financial markets cannot by themselves achieve
net transfers of capital between countries, but he does not acknowledge that it is primarily
frictions in the transfer of goods between countries that inhibit the transfer of real and
financial capital between countries. To the best of our knowledge, Ford and Horioka (2016)
is the first article to synthesize the views of Niehans (1986) and Obstfeld and Rogoff (2000)
to explain the Feldstein-Horioka puzzle or paradox. In this article, we show how this
synthesis also explains the PPP puzzle.

                                                1
To summarize our main findings, this article shows that global financial markets cannot, by
themselves, achieve net transfers of financial capital and real interest rate equalisation across
countries and that the integration of both global financial markets and global goods markets is
needed to achieve net transfers of capital and real interest rate equalisation across countries.
Thus, frictions (barriers to mobility) in one or both of these markets can impede the net
transfer of capital between countries, produce the Feldstein and Horioka (1980) finding of
high saving-investment correlations, and prevent real interest rates from being equalised
across countries. Moreover, frictions in global goods markets can explain why real exchange
rates deviate from PPP for extended periods of time and can therefore also explain the PPP
puzzle. Thus, we are able to resolve 2 of Obstfeld and Rogoff’s (2000) “6 major puzzles in
macroeconomics” with essentially the same explanation.



2. An Anecdotal Example

A more rigorous formulation of the line of argumentation presented in this article can be
found in Ford (2015), but a simple anecdotal example will suffice to illustrate our points.

We will consider 4 scenarios, and in all of these scenarios, there are just 2 countries in the
world--the US and Japan. We assume that the marginal productivity of real capital (MPK) is
initially 10% in the US and 6% in Japan (i.e., that US firms earn higher returns on capital
than firms in Japan), that there are no risk premiums, meaning that the real interest rate on
loans of money is the same as the marginal productivity of capital in both countries, and that
agents have perfect foresight.

Scenario 1: Let us assume, in Scenario 1, that both the purchase of foreign goods and
services and the purchase of foreign assets (real and financial) are prohibited. In other words,
both countries are in an autarky condition. In this scenario, even though the hypothetical Ms.
Tanaka and other Japanese investors will be eager to purchase US corporate bonds to take
advantage of the higher yields in the US, they will not be able to do so, and thus there will be
no gross or net transfers of capital between the 2 countries. And given that the stock of
capital remains unchanged in both countries, there is no reason to expect real interest rates to
change in either country. Thus, the real interest rate gap between the 2 countries will persist
and real interest rate parity will not be achieved. There is no market for foreign exchange, so
the exchange rate is indeterminate.

Scenario 2: Let us assume, in Scenario 2, that the purchase of foreign goods and services is
allowed but that the purchase of foreign assets and the ownership of assets in other countries
are not allowed. In this scenario, the same argument as the one for Scenario 1 applies since
the purchase of foreign assets is still not allowed. Thus, the real interest rate gap between the
2 countries will persist and real interest rate parity will not be achieved. However, because
the purchase of foreign goods and services is allowed, our old friend Mr. Smith (an avid
manga fan) will be able to purchase Japanese manga after buying Japanese yen (say from Ms.
Tanaka), but Ms. Tanaka will not be able to purchase US corporate bonds using the US
dollars she buys from Mr. Smith despite the higher yields in the US and will have to settle for
purchasing, say, US comic books. Trade between the 2 countries must be perfectly balanced,
and the real exchange rate will adjust until this is the case. Let us assume that this rate
corresponds approximately to PPP.
                                               2
Scenario 3: Let us assume, in Scenario 3, that the purchase of foreign goods and services is
not allowed but that restrictions on the purchase of foreign assets are lifted for a period of 5
years. At the end of the 5 years, agents will be obliged to surrender foreign assets to the
authorities at the PPP exchange rate. Ms. Tanaka and other Japanese investors will be eager
to purchase US corporate bonds to take advantage of the higher yields in the US, but in order
to do so, they must first convert their Japanese yen into US dollars, and this in turn requires
them to find someone (say Mr. Smith) who is willing to convert his US dollars into Japanese
yen. Suppose that Ms. Tanaka purchases 100,000 yen worth of US dollars from Mr. Smith
and uses the US dollars to purchase 100,000 yen worth of US corporate bonds with a yield of
10%. Given the prohibition on the purchase of foreign goods and services, Mr. Smith has no
choice but to use the Japanese yen he obtained from Ms. Tanaka to purchase Japanese
assets. Let us assume that he purchases 100,000 yen worth of Japanese corporate bonds with
a yield of 6%. Since Ms. Tanaka’s purchases of US corporate bonds will be exactly offset
by Mr. Smith’s purchases of Japanese corporate bonds, there will be no net transfer of capital
between the 2 countries. Given that the stock of capital remains unchanged in both countries,
there is no reason to expect real interest rates to change in either country. Thus, the real
interest rate gap between the 2 countries will persist and real interest rate parity will not be
achieved.

However, because Mr. Smith will forego a 4% yield by purchasing Japanese corporate bonds
rather than US corporate bonds, he will be prepared to sell his US dollars to Ms. Tanaka only
if he were offered a sufficiently favourable exchange rate. Ms. Tanaka therefore finds that
she has to offer Mr. Smith just over 20% (the 4% yield difference compounded for 5 years)
more than the PPP exchange rate to induce him to sell his US dollars to her. It can thus be
seen that frictions in global goods markets will cause the real exchange rate to deviate
substantially from PPP, at least initially, although it will return to PPP over the subsequent 5-
year period.

Scenario 4: Let us assume, in Scenario 4, that both the purchase of foreign goods and
services and the purchase of foreign assets are allowed. Suppose further that Mr. Smith, the
avid manga fan, converts 100,000 yen worth of US dollars into Japanese yen in order to
purchase a stock of Japanese comics, which he imports from Japan to the US. He obtains his
yen in the foreign exchange market from Ms. Tanaka, who wishes to purchase 100,000 yen
worth of US dollars from Mr. Smith in order to purchase 100,000 yen worth of US corporate
bonds to take advantage of the higher yields in the US. In this case, Ms. Tanaka’s purchase
of US corporate bonds will lead to a net transfer of capital from Japan to the US.

Of course, Ms. Tanaka and Mr. Smith are not alone in these markets. Many other Japanese
investors would, like Ms. Tanaka, prefer to own higher yielding US assets so they too will
seek to convert their Japanese yen into US dollars and purchase US corporate bonds, which
will drive up the value of the US dollar above its PPP value.

There will be agents such as Mr. Sato who acquires Superman comics with dollars he buys
off Ms. Jones, who in turn buys Japanese corporate bonds. Such a transaction would result in
a transfer of capital from the US to Japan. However, because of the strong value of the
dollar, there will be more Japanese goods exported to the US than there are US goods
exported to Japan, and thus there will be a net transfer of real and financial capital from Japan
to the US. This will result in a gradual decrease in real interest rates in the US, and a gradual
increase in real interest rates in Japan until real interest rates in the 2 countries have been
                                               3
equalised. As real interest rates in the 2 countries converge, the real exchange rate will move
back towards the PPP value, and net transfers of capital from Japan to the US will dry up.

It can be seen from these 4 scenarios that real interest rate parity will be achieved only in the
case of Scenario 4 and that real interest rate parity requires the integration of not only global
financial markets but also of global goods markets and the net transfer of capital between
countries. Moreover, the process is gradual because of frictions in both goods markets and
financial markets.

We saw in Scenario 3 that expected returns are equalised across countries not via adjustments
in real interest rates but via adjustments in real exchange rates when there are barriers to the
mobility of goods, services, and real assets. Thus, frictions in global goods markets can
explain why the real exchange rate deviates from PPP for extended periods of time and can
therefore explain the PPP puzzle.

In Scenario 3, the real exchange rate followed a steady foreseeable path back to PPP because
agents were assumed to have perfect foresight. However, if agents did not have perfect
foresight and expectations of future interest rates kept changing, the current equilibrium
exchange rate would also keep changing. We argue that it is these changes in expectations of
future interest rates that explain much exchange rate volatility.

In a word, frictions in global goods markets can explain not only the Feldstein-Horioka
paradox or puzzle but also the failure of real interest rate parity to hold and the PPP puzzle.



3．Conclusion

This article has shown that global financial markets cannot, by themselves, achieve net
transfers of financial capital and real interest rate equalisation across countries and that the
integration of both global financial markets and global goods markets is needed to achieve
net transfers of capital and real interest rate equalisation across countries. Thus, frictions
(barriers to mobility) in one or both of these markets can impede the net transfer of capital
between countries, produce the Feldstein and Horioka (1980) finding of high saving-
investment correlations, and prevent real interest rates from being equalised across countries.
Moreover, frictions in global goods markets can explain why real exchange rates deviate
from PPP for extended periods of time and can therefore also explain the PPP puzzle. Thus,
we have been able to resolve 2 of Obstfeld and Rogoff’s (2000) “6 major puzzles in
macroeconomics” with essentially the same explanation.




                                               4
                                       References

Apergis, Nicholas, and Tsoumas, Chris (2009), “A Survey of the Feldstein-Horioka Puzzle:
What Has Been Done and Where We Stand,” Research in Economics, vol. 63, no. 2 (June),
pp. 64-76.

Chung, S. Young, and Crowder, William J. (2004), “Why Are Real Interest Rates Not
Equalized Internationally?” Southern Economic Journal, vol. 71, no. 2 (October), pp. 441-
458.

Eaton, Jonathan; Kortum, Samuel S.; and Neiman, Brent (2015), “Obstfeld and Rogoff’s
International Macro Puzzles: A Quantitative Assessment,” NBER Working Paper No. 21774,
National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA (December).

Feldstein, Martin S., and Horioka, Charles Yuji (1980), “Domestic Saving and International
Capital Flows,” Economic Journal, vol. 90, no. 358 (June), pp. 314-329.

Ford, Nicholas (2015), “A Solution to the Feldstein-Horioka Puzzle, and an Exchange Rate
Model that Works,” mimeo., Wolfson College, Cambridge University, Cambridge, U.K

Ford, Nicholas, and Horioka, Charles Yuji (2016), “The ‘Real’ Explanation of the Feldstein-
Horioka          Puzzle,”      Applied       Economics         Letters,       forthcoming.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13504851.2016.1164814

MacDonald, Ronald (1999), “Exchange Rate Behaviour: Are Fundamentals Important?”
Economic Journal, vol. 109, no. 459 (November), pp. F673-691.

Mishkin, Frederic S. (1984), “Are Real Interest Rates Equal Across Countries: An Empirical
Investigation of International Parity Conditions,” Journal of Finance, vol. 39, no. 5
(December), pp. 1345-1357.

Niehans, Jurg (1986), International Monetary Economics. Baltimore, Maryland, USA: Johns
Hopkins University Press.

Obstfeld, Maurice, and Rogoff, Kenneth (2000), “The Six Major Puzzles in
Macroeconomics: Is There a Common Cause?” in Ben S. Bernanke and Kenneth Rogoff,
eds., NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2000, vol. 15 (Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA: MIT
Press), pp. 339-412.

Rogoff, Kenneth (1996), “The Purchasing Power Parity Puzzle,” Journal of Economic
Literature, vol. 34, no. 2 (June), pp. 647-668.




                                            5
