                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 HOW A MINIMUM CARBON PRICE COMMITMENT MIGHT HELP TO INTERNALIZE
                THE GLOBAL WARMING EXTERNALITY

                                       Martin L. Weitzman

                                       Working Paper 22197
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w22197


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2016




The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Martin L. Weitzman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
How a Minimum Carbon Price Commitment Might Help to Internalize the Global Warming
Externality
Martin L. Weitzman
NBER Working Paper No. 22197
April 2016
JEL No. F51,H41,Q54

                                           ABSTRACT

It is difficult to resolve the global warming free-rider externality problem by negotiating many
different quantity targets. By contrast, negotiating a single internationally-binding minimum
carbon price (the proceeds from which are domestically retained) counters self-interest by
incentivizing countries to internalize the externality. In this contribution I attempt to sketch out,
mostly with verbal arguments, the sense in which each country's extra cost from a higher
emissions price is counter-balanced by that country's extra benefit from inducing all other
countries to simultaneously lower their emissions in response to the higher price. Some
implications are discussed. While the paper could be centered on a more formal model, here the
tone of the discussion resembles more that of an exploratory think piece directed to policymakers
and the general public.


Martin L. Weitzman
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer 313
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
mweitzman@harvard.edu
    How a Minimum Carbon Price Commitment Might
    Help to Internalize the Global Warming Externality
                                    Martin L. Weitzman

                          For MIT Press Climate Symposium
                                   April 20, 2016



                                             Abstract

         It is di¢ cult to resolve the global warming free-rider externality problem by negoti-
      ating many di¤erent quantity targets. By contrast, negotiating a single internationally-
      binding minimum carbon price (the proceeds from which are domestically retained)
      counters self-interest by incentivizing countries to internalize the externality. In this
      contribution I attempt to sketch out, mostly with verbal arguments, the sense in which
      each country’s extra cost from a higher emissions price is counter-balanced by that
      country’s extra bene…t from inducing all other countries to simultaneously lower their
      emissions in response to the higher price.       Some implications are discussed.   While
      the paper could be centered on a more formal model, here the tone of the discussion
      resembles more that of an exploratory think piece directed to policymakers and the
      general public.
         JEL Codes: F51, H41, Q54
         Keywords: Climate change, Global Warming, International public goods, Prices
      versus quantities



1     Introduction
Throughout this paper I use the terms “climate change”and “global warming”interchange-
ably. The term “climate change”is currently in vogue and is a more apt description overall.
But the term “global warming”is more evocative of this paper’s main theme. Global warm-
ing is a global public-goods externality whose resolution requires an unprecedented degree of
    Department of Economics, Harvard University (mweitzman@harvard.edu).


                                                   1
international cooperation and coordination. This international climate-change externality
has frequently been characterized as the most di¢ cult public goods problem that humanity
has ever faced. I concentrate in this paper on carbon dioxide emissions, but in principle the
discussion could be extended to emissions of all relevant greenhouse gases. Throughout the
paper I blur the distinction between carbon dioxide and carbon, since the two are linearly
related.1
    The core problem confronting the political economy of climate change is an inability to
overcome the obstacles associated with free riding on a very important international public
good. The ‘international’ part is signi…cant. Even within a nation, it can be di¢ cult to
resolve public goods problems. But at least there is a national government, with some
governance structure, able to exert some control over externalities within its borders. A
national government can (at least in principle) impose targets on national public goods.
With climate change there is no overarching international governance mechanism capable
of coordinating the actions necessary to overcome the international problem of free riding.
Instead, instruments of control, like prices and/or quantities, must be negotiated among
sovereign nations.
    My point of departure throughout all of what follows is the critical centrality of the
international free-rider problem as a cause (really the cause) of negotiating di¢ culties on
climate change emissions. Negotiators here are playing a game in which self-interested
strategies are a crucial consideration. It turns out that negotiating rules de…ne an important
part of the game, and can thereby change self-interest, for better or for worse.
    In this paper I try to argue that a uniform minimum global tax-like price on carbon
emissions, whose revenues each country retains, can provide a focal point for a reciprocal
common commitment, while quantity targets, which do not as readily present such a single
focal point, have a tendency to rely ultimately on individual commitments. As a consequence,
negotiating a uniform minimum global carbon tax or price can help to solve the externality
problem while individual caps essentially incorporate it. I will try to explain why negotiating
a uniform minimum carbon price embodies what I call a “countervailing force” against
narrow self-interest by automatically incentivizing all negotiating parties to internalize, at
least approximately, the global warming externality. The basic challenge, as I see it, is to
construct a relatively simple and relatively acceptable one-dimensional international quid-
pro-quo mechanism, which automatically embodies the principle of “I will if you will.”
  1
      One ton of carbon equals 3.67 tons of carbon dioxide. My default unit is carbon dioxide (CO2 ).




                                                      2
2       Some Brief History of Climate Negotiations
In the decade from the actual entering into force of the Kyoto Protocol in February 2005 to
the Paris COP21 agreement of December 2015, the world seemed mired in what has aptly
been called global warming gridlock.2
    The Kyoto agreement, negotiated in December 1997, began by dividing the world into
two huge blocs under the so-called “principle of common but di¤erentiated responsibility
and respected capabilities.” The “Annex I” bloc of countries included most of the world’s
high-income advanced industrial nations. The rest of the world, the “non-Annex I” bloc
of countries, included most of the world’s low-income developing nations. The Annex I
countries agreed to “legally binding” average emissions reductions in 2008-2012 of approxi-
mately 5% relative to their baseline emissions of 1990. The non-Annex I countries were not
constrained by “legally binding”emissions reductions, but otherwise agreed to cooperate.
    In reality, the “legally binding”emissions reductions of the Kyoto Protocol were anything
but legally binding, because there was no provision for a mechanism to enforce compliance.
There was no provision for a mechanism to enforce compliance because, essentially, at the
end of the day the parties did not want to be bound by such a mechanism.
    Almost from the beginning, the U.S. and Australia refused to ratify the Kyoto treaty
(largely on the grounds that the non-Annex I countries were unfairly exempt from responsi-
bilities). Subsequently, Canada, Japan, and Russia pulled out of their part of the agreement
and refused to take on future commitments.
    I think it is fair to say that the “spirit”of Kyoto was a top-down intended adherence to
something like the following scenario. The Annex I countries agreed to show good faith …rst
by voluntarily lowering their emissions in 2010 by about 5% relative to their 1990 emissions.
Then, in a second stage, after around ten years (approximately by 2012 or so), the hope was
that the non-Annex I countries would be impressed by the good faith e¤ort shown over the
previous decade by the Annex I countries and would hopefully join by pledging something
like an emissions reduction target of 5% in 2020 (relative to 1990 emissions), while the Annex
I countries would agree to a more stringent emissions quota of about 10%. In reality, no
such second stage of ratcheted-up commitments ever materialized.
    The recently concluded Paris COP21 agreement of December 2015 (by contrast with Ky-
oto) made no formal dichotomy between developed and developing countries. In principle,
all nations were treated symmetrically. The Paris agreement covered countries currently
    2
     Global Warming Gridlock is the title of a book by David Victor (2011), who popularized the phrase.
For more information on the Kyoto Protocol, see the Wikipedia entry for “Kyoto Protocol” and the many
other references cited there. For more information on the Paris COP21 Accords, see the Wikipedia entry
for “Paris Agreement” and the many other references cited there.



                                                  3
accounting for some 95% of world carbon dioxide emissions. Countries agreed to make volun-
tary pledges, now named euphemistically “Intended Nationally Determined Contributions”
(INDCs). The INDCs aspired to be transparent in the sense that monitoring, reporting,
and veri…cation would be subject to uniform standards. COP21 committed countries to
report INDC compliance every …ve years or so and to set new (and hopefully more ambi-
tious) INDCs for the next …ve-year period, a policy sometimes labeled “pledge and review.”
There was also provision for possible international linkage via the euphemistically named
“Internationally Transferred Mitigation Outcomes”(ITMOs).
    All in all, the COP21 agreement seems like an improvement over the Kyoto Protocol. It
appears to me to be essentially a gamble that the modest voluntary slowdowns in emissions
may buy enough time to develop inexpensive future carbon-free technologies. This seems to
me a risky bet. In any event, it will take maybe a decade or more to sort out the e¤ectiveness
of the Paris COP21 agreement.
    The core weakness of the COP21 Paris Accord is essentially the same as the core weakness
of the Kyoto Protocol. Neither approach addresses the central problem of free riding on an
international public good of great importance. There is no penalty for voluntarily setting
under-ambitious national targets and there is no penalty for non-compliance by a country
with its own voluntary self-announced targets. Under COP21, the only mechanism for
compliance is “blame and shame,” which seems like a weak incentive for cutting back on
global emissions.
    I think the INDC label says it all. The contributions are chosen by each country. These
COP21 contributions are intended and nationally-determined. It is hard for me to envision
how the labels could more strongly emphasize the strictly voluntary nature of the entire
exercise. This does not seem to me like a formula for overcoming the free riding problem
associated with an international public good of great importance.
    If the Paris COP21 approach fails to halt “dangerous anthropogenic global warming,”
which takes the form of a perception of an impending climate catastrophe that is felt on a
grassroots level, then I think there may be more pressure on creating a top-down interna-
tional mechanism that actually works. If climate change becomes su¢ ciently threatening to
an “average” citizen of the world, public opinion may support relinquishing some national
sovereignty in favor of the greater good. This paper is targeted to such an eventuality.
    I will try to explain why negotiating a uniform minimum carbon price empowers what I
will call a “countervailing force” against narrow self-interest by automatically incentivizing
all negotiating parties to internalize, at least approximately, the global warming externality.
Again, the basic challenge, as I see it, is to construct a relatively simple and relatively accept-
able one-dimensional international quid-pro-quo mechanism, which automatically embodies


                                                4
the principle of “I will if you will.”


3       Negotiating Prices vs. Negotiating Quantities
At …rst, for simplicity of exposition I assume that a commitment to a uniform global price
of carbon will be implemented as an internationally harmonized, but nationally retained,
carbon tax. Later I indicate that the commitment is actually to an internationally-equal
minimum price on carbon emissions, which could be met in a variety of ways, including, in
principle, imposing a uniform price ‡oor in a cap-and-trade system. But for expositional
purposes here, I pretend that the uniform price takes the form of an equal self-imposed tax
on carbon emissions.
    An internationally harmonized but nationally retained carbon tax (or price) has already
been proposed as a potential solution to the global warming externality, and has been ex-
amined on its merits.3 In what follows I very brie‡y summarize some of the possible virtues
of an internationally-harmonized but nationally-collected carbon tax (or price) that have
already been noted in the literature. My foil here is an internationally harmonized cap-
and-trade system (without a uniform price ‡oor). This kind of global-design comparison is
complicated and full of subjective judgements about what might or might not work better
in practice and why or why not. Cap-and-trade systems are perhaps more widely used
than taxes throughout the world to control pollution, and in that sense are perhaps more
visible or more familiar market-like mechanisms than pollution taxes (although fossil-fuel
taxes and subsidies are ubiquitous, if somewhat hidden, almost everywhere). My purpose
here is merely to indicate that the perhaps less-familiar uniform carbon tax already has some
signi…cant arguments in its favor – as a prelude to some new arguments for negotiating a
uniform price on carbon that I will later develop in this paper.
    Both quantity-based and price-based controls are inherently uncertain for the period
during which they apply (in between times of periodic review), but the uncertainty takes
di¤erent forms. With cap-and-trade, total emissions are known but the price or (marginal)
cost is uncertain. With a carbon tax, the price or (marginal) cost of carbon emissions is
known, but total emissions are uncertain. On the basis of economic models of climate change
that include uncertainty, carbon taxes outperform tradable permits, both theoretically and
in numerical simulations.4 In the real world, above and beyond theory and numerical
simulations, I think that energy price volatility is very poorly tolerated by the general public.
    3
     There is actually a fair-sized literature on a carbon-tax (or carbon-price) approach. See, e.g., Metcalf
and Weisbach (2009), Cooper (2010), Cramton and Stoft (2012), Nordhaus (2007, 2013), and the many
further references cited in these works.
   4
     See Hoel and Karp (2002), Pizer (1999), and Weitzman (1974).


                                                     5
Swings in carbon prices, especially in extreme cases, could sour public opinion and discredit
for some time thereafter (decades, generations?) the entire idea of a market-based approach
to the climate change problem. On the other hand, it is di¢ cult for me to imagine the
broad public getting quite so upset because total emissions ‡uctuate.
    It has been argued, I think convincingly, that a carbon tax is more easily administered
and is more transparent than a cap-and-trade system. This consideration is especially
important in a comprehensive international context that would include all major emitting
countries. Under international cap-and-trade, governments will allocate valuable emissions
permits to their nation’s …rms and residents. In some places, under some circumstances,
there may be a great temptation for kleptocrats to e¤ectively steal these valuable emissions
permits and sell them on the international market.
    The collected revenues from an internationally harmonized carbon tax remain within
each country, and could be used to o¤set other taxes or even be redistributed internally
as lump sum payments. This, I think, is a desirable property. By contrast the revenues
generated from an internationally harmonized cap-and-trade system ‡ow as highly visible
external transfer payments across national borders, which might be less easily tolerated by
countries required to pay other countries large sums of taxpayer-…nanced money to buy
permits.5
    This extremely brief discussion of the advantages of an internationally harmonized carbon
tax (compared to cap-and-trade) is not intended to be comprehensive. There are also
legitimate arguments in favor of internationally harmonized tradable permits and against a
carbon tax.6
    A point in favor of tradable permits, frequently emphasized by its advocates, is the
political appeal of giving free allowance permits to carbon-intensive industry groups (as
contrasted with taxing them directly on their carbon emissions). As was pointed out,
carbon taxes that are internally-levied and collected by a national government could be used
to reduce other, more distortionary, taxes –or they could even be distributed directly to the
citizenry as lump-sum payments. But this redistribution aspect of a carbon tax is hidden,
behind the scenes as it were. Individual …rms will prefer, and typically strongly prefer,
   5
     Of course, persuading nations to commit to negotiating a uniform price of carbon in the …rst place might
well involve some “green-fund” equity transfers. Because the imposed “carbon tax” is internally retained
within each nation, then, at least for small changes, the green-fund transfers needed to o¤set increased
costs of compliance for price changes are deadweight-loss second-order Harberger triangles of the relatively
modest form ( P          Q)=2. The corresponding international transfers in a cap-and-trade system (which
can be either positive or negative, depending, among other things, on initial cap assignments) are …rst-order
immodest rectangles of the form P        Q.
   6
     For a critical review of carbon taxes vs. cap-and-trade for carbon emissions, see Goulder and Schein
(2013) and the many further references they cite.



                                                     6
what they perceive as the lesser burden to them of freely allocated permits over the greater
perceived burden to them of pollution taxes. Indeed, studies show that the market value
of the free allowances is typically signi…cantly greater than the higher compliance costs of
decarbonization that are incurred.7 Firms and countries in a cap-and-trade regime will
therefore struggle hard for a larger share of the total amount of freely distributed emissions
allocations. The political appeal of freely distributed tradable permits is a double-edged
sword. When negotiating emissions caps, a serious income distortion is introduced because
a nation is much more concerned with the revenues from its own free quota allocations than
it is concerned with overall international social optimality. Auctioning o¤ the allowances
would eliminate this income-e¤ect distortion on the individually desired level of free permit
allocations, but then we are e¤ectively back in a tax-like system.
    Both approaches (an internationally harmonized but domestically collected carbon price,
and freely distributed marketable permits) are subject to immense – sometimes seemingly
overwhelming –criticisms. In both cases there are innumerable practical details that must
be attended to and worked out. In both cases an e¤ective international treaty needs to
be binding, which raises uncomfortable issues of enforcement mechanisms and international
sanctions. Additionally, there might be mixed hybrid systems, such as cap-and-trade with a
uniform ‡oor on the carbon price. I merely want to establish a level playing …eld where the
idea of an internationally harmonized carbon tax already commands at least as much intel-
lectual respect as an internationally harmonized cap-and-trade system (without a uniform
price ‡oor).
    Throughout this paper I argue that it is very di¢ cult to resolve the global warming
externality problem by directly assigning individual quantity targets. A meaningful com-
prehensive quantity-based treaty involves specifying as many di¤erent binding emissions
quotas (whether in the form of tradable permits or not) as there are national entities. Each
national entity has a self-interested incentive to negotiate for itself a high cap on carbon
emissions –much higher than would be socially optimal. The resulting free-rider problem
plagues a quantity-based approach. Even if there were a collective commitment to nego-
tiate or vote on a second-stage worldwide total emissions cap, which I will later assume
for the sake of argument, disagreements over the …rst-stage fractional subdivision formula
(for disaggregating the negotiated or majority-voted aggregate worldwide quantity cap into
individual quantity caps) would make it di¢ cult to enact such a quantity-based approach.8
   7
     See Goulder et al (2010) and the further cited references therein.
   8
     One could try to argue that binding green-fund equity payments are required to get n countries to agree
in the …rst place to negotiate a uniform carbon price, also representing an n-dimensional problem. However,
footnotes 5 and 7 suggest that the required green-fund payments may be smaller than the absolute value
of the (positive or negative) transfers involved in a cap-and-trade regime that starts o¤, say, with equal



                                                     7
     The inspiration for this paper is the perception of a desperate need for some radical
rethinking of international climate policy. As a possibly useful conceptual guide for what
negotiations might accomplish, I sometimes ask the reader to temporarily suspend disbelief
by considering what might happen in a “World Climate Assembly” (WCA) that votes on
global carbon emissions via the basic principle of one-person-one-vote majority rule. In
this conceptualization, nations would vote along a single dimension for their desired level of
emissions stringency on behalf of their citizen constituents, but the votes are weighted by
each nation’s population.
     Right now, anything like a WCA seems hypothetical and hopelessly futuristic. It pre-
sumes a state of mind where the climate change problem has become su¢ ciently threatening
on a grassroots level that world public opinion is ready to consider novel governance struc-
tures which involve relinquishing some national sovereignty in favor of the greater good.
What might be the justi…cation for a new international organization like the WCA? The
ultimate justi…cation is that big new problems may require big new solutions. For a world
desperately wanting new solutions to the important externality of climate change, perhaps
it is at least worth considering establishing a new organization along the lines of the WCA.
After all, it is useful to have some concrete fallback decision mechanism behind vague “ne-
gotiations” because even with the focus on a one-dimensional harmonized carbon price (or
with the focus on a one-dimensional quantity of total emissions), there are bound to be dis-
agreements whose resolution is unclear. I merely assume that it is in the interest of enough
nations to forfeit their rights to pollute in favor of a WCA voting solution of the global
warming externality. This is truly a heroic assumption at the present time because the
WCA does not correspond to any currently-existing international body. Taken less literally,
the thought experiment of a hypothetical WCA can still help us to concentrate our thinking
and intuition on what negotiations should be trying to accomplish. In other words, I am
hoping that the …ction of a WCA might be useful in indicating what might be the outcome
of less-formal international negotiations.
     It could be objected that a “consensus” voting rule, not a majority voting rule, is em-
ployed in negotiations under the United Nations Framework on Climate Change. This
“consensus” voting rule has been widely interpreted as requiring near-unanimity. With
such a restrictive voting rule, signi…cant progress on resolving the global warming external-
ity seems virtually impossible. Surely, a less restrictive voting-like rule, such as majority
rule, would render progress more likely, and is at least worth considering.
per-capita permit assignments. Cramton, Ockenfels, and Stoft (2015) argue additionally that choosing
a green-fund equity-payment formula for a uniform price can itself be reduced to a one-dimensional focal
problem.



                                                   8
    One aspect should perhaps be emphasized above all others at the outset. The global
warming externality problem cannot be resolved without a binding agreement on some over-
all formula for dividing emissions responsibilities among nations. Voluntary altruism alone
will not solve this international public-goods problem. Of necessity there must be some
impingement on national sovereignty in the form of an international mechanism for deter-
mining targets, verifying ful…llment, and punishing non-compliance. The question then
becomes: Which collective-commitment frameworks and formulas are more promising than
which others?


4     Theory of Negotiating a Uniform Carbon Price
In this paper I examine the theoretical properties of a natural one-dimensional focus on nego-
tiating a single binding price on carbon emissions, the proceeds from which are domestically
retained. As was previously mentioned, for expositional simplicity, I identify this single
binding price on carbon as if it is an internationally-harmonized nationally-collected carbon
tax. At a theoretical level of abstraction, I blur the distinction between a carbon price and
a carbon tax. However, in actuality the important thing is acquiescence by each nation to
a common binding minimum price on carbon emissions, not the particular mechanism by
which this common binding minimum price is attained by a particular nation.
    A system of uniform national carbon taxes with revenues kept in the taxing country is a
relatively simple and transparent way to achieve internationally-harmonized carbon prices.
But it is not necessary for the conclusions of this paper. Nations or regions could meet the
obligation of a minimum price on carbon emissions by whatever internal mechanism they
choose – a tax, a cap-and-trade system, a hybrid system, or whatever else results in an
observable price of carbon above the internationally-agreed minimum. I elaborate further
on this issue in my concluding remarks.
    At a theoretical level, I would suggest that the instruments of negotiation for helping to
resolve the global warming externality should ideally possess three desirable properties.
    1. Induce cost e¤ectiveness.
    2. Be of one dimension based on a “natural”focal point to facilitate …nding an agreement
with relatively low transactions costs.
    3. Embody “countervailing force”against narrow self interest by automatically incentiviz-
ing all negotiating parties to internalize the externality via a simple, reciprocal, I-will-if-you-
will, common-climate–commitment formula.
    Using these three desirable theoretical properties as criteria, I now compare and con-
trast an idealized binding harmonized tax-like price with an idealized binding cap-and-trade

                                                9
system (without a uniform price ‡oor).
    On the …rst desirable property, in principle both a carbon price and tradable permits
achieve cost e¤ectiveness (provided agreement can be had in the …rst place).
    The second desirable property (low dimensionality) argues in favor of a one-dimensional
harmonized tax-like carbon price over an n-dimensional harmonized cap-and-trade system
among n nations. Alas, this argument is elusively di¢ cult to formulate rigorously, or even
to articulate coherently. My argument here is necessarily intuitive or behavioral and relies
on empirical counter-examples. In this situation two important empirical counter-examples
are the breakdown of the quantity-based Kyoto approach and the hugely under-ambitious
“intended nationally determined contributions” actually volunteered by nations under the
COP21 Paris Accord.
    With n di¤erent national entities, a quantity-based treaty involves assigning n di¤erent
binding emissions quotas (whether tradable or not). Treaty making can be viewed as a
coordination game with n di¤erent players. Such a game can have multiple solutions, often
depending delicately on the setup, what is being assumed, and, most relevant here, the
choice of negotiating instrument. In the case of Kyoto, the world had in practice arrived
at a bad quantity-based solution that essentially devolved to regional volunteerism. The
ultimate outcome of the COP21 Paris Accord remains to be seen, but so far the INDCs
actually volunteered by the parties seem grossly underwhelming, even leaving aside the
near-impossibility of achieving the stated goal of keeping global warming below 2 C.
    Thomas Schelling introduced and popularized the notion of a focal point in game theory.9
Generally speaking, a focal point of an n-party coordination game is some salient feature
that reduces the dimensionality of the problem and simpli…es the negotiations by limiting
bargaining by the parties to some manageable subset, hopefully of one dimension. The basic
idea is that by limiting bargaining to a salient focus, there may be more hope of reaching
a good outcome. In a somewhat circular de…nition, a focal point is anything that provides
a focus of convergence. The “naturalness” or “salience” of a focal point is an important
aspect of Schelling’s argument that is di¢ cult to de…ne rigorously and is ultimately intuitive.
    The concept of “transactions cost”is associated with the work of Ronald Coase.10 The
basic idea is that n parties to a negotiation can be prevented from attaining a socially
desirable outcome by the costs of transacting the agreement among themselves. One could
   9
     Schelling (1960). See also the special 2006 issue of the Journal of Economic Psychology devoted to
Schelling’s psychological decision theory, especially the introduction by Colman (2006). Three of the seven
articles in this issue concerned aspects of focal points, testifying to the lasting in‡uence of the concept.
  10
     Coase himself did not invent or even use the term “transactions cost”but he prominently employed the
concept. See Coase (1960). For an application of the transactions cost approach to controlling greenhouse
gas emissions, see Libecap (2013).



                                                    10
try to argue that, other things being equal, transactions costs increase proportionally with
the number of parties n. Negotiating a one-dimensional price with single-peaked preferences
has the important additional property of allowing a majority-rule voting equilibrium, which
avoids the Arrow impossibility theorem.
    In the case of international negotiations on climate change, I believe that both Schelling’s
concept of a salient focal point and Coase’s concept of transactions costs can be used as
informal arguments to support negotiating a single harmonized carbon price whose proceeds
are nationally rebated. Put directly, it is easier to negotiate one price than n quantities –
especially when the one price can be interpreted as “fair” in terms of equality of marginal
e¤ort. I cannot defend this claim rigorously. At the end of the day, this is more of a
plausible conjecture than a rigorous theorem. Whether justly or not, throughout this paper
I basically assume that the essential contrast is between one binding price assignment versus
n binding quantity assignments –and I then proceed to examine the consequences.
    The third desirable property is that the instrument or instruments of negotiation should
embody a “countervailing force” against narrow free-riding self-interest by incorporating
incentives that automatically internalize the externality. Such incentives should ideally take
the form of a simple, reciprocal, common climate commitment based on the quid-pro-quo
principle of “I will if you will.” I believe this third property is arguably the most important
property of all. This “countervailing force” property is inherently built into a price-based
harmonized system of emissions charges, but it is absent from a quantity-based international
cap-and-trade system, at least as traditionally formulated.
    If I am assigned a cap on emissions, then it is in my own narrow free-riding self-interest to
want my cap to be as large as possible (whether or not my cap will be tradable as a permit).
The self-interested part of me wants maximal leniency for myself. Other than altruism, there
is no countervailing force on the other side encouraging me to lower my desired emissions
cap because of the externality bene…ts I will be bestowing on others.
    Within a nation, the government assigns binding caps. But among sovereign nations,
binding caps must be negotiated. I believe that this is a crucial distinction for the success
or failure of a cap-and-trade regime. A quantity-based international system fails because
no one has an incentive to internalize the externality and everyone has the self-interested
incentive to free ride. What remains is essentially an erratic pattern of altruistic individual
volunteerism that is far from a socially optimal resolution of the problem.
    An internationally-harmonized domestically-collected carbon price is di¤erent. If the
price were imposed on me alone, I would wish it to be as low as possible so as to limit my
abatement costs. But when the price is uniformly imposed, it embodies a countervailing
force that internalizes the externality for me. Counterbalancing my desire for the price to


                                              11
be low (in order to limit my abatement costs) is my desire for the price to be high so that
other nations will restrict their emissions, thereby increasing my bene…t from worldwide total
carbon abatement. A binding uniform minimum price of carbon emissions has a built-in
self-enforcing mechanism that countervails free riding.11
    In previous work, I have tried to model formally the role of this third “countervailing
force” property of an internationally-harmonized but nationally-collected carbon price.12 I
constructed a basic model indicating an exact sense in which each agent’s extra cost from
a higher international minimum emissions price is counter-balanced by that agent’s extra
bene…t from inducing all other agents to simultaneously lower their emissions via the higher
international minimum price (which might well take the form of a uniform price ‡oor on a
cap-and-trade system).
    With further restrictions, the model showed that population-weighted majority rule for
an internationally harmonized tax-like carbon price can come as close to an optimal price on
emissions as the median per-capita marginal bene…t is close to the mean per-capita marginal
bene…t. The key insight from this way of looking at things is that in voting (or more
generally negotiating) a universal minimum carbon price, various nations are, to a greater
or lesser degree, internalizing the externality. Loosely speaking, an “average” nation is
fully internalizing the externality because its extra cost from a higher emissions price is
exactly o¤set by its extra bene…t from inducing all other nations to simultaneously lower
their emissions via the higher price.
    On the price side, a uniform carbon price automatically has the desirable property that
cost e¤ectiveness is guaranteed. I think that the formal WCA voting result of the model
might perhaps be interpreted somewhat less formally as indicating that negotiating an in-
ternationally harmonized (but nationally collected) carbon price may have an important
desirable property on the quantity side as well. If the median marginal bene…t (per capita)
equals the mean marginal bene…t (per capita), then the socially optimal carbon price in the
model has the property that, roughly speaking, half of the world’s population wants the price
to be higher, while the other half of the world’s population wants the price to be lower. In
this situation, the desirable quantity-side property is that the total worldwide output of all
emissions might be “close”to being optimal to the extent that the outcome of negotiations
mimics the outcome of majority voting. Although the real world is a far more complicated
  11
     Later I discuss negotiating one worldwide aggregate emissions cap (contingent upon a previous-round
subdivision formula for n fractional targets, set, for example, by a preceding agreement on various target
reductions from various baselines). A system based on negotiating aggregate emissions (given a subdivision
formula) could, in principle, embody countervailing force against the global warming externality. But,
again, I will conclude that negotiating the extra layer of n …rst-round Kyoto-like fractional subdivision
target reductions will likely founder politically when applied on a worldwide scale.
  12
     See Weitzman (2014).


                                                   12
and nuanced place than the restrictive theoretical model that was constructed, I think this
voting result is trying to indicate something positive (even if only at an abstract level) about
how a negotiated uniform carbon price might possess some overall potential to counteract
via internalization the externality of global warming.


5       Might a Modi…ed Cap-and-Trade Work as Well?
Previously I listed three desirable features that instruments for negotiating climate change
should ideally possess: (1) cost e¤ectiveness; (2) a natural one-dimensional focal point; (3) a
built-in countervailing-force mechanism that internalizes the externality by embodying “I will
if you will” behavior. I then explained that an internationally-harmonized but nationally-
retained carbon price possesses all three properties, whereas an n-dimensional quantity-based
cap-and-trade system at best (if it can be negotiated in the …rst place) possesses only the
…rst property of cost e¤ectiveness. With n sovereign nations, there will be di¢ cult bargaining
over n di¤erent caps with no force other than altruism countervailing each nation’s sel…sh
desire to be a free rider and secure for itself a large cap on emissions.
    But maybe I am being unfair to tradable permits. Suppose we imagine trying to convert
the n-dimensional problem of allocating carbon emissions permits into some one-dimensional
aggregate-quantity analogue of a uniform tax-like price on carbon emissions. We might
imagine a thought experiment where the cap-and-trade negotiators are sitting around a
negotiating table and limiting themselves to simple linear formulas for allocating individual
emissions caps as a fraction of total world emissions.13
    Suppose the cap-and-trade negotiators must decide the total amount of world emissions
E, given a sub-allocation formula for deciding the fraction of emissions permits allotted to
each nation. A standard way of conceptualizing this allocation problem for each country is
in terms of an assigned fractional emissions reduction from an assigned baseline level. Here
I think it is most instructive to view the essence of such an assignment process in terms of a
simple linear reduced form that allots emissions permits Ei (E) = ai + bi E to nation i (where
P                       P
    ai = 0, bi > 0, and    bi = 1).
    If each nation i would accept as given the assigned distributional coe¢ cients (ai ; bi ) and
the above sub-allocation formula Ei (E) = ai + bi E, one might then imagine negotiating over
(or even voting for) the total emissions E. Contingent upon the distribution of coe¢ cients
being accepted as given, this system would seemingly possesses the desirable property of
having a one-dimensional locus of negotiations (here the level of total worldwide emissions
E). And there is also countervailing force against negotiating for a higher value of worldwide
 13
      This approach is spelled out in more mathematical detail in Weitzman (2014).


                                                    13
total emissions E. Although each nation i’s automatic assignment of a higher individual
emissions cap Ei when total emissions E are higher helps that nation directly by lowering its
emissions costs, this domestic e¤ect is counteracted by the bene…ts that each nation would
lose from a higher total worldwide emissions level, because then everyone else would also
emit more. It appears that such a cap-and-trade system might in principle have desirable
focal-point and countervailing-force properties if the assigned distribution coe¢ cients were
accepted and bargaining were restricted to negotiating total emissions:
     But now follow the thought experiment further by asking : Where do the distributional
sub-allocation coe¢ cients (ai ; bi ) come from in the …rst place? They are presumably the
result of an n-party negotiating process where there is no countervailing force to the sel…sh
desire of each country to make its own fractional allocation coe¢ cients as high as possible.
With n di¤erent nations, there will be the usual di¢ cult bargaining over n di¤erent distri-
butional coe¢ cients, with no externality-internalizing incentive countervailing each nation’s
desire to secure for itself a high fraction of emissions.
    When a cap-and-trade system is used to control pollution within a nation, the government
of that nation assigns the caps (or the fractions of emissions).14 In this intra-national case
there is a natural symmetry between a one-dimensional price p and a one-dimensional total
quantity of emissions E. But there is no international government that has the unilateral
power to assign caps or fractions. These caps or fractions must be negotiated among sovereign
nations. This breaks the one-dimensional symmetry because now one tax-like price p is
contrasted with the asymmetry of n vested sovereign interests jockeying for the n initial
fractional distributions. There is thus a critical distinction between intra-national and inter-
national cap-and-trade systems. In the international case the initial distribution of caps
is explicitly distributive, resulting in a war of words about who caused the global-warming
problem and who should bear the burden of remedying it, who is rich and who is poor, what
is fair and what is unfair, and so forth and so on. There could also be a war of words about
the green-fund transfers required to induce participation in a uniform-price treaty, but, for
reasons elaborated in footnotes 5 and 8 having to do with the di¤erence between …rst-order
and second-order transfers, I think that an internally-retained price treaty takes a lot of
pressure o¤ the green-fund payments.
    But perhaps a formulation of this generality is biased against cap-and-trade. We might
try to imbue the distribution coe¢ cients with dimensionality-reducing salient qualities by
imagining “naturally symmetric” focal allocations of the fractional coe¢ cients. One such
seemingly symmetric formula might be that each country is assigned the same fractional
  14
     Admittedly, this is often done in a way that eases special-interest acceptance, such as being allocated
for free or almost for free based on something like a uniform reduction of previous pollution levels.



                                                    14
reduction of emissions from some agreed-upon baseline year. The Kyoto Protocol of 1997
adopted just a little of the spirit of this idea for developed countries alone, with the hope that
some variant of it might later be extended to developing countries. The high-income indus-
trialized countries (Annex I) agreed to “binding”commitments (but without any enforcement
mechanism!) to reduce greenhouse gas emissions in 2010 by an average of 5% relative to 1990
levels (although allowing some individually-negotiated variations around that 5% average).
Developing countries were exempt from any “binding” commitments. Overall, the Kyoto
Protocol did not come close to ful…lling its initial aspirations. The U.S. and Australia did
not ratify, Canada, Japan, and Russia eventually dropped out, and individual compliance
was at best spotty.15 Furthermore, and perhaps most distressingly, non-Annex I countries
did not formally agree to any actual future “binding”commitments going forward from 2012.
The Kyoto experience is subject to multiple interpretations. For me, it largely testi…es to
the great di¢ culty of negotiating binding international quantity caps on the major emit-
ters. In the language that I have employed here, it has been overwhelmingly problematic
to assign binding quantity-like distributional coe¢ cients on a worldwide basis. The Paris
COP21 agreement of December 2015 “solved”this problem only by making all targets com-
pletely voluntary as “intended nationally-determined contributions.” In COP21 there was
no pressure for nations to cut back emissions by 5% or any other uniform amount.
    Other seemingly symmetric quantity formulas might also be examined. For example, one
might entertain the idea of assigning the same worldwide emissions level per capita. This is
a symmetric formula that embodies a certain concept of worldwide fairness, but a cap-and-
trade system based on such an initial distribution of caps would involve massive transfers from
the developed to the developing countries, which would likely prove politically unacceptable.
Besides, even this formula does not address concerns regarding historical responsibility for
the cumulative stock of emissions, which would surely be raised. Alternatively, one might
imagine negotiating (or even voting on) an identical percentage reduction from some base
case of emissions. In this situation, I think, everyone would …rst argue about the fairness
of the baseline emissions that they were initially assigned.
    I abstain from further speculation. My point here is that no matter what quantity-like
initial allocation mechanism I can imagine, an attempt to modify an international cap-and-
trade system by making it one dimensional seems likely to founder for essentially the same
reasons that an unmodi…ed international cap-and-trade system founders. In a quantity-
  15
    The one bright spot might be considered the European Union, whose emissions trading system could
perhaps be interpreted as evolving towards an EU-wide cap (declining annually) with member-state shares
increasingly being determined by auctioning permits. I am unsure and somewhat skeptical about the extent
to which this EU model might be extended to the world as a whole. For a generally favorable assessment
of this possibility, see Ellerman (2010).



                                                  15
based system with n di¤erent sovereign nations I fear there will be intractable negotiations
for n di¤erent distributional assignments (ai ; bi ), with no force countervailing each nation’s
free-riding desire to secure for itself a sel…shly lenient emissions fraction of the total emissions
E.16
    Here is what I think is the essence of the one-price vs. n-quantities negotiation problem
as elaborated in this section. A quantity-type system based on a formula like Ei (E) =
ai + bi E involves two layers of negotiations. First, the n parties must agree on the quantity-
like distributional coe¢ cients (ai ; bi ). Then, second, the parties must agree on the single
worldwide aggregate level of emissions E. By contrast, a price-based system involves only
one layer of negotiation, focused on agreeing to a single one-dimensional uniform price p.
This latter is not an easy task, but it would seem generally easier to negotiate one price layer
than two quantity layers (whose …rst layer involves assigning n quantity-like distributional
coe¢ cients). Admittedly this argument depends upon a particular way of framing the issue,
but it seems to me that, in international negotiations among n sovereign nations, there may
be an irreducible asymmetry between one price instrument vs. n quantity instruments.
    Even while acknowledging that it only involves one layer of negotiations (as opposed to
two on the quantity side), one could ask on the price side what might induce n countries to
agree to a single harmonized charge for carbon emissions. We have been over this ground
before. If climate change becomes su¢ ciently threatening on a grassroots level, public opin-
ion may support relinquishing some national sovereignty over carbon emissions in favor of
the greater good of binding, enforceable international agreements.           It all begins with the
recognition that any resolution of the global warming free-rider problem requires a collective
commitment to some binding restriction on the sovereign right of nations to freely emit as
much carbon dioxide as they wish. Why might nations restrict their own sovereignty by
collectively committing to a common price regime for resolving the global warming exter-
nality? Perhaps because enough of them come to realize (or are made to realize) that the
international climate-change public good is su¢ ciently important to outweigh national rights
to pollute the global commons –and that a radical collective problem may call for a radical
collective solution. Without such a realization and the will to act upon it, progress on
resolving the global warming externality will be limited to voluntary altruism, which seems
to me not nearly enough to overcome the free rider problem.
  16
   Bosetti and Frankel (2012) propose a constructive and imaginative allocation formula for emissions
permits, but it still looks complicated and contentious to me.




                                                 16
6      Concluding Remarks
At the end of the day, there is no airtight logic in favor of a negotiated price over negotiated
quantities, only a series of partial arguments. One argument is that the revenues from a
tax-like carbon price are nationally collected, so that the contentious distributional side is
somewhat hidden and there is at least the appearance of fairness as measured by equality
of marginal e¤ort. A second desirable feature, I have argued, is the natural salience and
relatively low transaction costs of negotiating one price as against negotiating n quantities,
which, while somewhat imprecise, is in my opinion an important distinction. A third
argument is the self-enforcement mechanism that constitutes the main theme of this paper,
namely the built-in countervailing force of an imposed uniform price of carbon, which tends
to internalize the externality and gives national negotiators an incentive to o¤set their natural
impulse to otherwise bargain for a low price.
    Of necessity, my argument has been sprinkled with subjective judgements. This, un-
fortunately, is the nature of the subject. To repeat yet again, this time after examining
somewhat more carefully the alternatives, I judge it di¢ cult to escape the conclusion that,
in the context of an international treaty that covers all major emitters, it is more politically
acceptable and it comes closer to a social optimum to negotiate one binding price than n
binding quantities or quantity-like distributional coe¢ cients.
    My argument here is su¢ ciently abstract that it is open to enormous amounts of crit-
icism on many di¤erent levels. There are so many potential complaints that it would be
incongruous to list them all and attempt to address them one by one. These many po-
tential criticisms notwithstanding, I believe the argument here is exposing a fundamental
countervailing-force argument that deserves to be highlighted.
    Because the formulation is at such a high level of abstraction, it has blurred the distinction
between a carbon price and a carbon tax. As was previously noted, the important thing
is acquiescence by each nation to a binding minimum price on carbon emissions, not the
particular internal mechanism by which this obligation is met. A system of national carbon
taxes with revenues kept in the taxing country is a relatively simple and transparent way
to achieve internationally-harmonized carbon prices. But it is not absolutely necessary for
the conclusions of this paper. In principle, nations or regions could meet the obligation of
a minimum price on carbon emissions by whatever internal mechanism they choose –a tax,
a cap-and-trade system with a tax ‡oor, some other hybrid system, or whatever else results
in an observable price of carbon above the uniform minimum.17
  17
    A minimum carbon price could theoretically be attained in a cap-and-trade system by setting it as a ‡oor,
which could be enforced by making it a reserve price of permits actualized by a hypothetical international
agency that buys up excess permits whenever the price falls below the ‡oor. (Alas, such a mechanism


                                                     17
    Of course any nation or region could choose to impose a carbon tax or price above the
international minimum. The hope is that even a low positive initial value of a universal
minimum carbon tax or price could be useful for gaining con…dence and building trust in
this price-based international architecture.
    The purpose of this paper is primarily expository and exploratory. Any proposal to
resolve the global warming externality will face a seemingly overwhelming array of practical
administrative obstacles and will need to overcome powerful vested interests. That is the
nature of the global warming externality problem. The theory of this paper seems to
suggest that negotiating a uniform minimum price on carbon can have several desirable
properties, including, especially, helping to internalize the global warming externality. To
fully defend the relative “practicality”of what I am proposing would probably require a book,
not an article. In any event, this article is not primarily about practical considerations of
international negotiations. I leave that important task mostly to others.18 However, I do
want to mention just a few real-world considerations that have been left out of my mental
model yet seem especially pertinent.
    An example of a relatively small practical issue that I am waving aside is just where in
the production chain a carbon price should be collected. I think the presumption would
be that the carbon price should be collected by the country in which the carbon dioxide is
actually released into the atmosphere. One might try to argue that a carbon price should
be collected downstream as close as possible to the point where the carbon is burned. But
this would involve an impractically large number of collection points. It is much easier to
collect the price upstream, at various chokepoints where the carbon is …rst introduced into
the carbon-burning economy.19
    A truly critical issue is that a binding international agreement on a uniform minimum
carbon tax or price requires some serious compliance mechanism. To begin with, the carbon
price must be observable. For enforcement, perhaps there is no practical alternative to using
the international trading system for applying tari¤-based penalties on imports from non-
complying nations. Nordhaus (2015) advocates such an approach with uniform border tari¤s
on imports from non-member countries imposed by a “climate club”of member nations who
invites its own free-rider problem, because each nation has an incentive not to spend its own money, but
for other nations to spend their money to buy up excess permits.) Alternatively, a hypothetical worldwide
consignment auction for carbon permits with a uniform reserve price might work in theory but seems highly
impractical in practice. Again here, there is a marked distinction between the simplicity of a one-dimensional
price-tax and the complexity of negotiating a n-dimensional quantity-based binding agreement among n
di¤erent nations.
  18
     See, e.g., Bodansky (2010) or Barrett (2005).
  19
     This set of issues and its distributional consequences (including references to other literature) is discussed
extensively in Asheim (2012).



                                                        18
agree to impose on themselves a harmonized carbon price. Cooper (2010) has argued for
an expansive interpretation whereby the internationally agreed charge on carbon emissions
would be considered a cost of doing business, such that failure to pay the charge would be
treated as a subsidy that is subject to countervailing duties under existing provisions of the
World Trade Organization.20
    An e¢ cient carbon price naturally produces more winners than losers (by the metric of
the modi…ed Pareto criterion). In the case of the global warming externality, which has
been characterized as the greatest public goods problem of all time, it seems reasonable to
suppose that there might be many times more winners than losers from imposing a uniform
carbon price. Because countries here get to keep their own carbon-price-generated revenues,
then welfare-compensating transfers, to the extent they are made at all, ought, at least for
small changes, to be relatively modest second-order deadweight-loss triangles instead of the
relatively immodest …rst-order rectangle transfers associated with tradable permits from,
say, an initial assignment of caps that are equal per-capita.21
    I close by noting again that global warming is an extremely serious as-yet-unresolved
international public goods problem. With the failure of a Kyoto-style quantity-based ap-
proach, the world has seemingly given up on a comprehensive global design, settling instead
in the 2015 Paris COP21 agreement for completely voluntary and sporadic national, sub-
national, and regional “contributions.”These partial measures seem far from constituting a
socially e¢ cient response to the global warming externality.    Perhaps, as was previously
suggested, a quantity-based focus on negotiating emissions caps embodies a bad design ‡aw.
The arguments of this paper suggest a way in which negotiating a binding internationally-
harmonized nationally-collected minimum tax or price on carbon emissions might help to
internalize the global warming externality by empowering an “I will if you will”approach.


References
 [1] Asheim, Geir B. (2012). “A Distributional Argument for Supply-Side Climate Policies.”
     Environ Resource Econ, published online: 11 August 2012.
  20
     See also the discussion of the legality of such sanctions under WTO provisions in Metcalf and Weisbach
(2009).
  21
     Cramton, Ockenfels, and Stoft (2015) make an analogous argument in the form of a numerical example
indicating that committing to a price tends to be less risky than quantity targets. Thus, according to
this reasoning, equity transfers under cap-and-trade would have to be larger than equity transfers under a
uniform price because of the increased risk imposed by caps. In a separate argument, they also indicate
that choosing a particular green-fund equity-payment formula to encourage participation in a uniform price
regime can itself be reduced from a seemingly n-dimensional problem to a one-dimensional focal problem.




                                                    19
 [2] Barrett, Scott (2005). Environment and Statecraft: The Strategy of Environmental
     Treaty Making. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

 [3] Bodansky, Daniel (2010). The Art and Craft of International Environmental Law. Cam-
     bridge: Harvard University Press.

 [4] Bosetti, Valentina, and Je¤rey Frankel (2012). “Sustainable Cooperation in Global
     Climate Policy: Speci…c Formulas and Emissions Targets.” Mimeo dated August 2012.

 [5] Colman, A. M. (2006). “Thomas C. Shelling’s psychological decision theory: Introduc-
     tion to a special issue.” Journal of Economic Psychology, 27: 603-608.

 [6] Cooper, Richard N. (2010). “The Case for Charges on Greenhouse Gas Emissions.”
     In Josepph Aldy and Robert Stavins (eds), Post-Kyoto International Climate Policy:
     Architectures for Agreement, Cambridge University Press.

 [7] Cramton, Peter, and Steven Stoft (2012). “Global Climate Games: How Pricing and
     a Green Fund Foster Cooperation.” Economics of Energy & Environmental Policy, 1
     (2): 125-136.

 [8] Cramton, Peter, Axel Ockenfels, and Steven Stoft (2015). “An International Carbon-
     Price Commitment Promotes Cooperation.” Economics of Energy & Environmental
     Policy, 4(2): 37-50.

 [9] Ellerman, A. Denny (2010). “The EU’s Emissions Trading Scheme: A Prototype Global
     System?” In Joseph Aldy and Robert Stavins (eds), Post-Kyoto International Climate
     Policy: Architectures for Agreement, Cambridge University Press.

[10] Goulder, L. H., M.A.C. Hafstead, and M. Dworsky (2010). “Impacts of alternative emis-
     sions allowance allocation methods under a federal cap-and-trade program.” Journal
     of Environmental Economics and Management, 60(3), 161-181.

[11] Goulder, Lawrence H., and Andrew R. Schein (2013). “Carbon Taxes vs. Cap and
     Trade: A Critical Review.” Climate Change Economics 4(3): 1-28.

[12] Hoel, Michael, and Larry Karp (2002). “Taxes vs. quotas for a stock pollutant.” Re-
     source and Energy Economics 24: 367-384.

[13] Libecap, Gary D. (2013). “Addressing Global Environmental Externalities: Transaction
     Costs Considerations.” Journal of Economic Literature, 52(2): 424-79.



                                           20
[14] MacKay, D. P., P. Cramton, A. Ockenfels and S. Stoft (2015). “Price carbon –I will if
     you will.”Nature 526, 315-316.

[15] Metcalf, Gilbert E., and David Weisbach (2009). “The Design of a Carbon Tax.”
     Harvard Environmental Law Review 33.2: 499-556.

[16] Nordhaus, William D. (2007). “To tax or not to tax: Alternative approaches to slowing
     global warming.” Review of Environmental Economics and Policy 1(1): 26-44.

[17] Nordhaus, William D. (2013). The Climate Casino: Risk, Uncertainty, and Economics
     for a Warming World. New Haven: Yale University Press.

[18] Nordhaus, William D. (2015). “Climate Clubs: Designing a Mechanism to Overcome
     Free-riding in International Climate Policy.”American Economic Review 105 (4); 1339-
     1370.

[19] Pizer, William (1999). “Optimal Choice of Policy Instrument and Stringency under
     Uncertainty: the Case of Climate Change.” Resource and Energy Economics, 12: 255-
     287.

[20] Schelling, Thomas C. (1960). The Strategy of Con‡ict. Harvard University Press.

[21] Victor, David (2011). Global Warming Gridlock. Cambridge: Cambridge University
     Press.

[22] Weitzman, Martin L. (1974). “Prices vs. Quantities.” Review of Economic Studies 41,
     4: 477-491.

[23] Weitzman, Martin L. (2014). “Can Negotiating a Uniform Carbon Price Help to Inter-
     nalize the Global Warming Externality?” Journal of the Association of Environmental
     and Resource Economists 1(1/2): 29-49.




                                           21
