                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           MORTALITY INEQUALITY:
                THE GOOD NEWS FROM A COUNTY-LEVEL APPROACH

                                         Janet Currie
                                       Hannes Schwandt

                                      Working Paper 22199
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22199


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    April 2016




We would like to thank Anne Case, Angus Deaton, Pascaline Dupas, Ilyana Kuziemko, Ronald
Lee, Kenneth Wachter, Amelie Wuppermann as well as seminar participants at Princeton
University, University of Zurich, ETH Zurich, Fundacio Getulio Vargas Sao Paulo, University of
Bonn, University of Munich, University of Bergen, Berkeley, and the Chicago Fed as well as the
editors of the Journal of Economic Perspectives for helpful comments. Financial support from the
Princeton Center for Translational Research on Aging (2P30AG024928) is gratefully
acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Janet Currie and Hannes Schwandt. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Mortality Inequality: The Good News from a County-Level Approach
Janet Currie and Hannes Schwandt
NBER Working Paper No. 22199
April 2016
JEL No. J11

                                          ABSTRACT

Analysts who have concluded that inequality in life expectancy is increasing have generally
focused on life expectancy at age 40 to 50. However, we show that among infants, children, and
young adults, mortality has been falling more quickly in poorer areas with the result that
inequality in mortality has fallen substantially over time. This is an important result given the
growing literature showing that good health in childhood predicts better health in adulthood and
suggests that today’s children are likely to face considerably less inequality in mortality as they
age than current adults.

We also show that there have been stunning declines in mortality rates for African-Americans
between 1990 and 2010, especially for black men. The fact that inequality in mortality has been
moving in opposite directions for the young and the old, as well as for some segments of the
African-American and non-African-American populations argues against a single driver of trends
in mortality inequality, such as rising income inequality. Rather, there are likely to be multiple
specific causes affecting different segments of the population.


Janet Currie
Princeton University
316 Wallace Hall
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
jcurrie@princeton.edu

Hannes Schwandt
University of Zurich
Department of Economics
Schönberggasse 1
8001 Zürich, CH
schwandt@princeton.edu
Life expectancy for the U.S. population has shown a strong increase since 1990. The rise in life

expectancy at birth holds for both men and women, as shown in Figure 1. This development has

not been driven solely by improvements in life expectancy at older ages. Mortality rates for those

under one year of age, for the age group 1-4, and for every 5-year age group above that level,

declined for both males and females between 1990 and 2010 (Figure A1). Particularly

pronounced improvements in mortality occurred at younger ages, which tend to be age groups in

which deaths occur predominantly among the poor.

       However, this overall decline in mortality rates has been accompanied by prominent

recent studies highlighting that the gains have not been distributed equally (e.g. Cutler et al.

2011; Chetty et al. 2015; NRC 2015; Case and Deaton 2015). Indeed, several studies argue that

when measured across educational groups and/or geographic areas, mortality gaps are not only

widening, but that for some U.S. groups, overall life expectancy is even falling (Olshansky et al.

2012; Wang, Schumacher, Levitz, Mokdad, and Murray 2013; Murray et al. 2006). In fact, it

seems to have become widely accepted that inequality in life expectancy is increasing. Given

that the number of years that one can expect to live is such an important indicator of welfare, this

finding has been heralded as yet another dimension in which overall societal inequality is

increasing.

       In this essay, we ask whether the distributions of life expectancy and mortality have in

fact become generally more unequal. Focusing on groups of counties ranked by their poverty

rates, we show that in fact, gains in life expectancy at birth have been relatively equally

distributed between rich and poor areas. Analysts who have concluded that inequality in life

expectancy is increasing have generally focused on life expectancy at age 40 to 50. This




                                                  2
observation suggests that it is important to examine trends in mortality for younger and older

ages separately.

       Turning to an analysis of age-specific mortality rates, we show that among adults age 50

and over, mortality has declined more quickly in richer areas than in poorer ones, resulting in

increased inequality in mortality. This finding is consistent with previous research on the subject.

However, among children, mortality has been falling more quickly in poorer areas with the result

that inequality in mortality has fallen substantially over time. This is an important result given

the growing literature showing that good health in childhood predicts better health in adulthood

(Currie and Rossin-Slater, 2015). Hence, today’s children are likely to face considerably less

inequality in mortality as they age than current adults.

       We also show that there have been stunning declines in mortality rates for African-

Americans between 1990 and 2010, especially for black men. The fact that inequality in

mortality has been moving in opposite directions for the young and the old, as well as for some

segments of the African-American and non-African-American populations argues against a

single driver of trends in mortality inequality, such as rising income inequality. Rather, there are

likely to be multiple specific causes affecting different segments of the population.

       In what follows, we first provide a brief overview of the literature on inequality in

mortality. This is followed by a discussion of our methods, data, and main results. The end of

this paper offers some hypotheses about the causes of our results, including a discussion of

differential smoking patterns by age and socioeconomic status. These patterns may explain a

significant fraction of the increase in mortality inequality in older cohorts. Finally, we offer a

summary and suggestions for future research.




                                                  3
Background

Is There a Causal Relationship Between Inequality in Income and in Mortality?

       It is no accident that the resurgence of interest in mortality inequality has followed

growing public interest in income inequality. The two are linked in the minds of the public and

many academics (Marmot et al. 1991; Wilkinson 1996). There is no doubt that lower

socioeconomic status tends to be associated with higher mortality; Kitigawa and Hauser (1973)

showed this relationship more than 40 years ago. However, this insight does not mean that

increases in income inequality must inevitably widen differentials in mortality regardless of

actual income levels or other relevant policies. Indeed, given that much of the recent increase in

economic inequality is at the very top of the income distribution, it is not immediately obvious

why it should result in increases in deaths for other groups.

       In the academic literature, the idea that rising income inequality must necessarily lead to

rising inequality in mortality has been vigorously disputed. Deaton and Paxson (2001) show that

there is no necessary relationship between trends in income inequality per se and mortality

trends, and that in fact, the two moved in opposite directions for much of the twentieth century.

Gravelle (1998) argues that empirically, places that have a lot of income inequality also tend to

have a lot of poverty, and that it is poverty and not income inequality that is causally related to

higher mortality.

       In this journal, Smith (1999) argues that health may be driving income differences rather

than the reverse, at least among adults. Similarly, Case and Paxson (2011), in their reanalysis of

data from the Whitehall studies of British civil servants, show that poor health in childhood

causes lower socioeconomic status in adulthood, rather than lower socioeconomic status causing

poor health in adulthood. An important possible explanation may be that health trajectories are




                                                  4
established early in childhood (Almond and Currie 2011; Smith 2007). From this perspective,

mortality differentials that are seen today among middle-aged and older adults likely had their

roots decades ago. Aizer and Currie (2014) show that the health of infants in the lowest

socioeconomic status groups is catching up to those of higher status groups and argue that this

convergence likely reflects a range of recent policies that have improved the prospects of these

children.

        An overall reading of this evidence suggests that it is not at all obvious how one should

expect trends in mortality inequality to have evolved over the past 20 years. While income

inequality has increased greatly over this period, there have been dramatic changes in access to

health insurance among pregnant women and children, as well as a sea change in societal

attitudes towards smoking. Fenelon and Preston (2012) place particular emphasis on smoking,

estimating that about 20 percent of U.S. mortality may be attributed to smoking, and that there

are deleterious effects even on those “ever smokers” who have not smoked for many years.

There have also been tremendous increases in obesity rates and addiction to prescription

painkillers, as well as the rise (followed by the subsequent imperfect control of) HIV/AIDS. 1

        Complicating matters further, many of the health-related behaviors that are associated

with lower socioeconomic status contemporaneously—like smoking, drinking, or overeating—

do not explain differences in health at the population level. For example, Banks et al. (2006)

show that British citizens have lower morbidity than Americans even though they tend to smoke

and drink more and are almost equally likely to be overweight. The question of how inequality in

mortality has evolved cannot be readily inferred from the mixture of other social trends about

income inequality or behavior and instead must be estimated directly.


1
 Crime is not likely to be large factor over the timeframe considered here since over this period crime
was low by historical standards. See http://www.pewsocialtrends.org/2013/05/07/gun-crime.


                                                    5
Approaches to Measurement of Inequality of Mortality

        An important point to keep in mind is that although life expectancy sounds like it

measures the number of years that a particular cohort can expect to live, it is unlikely to do so. It

is easiest to understand the problem with a concrete example. Suppose we are interested in the

life expectancy of the cohort that is currently 20 years old. Life expectancy is computed using

the assumption that when this cohort reaches age 40, it can expect to live the same number of

years as the cohort that is currently 40 years old. It is easy to see that if age-specific mortality

rates are changing over time, then this assumption will be false. Only in a world where mortality

rates are static does life expectancy mean what most people think that it does. For this reason, we

focus most of our attention in what follows on age-specific mortality rates.

        A recent National Academy report lays out three common approaches to measuring

inequality in mortality: “One looks at differences in the mortality of populations of U.S. counties

in relation to county-level economic measures. Another looks at mortality by educational

attainment. A third approach looks at mortality by career earnings” (NRC, 2015). One reason for

the multiplicity of approaches is that each has weaknesses.

        The most popular method involves splitting the population either by education or by

income level. Examples of studies looking at inequality in mortality by education level include

Pappas et al. (1993), Elo and Preston (1996), Preston and Elo (1995), Olshansky et al. (2012),

Meara et al. (2008), Cutler et al. (2011), Montez and Berman (2014), and Montez and Zajacova

(2013). The main difficulty with this approach is that the share of the population in different

educational categories has changed dramatically over time (Dowd and Hamoudi, 2014; Hendi,

2015; Bound et al., 2014; Godring et al. ,2015). For example, the share of white, non-Hispanic




                                                   6
women aged 25-84 who had less than a high school degree fell by remarkable 66 percent

between 1990 and 2010 (Table A1). Moreover, it is likely that those women who would have

been high school dropouts in 1990, but who now have higher levels of education, are of higher

socioeconomic status and/or ability than those who remain in the high school dropout category.

They might therefore have been expected to have better health in any case.

       Thus, the observed decline in life expectancy among white, non-Hispanic, high school

dropout women highlighted in Olshansky et al. (2012) could be mostly or entirely accounted for

by changes in the composition of this group. Bound et al. (2014) address the issue by

categorizing education in terms of relative rank in the overall distribution and focusing on the

bottom quartile of the education distribution. They find no evidence that survival probabilities

declined in the bottom quartile of the education distribution.

       A second strategy is to examine mortality inequality by relative income levels (NRC,

2015; Pappas et al., 1993; Waldron, 2007; Waldron 2013; Bosworth and Burke, 2014; Pijoan-

Mas and Rios-Rull, 2014). These studies are subject to the concerns mentioned earlier about

possible reverse causality—that is, the idea that economic hardship could be caused by ill health

rather than vice-versa, (Smith 1999, 2005, 2007). Moreover, these analyses have been limited by

the fact that many potential data sources for mortality rates do not include information on income

or earnings.

       The Health and Retirement Study, which follows a representative sample of the U.S.

elderly population who can be linked to Social Security earnings histories, does include

information on both income and mortality. Studies based on the HRS find increasing divergence

in life expectancy at age 50 by income over time (for example, NRC 2015; Bosworth and Burke,

2014; Pijoan-Mas and Rios-Rull, 2014). However, these analyses are constrained by the limited




                                                 7
age ranges that are observed in different years due to the cohort structure of the data, as well as

by small sample sizes; for example, the sample used in the NRC (2015) study includes 5,740

deaths, compared to the 21 million deaths analyzed in our study). These data limitations mean

that strong assumptions are required to estimate and project life expectancy trends in

socioeconomic subgroups, given that some subgroups have very few deaths.

       A third strategy, and the one we pursue here, is to examine inequality by geographical

areas, such as counties. Analyses based on geographic areas are potentially subject to bias due to

selective migration. If for example, the most healthy and able-bodied people tend to leave lower-

income counties over time and migrate to higher-income counties, we might expect to see

mortality increase in the poor counties and decrease in the rich counties even if in fact each

individual’s health remained exactly the same.

       Some previous studies have taken this geographical approach (for example, Wilmoth et

al. 2011; Sing and Siahpush 2006; Kulkarni et al. 2011; Wang et al. 2013; Murray et al. 2006),

but concerns over migration and other changes in geographic areas can make the results tricky to

interpret. For example, Wang et al. (2013) find that female life expectancy decreased by 2.68

years in the counties with the sharpest declines in life expectancy between 1985 and 2010, while

it increased by 6.16 years in the counties with the largest gains in life expectancy. However, our

calculations show that during this time period, the population fell 6 percent in the counties with

the largest mortality declines, while the population of the top counties grew on average by 101

percent, making it extremely difficult to interpret these trends (these calculations are presented in

Appendix Table A1).

       Sing and Siahpush (2006) divide counties based on a socioeconomic index for the

population in 1980 and follow these same county groups up to 2000. We follow a similar




                                                  8
strategy here, although we reorder the counties in each Census year to insure that we are always

comparing poor counties to rich ones. In practice, this refinement does not have a lot of impact

on our estimates. Our approach differs from theirs in that we examine age-specific mortality in

addition to life expectancy.

       In an exceptional recent paper, Chetty et al. (2015) categorize individuals by both income

and location. Using tax data, they first examine mortality by percentiles of the income

distribution for each age from 40 to 76. Their preferred specification uses income from two

years ago in order to reduce the chance that their results are driven by reverse causality from

health to inequality of income, but they show that they would obtain similar results using income

from five and ten years ago. Using this information, they calculate survival curves and

extrapolate them to age 90. These data are then used to calculate life expectancy at age 40 for

each quartile of the income distribution, in different locations using either counties or clusters of

counties that make up commuting zones.

       They conclude that “low-income individuals live longest in affluent cities with more

educated people and higher local government expenditures…[and] low-income individuals on

both coasts experienced annual gains in life expectancy of approximately .3 years, comparable to

the mean gain in the U.S. for the highest income individuals.” This work does show significant

declines in life expectancy at age 40 among low income individuals in some places, including

Nevada, Appalachia, and southern Ohio. However, the results also suggest that some features of

location boost health at least as much among the poor as among the rich. 2,3



2
 Costa and Kahn (2015) provide a historical example of how improvements in a location’s health
environment reduce mortality among the poor more than among the rich by studying city-wide clean
water interventions and drug availability in New York City and Philadelphia in the early twentieth
century.



                                                   9
        Hence, the Chetty et al. study suggests an additional reason that we should be interested

in the analysis of inequalities in mortality across geographical areas: There may be features of

particular areas (e.g. air pollution) that affect everyone living in a particular location. There may

also be spillovers from rich to poor (or vice versa) within areas. For instance, if the rich insist on

excellent parks and hospitals, then to the extent that the poor are able to live in the same

locations, they may also benefit from these resources. 4



Mortality Rates: Measurement Issues

        An intrinsic problem in empirical work with U.S. mortality rates is that the numerator and

denominator come from different data sets, with somewhat different and changing measures of

key concepts. Death statistics come from the Vital Statistics mortality data, which are collected

by each local county registrar-recorder and eventually forwarded to the national government.

However, population estimates come from the decennial Census and the American Community

Survey. Debate continues as to the quality of the reporting in these sources (Arias et al., 2008).

Information on education, Hispanic ethnicity, race, and occupation of the decedent is supposed to

be completed by the funeral director on the basis of information provided by an informant (or in

the absence of an informant, based on observation). These variables do not appear on the

certified death certificate. 5 In 1990, about 8 percent of certificates were missing education--a


3
  Some limitations of the Chetty et al. approach include the fact that income is not observed for non-
earners and race is not observed while (as we will show) there having been dramatic improvements in
mortality among African-Americans.
4
  A somewhat obvious point about any analysis of inequality between counties is that such an analysis
neglects inequality within county, which may nevertheless be important. Thus, between-county inequality
in mortality is only part of the story, albeit an important part.
5
  More than one race can be entered on the death certificates, but only the first-mentioned race is recorded
in the Vital Statistics files. While there is evidence of a slight general underreporting of Hispanic origin in
death certificates (Murphy et al. 2013), no systematic changes have occurred over time.



                                                      10
proportion that fell to 1 percent by 2010. If the missing data are concentrated in lower-education

subgroups, then excluding observations with missing values will bias estimated trends in

mortality by education.

        Changes in the measures over time present a vexing question for the analysis of trends.

For example, the Census now allows each respondent to report more than one race. Similarly,

since 2003, an increasing number of states changed from reporting education by years completed

to reporting educational degrees as stated on death certificates, while the Census and American

Community Survey data continue to report education in years completed.

        An important change regarding Hispanic origin occurred recently in the American

Community Survey: In 2008, the wording in the questionnaire changed from “Hispanic” to

“Hispanic origin.” According to the Census Bureau (undated), this wording change “likely

identified Hispanics--mostly native-born--who would not have been captured before.” 6 If there is

an increasing tendency for people to identify themselves as Hispanic in the American

Community Survey, while no changes in race reporting occur in the Vital Statistics data, the

mortality rate of Hispanics will mechanically decrease and the rate for non-Hispanics will

increase, with the impact being larger for Hispanics than for non-Hispanics because the latter

group is much larger.

        A related issue that could also have a large impact on the size of the denominator is

undercounting of undocumented immigrants in the U.S. Census. To the extent that the size of the

population is undercounted while the deaths are all counted, mortality rates will tend to be too

high. However, Hispanics are estimated to have the highest life expectancy at birth in the U.S.

despite large numbers of both documented and undocumented immigrants, though it is unknown


6
 Figure A8 shows that among US born adults the fraction identifying as Hispanic sharply increased after
2008.


                                                  11
to what extent this result may be due to the sorts of measurement problems we highlight here

(Arias et al., 2010).



Methods and Data

        In our main analysis of mortality and inequality, we follow Currie and Schwandt (2016),

and rank counties by their poverty rates and then divide the counties into groups that each

represent equal one percent shares (or equal five percent shares) of the overall U.S. population.

We do this separately for each Census year. In this way, we compare the one (five) percent of the

population who lived in counties with the highest poverty levels in 1990 to the one (five) percent

of the population who lived in counties with the highest poverty levels in each Census year. This

approach accounts for the fact that counties may change poverty rank over time and avoids

problems due to shrinking or growing counties by always looking at county bins of similar size. 7

        Our focus on mortality at the level of county groups has advantages beyond the

possibility of adjusting for changes in population shares. County of residence is consistently

reported both in the Vital Statistics and the Census data, unlike other proxies for socioeconomic

status such as education or race. Moreover, grouping counties into equal shares of the population

helps to address the problem of measurement error in mortality rates for small counties, in

particular when analyzing age ranges with low mortality or racial minorities. We also look at

mortality rates over a 3-year period in each county, which further helps to minimize noise due to

measurement error and to avoid counties reporting zero deaths. A further advantage of our

approach is that several socio-economic indicators are available at the county level. Our baseline


7
 If people systematically left the poorest counties, then over time the population in a fixed group of
counties would represent a smaller share of the total population. Moreover, if out-migrants were relatively
healthy while the relatively unhealthy remained, then it could appear that health was declining in the
poorest counties even if in fact all that was happening was selective out-migration of the healthy.


                                                    12
specification ranks counties by their poverty rates, but we also show results for rankings in terms

of the fraction of the population that are high school dropouts, median income, and life

expectancy.

        Various issues arise when dividing up counties in this way. For example, dividing

counties into groups that represent equal fractions of the population is not an exact procedure

because counties at the margin will overlap the bins, making one group too large and the next

group too small. 8 In practice, however, this variation in county group size is relatively small, and

it is not systematically related to county-level poverty. 9

        Our analysis requires three broad categories of data: on life expectancy, on mortality

rates, and about county characteristics including the poverty rate, median income, and the

fraction of high school dropouts.

        For mortality rates, we construct age group, gender, and race-specific 3-year mortality

rates at the level of county groups for the years 1990, 2000, and 2010 based on Vital Statistics

mortality data and population counts from the decennial Census. In order to account for changes

in the age structure within age groups (e.g. the fact that within a group like “over 50” the age

distribution can change over time), we age-adjust mortality rates in 2000 and 2010 using the

8
 In order to smooth the size of the county groups we divide the five largest counties in our sample—
Cook County, Illinois (which includes the city of Chicago), Los Angeles County, California, Riverside
County, California, Harris County, Texas (including Houston), and Maricopa County (including
Phoenix), Arizona into three smaller groups, each of identical size and with the identical mortality rates.
See Appendix Figure A2 for evidence that the variation in county group size is relatively small. Figure A2
also shows how median income and per capita income vary with the county group poverty ranking.
9
  Most of the poorest counties that together make up 10 percent of the U.S. population in both 1990 and
2010 were located in the South and Southwest, together with some counties in the Midwest (in particular,
in South Dakota), and in Alaska. Conversely, the counties with the lowest poverty rates that make up 10
percent of the population in both 1990 and 2010 are predominantly located in the North, with clusters in
the Northeast. Thus, the geographic distribution of the counties with the highest and lowest poverty rates
remained fairly stable between 1990 and 2010, and in fact, whether we readjust county groups to account
for population changes or instead follow fixed sets of poor and rich counties over time provide similar
results.



                                                    13
1990 population. This means we apply the age-specific mortality rates in 2000 and 2010 to the

1990 population, which effectively keeps the age composition within broader age groups

constant over time.

         The mortality data gives the month of death, which allows us to construct mortality rates

based on deaths that occurred after Census Day (April 1). To be specific, the 3-year mortality

rate in 1990 is the ratio of all deaths that occurred in a cohort between April 1, 1990, and March

31, 1993, divided by the 1990 Census population count. We use the decedent’s county of

residence, which is what the Census reports, rather than the county where the death occurred.

         Following Dorn (2009) we account for changes in county definitions that occurred

between 1990 and 2010. Mortality rates by race are constructed using single-race definitions in

the 2000 and 2010 Census. We focus on mortality rates in levels and consider there to have been

a decline in inequality if the mortality rate in poor counties decreased more strongly in absolute

terms than the mortality rate in rich counties. In what follows, we also discuss percentage

changes in mortality. Because death rates tend to be higher among the poor than among the rich,

the same absolute decline in mortality represents a larger percent decline among the rich and vice

versa.

         We calculate gender-specific life expectancy at the level of county groups based on 1-

year mortality rates in 19 age groups (following standard life table techniques, e.g. described in

Chiang, 1984).

         Finally, county characteristics are taken from the Census (in 1990 and 2000) and from the

American Community Survey (ACS) in 2010 (the ACS replaced the long form of the Census).

These include: the poverty rate, median income, and the percent of respondents who are high




                                                 14
school dropouts. Further details about definitions of race, education level, and other variables are

discussed below.



The Evolution of Inequality in Life Expectancy and Mortality

       Inequality is never fully captured by any single all-inclusive measure. Thus, we slice up

the data in several ways to present our findings, first looking at life expectancy at birth, then at

mortality by age group, and finally at mortality by race and age. Throughout, we show separate

estimates for males and females given that there are profound gender differences in both levels

and trends of mortality.



Life Expectancy at Birth

       The points in Figure 2 represent measures of life expectancy at the level of county

groups. On the horizontal axis, county groups are ranked from those with the lowest percentage

of the population in poverty to those with the highest percentage in poverty. The size of each

group represents about one percent of the population in the relevant year. The vertical axis shows

life expectancy at birth, with the left-hand panel showing data for males and the right-hand panel

for females. The triangles show the average life expectancy in each county bin in 1990, with a

light best-fit regression line drawn through the points. The dashed line shows a fitted regression

line for life expectancy at birth in 2000. The circles refer to the 2010 life expectancy at birth

(again with a light best-fit regression line drawn through them). The negative slope of each line

shows that life expectancy is lower for people in counties with higher poverty rates in each

Census year. The fact that the 2010 line is consistently above the 1990 line shows that life




                                                  15
expectancy increased in every type of county group, from those with the lowest to the highest

poverty rates.

        If the slope of the line becomes flatter over time, then this indicates that life expectancy is

increasing more in poorer areas than in richer ones, and vice versa. For men, the shift in life

expectancy over time is shown by essentially parallel lines, implying that life expectancy

increased roughly equally in rich and poor counties and that inequality in life expectancy at birth

neither decreased nor increased. For women, increases in life expectancy at birth have been

somewhat stronger in the low-poverty county groups resulting in a steepening of the gradient

between 1990 and 2010, which illustrates a slight increase in inequality. 10 For women between

1990 and 2010, life expectancy at birth in the county group with the lowest poverty increased by

3 years, about 1 year more than in the county group with the highest poverty rate. However,

changes in life expectancy at birth are positive for each county group, with an average

improvement in life expectancy of about two years for the county groups with the highest

poverty rates. Overall, improvements in life expectancy have been greater for men than for

women, implying a strong reduction of the gender gap (a change also visible in Figure 1).

        How do these results relate to the findings of an increase in inequality in life expectancy

from previous prominent studies such as Chetty et al. (2015) and NRC (2015)? One salient

difference in methodology is that those studies focus on life expectancy at older ages. For

example, Chetty et al. (2015) use mortality at age 40 to 63 to estimate income-specific trends in

10
  Table A2 provides numerical values. Figure A3 plots changes in life expectancy at birth between 1990
and 2010 across county groups. For men the slope of the fitted line is 0.0043 with a standard error of
0.0041—which means that the change in the slope is not significantly different from zero. For women, the
slope of the corresponding line is -0.009 with a standard error of 0.0041, indicating a small but
statistically significant increase in inequality. Figure A3 also shows these changes in percent of the 1990
level. Since males in poor counties have low levels of life expectancy in 1990, the positive change in the
poorest groups becomes more pronounced relative to the richer counties, implying a statistically
significant decrease in inequality for males according to this measure.



                                                    16
life expectancy, while NRC (2015) uses mortality at age 50 to 78, an approach that by

construction does not consider developments at younger ages. Figure A4 shows that when we

use our data and method to look at life expectancy at age 50, we also find increases in inequality

in life expectancy for both men and women. The next subsection investigates the potential for

differences between old and young in trends in age-specific mortality.



Age-specific Mortality

       Our data allow us to construct death rates at different ages. Figure 3 shows 3-year

mortality rates at the level of county groups, with counties ranked by the share of their

population below the poverty line, for males and females in four different age groups. 11 In these

figures, each marker shows the mortality rate for a bin representing five percent of the U.S.

population in the relevant year. As in the life expectancy figures, a slope that becomes steeper

over time implies increasing inequality and vice versa.

       Figure 3 shows dramatic reductions in mortality among children aged zero to four

between 1990 and 2000, with smaller reductions between 2000 and 2010. From 1990 to 2000,

the reductions in under-five mortality were much greater in poorer counties than in richer ones,

and slightly larger for males than for females. For example, the under-five mortality rate for

males fell from 4.5 per 1000 in 1990 to 2.3 per 1000 in the poorest counties, compared to a

decline from 2.4 to 1.3 per 1000 in the richest counties over the same period. Among children

aged 5 to 19, there were large reductions in mortality for males, with more modest reductions for

females (from already low levels). Once again, reductions were larger in poorer counties,

implying significant reductions in mortality inequality.

11
  For an analysis by finer age groups, see Currie and Schwandt (2016). Table A3 shows numerical values
for the mortality estimates and includes tests for whether the slopes of a line drawn through the 1990
points is different from the slope of a line drawn through the 2010 points for each age group.


                                                 17
       Moving into young adulthood and middle age, Figure 3 shows that the different trends for

males and females intensified. Males aged 20-49 experienced declines in mortality in poorer

counties (though not so much in richer ones) leading to a significant decline in mortality

inequality, whereas for women there was little improvement in mortality in either rich or poor

county groups. This a truly remarkable stagnation in light of the significant progress in mortality

reduction made in other age categories.

       After age 50, mortality again showed large decreases over the whole 20-year period. For

females, virtually all of this improvement occurred between 2000 and 2010. For men, there were

larger and steadier declines in mortality. For women in this age group, gains were bigger in the

richest county groups, leading to a significant increase in inequality in mortality. For men, the

increase in mortality inequality is not statistically significant in the 50-plus group, though for

males 65 and older, inequality in mortality is increasing significantly.

       All the results in this section are robust to ordering counties using the fraction of high

school dropouts, median income, or average life expectancy rather than poverty (Figure A9). The

patterns look extremely similar when counties are ranked by the fraction of high school dropouts

or by life expectancy. When we sort by median income, the reductions in mortality appear to be

more evenly distributed.



Age and Race-Specific Mortality

       As discussed above, the Census now allows people to describe themselves as belonging

to more than one race. Figure 4 (A) shows a striking exponential growth in the fraction of people

identifying as multiple races across birth cohorts, as reported in the 2000 and 2010 Census.

While the fraction reporting multiple races is below 2.5 percent among those born in the first half




                                                  18
of the past century, it strongly increased in more recent cohorts. For the 2010 cohort, it reached

10 percent for whites and 20 percent for African-Americans. Importantly, these patterns do not

reflect age effect. The curves for 2000 and 2010 virtually match, even though the cohorts grew

10 years older between the two Censuses. As we show in panel (B) of Figure 4, if the observed

exponential growth of multiple-race reporting continues into the future, the last single-race

African-American and single-race white persons will be born in 2050 and 2080, respectively.

While continuing exponential growth is a strong assumption, the patterns in Figure 4 suggest that

multiple race reporting will become more important in the future. It is important to account for

this development when studying trends in race-specific mortality, particularly among younger

cohorts. We therefore report mortality rates based both on single and multiple race population

counts. 12

        Figure 5 shows an analysis of age-specific 3-year mortality rates by race. 13 Recall that

only one race is reported on the death certificates, even for people who consider themselves

biracial. However, in the total population data, we have counts for people who consider

themselves biracial. The lines with triangles or circles are based on rates calculated using, for the

denominator, people who consider themselves only white or black. For 2010, we have also added

a second line, marked with squares, that in the denominator also includes those who identify with


12
  The Census has responded to these problems by producing “bridged” estimates that attempt to allocate
the entire population to one of four races (white, African-American, Native American, Asian) following
an imputation procedure estimation procedure. Figure A6 provides an example of how these differences
in reporting can influence the calculated death rates for those aged 20 to 24. Overall the results suggest
that changes in race reporting may have important effects on estimated trends in mortality among groups
where the changes in mortality are relatively small, either because mortality does not change, or because
changes start from a very low baseline and are small in absolute terms.
13
   As before we rank counties by their overall poverty rate. The figure looks similar when ranking
counties by race-specific poverty rates, but there seems to be a considerable sampling error for black
poverty estimates in 1990, which is why we continue to use overall county poverty levels for these
figures. Ranking counties the same way with the figures for both blacks and whites also facilitates
comparisons.


                                                    19
more than one race. Of course, adding these individuals to the denominator without increasing

the numerator lowers the estimated mortality rates.

       Panel A shows mortality rates for children under five. What is most striking in these

figures is the truly remarkable reduction in black mortality rates between 1990 and 2000, and the

continuing, though smaller, decline for blacks between 2000 and 2010. In 1990, young black

male children in the richest counties had mortality rates of 6.2 per 1000, while white male

children in the poorest counties had mortality rates of about 4 per 1000. Thus, racial disparities

trumped any inequality based on geographic areas. By 2010, the mortality rate for young black

male children in the richest counties was still above the mortality rate for young white males in

the poorest counties, but the gap had narrowed greatly. Moreover, if we use the rates calculated

including people with multiple races in the denominator, the estimated black mortality rate falls

even further.

       Panel B shows similar figures for children aged 5 to 19. In this age group, differences

between black and white females are less apparent than for those under five. However for males,

there is still a very large disparity in death rates, albeit one that was greatly reduced over the 20-

year period. For both black and white males, death rates fell much more in the poorest county

groups. By 2010, there was actually some overlap between the distributions of death rates for

black and white males. By 2010, there was actually some overlap between the distributions of

death rates for black and white males. Including those with multiple races makes much less

difference in these figures than in those for the children under five, though it still impacts the

estimated mortality rate for black males.

       Panel C of Figure 5 focuses on people aged 20 to 49. A striking finding from this figure

is the stagnation in white female mortality rates between 1990 and 2010. There is even a slight




                                                  20
increase in the mortality among the poorest county groups. This result is of course completely

consistent with those of Case and Deaton (2015), who document strong increases in middle-age

mortality among non-Hispanic whites between 2000 and 2010. 14 Black females show reductions

in mortality rates in both rich and poor counties, while white males experienced reductions only

in the poorer counties, resulting in reduced mortality inequality for that group. The results for

black males show, once again, huge reductions in mortality, which are greater in the poorest

counties. By 2010, black males in the richest counties had considerably lower mortality than

white males in the poorest counties, which had not been the case in 1990.

        Results for people over 50 are shown in Panel D. Mortality fell for each of the four race

and gender categories. Among females and among white males, it fell slightly more in the richest

county groups, while for black males, mortality fell similarly in poor and rich county groups.

Multiple race reporting appears to be a relatively insignificant issue in this age category, as one

would expect given the low rate of multiple race reporting in this age range (Figure 4).

Important Drivers of Mortality Trends in Different Cohorts

Given that there is so much dispute about the nature of the trends in inequality in mortality rates,

perhaps it is unsurprising that there is so little research seeking to establish the causes of the

trends. Aizer and Currie (2014) document the fall in mortality inequality among infants and cite

many possible explanations including increases in maternal education, expansions of health

insurance for pregnant women, the Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and

Children, and expansions of the Earned Income Tax Credit.




14
  In Appendix Figure A7 we show US-wide age-specific mortality trends for non-Hispanic females and
males, based on different population counts. The strong mortality increases in middle age between 2000
and 2010, highlighted by Case and Deaton (2015), are clearly visible across all measures, i.e. they are
hardly affected by the way the non-Hispanic white population is counted.


                                                   21
         Other than Currie and Schwandt (2016), we are not aware of any research that has looked

systematically at the causes of reductions in mortality among older children. Some possibilities

include expansion of public health insurance (Brown, Kowlaski and Lurie 2015; Cahodes et al.

2014; Currie, Decker, and Lin, 2008; Miller and Wherry 2015; Wherry and Meyer 2015;

Wherry, et al. 2015), other social safety net programs such as Head Start (Ludwig and Miller

2007; Almond, Hoynes, Schanzenbach, forthcoming), and reductions in pollution (Isen et al.

2015).

         We are also unaware of research that has investigated the role of immigration in driving

inequalities in mortality. To the extent that Hispanic immigrants tend to be both poorer and

healthier than the average American (the so-called “Hispanic paradox”), areas that receive a lot

of immigrants might see improvements in mortality differentials. One might also be more likely

to see this pattern for the young than for the old, given that immigrants tend to be young.

         Smoking is a major driver of spatial mortality differences among older adults in the

U.S. 15 In our context, at least some of the increasing disparities that we observe in old age

mortality might reflect differences in taking up smoking and smoking cessation by

socioeconomic status. De Walque (2010) shows that better-educated people stopped smoking

much more quickly following the 1964 Surgeon General’s report on the dangers of smoking than

less-educated people. Moreover, males started with much higher smoking rates than females, but

quickly reduced their rates, while smoking continued to gain ground among less-educated

women for some time after the Surgeon General’s report. These cohorts in which more-educated

women had already reduced smoking while the less educated still smoked at increasing rates,




15
 Fenelon and Preston (2012) estimate that smoking can explain 60% of the differences in age 50-plus
mortality across U.S. states.


                                                 22
entered old age over the past two decades, implying that lifetime smoking rates between the

elderly rich and the poor likely diverged during that time period.

       Figure 6 shows, based on smoking histories from the National Health Interview Survey,

how these patterns have continued to play out during the time period that we analyze. Among

those 50 and over, men are much more likely to have ever smoked than women, but lifetime

smoking rates decreased strongly between 1990 and 2010 for both rich and poor men. The

decrease was somewhat stronger for rich men, which implies that the smoking gap between rich

and poor men 50 and over widened during that time period. This pattern could explain why we

observe strong reductions in mortality among elderly men both in rich and poor county groups,

with somewhat stronger improvements among the rich.

       In the cohorts of women who passed age 50 over the past two decades, smoking rates

declined among rich women, but increased strongly among the poor. In fact, in 1990, lifetime

smoking rates were substantially lower among cohorts of poor women but by 2010, their rate had

surpassed that of rich women. The smoking gap between these two groups increased by 11

percentage points during the past 20 years, almost twice as much as the increase for men (6.4

percentage points). This pattern is in line with the increasing inequality in female old-age

mortality that we observe between rich and poor counties between 1990 and 2010 (note the

significant steepening of the line for females age 50+ in Figure 3).

       These findings suggest that at least part of the diverging mortality rates currently

observed at older ages might be a temporary phenomenon driven by a strong improvement in

health behavior which simply occurred with some lag among the poor. Once the later-born

cohorts, which experienced strong reductions in smoking among both rich and poor, enter old

age and replace these transition cohorts, smoking-induced mortality among the elderly is likely




                                                23
to converge to lower levels. The right panel of Figure 6 shows that the fraction who ever smoked

is already much lower among adults aged 18 to 40. Moreover, the rates look quite similar

regardless of poverty status for men. Among women, the poor are still more likely to smoke, but

the rates are falling at roughly similar rates across all groups. When these cohorts reach old age

in the coming decades, society will fully reap the benefits of the “anti-smoking dividend,”

resulting ceteris paribus in lower mortality and decreasing inequality in mortality at these ages.

       Other factors also may have impacted inequality in mortality between counties.

Improvements in medical care, such as for heart disease, seem likely to have reduced health

inequality as they have diffused over time, other things being equal. The gap in obesity rates

between rich and poor has also been narrowing, but this development is driven by increasing

obesity among the rich, which may in fact auger higher death rates for rich and poor in future

(NRC, 2015). Case and Deaton (2015) highlight another factor that may be driving increased

inequality in some segments of the population: the opioid epidemic. It may be possible to address

these questions using the cause of death in the Vital Statistics Mortality data. However, given the

issues discussed above with respect to changes in measurement, measurement error, and missing

data about causes, these data are unlikely to provide a definitive answer.



Discussion and Conclusions

       In contrast to many recent analyses of mortality inequality, we find improvements in

overall life expectancy in both rich and poor counties. Our focus on life expectancy at birth

rather than life expectancy in middle age may explain this finding. We find that inequality in

mortality has fallen greatly among children. It is worth emphasizing that the reductions in

mortality among African Americans, especially African-American males of all ages, are stunning




                                                 24
and that is a major driver of the overall positive picture. This positive finding has been largely

neglected in much of the discussion of overall mortality trends. Although our overall message is

more positive than some earlier studies, we do find increases in mortality among white women

aged 20 to 49, which are stronger in the poorest counties, indicating increasing inequality in

mortality in that group.

       It sometimes seems as if the research literature on mortality is compelled in some way to

emphasize a negative message, either about a group that is doing less well or about some aspect

of inequality that is rising. In contrast, this study is one of comparatively few, along with Aizer

and Currie (2014) and Currie and Schwandt (2016), that have emphasized improvements in life

expectancy across the broad U.S. population. Our results point to strong health improvements

and decreasing inequality, particularly among the younger cohorts who will form the future adult

population of the U.S. Given the growing literature demonstrating a connection between health

in childhood and future health (c.f. Currie and Rossin-Slater, 2015), this improvement in health

among young people in poor counties suggests that these cohorts may well be healthier and

suffer less mortality inequality in the future than those who are currently middle aged and older.

In addition, much of the increase in inequality in older cohorts in the past 20 years has been

driven by historical smoking patterns. Current cohorts have much lower lifetime smoking rates,

which is also likely to lead to more convergence in mortality rates.

       We believe that a balanced approach to the mortality evidence, which recognizes real

progress as well as areas in need of improvement, is more likely to result in sensible policy-

making. After all, emphasizing the negative could send the message that “nothing works,”

especially in the face of seemingly relentless increases in income inequality. We have

emphasized considerable heterogeneity in the evolution of mortality inequality by age, gender,




                                                 25
and race. Going forward, identifying social policies that have helped the poor and reduced

mortality inequality is an important direction for future research. Similarly, understanding the

reasons that some groups and age ranges have seen stagnant mortality rates will be important for

mobilizing efforts to reduce inequality in mortality and improve the health of the poor.




Acknowledgements

       We would like to thank Anne Case, Angus Deaton, Pascaline Dupas, Ilyana Kuziemko,
Ronald Lee, Kenneth Wachter, Amelie Wuppermann as well as seminar participants at
Princeton, University of Zurich, ETH Zurich, Fundação Getúlio Vargas Sao Paulo, University of
Bonn, University of Bergen, Berkeley, and the Chicago Fed for comments. Financial support
from the Princeton Center for Translational Research on Aging (2P30AG024928) is gratefully
acknowledged.




                                                26
References

Aizer, Anna and Janet Currie. 2014. “The intergenerational transmission of inequality: Maternal
disadvantage and health at birth.” Science 344 (6186): 856-861.

Currie, Janet, and Douglas Almond. "Human capital development before age five." Handbook of
Labor Economics 4 (2011): 1315-1486.

Arias, Elizabeth., William S. Schauman, Karl Eschbach, Paul D. Sorlie, and Eric Bucklund. 2008.
“The validity of race and Hispanic origin reporting on death certificates in the United States.” Vital
and Health Statistics 2 (148):1-23.

Arias, Elizabeth., Karl Eschbach, William S. Schauman, Eric Bucklund, and Paul D. Sorlie. 2010.
“The Hispanic mortality advantage and ethnic misclassification on US death certificates.” American
Journal of Public Health 100(S1): S171-7.

Banks, James, Michael Marmot, Zoe Oldfield, and James Smith. 2006. “Disease and Disadvantage
in the United States and in England.” Journal of the American Medical Association 295 (17): 2037-
2045.

Bosworth, Barry P. and Kathleen Burke. 2014. Differential Mortality and Retirement Benefits in the
Health and Retirement Study. The Brookings Institution.

Bound, John, Arline Geronimus, Javier Rodriguez, and Timothy Waidman. 2014. “The
Implications of Differential Trends in Mortality for Social Security Policy.” University of
Michigan Retirement Research Center (MRRC) Working Paper, WP 2014-314. Ann Arbor, MI.

Brown, David, Amanda Kowalski, and Ithai Lurie. 2015. “Medicaid as an Investment in
Children: What is the Long-Term Impact on Tax Receipts?” NBER Working Paper #20835.

Cahodes Sarah, Samuel Kleiner, Michael F. Lovenhem, and Michael Grossman. 2014. "Effect of
Child Health Insurance Access on Schooling." NBER Working Paper #20178.

Case, Anne and Angus Deaton. 2015 “Rising Morbidity and Mortality in Midlife Among White
non-Hispanic Americans in the 21s Century” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of
the United States of America 112 (49): 15078–15083.

Case, Anne, and Christina Paxson. "The Long Reach of Childhood Health and Circumstance:
Evidence from the Whitehall II Study." The Economic Journal 121, no. 554 (2011): F183-F204.

Chetty, Raj, Michael Stepner, Sarah Abraham, Shelby Lin, Benjamin Scuderi, Nicholas Turner,
Augustin Bergeron, and David Cutler. 2015. “The Relationship between Life Expectancy and
Income in the United States 2001-2014.” JAMA, in press, April 11 2016.

Chiang, C. (1984) The Life Table and its Applications. Malabar (FL): Robert E. Krieger
Publishing.



                                                  27
Costa, Dora L., and Matthew E. Kahn. 2015. “Declining Mortality Inequality within Cities
during the Health Transition.” The American Economic Review 105(5): 564-569.

Currie, Janet, Sandra Decker, and Wanchuan Lin. “Has Public Health Insurance for Older
Children Reduced Disparities in Access to Care and Health Outcomes?” Journal of Health
Economics, 27 #6, Dec. 2008, 1407-1652.

Currie, Janet and Mark Stabile. 2003. “Socioeconomic Status and Child Health: Why is the
Relationship Stronger for Older Children?” American Economic Review 93(5): 1813-1823.

Currie, Janet and Maya Rossin-Slater, 2015. "Early-Life Origins of Lifecycle Wellbeing:
Research and Policy Implications," Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, v34 n1 p208-
242 Winter.

Currie, Janet and Hannes Schwandt. 2016. “Inequality in Mortality Between Rich and Poor U.S.
Counties Decreased Among the Young While Increasing for Older Adults, 1990-2010.
Science, forthcoming.

Cutler, David M, Ellen Meara, and Seth Richards. 2008. “The Gap Gets Bigger: Changes in
Mortality and Life Expectancy by Education, 1981-2000,” Health Affairs 27 (2): 350-360.

Cutler, David M., Fabian Lange, Ellen Meara, Seth Richards-Shubik, and Christopher J Ruhm.
2011. “Rising educational gradients in mortality: The role of behavioral risk factors,” Journal of
Health Economics 30(6) 1174-1187.

Deaton, Angus, and Christina H. Paxson. 2001. “Mortality, education, income, and inequality
among American cohorts. In: Wise, D. A. (Ed.), Themes in the Economics of Aging. University
of Chicago Press, Cicago, IL. 129–165.

Deaton, Angus. 2003. "Health, Inequality, and Economic Development." Journal of Economic
Literature 41(1): 113-158.

de Walque, Damien. 2010. “Education, Information, and Smoking Decisions: Evidence from
Smoking Histories in the United States, 1940–2000.” Journal of Human Resources 45 (3): 682-
717.

Dorn, David 2009. "Essays on Inequality, Spatial Interaction, and the Demand for Skills."
Dissertation University of St. Gallen no. 3613, September 2009.

Dowd, Jennifer B. and Amar Hamoudi. 2014. "Is life expectancy really falling for groups of low
socio-economic status? Lagged selection bias and artefactual trends in mortality." International
Journal of Epidemiology 43(4): 983-988.

Elo, Irma T., and Samuel H. Preston. 1996. “Educational differentials in mortality: United States,
1979-1985.” Social Science & Medicine 42(1): 47-57.




                                                28
Fenelon, Andrew, and Samuel H. Preston. (2012) "Estimating smoking-attributable mortality in
the United States." Demography 49, no. 3: 797-818.

Goldring, Thomas, Fabian Lange, and Seth Richards-Shubik. 2015. “Testing for Changes in the
SES-Mortality Gradient When the Distribution of Education Changes Too.” NBER Working
Paper #20993.

Gravelle, Hugh. 1998. “How Much of the Relation Between Population Mortality and Unequal
Distribution of Income is a Statistical Artifact?” British Medical Journal 316 (7128): 382-385.

Hamoudi, Amar and Jennifer Beam Dowd. 2014.'Light from a Distant Star': Lagged selection
bias and artefactual trends in mortality. International Journal of Epidemiology 43 (4): 983-988.

Hendi, Arun S. 2015. “Trends in U.S. life expectancy gradients: the role of changing educational
composition.” International Journal of Epidemiology 44 (3): 946-55.

HMD. 2015. Human Mortality Database. University of California, Berkeley (USA), and Max
Planck Institute for Demographic Research (Germany).

Hoynes, Hilary, Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach, and Douglas Almond. (forthcoming). "Long
Run Impacts of Childhood Access to the Safety Net." American Economic Review.

IHME. 2013. Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation. United States Life Expectancy
Estimates by County 1985-2010. Seattle, United States.

Isen, Adam, Maya Rossin-Slater, Reed Walker. 2015. “Every Breath You Take Every Dollar
You’ll Make: The Long-Term Consequences of the Clean Air Act of 1970.” Journal of Political
Economy.

Kawachi, Ichiro. Nancy E. Adler, and William H. Dow. 2010. “Money, schooling and health:
Mechanisms and causal evidence.” Annals of the New York Academy of Science 1186: 56-58.

Kitagawa, Evelyn M., and Philip M. Hauser (1973) "Differential mortality in the United States: A
study in socioeconomic epidemiology." Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Kulkarni, Sandeep C., Alison Levin-Rector, Majid Ezzati, and Christopher JL Murray. 2011.
“Falling behind: life expectancy in US counties from 2000 to 2007 in an international context.”
Population Health Metrics 9:16.

Ludwig, Jens and Douglas L Miller. 2007. "Does Head Start Improve Children's Life Chances?
Evidence from a Regression Discontinuity Design." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 122(1):
159-208.

Lynch, John, George Davey Smith, Sam Harper, Marianne Hillemeier, Nancy Ross, George A.
Kaplan, and Michael Wolfson. 2004. “Is income inequality a determinant of population health? Part
1. A systematic review.” Milbank Quarterly 82: 5-99.



                                               29
Marmot, Michael G., George Davey Smith, Stephen Stansfeld, Chandra Patel, Fiona North,
Head, J., Ian White, Eric Brunner, and Amanda Feeny. 1991. “Health inequalities among British
civil servants: the Whitehall II study.” Lancet 337(8754): 1387-93.

Meara, Ellen R., Seth Richards, and David M. Cutler. 2008. “The Gap Gets Bigger: Changes in
Mortality and Life Expectancy, by Education, 1981–2000.” Health Affairs 27(2): 350–60.

Mellor, Jennifer. M., and Jeffrey Milyo. 2002. “Income Inequality and Health Status in the United
States: Evidence from the Current Population Survey.” The Journal of Human Resources 37(3),
510–539.

Meyer, Bruce D. and Laura R. Wherry. 2015. “Saving Teens: Using a Policy Discontinuity to
Estimate the Effects of Medicaid Eligibility.” NBER Working Paper #18309.

Miller, Sarah and Laura R. Wherry. 2015. “The Long-Term Health Effects of Early Life
Medicaid Coverage.” Working Paper.

Montez, Jennifer K. and Anna Zajacova. 2013. “Explaining the widening education gap in mortality
among U.S. white women.” Journal of Health and Social Behavior 54(2): 166-82.

Montez, Jennifer K. and Lisa F. Berkman. 2014. “Trends in the Educational Gradient of Mortality
Among US Adults Aged 45 to 84 Years: Bringing Regional Context Into the Explanation.”
American Journal of Public Health 104(1): e82-90.

Murphy, Sherry L., Jiaquan Xu, and Kenneth D. Kochanek. (2013) "Deaths: final data for 2010."
National vital statistics reports: from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National
Center for Health Statistics, National Vital Statistics System 61, no. 4: 1-117.

Murray, Christopher JL, Sandeep C. Kulkarni, Catherine Michaud, Niels Tomijima, Maria T.
Bulzacchelli, Terrell J. Iandiorio, and Majid Ezzati. 2006. "Eight Americas: investigating
mortality disparities across races, counties, and race-counties in the United States." PLoS Med 3,
no. 9: e260.

NRC. 2015. "The Growing Gap in Life Expectancy by Income: Implications for Federal
Programs and Policy Responses." National Research Council, Committee on the Long-Run
Macroeconomic Effects of the Aging U.S. Population.

Olshansky, Jay S., Toni Antonucci, Lisa Berkman, Robert H. Binstock, Axel Boersch-Supan, John
T. Cacioppo, Bruce A. Carnes, Laura L. Carstensen, Linda P. Friend, Dana P. Goldman, James
Jackson, Martin, Kohli, John Rother, Yuhui Zheng, and John Rowe. 2012. “Differences In Life
Expectancy Due To Race And Educational Differences Are Widening, And Many May Not Catch
Up.” Health Affairs 31(8): 1803-1813.

Pappas, Gregory, Susan Queen, Wilbur Hadden, and Gail Fisher. 1993. “The increasing disparity
in mortality between socioeconomic groups in the United States, 1960 and 1986.” The New
England Journal of Medicine 329: 103-109.



                                                30
Pijoan-Mas, Josep and Jose-Victor Rios-Rull. 2014. “Heterogeneity in Expected Longevities.”
Demography 51(6): 2075-102.

Preston, Samuel H., and Irma T. Elo. (1995). “Are educational differentials in adult mortality
increasing in the United States?” Journal of Aging and Health 7(4), 476-496.

Rostron, Brian L., Elizabeth Arias, John L. Boies. 2010. “Education reporting and classification
on death certificates in the United States.” National Center for Health Statistics. Vital Health Stat
2 (151):1-21.

Singh, Gopal K. and Mohammad Siahpush. 2006 “Widening socioeconomic inequalities in US
life expectancy, 1980-200.” International Journal of Epidemiology 35(4): 969-979.

Smith, James P. 1999. “Healthy bodies and thick wallets: The dual relation between health and
economic status.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 13(2): 145-166.

Smith, James P. 2005. "Consequences and Predictors of New Health Events," NBER Chapters,
in: Analyses in the Economics of Aging, pages 213-240 National Bureau of Economic Research,
Inc.

Smith, James P. 2007. “The impact of socioeconomic status on health over the life-course.”
Journal of Human Resources 42 (4): 739-764.

US Census Bureau. Undated. “The American Community Survey (ACS) Mail Questionnaire
from 2005 to 2008.” http://www2.census.gov/programs-
surveys/acs/methodology/questionnaires/SQuestChanges05to08.pdf.

Waldron, Hilary. 2007. “Trends in mortality differentials and life expectancy for male Social
Security-covered workers, by socioeconomic status.” Social Security Bulletin 67(3).

Waldron, Hilary. 2013. “Mortality differentials by lifetime earnings decile: Implications for
evaluations of proposed Social Security law changes.” Social Security Bulletin 73(1).

Wang, Haidong, Austin E Schumacher, Carly E Levitz, Ali H Mokdad, and Christopher JL
Murray. 2013. “Left behind: widening disparities for males and females in US county life
expectancy, 1985–2010.” Population Health Metrics 11(1): 8.

Wherry, Laura R. and Bruce D. Meyer. "Saving Teens: Using a Policy Discontinuity to Estimate
the Effects of Medicaid Eligibility." Journal of Human Resources (2015).

Wilkinson, Richard G. 1996. Unhealthy Societies: The Afflictions of Inequality. New York:
Routledge.

J. Wilmoth, C. Boe, M. Barbieri, (2011) “Geographic differences in life expectancy at age 50 in
the United States compared with other high-income countries.” in: Eileen M. Crimmins, Samuel



                                                 31
H. Preston, and Barney Cohen (eds.), International Differences in Mortality at Older Ages:
Dimensions and Sources, Washington, D.C.: National Academies Press, pp. 337-372 (2011)




                                              32
Figures and Tables

Figure 1: Life expectancy at birth by gender and year




Notes: Data source: HMD (2015).




                                               33
Figure 2: Life expectancy at birth across poverty percentiles




Notes: Counties are ranked by their poverty rate in 1990, 2000, and 2010, and divided into groups each
representing about 1% of the overall population. Each marker represents the life expectancy at birth in a
given county group. Lines are fitted using OLS regression. For 2000, markers are omitted and only the
regression line is shown. Table A2 provides magnitudes for individual life expectancy estimates and for
the slopes of the fitted lines.




                                                    34
Figure 3: 3-year mortality rates across groups of counties ranked by their poverty rate




Notes: 3-year mortality rates for four different age groups are plotted across county groups ranked by
their poverty rate. For further details, see the comments below Figure 2 and in the text. Mortality rates in
2000 and 2010 are age-adjusted using the 1990 population, i.e. they account for changes in the age
structure within age, gender, and county groups since 1990. Table A3 provides magnitudes for individual
mortality estimates and for the slopes of the fitted lines.




                                                     35
Figure 4: Fraction of the black and white U.S. population reporting multiple races




Notes: Panel (A) plots the fraction of people reporting multiple races among all those reporting that they
are black (or white) alone or in combination, in the 2000 and 2010 Census. Panel (B) forecasts the
fraction reporting multiple races among future birth cohorts. Assuming that the exponential growth
continues, we fit a linear trend through the log fraction reporting multiple races for birth cohorts 1970 to
2010 in the 2010 Census and project this trend up to the 2080 birth cohort. The projected fraction reaches
unity in 2051 for blacks and in 2081 for whites.




                                                     36
Figure 5: 3-year white and black mortality rates across poverty percentiles, based on single and
multiple race population counts




                                               37
38
Notes: 3-year mortality rates for four different age groups are plotted separately for whites and African-
Americans across county groups ranked by their overall poverty rate. For further details see the comments
below Figure 2 and in the text. Green circles represent mortality rates constructed as the ratio of race-
specific death counts in the Vital Statistics divided by single race population counts in the 2010 Census.
The mortality rates represented by red squares are based on the same death counts, but divided by
population counts including multiple race reports. Mortality rates in 2000 and 2010 are age-adjusted using
the 1990 population, i.e. they account for changes in the age structure within age, gender, race, and
county groups since 1990.




                                                   39
Figure 6: Fraction that ever smoked in old and young population by poverty status and gender,
1990-2010




Notes: Smoking rates in the overall old and young adult U.S. population, divided by poverty status, are
plotted from 1990 to 2010. Lines are fitted based on OLS regressions. Data source is the National Health
Interview Survey.




                                                   40
Appendix
Figure A1: 1-year mortality rates by age, overall U.S. 1990-2010




Notes: 1-year age-specific mortality rates are plotted for the overall U.S., unlike other figures in this paper
which focus on 3-year mortality rates across county groups. Data source is HMD (2015).




                                                      41
Figure A2: County group characteristics




Notes: Median and per capita income are adjusted for inflation and reported in constant 1999 dollars.
Median income refers to counties’ median income averaged across counties in each county group,
weighted by counties’ population size. The outliers in panel (d) are driven by New York County, NY, a
big county with both a high poverty rate and high per capita income.




                                                  42
Figure A3: 2010-1990 change in life expectancy at birth, in years and in percent of 1990 level




Notes: The left panel plots the change in life expectancy at birth between 2010 and 1990 for county
groups ranked by their poverty rate (for the levels in 1990 and 2010 see Fig. 2). The right panel shows the
same changes, as percent of the 1990 level. Lines are fitted using OLS regression. The fitted line in the
left panel has a slope of 0.004 (SE=0.004, p=0.317) for men and for women a slope of -0.009 (SE=0.004,
p=0.02). The slope in the right figure is 0.012 (SE=0.006, p=0.066) for men and -0.01 (SE=0.005,
p=0.04) for women. For further explanations, see the notes below Fig. 2.




                                                    43
Figure A4: 2010-1990 change in life expectancy across poverty percentiles at birth and at age 50




Notes: The left panel plots the county group-specific change in life expectancy between 2010 and 1990 as
a percent of the 1990 level (as in Fig. A3). The right panel shows the same percentage changes for life
expectancy at age 50. Lines are fitted using OLS regression. For further explanations, see the notes below
Fig. 2.




                                                   44
Figure A5: 3-year mortality rates across groups of counties ranked by their poverty rate in 1990




Notes: This figure replicates Fig. 4, holding the 1990 poverty rank of county groups fixed. Counties are
ranked and divided into groups in 1990, and these groups are followed over time without reordering until
2010. For further explanations, see comments below Fig. 4.




                                                   45
Figure A6: 1-year mortality rates at age 20-24, by race, based on different population counts




Notes: These figures show race and gender-specific mortality rates (death counts divided by population
counts) at age 20 to 24, based on same death counts but using different population counts. For the blue
dots, these death counts are divided by single race population counts. The red squares, on the other hand,
are based on population counts that include multiple race reports in 2000 and 2010. This results in a larger
population denominator and thereby in a lower mortality rate. The black triangles, instead, use the
Vintage 2010 Bridged-Race Postcensal Population Estimates provided by the National Center for Health
Statistics (NCHS). These bridged estimates divide the entire population into four race categories (white,
black, native American, and Asian), with the majority of multiple race or “other race” reports being
assigned to Hispanic white. This inflates the white population denominator and attenuates the white
mortality rate.




                                                    46
Figure A7: 1-year mortality rates for non-Hispanic whites, based on different population counts




Notes: These figures show death rates for non-Hispanic white females and males across age groups, based
on different population counts. For further comments see the notes below the previous figure.



                                                  47
Figure A8: Size of U.S.-born Hispanic white birth cohorts born 1969-1971 (1990=100)




Notes: The sample consists of Hispanic whites born in the U.S. between 1969--1971. The population size
is plotted relative to 1990. The size of this group should shrink over time, as people die and as more
people might leave the country than return (after having left beforehand). Data sources are the 1990/2000
Census and the 2006-2010 ACS. In 2008, the question regarding Hispanic origin was changed, likely
extending the measure to U.S.-born Hispanics who had not identified as Hispanics before. A comparison
with the 2010 Census is not possible, since information about the respondent’s birth place is not available
in the short form used for that Census wave.




                                                    48
Figure A9: 3-year mortality rates ranked using alternative county characteristics




                                                49
Notes: These figures replicate the age-specific mortality rates across county groups shown in Figure 3,
using alternative characteristics to rank counties. The rankings for median income and life expectancy are
reversed, such that a higher ranking refers to a lower value. The ranking by life expectancy requires life
expectancy estimates at the county level, which are provided by IHME (2013). Mortality rates in 2000
and 2010 are age-adjusted using the 1990 population.



                                                   50
Table A1: Changes in life expectancy and population share by education and individual counties


     A. By education groups (following Olshansky et al. 2012)
                                                                  <12 years of          16+ years of
     White non-Hispanic females, age 25-84                         education             Education
     Change in life expectancy at birth, 1990-2008 (*)                -3.94                 4.12
     Population share in 1990                                        7.10%                 9.75%
     Population share in 2010                                        2.42%                10.90%
     Percentage change in population share                          -65.97%               11.71%
     (*)
           Reported by Olshansky et al. (2012)


     B. By counties ranked in terms of life expectancy change (following Wang et al. 2013)

                                                                   20 counties           20 counties
                                                                  with strongest        with strongest
                                                                    decrease              increase
                                                                   in female life expectancy from
                                                                            1985 to 2010
     Change in female life expectancy at birth, 1985-2010 (
     **)                                                              -2.68                 6.16
     Combined population share in 1985                                0.18%                 4.50%
     Average population growth, 1985-2010                            -6.15%               101.39%
     Population weighted population growth, 1985-2010                -1.51%                44.68%
     US population growth, 1985-2010                                           30.39%
     (**)
            Reported by Wang et al. (2013)



Notes: This table shows life expectancy and population changes for different subgroups defined by
education and location that were used in Olshansky et al. (2012) and Wang et al. (2013). The changes in
life expectation are taken from the respective publication, while the population growth estimates are the
authors’ calculations based on US Census data.




                                                    51
Table A2: Life expectancy for selected county groups and slope of regression lines, 1990 vs. 2010

                                              Life expectancy at birth across gender, years, and county groups
                                                       Males                                    Females
                                              1990              2010                   1990               2010
                                         value std. err. value std. err.         value std. err. value std. err.
                                          (1)      (2)      (3)       (4)         (5)        (6)      (7)      (8)

                         (a) LE at birth by poverty ranking of county group
                         1             75.32     0.13     79.86     0.11               80.20       0.13      83.57      0.10

                         25             73.07       0.15      77.60       0.12         79.96       0.14      82.23      0.11

                         50             72.88       0.17      75.87       0.12         79.81       0.16      80.74      0.12

                         75             70.36       0.19      75.29       0.14         78.11       0.18      80.37      0.13

                         100            69.23       0.16      73.78       0.13         77.65       0.14      79.59      0.12

                         (b) Slope of fitted regression line
                                          Slope 1990         Slope 2010                   Slope 1990            Slope 2010
                                            -0.0570            -0.0518                      -0.0300               -0.0383

                         (c) p-value of test Slope1990=Slope2010
                                                     0.2748                                            0.0436

Notes: Panel (a) shows life expectancy along with standard errors for the counties in the 1st, 25th, 50th, 75th and 100th poverty percentile, as plotted
in Fig. 2. Panel (b) reports the slopes of the fitted regression lines plotted in Figure 2. Panel (c) reports the p-value of the difference between the
two slopes.




                                                                           52
Table A3: Age-specific mortality in the richest and poorest county groups and slope of regression lines, 1990 vs. 2010

                             3-year mortality (per 1,000) in 5% of the population living in
                      counties with lowest poverty rate        counties with highest poverty rate               Slope of fitted regression line
                           1990               2010                   1990                2010                                        p-value of
                      rate    std. err.  rate    std. err.     rate     std. err.   rate    std. err.           1990        2010      difference
                       (1)       (2)      (3)       (4)         (5)        (6)       (7)       (8)               (9)         (10)        (11)

 Males
 Age 0-4              2.38      0.07       1.32      0.05          4.49      0.09       2.39      0.07          0.020       0.009       <0.001
 Age 5-19             1.31      0.03       0.86      0.03          2.89      0.04       1.52      0.03          0.015       0.006       <0.001
 Age 20-49            5.23      0.04       4.46      0.04         12.44      0.07       8.56      0.06          0.068       0.034       <0.001
 Age 50+             77.74      0.23      53.93      0.19        113.10      0.27      90.10      0.25          0.274       0.288       0.734
 Age 65+            154.96      0.50     108.25      0.43        185.41      0.49     147.15      0.45          0.246       0.322       0.096

 Females
 Age 0-4              1.91      0.07       1.17      0.05          3.61      0.09       2.04      0.07          0.017       0.008       <0.001
 Age 5-19             0.62      0.02       0.42      0.02          1.10      0.03       0.67      0.02          0.004       0.002       <0.001
 Age 20-49            2.66      0.03       2.34      0.03          5.19      0.04       4.80      0.04          0.023       0.021       0.665
 Age 50+             72.27      0.20      58.42      0.18         84.80      0.21      76.76      0.20          0.097       0.157       0.046
 Age 65+            132.35      0.39     109.46      0.35        136.18      0.35     124.04      0.34          0.052       0.155       0.007

Notes: Columns (1) to (8) show mortality rates for the bottom and top ventile of county groups, as plotted in Fig. 3 (age group 65+ is added), along
with standard errors. Columns (9) and (10) report the slope of the fitted regression lines for 1990 and 2010 in Fig. 3, and (11) reports the p-value
of the difference between the two slopes.




                                                                        53
