NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE EFFECT OF WEIGHT ON LABOR MARKET OUTCOMES:
AN APPLICATION OF GENETIC INSTRUMENTAL VARIABLES
Petri Böckerman
John Cawley
Jutta Viinikainen
Terho Lehtimäki
Suvi Rovio
Ilkka Seppälä
Jaakko Pehkonen
Olli Raitakari
Working Paper 22200
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22200

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2016
The Young Finns Study has been financially supported by the Academy of Finland: grants
134309 (Eye), 126925, 121584, 124282, 129378 (Salve), 117787 (Gendi), and 41071 (Skidi), the
Social Insurance Institution of Finland, Kuopio, Tampere and Turku University Hospital Medical
Funds (grant 9N035 and X51001), Juho Vainio Foundation, Paavo Nurmi Foundation, Finnish
Foundation of Cardiovascular Research and Finnish Cultural Foundation, Tampere Tuberculosis
Foundation and Emil Aaltonen Foundation. The use of linked data is supported by the
Palkansaaja Foundation. Two of the authors acknowledge the financial support from the Yrjö
Jahnsson foundation (grants 6646 and 6664). We thank Jani-Petri Laamanen for helpful
discussant comments. Cawley thanks the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation for an Investigator
Award in Health Policy Research. We thank Barton Willage for research assistance. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Petri Böckerman, John Cawley, Jutta Viinikainen, Terho Lehtimäki, Suvi Rovio, Ilkka
Seppälä, Jaakko Pehkonen, and Olli Raitakari. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The Effect of Weight on Labor Market Outcomes: an Application of Genetic Instrumental
Variables
Petri Böckerman, John Cawley, Jutta Viinikainen, Terho Lehtimäki, Suvi Rovio, Ilkka Seppälä,
Jaakko Pehkonen, and Olli Raitakari
NBER Working Paper No. 22200
April 2016
JEL No. D62,I1,I12,J01,J24,J3,J7
ABSTRACT
The increase in the prevalence of obesity worldwide has led to great interest in the economic
consequences of obesity, but valid and powerful instruments for obesity, which are needed to
estimate its causal effects, are rare. This paper contributes to the literature by using a novel
instrument: genetic risk score, which reflects the predisposition to higher body mass index across
many genetic loci. We estimate IV models of the effect of BMI on labor market outcomes using
Finnish data that have many strengths: genetic information, measured body mass index, and
administrative earnings records that are free of the problems associated with non-response, selfreporting error or top-coding.
The first stage of the IV models indicate that genetic risk score is a powerful instrument, and the
available evidence from the genetics literature is consistent with instrument validity. The results
of the IV models indicate weight reduces earnings and employment and increases social income
transfers, although we caution that the results are based on small samples, and are sensitive to
specification and subsample.
Petri Böckerman
Turku School of Economics
Finland
petri.bockerman@labour.fi
John Cawley
2312 MVR Hall
Department of Policy Analysis and Management
and Department of Economics
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14853
and NBER
JHC38@cornell.edu
Jutta Viinikainen
Jyväskylä University
School of Business and Economics
Finland
jutta.viinikainen@jyu.fi
Terho Lehtimäki
University of Turku
terho.lehtimaki@uta.fi

Suvi Rovio
Turku, Finland
suvi.rovio@utu.fi
Ilkka Seppälä
University of Tampere
Finland
ilkka.seppala@uta.fi
Jaakko Pehkonen
Jyväskylä University
School of Business and Economics
Finland
jaakko.k.pehkonen@jyu.fi
Olli Raitakari
University of Turku and
Turku University Hospital
Finland
olli.raitakari@utu.fi

Introduction
The prevalence of obesity, defined as a body mass index (or BMI, which is
calculated as weight in kg divided by height in m squared) of 30 or higher, has risen
dramatically in many countries in the past several decades (NCD Risk Factor
Collaboration, 2016; OECD, 2014). Economists have shown considerable interest in
the economic consequences of obesity, in particular whether obesity lowers wages or
reduces the probability of employment (see the reviews in Averett, 2011; Averett,
2014; and Cawley, 2015). Obesity could result in worse labor market outcomes for
several reasons; e.g. it has long been established that obesity worsens health (Hu,
2008) which may lower productivity and thus wages, or there may be obesity-related
discrimination in the labor market (Puhl, 2011; Rooth, 2009).
Correlations between weight and labor market outcomes are difficult to
interpret. They reflect not only any impact of weight on labor market outcomes, but
also any reverse causality that would arise if low income results in weight gain (see
e.g. Schmeiser, 2009 and Akee et al., 2013), and influence of omitted variables (e.g.
rate of time preference; people who are myopic may be heavier and also lowerproductivity workers).
Several studies have used the method of instrumental variables to estimate the
causal effect of weight on labor market outcomes. Most have instrumented for
respondent weight using the weight of a biological relative; e.g. Cawley (2004),
Brunello and D’Hombres (2007), Kline and Tobias (2008), and Lindeboom et al.
(2010). This approach takes advantage of the substantial genetic variation in weight;
genetics studies estimate a strong heritable component of BMI, roughly 40-70%
(Barsh et al., 2000; Pietilainen et al., 1999; Locke et al., 2015).

2

The gradually increasing availability of genetic data has raised the possibility
of more accurate instruments that measure a genetic predisposition to obesity. In
theory, information about individual genes can be used as instruments, taking
advantage of the natural experiment known as Mendelian Randomization, which
refers to the random assignment of an individual’s genotype at conception (von Hinke
Kessler Scholder et al., 2016; Tyrrell et al. 2016). One study (Norton and Han, 2008)
used genetic information as an instrument for weight to estimate the effect of weight
on labor market outcomes, although the specific approach was later called into
question as relatively weak and likely invalid (Cawley, Han, and Norton, 2011; von
Hinke Kessler Scholder et al., 2016). The problem is that the six single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs)1 that were used as instruments all influenced the
neurotransmitters dopamine and serotonin and thus were only weakly associated with
weight and were associated with many other things that could affect labor market
outcomes (such as education and depression).
The contribution of this study is as follows. The most important contribution is
that we advance the literature by estimating IV models of obesity on labor market
outcomes using genetic instruments. The specific instrument used in this paper is
based on the findings of the genetics literature; specifically, our instrument is a
genetic risk factor score that takes into account 32 SNPs that have robustly and
significantly (p < 1.0 x 10-8) been found to influence obesity in genome-wide
association studies involving very large population samples. This makes for a stronger
instrument. Moreover, the genetics literature fails to find a link between these SNPs
and other, non-obesity-related characteristics that could affect labor market outcomes.
Places where DNA differ between people are called polymorphisms, and a single nucleotide
polymorphism or SNP is a single base-pair variation in DNA. Humans have two copies of each
chromosome, so they have two alleles, or versions, of each SNP that may be the same (homozygous) or
different (heterozygous). See Appendix A of von Hinke Kessler Scholder et al. (2012).
1

3

Thus, the instrument is also arguably more valid than past genetic instruments used in
this context. Moreover, a recent study used it as an example of a powerful and valid
application of genes as instruments (von Hinke Kessler Scholder et al., 2016).
This study has two other advantages over the previous literature on the effect
of weight on labor market outcomes. First, it uses data on measured weight and
height instead of self-reported weight and height; thus, we avoid the problems arising
from reporting error in weight such as inefficiency and bias (see Cawley, Maclean et
al., 2015; Courtemanche et al., 2015). Second, this paper uses administrative data on
earnings, which likewise avoids problems associated with refusal to report, and
reporting error in, wages and salaries.
We use data from Finland. The prevalence of obesity in Finland is 20.9%
among adult men and 22.3% among adult women (Ng et al., 2014). This is roughly
two-thirds the prevalence of obesity in the U.S. but is similar to that in other Western
European countries. The Finnish labor markets are comparable to those of other
countries in Western Europe, in that the employment rate and female labor market
participation are high, with similar labor market institutions such as collective wage
bargaining and binding minimum wages. Moreover, previous studies have established
that there is a significant negative correlation between weight and labor market
outcomes in Finland (Sarlio-Lähteenkorva et al., 2004; Johansson et al., 2009), as
there is for many other countries of Western Europe (e.g. Brunello and D’Hombres,
2007; Averett, 2014).

Data
We link data from three sources: 1) the Cardiovascular Young Finns Study
(YFS); 2) the Finnish Longitudinal Employer-Employee Data (FLEED) of Statistics
4

Finland (SF); and 3) the Longitudinal Population Census (LPC) of SF. The merge is
executed using unique personal identifiers, which is exact matching; i.e. there are no
misreported ID codes. As a result, this paper avoids problems created by errors in
record linkages (e.g. Ridder and Moffitt, 2007).
The Cardiovascular Young Finns Study (YFS) began in 1980 with the goal of
examining how youthful health behaviors, as well as biological and psychological
factors, contribute to the risk of cardiovascular diseases in adulthood.2 Subjects in six
age cohorts (aged 3, 6, 9, 12, 15 and 18 years) were randomly chosen from the five
university hospital districts of Finland using the national population register
(Raitakari et al. 2008).3 The sample is relatively small – 3,596 persons participated in
the study at baseline – but the richness of the data are a strong offsetting advantage.
Eight waves of data have been collected, starting with baseline in 1980 and most
recently in 2011-12, with response rates between 60 and 80%.4 We use data from the
2001, 2007 and 2011 waves, because we have labor market data only for 1990-2012
(as we explain below). The 1992 wave of YFS has relatively few observations,
because most of the sample was too young for full-time employment.
The YFS collects data through questionnaires, physical measurements and
blood tests. Weight and height were measured in all waves of the YFS. All
anthropometric measurements, including those for weight and height, were conducted
by medical professionals at local health centers.
In 2009, genome-wide association studies (GWAS) were performed for YFS
subjects using the 670K Illumina platform (Sanger Institute, UK). Variation in over

YFS is the largest running follow-up study in Europe that evaluates cardiovascular risk factors from
childhood to adulthood.
3
Finland is divided into 20 hospital districts, five of which are university hospital districts.
4
For more information on the study design of the Cardiovascular Risk in Young Finns Study, see:
http://youngfinnsstudy.utu.fi/studydesign.html
2

5

670,000 known single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) was measured from 2,450
study subjects. Imputation for up to 2.5 million SNPs was performed using
information on Hapmap 2 by using MACH.5 All the SNPs were imputed with
excellent imputation quality (MACH r2>0.8).
We utilize a genetic risk score for BMI that is based on the 32 SNPs that were
found to be associated genome-wide significantly (p<1.0 x 10-8) with BMI by
Speliotes et al. (2010). The genetic risk score is equal to the sum of the alleles in all of
the 32 SNPs that put one at elevated risk of high BMI. This risk score has two major
advantages as an instrument: first, it is more powerful (explains more variation in
weight) than any of the SNPs individually, and second, it is arguably more valid
because it reduces the risk that an alternative biological pathway (pleiotropy) in any
individual SNP will bias the IV results (Palmer et al., 2012; Davey Smith, 2011). We
describe later the evidence from the genetics literature regarding the pleiotropy of the
individual SNPs.
The second dataset that we use, the Finnish Longitudinal Employer-Employee
Data (FLEED), is the source for labor market outcomes such as employment status,
salary, and other income, for 2001 to 2012. FLEED data come directly from tax and
other administrative registers that are collected and/or maintained by SF. Such
register-based data have much less measurement error than self-reports from surveys;
e.g. the income data in FLEED do not suffer from underreporting or recall error, nor
are they top coded. This accuracy increases the efficiency of the estimates, which is
particularly important for relatively small samples such as the YFS. The third dataset
that we use, the Longitudinal Population Census (LPC), is the source of information

For more information on the MACH method of imputation, see:
http://www.sph.umich.edu/csg/abecasis/mach/

5

6

on parental education. The linkage of both FLEED and LPC to the YFS data is
performed using unique personal identifiers that are available for both parents and
their children.

Methods
We estimate regressions of the following form:
Yi    Wi   X i   i

(1)

We examine four labor market outcomes Y. Out of a concern that short-term,
cross-sectional measures, such as yearly earnings or current employment status
contain idiosyncratic components that diminish the precision of the estimates (cf.
Dahl et al., 2011), Y is usually the average of the values over the period of the data
(2001 to 2012), although we examine year-specific outcomes as a robustness check.
The first labor market outcome we examine is the logarithm of the average of
the individual’s annual wage and salary earnings over the period that most
respondents were of working age: 2001-2012.
The second dependent variable we examine is labor market attachment;
specifically: the share of years employed during 2001-2012, with employment status
in a year classified by the individual’s status in the last week of the year in FLEED.
Retirement is not an issue for this sample; the YFS participants are between 35 and 50
years old in 2012.6
The third dependent variable we examine is an indicator variable for whether
the respondent received any social income transfers between 2001 and 2012. The

We considered examining an additional outcome: receipt of disability pension. This information is
included in the FLEED for each year, but YFS subjects are still relatively young during our observation
window of 2001-2010 (48 years old at the most) and thus receipt of disability pension is almost nonexistent among YFS subjects.
6

7

fourth and final dependent variable is the logarithm of the average of the individual’s
annual social income transfers. Social income transfers include unemployment
benefits and disability payments.7 We examine their receipt for two reasons: first,
social income transfers are an important component of total income in Finland, a
welfare state, and second, the amount of social income transfers is informative about
negative externalities related to obesity. For both wages/earnings and social income
transfers, the values in each year are converted to constant (inflation-adjusted) values
using the consumer price index (base year 2000) before the average is calculated.
Our regressor of interest is weight W. Our primary measure of weight is body
mass index or BMI, which is calculated as a person’s weight in kilograms divided by
height in meters squared – higher values indicating increased adiposity. In our
primary models, we use BMI measured in 2001, although as a robustness check we
also use BMI from 2007 and 2011. As robustness checks, we also estimate models in
which the measure of weight is an indicator variable for obesity (defined as a
BMI>=30) and weight in kilograms (controlling for height in meters). BMI and
weight in kg are limited measures of fatness because they ignore body composition
(see, e.g. Burkhauser and Cawley, 2008). For this reason, we also use waist-to-hip
ratio (WHR), a measure of central adiposity (i.e., fatness around the midsection).
The model also controls for other potential determinants of wages with the
vector of regressors X. These include: indicator variables for birth month and birth
year, gender, and height. Typically, wage equations include education as a regressor
(Mincer, 1974). In this case that practice is questionable, as obesity has been shown
to reduce academic performance and be associated with lower educational attainment,

We exclude parental leave benefits from social income transfers because they are not a “negative
indicator” in the same way as unemployment benefits and disability payments.

7

8

although findings are mixed (Sabia, 2007; von Hinke Kessler Scholder et al., 2012).
As a precaution, we omit respondent education from the set of regressors and instead
control for a measure of parental education: whether each parent has obtained at least
some university education (based on LPC data from 1980).
Wage equations sometimes include controls for cognitive ability, when the
data are available. Again, however, there is evidence that obesity lowers achievement
test scores (Sabia, 2007; Averett and Stifel, 2010). Another consideration in our case
is power; tests of cognitive ability were administered to only a subset of the YFS, so
to control for it we would have to restrict our sample. For these two reasons we do not
control for cognitive ability in our main regressions but we do control for it as an
extension (see Appendix A1 for description of the measures for cognitive skills).
The relatively small sample size of the YFS limits the statistical power when
estimating the model for subsamples. For this reason, the main models in our paper
are estimated for men and women pooled, and thus represent the average effect across
both sexes. However, previous studies of the impact of weight on labor market
outcomes have often found differences by gender (e.g. Cawley, 2004), so as an
extension we also estimate models separately by gender.
We first estimate equation (1) using ordinary least squares (OLS) in order to
estimate the conditional correlation of weight with labor market outcomes.8 However,
these correlations reflect not only any causal effect of weight on wages, but also
potentially reverse causality and the influence of omitted variables that may be
correlated with both weight and labor market outcomes.

For the binary outcome of receiving any social income transfers we estimate linear probability
models.
8

9

In order to estimate the causal effect of body weight on labor market
outcomes, we estimate models of instrumental variables (IV) in which our IV is the
genetic risk factor score for BMI.9 It is estimated that 40-70% of inter-individual
variability in BMI is due to genetic factors (e.g. Locke et al., 2015), so the genetic risk
factor score has the potential to be a powerful instrument.
The risk score we use is based on the 32 SNPs identified as linked to BMI in
Speliotes et al. (2010). The score equals the number of alleles associated with an
elevated risk of high BMI; because each person has at most two such alleles for each
of the 32 SNPs, the score ranges from 0 to 64. Speliotes et al. (2010) report that the
mechanisms by which these SNPs affect weight are through: 1) regulators of appetite
or energy balance; and 2) insulin secretion or response. Speliotes et al. (2010)
estimate that, collectively, the 32 loci that constitute our risk score explain 1.45% of
the inter-individual variation in BMI.10 (Even though it is estimated that 40-70% of
inter-individual variation in BMI is due to genetic factors, all currently-identified
SNPs explain just a few percentage points of the variation; in other words, the vast
majority of genetic variability in BMI remains unexplained; see, e.g., Locke et al.,
2015.) Each one-unit increase in the genetic risk factor score was associated with an
increase in BMI of 0.17 units, or roughly one-half of a kilogram of weight for an
average-sized adult (Speliotes et al., 2010). This same instrument (an unweighted risk
score based on the 32 SNPs associated with obesity by Speliotes et al., 2010) was also
used in von Hinke Kessler Scholder (2016) as an example of a valid and powerful

For all outcomes, the IV model is two-stage least squares.
Speliotes et al. (2010) reports that the SNP with the greatest explanatory power for BMI is FTO
(which explains 0.34% of variation in BMI), and that having the risky allele for FTO is associated with
20.3% greater odds of obesity. We have also estimated models in which the IV is a genetic risk score in
which each SNP is weighted based on their effect size in the meta-analysis; this was no more powerful
than the unweighted genetic risk score.
9

10

10

application of genes as instruments, and to estimate the effect of fat mass on academic
achievement and blood pressure.
A threat to the validity of genetic instruments is pleiotropy – genes having
more than one function (see, e.g., von Hinke Kessler Scholder, 2016; Cawley, Norton,
and Han, 2011). For example, if the same genes associated with higher weight were
also associated with unrelated traits or conditions that affect labor market outcomes,
then those genes are invalid instruments because the exclusion restriction is violated.
We investigate this possibility two ways. First, we check whether, in the
genetics literature, the genes significantly associated with BMI are also significantly
associated with other possible determinants of labor market outcomes. Locke et al.
(2015) and Speliotes et al. (2010) search the genetics literature for evidence of any
pleiotropy of the BMI-related SNPs. Of the 32 SNPs linked to BMI, four are also
associated with either Type 2 diabetes, fasting glucose, fasting insulin, or insulin
resistance, but this is not surprising because excess fat (by secreting the hormone
resistin) causes insulin resistance and thus diabetes (Hu, 2008); thus, these can be
considered part of the total effect of obesity. Three of the 32 SNPs are also associated
with height (Speliotes et al., 2010), so we control for height in all of our models. Two
of the 32 SNPs are associated with age of onset of menstruation (menarche), but this
too is related to fatness (Kaplowitz, 2008; Wang, 2002) and thus is not a threat to
validity. Two of the 32 SNPs are linked to cholesterol levels and one to blood
pressure; both of these conditions are strongly associated with obesity (e.g. Hu, 2008)
and thus can be considered part of the effect of obesity, but as an extension we reestimate our models controlling for genetic risk scores for total cholesterol,
triglycerides, and blood pressure. In summary, the few other phenotypes that the
obesity-related SNPs are associated with tend to be obesity-related comorbidities; the
11

exception is height, which we are able to control for directly.11 Thus, findings from
the genetics literature tend to be consistent with the identifying assumption.12
As a second check of the validity of the genetic instruments, we follow
McClellan et al. (1994) and divide our sample into those with an above-average and
below-average value of the instrument, and test whether the two groups significantly
differ in their observable characteristics that are likely correlated with the secondstage outcome. It is impossible to confirm the null hypothesis that the instrument is
uncorrelated with the second-stage error term, but a lack of correlation between the
instrument and observed variables would be consistent with the exclusion restriction.

Empirical Results
Summary Statistics
Appendix Table A2 contains summary statistics for our regression sample. In
2001, the mean weight of respondents was 74.7 kg and the mean BMI in 2001 was
25.1. The average annual earnings between 2001 and 2012 are €24,528, and the
average annual social income transfers are €1,846. The average share of years spent
employed between 2001 and 2012 is 85.7%. Relatively few have college-educated
mothers (7.2%) or college-educated fathers (10.2%), which is true for these birth-year
cohorts in Finland as a whole (OECD, 2015). The average genetic risk score for BMI
is 29.1, with a maximum in this sample of 41.8, out of a possible maximum of 64 (2
alleles for each of 32 SNPs).

In contrast, there was abundant evidence that the dopamine-related genes used as IVs for weight in
the previous literature were only very weakly associated with weight and were associated with a wide
range of conditions that were unrelated to weight and thus were a threat to validity; see the discussion
in Cawley, Han and Norton (2011).
12
A spreadsheet listing the SNPs associated with these conditions, and the relevant studies, is available
upon request.
11

12

OLS Estimates
OLS estimates are presented in Column 1 of Table 1. In OLS regressions, a one-unit
increase in BMI is associated with: 0.07% lower average earnings, 0.2% fewer years
spent employed, 0.1 percentage point lower probability of any social income
transfers, and 1.2% lower social income transfers, none of which are statistically
significant.

IV: Power and Validity
Because we seek to estimate the causal effect of BMI on labor market
outcomes, we next estimate IV models.
The genetic risk score for BMI is a powerful instrument for BMI. In the first
stage of IV, the F statistic on the instrument is 36.59 in the earnings regression, 39.94
in the employment regression, and 36.59 in the social income transfers regressions, all
of which far exceed the minimum standard of F=10 suggested in Staiger and Stock
(1997).13 In the first stage of IV, the marginal R-squared of the genetic risk score is
0.0167, which implies that the risk score explains 1.67% of the variation in BMI; this
is similar to the estimate in Sperliotes et al. (2010) that the risk score explains 1.77%
of inter-individual variation in BMI in their sample.
In order to examine the validity of the genetic instruments, Appendix Table
A3 presents means of the observed variables for those with above- and below-average
values of the BMI genetic risk score, and tests for equality of the means. As expected,
those with above-average genetic risk factor scores have a significantly higher BMI
(by 0.92 units); this is consistent with the instrument being powerful. The table also

We have also estimated IV models that use both the genetic risk score and its square as instruments.
The first-stage F-statistics in these models are lower (roughly 18), and the results are similar, so we
continue to estimate models that simply use the level of the risk score as the IV.
13

13

shows that those with a higher genetic risk score for obesity have significantly lower
earnings, which is consistent with BMI worsening labor market outcomes.
Regarding validity, there is no significant difference between those with high
and low genetic risk scores in terms of marital status, mother’s income, father’s
income, mother’s education, or father’s education. There is a significant difference in
two aspects of cognitive performance: rapid visual information processing and spatial
working memory. The literature searches of Speliotes et al. (2010) and Locke et al.
(2015) did not turn up evidence of a link between the BMI-related SNPs and
intelligence. There is also some evidence that obesity worsens academic test scores
(Sabia, 2007; Averett and Stifel, 2010), although von Hinke Kessler Scholder et al.
(2012) could not reject the null of no effect. In case these SNPs are associated with
intelligence through mechanisms other than weight, we, as a robustness check,
estimate a model that controls for the measures of cognition. (We do not control for it
in all models because it may be affected by weight, and we only have cognitive scores
for a subset of the already-small sample.)

IV Estimates
The coefficients from the IV models are presented in column 2 of Table 1.
They indicate that a one-unit increase in BMI is associated with 6.6% lower wages
and 1.7% fewer years employed. The standard deviation of BMI in the YFS data is
4.29; thus, a two-standard deviation increase in BMI is associated with 56.6% lower
wages and 14.59% fewer years employed.
A one-unit increase in BMI is also associated with a 2.9 percentage point
(3.5%) higher probability of receiving any social income transfers, and a 24.8%
increase in the amount of social income transfers.
14

Table 2 presents results of reduced-form models that regress labor market
outcomes on the instrument (BMI genetic risk score) directly, controlling for the same
set of regressors as earlier. The results are consistent with those of the IV models.
Raising the genetic risk score by one (meaning that an individual has one additional
allele that raises their risk of weight gain) is associated with 1.1% lower earnings,
0.3% fewer years of employment, a 0.5 percentage point (0.6%) higher probability of
receiving any social income transfers, and 4.1% higher amount of social income
transfers, all of which are statistically significant.

Extensions
We estimate several additional models to assess the robustness of the results.

Extension 1: Estimate Models Separately by Wave
In our main results we examine average labor market outcomes over the
period 2001-2012 in order to minimize the influence of idiosyncratic variation that
would diminish the precision of the estimates (cf. Dahl et al., 2011). As an extension
we estimate models for each wave of the YFS separately (2001, 2007, 2011),
regressing the labor market outcome for that year on BMI from that year and other
characteristics in that year (the exception is parental education, which is recorded on a
single date); these results are presented in Table 3.
With the smaller samples and reduced power that comes from examining each
wave separately, only one of the wave-specific estimates is statistically significant.
The IV model indicates that a one-unit increase in BMI lowers earnings by 17.9% in
2001, compared to 6.6% over 2001-2012. Both results are statistically significant at a
10% level. The estimated effect of BMI on employment is very similar for 2001
15

(-2.1%) and 2001-2012 (-1.7%), but the former is not statistically significant whereas
the latter is.
Although the point estimates in Table 3 are not significantly different from
those in Table 1, some are of the opposite sign. There are several possible
explanations for the difference in point estimates. For example, it could be the result
of idiosyncratic variation in labor market outcomes in a single year. Conversely,
contemporaneous weight (used in the wave-specific regressions) may be more
relevant than one’s historic weight to outcomes in that year.

Extension 2: Control for Genetic Predisposition to Obesity-Related Illnesses
A general concern about using genetic markers as IVs is that genes may affect
multiple things (pleiotropy). As an extension we control for the genetic risk score for
blood pressure, total cholesterol, and triglycerides (International Consortium for
Blood Pressure Genome-Wide Association Studies, 2011; Teslovich et al., 2010).
Table 4 shows that the resulting IV estimates are very similar after we control for
these additional genetic risk scores. For example, the IV models indicate that a oneunit increase in BMI reduces log average wages by 6.6% when we do not control for
the other risk scores, and by 6.7% when we do. A one-unit increase in BMI reduces
years spent employed by 1.7% when we do not control for the other genetic risk
scores, and by 1.5% when we do. Controlling for other genetic risk scores likewise
has only a small impact on the IV coefficient on BMI in the regressions concerning
social income transfers.

16

Extension 3: Control for Cognitive Ability
In the YFS, measures of cognitive skills are available for only a subset of the
sample (1,339 out of 2,062). In the main results of this paper, we exclude cognitive
skills from the set of regressors because they may be affected by obesity (e.g. Sabia
2007) and in order to avoid losing observations and thus statistical power. However,
as an extension we estimate models in which we control for the five measures of
cognitive performance: 1) overall cognitive performance 2) visual and episodic
memory and visuospatial associative learning; 3) reaction time; 4) rapid visual
information processing; and 5) spatial working memory. The results are presented in
Table A4.
In each case, the point estimate of the coefficient on BMI is smaller in
absolute magnitude. In three of the four cases, the coefficient is no longer
statistically significant. The coefficient on BMI in the social income transfers
regression remains significant, implying that a one-BMI unit increase raises social
income transfers by 20.9%.

Extension 4: Estimate Models Separately by Sex
Because of the relatively small sample size of the YFS, the main models in
this paper were estimated for men and women pooled. However, previous studies of
weight and labor market outcomes often found differences by sex; for example, there
tends to be a greater wage penalty for excess weight among women than men in the
U.S. (Cawley, 2004) and Finland (Johansson et al., 2009). For this reason, as an
extension we estimate models separately for men and women; see Appendix Tables
A5 (men) and A6 (women). Interestingly, the genetic risk score is a more powerful
instrument for men (F of 29-30) than women (F of 9-12). As found in earlier studies
of weight and wages, the point estimate of the IV coefficient on BMI is larger for
17

women than men; specifically, a one-unit increase in BMI is associated with 10.5%
lower wages for women compared to 4.8% lower wages for men. Neither is
statistically significant, however, presumably because of the smaller sample sizes
(1,109 women and 929 men).
The point estimates of the IV coefficient on BMI in the employment
regressions are similar for women and men; a one-unit increase in BMI lowers the
time spent working by 1.9% for women and 1.7% for men; neither is statistically
significant.
The impact of BMI on social welfare transfers is positive, large, and
statistically significant for men; a one-unit increase in BMI increases social welfare
transfers by 26.6%. For women, the estimate is similar, 30.0%, but is not statistically
significant. However, a one-unit increase in BMI raises the probability of receiving
any social income transfers by 5.2 percentage points (5.9%) among women.

Extension 5: Alternate Measures of Fatness: Obesity, Kg, Waist-to-Hip Ratio
As an extension, we estimate models for additional measures of fatness: an
indicator variable for obesity (BMI>=30), weight in kilograms (controlling for height
in meters), and waist-to-hip ratio (WHR). WHR is a measure of central adiposity, i.e.
fatness around the midsection. As a result, it is more accurate than BMI at predicting
adverse health consequences of fatness such as cardiovascular disease, diabetes, and
mortality (Hu, 2008; Heid et al., 2010). WHR is also a measure of attractiveness; a
low WHR is perceived as more attractive in women and a higher WHR is perceived
as more masculine for men (e.g. Singh, 1993; Pazhoohi and Liddle, 2012), and thus
any labor market discrimination on the basis of appearance may be more highly

18

correlated with WHR than BMI. Results are presented in Appendix Tables A7
(obesity), A8 (kg) and A9 (WHR).
Column 1 in each Table presents results from OLS models. Interestingly,
although the OLS coefficients on BMI were not statistically significant (in Table 1),
the OLS coefficients on several of the alternate measures of weight are statistically
significant. For example, obesity is associated with 13.5% lower wages and 3.2%
fewer years employed (Appendix Table A7), and a larger waist-to-hip ratio is
associated with lower earnings, less employment, and a larger amount of social
income transfers received (Appendix Table A9).
We use BMI genetic risk score as an instrument for the indicator for obesity
and for weight in kg (the F statistics far exceed 10 in each case). Appendix Table A7
presents IV results for the indicator for obesity. Results are generally consistent with
the IV models for BMI: obesity reduces earnings (by an implausibly large amount –
102.8%) and reduces the time spent employed by 26.6%. The IV estimates also
indicate that obesity raises the probability of receiving social income transfers by
45.7% and their amount by 386.7%.
Appendix Table A8 presents results for weight in kg. Again, the results are
consistent with the models for BMI. The BMI risk score is a powerful IV for weight
in kg (F of 37-41). The IV models indicate that an additional 10 kg of weight reduces
earnings by 22%, reduces the time spent employed by 6%, raises the probability of
receiving social income transfers by 10% and the amount of such transfers by 81%.
We instrument for WHR using a different genetic risk score – one that is
based on 16 known susceptibility loci for WHR (Heid et al., 2010). However, the
genetic risk score for WHR is not a sufficiently powerful instrument for WHR; i.e. the
F statistic in the first stage of IV is below 10 (specifically, between 5 and 6). Adding
19

the square of the waist-hip score as an additional instrument does not appreciably
raise the F statistic. The genetics literature suggests that WHR is 22%-61% heritable
(Heid et al., 2010); this is somewhat lower than the heritability of BMI (40-70%, see
Locke et al., 2015) but it is still sufficiently high that one would expect a complete
genetic risk score for WHR to be a powerful instrument. The most likely explanation
is that most of the SNPs that affect WHR have not yet been identified.14
Results for the IV models of WHR are provided in Appendix Table A9.
Although WHR was significantly correlated with labor market outcomes and the
amount of social income transfers in the OLS models, in IV models the IV
coefficients on WHR are not statistically significant (although the point estimates of
the IV coefficients are much larger than those of the OLS coefficients).
In order to investigate the relative importance of BMI and WHR for labor
market outcomes, we estimated reduced-form regressions of labor market outcomes
on both the genetic risk score for BMI and the genetic risk score for WHR. The
results are contained in Appendix Table A10. For all four outcomes, a higher genetic
risk score for BMI is associated with worse labor market performance. In addition,
those with a high genetic risk score for WHR spend fewer years employed and
receive more social income transfers; WHR risk score is not correlated with earnings
or the probability of receiving social income transfers. Thus, while genetic risk score
for BMI is more consistently associated with worse labor market outcomes, the
genetic risk score for WHR is also influential for certain important outcomes.

Heid et al. (2010) find that the loci and processes associated with body fat distribution (i.e. WHR)
are largely distinct from those that influence BMI; the loci identified with WHR in their study “display
no overlap with those shown to be associated with BMI…” (p. 954).
14

20

Discussion
There is a large literature on the economic consequences of obesity. Much of
the evidence about causal effects is based on IV models in which the instrument for
respondent weight is the weight of a biological relative. This paper contributes to the
literature by using a different instrument: a genetic risk score for obesity that is based
on the genetics literature and was suggested in a recent study as an example of a
powerful and valid application of genes as IVs (von Hinke Kessler Scholder et al.,
2016).
An additional advantage is that, to the best of our knowledge, this is the first
study of weight and labor market outcomes in which both the outcomes and the
weight variables are free of reporting error; i.e. the data include measured weight and
height and administrative records on earnings, employment, and social income
transfers. This implies that the estimates are relatively free of the problems of
coefficient bias and inflated standard errors that result from error in the dependent
and independent variables (Bound et al., 2001; Cawley et al., 2015; Courtemanche et
al., 2015).
The estimates of our IV model confirm those of the previous literature that
used the weight of a biological relative as an instrument: weight lowers wages and the
probability of employment. Specifically, our IV estimates indicate that an additional
unit of BMI lowers wages by 6.6% and reduces the share of years employed by 1.7%.
We also examine novel outcomes that relate to the negative externalities associated
with excess weight; we find that an additional unit of BMI increases the probability of
receiving social income transfers by 2.9 percentage points (3.5%) and raises the
amount of such social income transfers by 24.8%.
Reduced form models that regress outcomes directly on the genetic risk score
are also consistent with the hypothesis that additional weight worsens labor market
21

outcomes; raising the genetic risk score by one (meaning that an individual has one
additional allele that raises their risk of weight gain) is associated with lower
earnings, a lower probability of employment, a higher probability of receiving social
income transfers, and a higher amount of social income transfers received.
These findings are robust to some but not all permutations of the sample and
model. The IV results are robust to controlling for genetic risk of obesity-related
comorbidities such as high blood pressure, total cholesterol, and triglycerides. They
are also robust to replacing BMI with obesity (BMI>=30) or weight in kg (controlling
for height).
However, we caution that the sample is small (N=2,062), and thus when we
estimate models separately by wave only one of the IV coefficients is statistically
significant (although other coefficients are not significantly different from the
coefficients from the overall model). The same is generally true when we estimate
models separately by sex, although the IV model indicates that BMI raises the
probability of receiving any social income transfers by women, and raises the amount
of social income transfers received by men. Adding controls for cognitive ability
reduces the size of the sample, and the IV coefficients are not statistically significant.
The evidence that weight worsens labor market outcomes is consistent with
the previous literature that relied on other identification strategies. Using the weight
of a biological relative as an instrument for respondent weight, Cawley (2004) found
that the impact of weight on wages in the U.S. varied by race and gender. The greatest
impact was found for white females, among whom an additional 10 pounds lowered
wages by 2.8%. Using the same identification strategy and data from nine countries in
Europe, Brunello and D’Hombres (2007) found that a 10% increase in BMI reduced
the wages of females by 1.86% and those of males by 3.27% for the nine nations
22

pooled. One of the nine nations represented in their data is Finland; they estimate that
an additional unit of BMI reduces wages among women by 3.6% (which is
statistically significant at the 10% level) and reduces wages among men by 1.2%
(which is not statistically significant). Our estimates for Finnish men and women
pooled indicate that a unit of BMI reduces wages by 6.6%; the results estimated
separately by sex are not statistically significant but the point estimates are larger for
women (10.5%) than men (4.8%), although the difference by sex is not statistically
significant.
Our results can also be compared to the previous research on the effect of
weight on employment. Lindeboom et al. (2010) use the weight of a biological
relative as an instrument and estimate the impact of weight on the probability of
employment in the Great Britain; they cannot reject the null hypothesis of no effect.
A recent study of the impact of weight on employment (Reichert, 2015) used a novel
identification strategy: random assignment to a weight loss intervention that offered
monetary rewards for weight loss, as opposed to assignment to a control group. The
IV estimates suggest that a 1 percentage point reduction in BMI raises the probability
of employment for women by 2.1 percentage points (2.8%) but has no impact on the
employment probability of men. A limitation is the small sample size (N=680) and
uncertain generalizability (subjects were all obese and drawn from four medical
rehabilitation clinics in Germany).
A recent study by some of the same authors as this study examined the impact
of birth weight (instrumented using the genetic risk score for birth weight) on adult
earnings (Pehkonen et al., 2015). The authors could not reject the null hypothesis of
no effect; the IV estimates were large, but imprecise.

23

This paper also includes the first test for a causal effect of waist-to-hip ratio on
labor market outcomes. Past studies estimating the impact of weight on labor market
outcomes primarily use as their measure of weight BMI or clinical classifications
based on BMI. However, BMI is a limited measure of fatness in that it does not
actually measure fat; it does not distinguish between fat mass and lean mass (see
Burkhauser and Cawley, 2008). WHR, in contrast, is a measure of central adiposity or
fatness and may be a better measure of how excess weight affects health or
appearance. The IV models suggest that a higher WHR increases the amount of social
income transfers; however, the genetic risk score for WHR was a relatively weak
instrument. Reduced form models indicate that not only the genetic risk score for
BMI, but also the genetic risk score for WHR, are associated with worse labor market
outcomes. This confirms that BMI is a limited measure of fatness, and that other
measures of fatness may add to the explanatory power of economic models and offer
additional insights.
If, as many of these studies suggest, weight worsens labor market outcomes,
an important question is why. One mechanism seems to be discrimination on the basis
of appearance. Rooth (2009) conducted an audit study, sending matched resumes to
job openings in Sweden, which were accompanied by photos of the fictitious
applicants, the apparent weight of whom was manipulated by computer photo editing
software. The apparently obese applicant was significantly less likely to be contacted
for a job interview than their lighter equivalent; this disadvantage equaled 8
percentage points for women and 6 percentage points for men. Given that the resumes
of these pairs were constructed to be as similar as possible, this suggests that
employer hiring decisions are influenced by applicants’ (apparent) weight. Other
evidence is consistent with bias in pay; Gregory and Ruhm (2011) estimate IV models
24

of weight on wages, using the weight of a biological relative as an instrument, and
find for U.S. data that weight begins reducing wages for women at a low level of BMI
(roughly 23); they interpret this as evidence that weight reduces wages not because of
impaired health or lower productivity but because of employers’ preferences for a
slender appearance.
This is not to say that none of the impact of weight on labor market outcomes
operates through health and productivity. Excess fat raises the risk of Type II
diabetes, heart attack, stroke, and cancer (Hu, 2008). Morbidly obese patients who
undergo bariatric surgery report after the ensuing weight loss that they are able to get
more work done, do higher quality work, and make fewer mistakes (Sockalingam et
al., 2015). Thus, both discrimination and health impacts are likely explanations for
why weight worsens labor market outcomes.
Our findings have several policy implications. To the extent that individuals
face discrimination in the labor market on the basis of their weight, policymakers may
wish to consider including obesity as a protected class in anti-discrimination laws. To
the extent that weight worsens health, which in turn worsens labor market outcomes,
this implies that the cost-effectiveness of obesity prevention and treatment programs
should take into account the labor market gains that can result from averting and
reducing obesity.
We recognize a variety of limitations to the paper. It is always important to
note when using the method of IV that important assumptions regarding the validity
of the instruments are not testable. Although the genetics literature did not find
evidence of pleiotropy – i.e. the SNPs that are used in the genetic risk score for BMI
were generally not found to be linked to non-obesity-related outcomes – the failure to
reject the null hypothesis of no effect is not the same as proving the null. We
25

acknowledge that the exact function and mechanisms of these SNPs are not known
with certainty. Although the instrument we use was offered in a recent study as an
example of a powerful and valid application of genes as IVs (von Hinke Kessler
Scholder et al., 2016), that study also pointed out the need for caution regarding the
assumption of instrument validity.
The Local Average Treatment Effect (LATE) that we measure concerns the
impact of genetic variation in weight; it is possible that variation due to other sources
could have a different impact on labor market outcomes. Moreover, our IVs measure
only the genetic variation due to the 32 SNPs identified by Speliotes et al. (2010),
which affect weight through regulators of appetite or energy balance, or insulin
secretion or response. It is possible that genetic variation in weight that operates
through other mechanisms (e.g. resting metabolic rate, or propensity to add muscle
mass) could also exhibit a different relationship with labor market outcomes.
Our data are from Finland, a relatively small nation, which may raise some
issues of generalizability, but it is a highly economically developed country that is a
member of the European Union and shares many labor market characteristics with the
rest of Western Europe. Another limitation of this paper is its modest sample size,
which limits our ability to estimate models separately by survey wave or by sex.
Despite these limitations, the strengths of the data, such as genetic information,
measured weight and height, and administrative data on wages, employment, and
social income transfers, make it uniquely well-suited to answer this research question.

26

Acknowledgements
The Young Finns Study has been financially supported by the Academy of
Finland: grants 134309 (Eye), 126925, 121584, 124282, 129378 (Salve), 117787
(Gendi), and 41071 (Skidi), the Social Insurance Institution of Finland, Kuopio,
Tampere and Turku University Hospital Medical Funds (grant 9N035 and X51001),
Juho Vainio Foundation, Paavo Nurmi Foundation, Finnish Foundation of
Cardiovascular Research and Finnish Cultural Foundation, Tampere Tuberculosis
Foundation and Emil Aaltonen Foundation. The use of linked data is supported by the
Palkansaaja Foundation. Two of the authors acknowledge the financial support from
theYrjö Jahnsson foundation (grants 6646 and 6664). We thank Jani-Petri Laamanen
for helpful discussant comments. Cawley thanks the Robert Wood Johnson
Foundation for an Investigator Award in Health Policy Research. We thank Barton
Willage for research assistance.

27

Works Cited
Akee, R., Simeonova, E., Copeland, W., Angold, A., & Costello, E.J. (2013). Young
adult obesity and household income: effects of unconditional cash transfers.
American Economic Journal: Applied economics, 5, 1–28.
Averett, S.L. (2011). Labor market consequences: employment, wages, disability, and
absenteeism. In: Cawley, J. (Ed.): The Oxford Handbook of the Social Science
of Obesity. New York: Oxford University Press.
Averett, S.L. (2014). Obesity and labor market outcomes. IZA World of Labor, 32.
doi: 10.15185/izawol.32Averett, S.L., and Stifel, D.C. (2010). Race and
gender differences in the cognitive effects of childhood overweight. Applied
Economics Letters, 17, 1673–1679.
Barsh, G.S., Farooqi, I.S., and O’Rahilly, S. (2000). Genetics of body-weight
regulation. Nature, 404, 644–651.
Bound, J., Brown, C., Mathiowetz, N., (2001). Measurement error in survey data. In:
Leamer, Heckman J. (Ed.), Handbook of Econometrics, vol. 5. SpringerVerlag, New York, NY, pp. 3705–3843.
Brunello, G., and d’Hombres, B. (2007). Does body weight affect wages? Evidence
from Europe. Economics and Human Biology, 5, 1–19.
Burkhauser, R.V., and Cawley, J. (2008). Beyond BMI: the value of more accurate
measures of fatness and obesity in social science research. Journal of Health
Economics, 27, 519–529.
Cawley, J. (2004). The impact of obesity on wages. Journal of Human Resources, 39,
451–474.
Cawley, J. (2015). An economy of scales: a selective review of obesity’s economic
causes, consequences, and solutions. Journal of Health Economics, 43, 244–
268.
Cawley, J., Han, E., and Norton, E.C. (2011). The validity of genes related to
neurotransmitters as instrumental variables. Health Economics, 20, 884–888.
Cawley, J., Maclean, J.C., Hammer, M., and Wintfeld, N. (2015). Reporting error in
weight and its implications for estimates of the economic consequences of
obesity. Economics and Human Biology, 19, 27–44.
Courtemanche, C., Pinkston, J.C., and Stewart, J. (2015). Adjusting body mass for
measurement error with invalid validation data. Economics and Human
Biology, 19, 275–293.
Dahl, M., DeLeire, T., and Schwabish, J.A. (2011). Estimates of year-to-year
volatility in earnings and in household incomes from administrative, survey,
and matched data. Journal of Human Resources, 46, 750–774.
Davey Smith, G. (2011). Random allocation in observational data: how small but
robust effects could facilitate hypothesis-free causal inference. Epidemiology,
22, 460–463; discussion 467–468.
De Luca, C.R., Wood, S.J., Anderson, V., Buchanan, J.A., Proffitt, T.M., Mahony, K.,
and Pantelis, C. (2003). Normative data from the CANTAB. I: development of
executive function over the lifespan. Journal of Clinical and Experimental
Neuropsychology, 25, 242–254.
Gregory, C.A., and Ruhm, C.J. (2011). Where does the wage penalty bite? In
Grossman, M. and Mocan, N.H. (Eds.): Economic Aspects of Obesity.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Heid, I.M., Jackson, A.U., Randall, J.C., Winkler, T.W., Qi, L., Steinthorsdottir, V., ...
and Yang, J. (2010). Meta-analysis identifies 13 new loci associated with
28

waist-hip ratio and reveals sexual dimorphism in the genetic basis of fat
distribution. Nature Genetics, 42, 949–960.
Hu, F.B. (2008). Obesity Epidemiology. New York: Oxford University Press.
International Consortium for Blood Pressure Genome-Wide Association Studies
(2011). Genetic variants in novel pathways influence blood pressure and
cardiovascular disease risk. Nature, 478, 103–109.
Johansson, E., Böckerman, P., Kiiskinen, U., and Heliövaara, M. (2009). Obesity and
labour market success in Finland: the difference between having a high BMI
and being fat. Economics and Human Biology, 7, 36–45.
Kaplowitz, P.B. (2008). Link between body fat and the timing of puberty. Pediatrics,
121(Suppl 3), S208–S217.
Kline, B., and Tobias, J.L. (2008). The wages of BMI: Bayesian analysis of a skewed
treatment–response model with nonparametric endogeneity. Journal of
Applied Econometrics, 23, 767–793.
Lindeboom, M., Lundborg, P., and van der Klaauw, B. (2010). Assessing the impact
of obesity on labor market outcomes. Economics and Human Biology, 8, 309–
319.
Locke, A.E., Kahali, B., Berndt, S.I., Justice, A.E., Pers, T.H., Day, F.R., ... &
Kristiansson, K. (2015). Genetic studies of body mass index yield new
insights for obesity biology. Nature, 518, 197–206.
McClellan, M., McNeil, B.J., and Newhouse, J.P. (1994). Does more intensive
treatment of acute myocardial infarction in the elderly reduce mortality?
Analysis using instrumental variables. Journal of the American Medical
Association, 272, 859–866.
Mincer, J. (1974). Schooling, Experience, and Earnings. New York: National Bureau
of Economic Research.
NCD Risk Factor Collaboration. (2016). Trends in adult body-mass index in 200
countries from 1975 to 2014: a pooled analysis of 1698 population-based
measurement studies with 19·2 million participants. The Lancet, 387, 1377–
1396.
Ng, M., Fleming, T., Robinson, M., Thomson, B., Graetz, N., Margono, C., ... &
Abraham, J.P. (2014). Global, regional, and national prevalence of overweight
and obesity in children and adults during 1980–2013: a systematic analysis for
the Global Burden of Disease Study 2013. The Lancet, 384, 766–781.
Norton, E.C., and Han, E. (2008). Genetic information, obesity and labor market
outcomes. Health Economics, 17, 1089–1104.
OECD (2014). Obesity Update. Paris: OECD Publishing.
http://www.oecd.org/els/health-systems/Obesity-Update-2014.pdf (accessed
January 26, 2016).
OECD (2015). Education at a Glance 2015. Paris: OECD Publishing.
Palmer, T.M., Lawlor, D.A., Harbord, R.M., Sheehan, N.A., Tobias, J.H., Timpson,
N.J., ... & Sterne, J.A. (2012). Using multiple genetic variants as instrumental
variables for modifiable risk factors. Statistical Methods in Medical Research,
21, 223–242.
Pazhoohi, F., and Liddle, J.R. (2012). Identifying feminine and masculine ranges for
Waist-to-Hip ratio. Journal of Social, Evolutionary, and Cultural Psychology,
6, 227–232.
Pehkonen, J., Viinikainen, J., Böckerman, P., Lehtimäki, T., Rovio, S., and Raitakari,
O. (2016). Early origins of adult earnings: evidence using genetic instrumental
variables. Unpublished manuscript.
29

Pietiläinen, K.H., Kaprio, J., Rissanen, A., Winter, T., Rimpelä, A., Viken, R.J., and
Rose, R.J. (1999). Distribution and heritability of BMI in Finnish adolescents
aged 16 y and 17 y: a study of 4884 twins and 2509 singletons. International
Journal of Obesity & Related Metabolic Disorders, 23, 107–115.
Puhl, R.M. (2011). Bias, stigma, and discrimination. In: Cawley, J. (Ed.): The Oxford
Handbook of the Social Science of Obesity. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Raitakari, O.T., Juonala, M., Rönnemaa, T., Keltikangas-Järvinen, L., Räsänen, L.,
Pietikäinen, M., ... & Viikari, J.S. (2008). Cohort profile: the cardiovascular
risk in Young Finns Study. International Journal of Epidemiology, 37, 1220–
1226.
Reichert, A.R. (2015). Obesity, weight loss, and employment prospects: evidence
from a randomized trial. Journal of Human Resources, 50, 759–810.
Ridder, G., and Moffitt, R. (2007). The econometrics of data combination. In
Heckman, J.J., and Leamer, E.E. (Eds.): Handbook of Econometrics, Volume
6. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Robbins, T.W., James, M., Owen, A.M., Sahakian, B.J., McInnes, L., and Rabbitt, P.
(1994). Cambridge Neuropsychological Test Automated Battery (CANTAB):
a factor analytic study of a large sample of normal elderly volunteers.
Dementia (Basel, Switzerland), 5, 266–281.
Rooth, D.-O. (2009). Obesity, attractiveness, and differential treatment in hiring: a
field experiment. Journal of Human Resources, 44, 710–735.
Sabia, J.J. (2007). The effect of body weight on adolescent academic performance.
Southern Economic Journal, 73, 871–900.
Sarlio-Lähteenkorva, S., Silventoinen, K., and Lahelma, E. (2004). Relative weight
and income at different levels of socioeconomic status. American Journal of
Public Health, 94, 468–472.
Schmeiser, M.D. (2009). Expanding wallets and waistlines: the impact of family
income on the BMI of women and men eligible for the earned income tax
credit. Health Economics, 18, 1277–1294.
Singh, D. (1993). Adaptive significance of female physical attractiveness: role of
waist-to-hip ratio. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 65, 293–307.
Sockalingam, S., Wnuk, S., Kantarovich, K., Meaney, C., Okrainec, A., Hawa, R.,
and Cassin, S. (2015). Employment outcomes one year after bariatric surgery:
the role of patient and psychosocial factors. Obesity Surgery, 25, 514–522.
Speliotes, E.K., Willer, C.J., Berndt, S.I., Monda, K.L., Thorleifsson, G., Jackson,
A.U., ... and Hoesel, V. (2010). Association analyses of 249,796 individuals
reveal 18 new loci associated with body mass index. Nature Genetics, 42,
937–948.
Staiger, D., and Stock, J.H. (1997). Instrumental variables regression with weak
instruments. Econometrica, 65, 447–486.
Teslovich, T.M., Musunuru, K., Smith, A.V., Edmondson, A.C., Stylianou, I.M.,
Koseki, M., ... & Willemsen, G. (2010). Biological, clinical and population
relevance of 95 loci for blood lipids. Nature, 466, 707–713.
Tyrrell, J., Jones, S.E., Beaumont, R., Astley, C.M., Lovell, R., Yaghootkar, H., ... &
Wood, A.R. (2016). Height, body mass index, and socioeconomic status:
Mendelian randomisation study in UK Biobank. British Medical Journal, 352,
i582.
Von Hinke Kessler Scholder, S., Smith, G.D., Lawlor, D.A., Propper, C., and
Windmeijer, F. (2012). The effect of fat mass on educational attainment:
30

examining the sensitivity to different identification strategies. Economics and
Human Biology, 10, 405–418.
Von Hinke Kessler Scholder, S., Smith, G.D., Lawlor, D.A., Propper, C., and
Windmeijer, F. (2016). Genetic markers as instrumental variables. Journal of
Health Economics, 45, 131–148.
Wang, Y. (2002). Is obesity associated with early sexual maturation? A comparison of
the association in American boys versus girls. Pediatrics, 110, 903–910.

31

Table 1. The effect of BMI on average labor market outcomes, 2001-2012
OLS

IV

-0.007
(0.005)

-0.066*
(0.036)

F-statistics
Mean outcome
N

…
9.863
2038

36.59
9.863
2038

Panel B: Share of Years Employed, 2001-2012

OLS

IV

-0.002
(0.001)

-0.017*
(0.009)

F-statistics
Mean outcome
N

..
0.857
2062

39.94
0.857
2062

Panel C: Indicator for Social Income Transfers,
2001-2012

OLS

IV

-0.001
(0.002)

0.029*
(0.016)

F-statistics
Mean outcome
N

..
0.821
2038

36.59
0.821
2038

Panel D: Log of Average Social Income Transfers,
2001-2012

OLS

IV

-0.012
(0.015)

0.248**
(0.119)

..
5.603
2038

36.59
5.603
2038

Panel A: Log of Average Earnings, 2001-2012

BMI

BMI

BMI

BMI
F-statistics
Mean outcome
N

Notes: Earnings are measured as the log of average earnings over the period 2001-2012. Employment
is measured as the average share of employment years over the period 2001-2012. Indicator for social
income transfers equals one for those who have received social security transfers at least once during
2001-2012. Social income transfers are measured as the log of average transfers over the period 20012012. The mean values for the dependent variables are reported. BMI is measured in 2001. All models
include controls for the birth month and birth year effects. Gender, height (2001), and parental
education (1980) are also controlled for in all models. The instrument used in the IV models is the BMI
risk score, based on genetic markers. Angrist-Pischke multivariate F-tests of excluded instrument are
reported for the IV models. Heteroscedasticity-robust standard errors are reported in parentheses:
*statistically significant at the 0.10 level; **at the 0.05 level; *** at the 0.01 level.

32

Table 2. Reduced form IV estimates
Panel A
Log of Average Earnings, 20012012
Mean outcome
N

BMI risk score
-0.011*
(0.006)
9.863
2038

Panel B
Share of Years Employed, 20012012
Mean outcome
N

BMI risk score
-0.003*
(0.002)
0.857
2062

Panel C

BMI risk score

0.005**

Indicator for Social Income Transfers,
2001-2012

(0.002)
0.821
2038

Mean outcome
N
Panel D

BMI risk score

0.041**

Log of Average Social Income
Transfers, 2001-2012

(0.018)
5.603
2038

Mean outcome
N

Notes: Earnings are measured as the log of average earnings over the period 2001-2012. Employment
is measured as the average share of employment years over the period 2001-2012. Indicator for social
income transfers equals one for those who have received social security transfers at least once during
2001-2012. Social income transfers are measured as the log of average transfers over the period 20012012. The mean values for the dependent variables are reported. All models include controls for the
birth month and birth year effects. Gender, height, and parental education (1980) are also controlled for
in all models. Heteroscedasticity-robust standard errors are reported in parentheses: *statistically
significant at the 0.10 level; **at the 0.05 level.

33

Table 3. The effect of BMI on contemporaneous labor market outcomes
2001
OLS

2007
IV

OLS

2011
IV

OLS

IV

Panel A: Log of Earnings

BMI
F-statistics
Mean
outcome
N

-0.015
(0.015)

-0.179*
(0.104)

-0.004
(0.014)

0.047
(0.106)

-0.005
(0.012)

-0.007
(0.086)

..

36.59

..

32.09

..

39.17

8.912
2038

9.433
1659

9.629
1729

Panel B: Indicator for Being Employed

BMI
F-statistics
Mean
outcome
N

-0.002
(0.002)

-0.021
(0.015)

-0.002
(0.002)

..

39.94

..

0.807
2062

0.887

0.008
(0.013)

-0.002
(0.002)

34.07

..

1672

0.001
(0.011)
0.906

40.80

1742

Panel C: Indicator for Social Income Transfers

BMI
F-statistics
Mean
outcome
N
BMI
F-statistics
Mean
outcome
N

0.002
(0.003)

0.005
(0.019)

0.002
(0.003)

-0.019
(0.019)

0.000
(0.002)

0.015
(0.017)

..

36.59

..

32.09

..

39.17

0.367

0.334

2038
1659
Panel D: Log of Social Income Transfers

0.291
1729

0.020
(0.020)

0.107
(0.152)

0.022
(0.021)

-0.128
(0.158)

-0.001
(0.019)

0.131
(0.137)

..

36.59

..

32.09

..

39.17

2.822
2038

2.548
1659

2.168
1729

Notes: The outcomes and BMI are measured in 2001, 2007 and 2011. All models include controls for
the birth month and birth year effects. Gender, contemporaneous height, and parental education (1980)
are also controlled for in all models. The instrument used in the IV models is the BMI risk score, based
on genetic markers. Angrist-Pischke multivariate F-tests of excluded instrument are reported for the IV
models. Heteroscedasticity-robust standard errors are reported in parentheses: *statistically significant
at the 0.10 level; **at the 0.05 level; *** at the 0.01 level.

34

Table 4. The effect of BMI on average labor market outcomes, 2001-2012 with
controls for other genetic markers
Panel A: Log of Average Earnings, 20012012

OLS

IV

-0.007
(0.005)

-0.067*
(0.036)

F-statistics
Mean outcome
N

…
9.860
2001

36.78
9.860
2001

Panel B: Share of Years Employed, 20012012

OLS

IV

-0.002
(0.001)

-0.015*
(0.009)

F-statistics
Mean outcome
N

..
0.857
2024

40.14
0.857
2024

Panel C: Indicator for Social Income
Transfers, 2001-2012

OLS

IV

-0.002
(0.002)

0.026*
(0.015)

F-statistics
Mean outcome
N

..
0.822
2001

36.78
0.822
2001

Panel D: Log of Average Social Income
Transfers, 2001-2012

OLS

IV

-0.015
(0.015)

0.225*
(0.117)

..
5.615
2001

36.78
5.615
2001

BMI

BMI

BMI

BMI
F-statistics
Mean outcome
N

Notes: Earnings are measured as the log of average earnings over the period 2001-2012. Employment
is measured as the average share of employment years over the period 2001-2012. Indicator for social
income transfers equals one for those who have received social security transfers at least once during
2001-2012. Social income transfers are measured as the log of average transfers over the period 20012012. The mean values for the dependent variables are reported. BMI is measured in 2001. All models
include controls for the birth month and birth year effects. Gender, height (2001), and parental
education (1980) are also controlled for in all models. The instrument used in the IV models is the BMI
risk score, based on genetic markers. Angrist-Pischke multivariate F-tests of excluded instrument are
reported for the IV models. Heteroscedasticity-robust standard errors are reported in parentheses:
*statistically significant at the 0.10 level; **at the 0.05 level; *** at the 0.01 level.

35

Appendix A1:
Tests of cognitive ability
In the latest follow-up of YFS (2011-12), cognitive function was assessed with
commercially available Cambridge Neuropsychological Test Automated Battery
(CANTAB®). The CANTAB® is a computerized, predominantly non-linguistic and
culturally neutral test performed using a validated touch-screen computer system. The
full test battery includes 25 individual tests from which, five age sensitive tests
(Robbins et al. 1994; DeLuca et al. 2003) were selected for YFS. The tests measured
several cognitive domains: 1) short term memory, 2) spatial working memory, 3)
problem solving, 4) reaction time, 5) attention, 6) rapid visual processing, 7) visual
memory, 8) episodic memory, and 9) visuospatial learning.
During cognitive testing the participants first conducted a motor screening test
(MOT) measuring psychomotor speed and accuracy. In this study, the MOT test was
considered as a training procedure in which the participants were introduced to the
equipment used in the testing, and as a screening tool to point out any difficulties in
vision, movement, comprehension or ability to follow simple instructions. Paired
associates learning (PAL) test was used to assess visual and episodic memory as well
as visuospatial associative learning containing aspects of both delayed response
procedure and conditional learning. Spatial working memory (SWM) test was used to
measure ability to retain spatial information and to manipulate items stored in the
working memory, problem solving as well as the ability to conduct a self-organized
search strategy. Reaction time (RTI) test assessed speed of response and movement
on tasks where the stimulus was either predictable (simple location task) or
unpredictable (five-choice location task). Rapid visual information (RVP) test was
used to assess visual processing, recognition and sustained attention.
Each of the CANTAB® tests produced several variables. Therefore, principal
component analysis was conducted to reduce the number of variables and to identify
components accounting for the majority of the variation within the cognition dataset.
First, principal component analysis was conducted for the complete cognitive data
and the resulting first component was considered as an indicator for overall cognitive
performance. Second, principal component analyses were performed separately for all
individual tests (MOT, PAL, SWM, RTI, RVP). The first components resulting from
these analyses were considered to represent cognitive performance related to the
particular domain. After creating the overall and testwise principal components their
distributions were analyzed. The component for MOT test was excluded from further
analyses because it did not discriminate the subjects indicating a ceiling effect. All
other components were normalized based on the rank order normalization procedure
resulting in five separate variables, each with mean value of 0 and standard deviation
of 1.

36

Appendix Table A2:
Descriptive statistics
Variable

Mean (SD)

N

Average earnings (2001-2012), euros
Share of years employed (2001-2012)
Indicator for social income transfers (2001-2012)
Average social income transfers (2001-2012),
euros

24527.93 (15042.27)
0.857 (0.245)
0.821 (0.384)
1845.67 (2375.05)

2038
2062
2038
2038

Earnings (2001), euros
Earnings (2007), euros
Earnings (2011), euros
Indicator for being employed (2001)
Indicator for being employed (2007)
Indicator for being employed (2011)
Indicator for social income transfers (2001)
Indicator for social income transfers (2007)
Indicator for social income transfers (2011)
Social income transfers (2001), euros
Social income transfers (2007), euros
Social income transfers (2011), euros

18915.49 (14382.31)
26270.74 (19529.69)
29528.85 (19952.31)
0.807 (0.395)
0.887 (0.317)
0.906 (0.291)
0.367 (0.482)
0.334 (0.472)
0.291 (0.454)
1584.18 (3152.20)
1752.15 (3838.53)
1836.76 (4386.63)

2038
1659
1729
2062
1672
1742
2038
1659
1729
2038
1659
1729

BMI (2001)
BMI (2007)
BMI (2011)
BMI risk score
Height (2001)
Height (2007)
Height (2011)
BMI>=30 (2001)
Weight (2001)

25.052 (4.290)
25.864 (4.485)
26.338 (4.621)
29.144 (3.358)
172.252 (9.151)
172.247 (9.254)
172.407 (9.271)
0.124 (0.329)
74.686 (15.854)

2038
1659
1729
2038
2038
1659
1729
2038
2038

Waist-hip ratio (2001)
Waist-hip risk score

0.841 (0.082)
15.202 (2.358)

1972
1972

University education (1980), mother
University education (1980), father
Income (1980), mother (euros)
Income (1980), father (euros)

0.072 (0.258)
0.102 (0.303)
4616.65 (3503.96)
8739.78 (5775.44)

2038
2038
2023
1931

Married (2001)

0.445 (0.497)

2038

Overall cognitive performance (2011-2012)
Visual and episodic memory and visuospatial
associative learning
Reaction time
Rapid visual information processing
Spatial working memory

0.010 (0.996)
0.013 (0.989)

1334
1334

0.021 (0.996)
0.042 (0.985)
0.005 (0.974)

1334
1334
1334

Genetic risk score for blood pressure

30.449 (3.215)

2001

37

Genetic risk score for total cholesterol
Genetic risk score for triglycerides

27.462 (3.089)
26.128 (2.875)

2001
2001

Notes: Descriptive statistics are reported for the samples that are used in the estimations.

38

Appendix Table A3:
Comparison of observables by value of instrument
Below
average BMI
risk score
Mean (SD)

Above
average BMI
risk score
Mean (SD)

Difference

t-statistics

25237.39
(15263.52)
0.865
(0.241)

23743.71
(14762.08)
0.848
(0.249)

1493.685

2.241**

0.017

1.575

0.809
(0.393)

0.834
(0.373)

-0.024

-1.434

1592.72
(2079.09)

1731.16
(2160.78)

-138.442

-1.473

BMI (2001)

24.615
(4.095)

25.535
(4.449)

-0.920

-4.840***

Married (2001)

0.445
(0.497)

0.444
(0.497)

0.001

0.029

0.042
(0.940)

-0.019
(1.040)

0.061

1.114

0.007
(1.007)
0.130
(0.976)

0.036
(0.984)
-0.057
(0.987)

-0.028

-0.517

0.187

3.481***

0.063
(0.977)

-0.061
(0.967)

0.124

2.321**

4734.06
(3634.87)
8803.89
(5578.61)
0.071
(0.257)
0.100
(0.300)

4486.90
(3350.45)
8668.88
(5987.82)
0.072
(0.259)
0.104
(0.306)

247.164

1.591

135.016

0.511

-0.001

-0.112

-0.004

-0.323

Earnings,
2001-2012 (euros)
Share of years
employed, 20012012
Indicator for social
income transfers,
2001-2012
Social income
transfers, 2001-2012
(euros)

Cognitive skills
(2011-2012)
Visual and episodic
memory and
visuospatial
associative learning
Reaction time
Rapid visual
information
processing
Spatial working
memory
Family background
(1980)
Income, mother
(euros)
Income, father
(euros)
University education,
mother
University education,
father

39

Appendix Table A4:
The effect of BMI on average labor market outcomes, 2001-2012 with controls
for cognitive ability
Panel A: Log of Average Earnings, 20012012

OLS

IV

-0.006
(0.005)

-0.020
(0.029)

F-statistics
Mean outcome
N

…
9.956
1334

34.61
9.956
1334

Panel B: Share of Years Employed, 20012012

OLS

IV

-0.000
(0.001)

-0.006
(0.008)

F-statistics
Mean outcome
N

..
0.886
1339

34.74
0.886
1339

Panel C: Indicator for Social Income
Transfers, 2001-2012

OLS

IV

-0.003
(0.003)

0.024
(0.016)

F-statistics
Mean outcome
N

..
0.813
1334

34.61
0.813
1334

Panel D: Log of Average Social Income
Transfers, 2001-2012

OLS

IV

-0.013
(0.019)

0.209*
(0.122)

..
5.477
1334

34.61
5.477
1334

BMI

BMI

BMI

BMI
F-statistics
Mean outcome
N

Notes: Earnings are measured as the log of average earnings over the period 2001-2012. Employment
is measured as the average share of employment years over the period 2001-2012. Indicator for social
income transfers equals one for those who have received social security transfers at least once during
2001-2012. Social income transfers are measured as the log of average transfers over the period 20012012. The mean values for the dependent variables are reported. BMI is measured in 2001. All models
include controls for the birth month and birth year effects. Gender, height (2001), and parental
education (1980) are also controlled for in all models. The instrument used in the IV models is the BMI
risk score, based on genetic markers. Angrist-Pischke multivariate F-tests of excluded instrument are
reported for the IV models. Heteroscedasticity-robust standard errors are reported in parentheses:
*statistically significant at the 0.10 level; **at the 0.05 level; *** at the 0.01 level.

40

Appendix Table A5:
The effect of BMI on average labor market outcomes 2001-2012 for men
Panel A: Log of Average Earnings,
2001-2012

OLS

IV

BMI

-0.005
(0.008)

-0.048
(0.037)

F-statistics
Mean outcome
N

..
10.082
929

29.07
10.082
929

OLS

IV

-0.001
(0.002)

-0.017
(0.011)

F-statistics
Mean outcome
N

..
0.889
937

29.60
0.889
937

Panel C: Indicator for Social
Income Transfers, 2001-2012

OLS

IV

-0.004
(0.003)

0.021
(0.020)

F-statistics
Mean outcome
N

..
0.763
929

29.07
0.763
929

Panel D: Log of Average Social
Income Transfers, 2001-2012

OLS

IV

-0.029
(0.024)

0.266*
(0.148)

..
4.765
929

29.07
4.765
929

Panel B: Share of Years Employed,
2001-2012
BMI

BMI

BMI
F-statistics
Mean outcome
N

Notes: Earnings are measured as the log of average earnings over the period 2001-2012. Employment
is measured as the average share of employment years over the period 2001-2012. Indicator for social
income transfers equals one for those who have received social security transfers at least once during
2001-2012. Social income transfers are measured as the log of average transfers over the period 20012012. The mean values for the dependent variables are reported. BMI is measured in 2001. All models
include controls for the birth month and birth year effects. Height (2001), and parental education
(1980) are also controlled for in all models. The instrument used in the IV models is the BMI risk
score, based on genetic markers. Angrist-Pischke multivariate F-tests of excluded instrument are
reported for the IV models. Heteroscedasticity-robust standard errors are reported in parentheses:
*statistically significant at the 0.10 level; **at the 0.05 level; *** at the 0.01 level.

41

Appendix Table A6:
The effect of BMI on average labor market outcomes 2001-2012 for women
Panel A: Log of Average Earnings,
2001-2012

OLS

IV

-0.008
(0.007)

-0.105
(0.077)

F-statistics
Mean outcome
N

..
9.679
1109

9.08
9.679
1109

Panel B: Share of Years Employed,
2001-2012

OLS

IV

-0.002
(0.002)

-0.019
(0.017)

F-statistics
Mean outcome
N

..
0.831
1125

11.61
0.831
1125

Panel C: Indicator for Social
Income Transfers, 2001-2012

OLS

IV

0.001
(0.002)

0.052*
(0.030)

F-statistics
Mean outcome
N

..
0.869
1109

9.08
0.869
1109

Panel D: Log of Average Social
Income Transfers, 2001-2012

OLS

IV

0.004
(0.019)

0.300
(0.224)

..
6.305
1109

9.08
6.305
1109

BMI

BMI

BMI

BMI
F-statistics
Mean outcome
N

Notes: Earnings are measured as the log of average earnings over the period 2001-2012. Employment
is measured as the average share of employment years over the period 2001-2012. Indicator for social
income transfers equals one for those who have received social security transfers at least once during
2001-2012. Social income transfers are measured as the log of average transfers over the period 20012012. The mean values for the dependent variables are reported. BMI is measured in 2001. All models
include controls for the birth month and birth year effects. Height (2001), and parental education
(1980) are also controlled for in all models. The instrument used in the IV models is the BMI risk
score, based on genetic markers. Angrist-Pischke multivariate F-tests of excluded instrument are
reported for the IV models. Heteroscedasticity-robust standard errors are reported in parentheses:
*statistically significant at the 0.10 level; **at the 0.05 level; *** at the 0.01 level.

42

Appendix Table A7:
The effect of obesity (BMI ≥ 30) on average labor market outcomes 2001-2012
Panel A: Log of Average Earnings,
2001-2012

OLS

IV

-0.135**
(0.068)

-1.028*
(0.563)

F-statistics
Mean outcome
N

..
9.863
2038

24.95
9.863
2038

Panel B: Share of Years Employed,
2001-2012

OLS

IV

-0.032*
(0.018)

-0.266*
(0.144)

F-statistics
Mean outcome
N

..
0.857
2062

27.75
0.857
2062

Panel C: Indicator for Social
Income Transfers, 2001-2012

OLS

IV

-0.023
(0.027)

0.457*
(0.249)

F-statistics
Mean outcome
N

..
0.821
2038

24.95
0.821
2038

Panel D: Log of Average Social
Income Transfers, 2001-2012

OLS

IV

-0.138
(0.199)

3.867**
(1.914)

..
5.603
2038

24.95
5.603
2038

Obesity (BMI ≥ 30)

Obesity (BMI ≥ 30)

Obesity (BMI ≥ 30)

Obesity (BMI ≥ 30)
F-statistics
Mean outcome
N

Notes: Obesity indicator equals one for whose BMI was at least 30 in 2001. Earnings are measured as
the log of average earnings over the period 2001-2012. Employment is measured as the average share
of employment years over the period 2001-2012. Indicator for social income transfers equals one for
those who have received social security transfers at least once during 2001-2012. Social income
transfers are measured as the log of average transfers over the period 2001-2012. The mean values for
the dependent variables are reported. All models include controls for the birth month and birth year
effects. Gender, height (2001), and parental education (1980) are also controlled for in all models. The
instrument used in the IV models is the BMI risk score, based on genetic markers. Angrist-Pischke
multivariate F-tests of excluded instrument are reported for the IV models. Heteroscedasticity-robust
standard errors are reported in parentheses: *statistically significant at the 0.10 level; **at the 0.05
level; *** at the 0.01 level.

43

Appendix Table A8:
The effect of weight (kg) on average labor market outcomes 2001-2012
Panel A: Log of Average Earnings,
2001-2012

OLS

IV

-0.002
(0.002)

-0.022*
(0.012)

F-statistics
Mean outcome
N

..
9.863
2038

37.80
9.863
2038

Panel B: Share of Years Employed,
2001-2012

OLS

IV

-0.001
(0.000)

-0.006*
(0.003)

F-statistics
Mean outcome
N

..
0.857
2062

41.06
0.857
2062

Panel C: Indicator for Social
Income Transfers, 2001-2012

OLS

IV

-0.001
(0.001)

0.010*
(0.005)

F-statistics
Mean outcome
N

..
0.821
2038

37.80
0.821
2038

Panel D: Log of Average Social
Income Transfers, 2001-2012

OLS

IV

-0.004
(0.005)

0.081**
(0.039)

..
5.603
2038

37.80
5.603
2038

Weight (kg)

Weight (kg)

Weight (kg)

Weight (kg)
F-statistics
Mean outcome
N

Notes: Weight (kg) is measured in 2001. Earnings are measured as the log of average earnings over the
period 2001-2012. Employment is measured as the average share of employment years over the period
2001-2012. Indicator for social income transfers equals one for those who have received social security
transfers at least once during 2001-2012. Social income transfers are measured as the log of average
transfers over the period 2001-2012. The mean values for the dependent variables are reported. All
models include controls for the birth month and birth year effects. Gender, height (2001), and parental
education (1980) are also controlled for in all models. The instrument used in the IV models is the BMI
risk score, based on genetic markers. Angrist-Pischke multivariate F-tests of excluded instrument are
reported for the IV models. Heteroscedasticity-robust standard errors are reported in parentheses:
*statistically significant at the 0.10 level; **at the 0.05 level; *** at the 0.01 level.

44

Appendix Table A9:
The effect of waist-hip ratio on average labor market outcomes 2001-2012
Panel A: Log of Average Earnings,
2001-2012

OLS

IV

Waist-hip ratio

-1.541***
(0.337)

-11.170
(6.988)

F-statistics
Mean outcome
N

..
9.861
1972

5.49
9.861
1972

Panel B: Share of Years Employed,
2001-2012

OLS

IV

Waist-hip ratio

-0.328***
(0.095)

-2.931
(1.937)

F-statistics
Mean outcome
N

..
0.858
1995

6.17
0.858
1995

Panel C: Indicator for Social
Income Transfers, 2001-2012

OLS

IV

Waist-hip ratio

0.219
(0.146)

4.221
(3.176)

F-statistics
Mean outcome
N

..
0.819
1972

5.49
0.819
1972

Panel D: Log of Average Social
Income Transfers, 2001-2012

OLS

IV

Waist-hip ratio

2.391**
(1.107)

37.651
(25.214)

F-statistics
Mean outcome
N

..
5.585
1972

5.49
5.585
1972

Notes: Waist-hip ratio is measured in 2001. Earnings are measured as the log of average earnings over
the period 2001-2012. Employment is measured as the average share of employment years over the
period 2001-2012. Indicator for social income transfers equals one for those who have received social
security transfers at least once during 2001-2012. Social income transfers are measured as the log of
average transfers over the period 2001-2012. The mean values for the dependent variables are reported.
All models include controls for the birth month and birth year effects. Gender, height (2001), and
parental education (1980) are also controlled for in all models. The instrument used in the IV models is
the waist-hip ratio risk score, based on genetic markers. Angrist-Pischke multivariate F-tests of
excluded instrument are reported for the IV models. Heteroscedasticity-robust standard errors are
reported in parentheses: *statistically significant at the 0.10 level; **at the 0.05 level; *** at the 0.01
level.

45

Appendix Table A10:
Reduced form IV estimates with BMI and WHR risk scores
Log of Average
Earnings, 20012012

Share of Years
Employed, 20012012

Indicator for
Social Income
Transfers,
2001-2012

WHR risk
score

-0.011*
(0.006)
-0.011
(0.008)

-0.003*
(0.002)
-0.004*
(0.002)

0.004*
(0.002)
0.005
(0.004)

Log of
Average Social
Income
Transfers,
2001-2012
0.039**
(0.018)
0.049*
(0.027)

Mean outcome
N

9.863
2029

0.857
2053

0.821
2029

5.601
2029

BMI risk score

Notes: Earnings are measured as the log of average earnings over the period 2001-2012. Employment
is measured as the average share of employment years over the period 2001-2012. Indicator for social
income transfers equals one for those who have received social security transfers at least once during
2001-2012. Social income transfers are measured as the log of average transfers over the period 20012012. The mean values for the dependent variables are reported. All models include controls for the
birth month and birth year effects. Gender, height, and parental education (1980) are also controlled for
in all models. Heteroscedasticity-robust standard errors are reported in parentheses: *statistically
significant at the 0.10 level; **at the 0.05 level.

46

