                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  WHO WANTS AFFORDABLE HOUSING IN THEIR BACKYARD? AN EQUILIBRIUM
          ANALYSIS OF LOW INCOME PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT

                                     Rebecca Diamond
                                     Timothy McQuade

                                     Working Paper 22204
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w22204


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    April 2016




We are grateful to William Diamond, Darrell Duffie, Guido Imbens, Stuart Rosenthal, Amit Seru,
and seminar and conference participants at the NBER Summer Institutes of Labor Studies, Public
Economics, Urban Economics, and Real Estate, the UCLA Housing Affordability Conference,
UCLA economics, UC-Irvine Economics, USC Price, the Federal Reserve Board, and the
Stanford GSB economics and finance lunches. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Rebecca Diamond and Timothy McQuade. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Who Wants Affordable Housing in their Backyard? An Equilibrium Analysis of Low Income
Property Development
Rebecca Diamond and Timothy McQuade
NBER Working Paper No. 22204
April 2016
JEL No. H23,R13,R38

                                        ABSTRACT

We nonparametrically estimate spillovers of properties financed by the Low Income Housing Tax
Credit (LIHTC) onto neighborhood residents by developing a new difference-in-differences style
estimator. LIHTC development revitalizes low-income neighborhoods, increasing house prices
6.5%, lowering crime rates, and attracting racially and income diverse populations. LIHTC
development in higher income areas causes house price declines of 2.5% and attracts lower
income households. Linking these price effects to a hedonic model of preferences, LIHTC
developments in low-income areas cause aggregate welfare benefits of $116 million. Affordable
housing development acts like a place-based policy and can revitalize low-income communities.


Rebecca Diamond
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
655 Knight Way
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
diamondr@stanford.edu

Timothy McQuade
Stanford Graduate School of Business School
655 Knight Way
Stanford, CA 94305
tmcquade@stanford.edu
1       Introduction
Increasing geographic income segregation and rising housing costs have put the issue of the
government’s role in promoting a¤ordable housing at the forefront of current policy debates.1
Subsidized housing policy often focuses on easing low income households’housing costs and
providing access to …nancially out of reach neighborhoods. However, subsidized housing is
also a place-based policy. Housing subsidies in‡uence households’choices of neighborhoods
and developers’ choices of where to build. Subsidy induced changes in the locations of
households and housing construction can have important spillovers onto the neighborhood
residents.2 This creates the challenging task of determining how to best allocate a¤ordable
housing across neighborhoods.3
    In this paper, we provide an analysis of the costs and bene…ts of a¤ordable housing con-
struction to surrounding neighborhood residents and how they vary across demographically
di¤erent neighborhoods. We study the neighborhood impacts of multifamily housing de-
velopments funded through the Low Income Housing Tax Credit (LIHTC). Established in
1986, this program has become an integral component of federal housing policy, funding 21
percent of all multifamily developments over the period 1987-2008. Looking forward, with
the construction of publicly run housing projects expected to continue to decline, the LIHTC
program is likely to remain one of the main federal government initiatives designed to ensure
access to a¤ordable housing by low income households.4
    We combine data on the location and funding dates for all LIHTC funded projects, hous-
ing transaction data from 129 counties, and home buyer race and income data to estimate
the e¤ects of LIHTC construction on the surrounding neighborhood. Our estimates show
that the impact of a¤ordable housing construction has dramatically di¤erent e¤ects on sur-
rounding property values based on whether the a¤ordable housing was built in a relatively
richer or poorer neighborhood and whether the neighborhood has a high share of minority
residents. LIHTC construction in neighborhoods with a median income below $26,000 in-
creases local property values by approximately 6.5% within 0.1 miles of the development site
    1
     New York City and San Francisco have both announced plans for large expansions of a¤ordable housing
units to "ensure diverse and inclusive neighborhoods." Upon entering o¢ ce, Bill de Blasio, mayor of New
York City, unveiled a plan to create and preserve 200,000 units of a¤ordable housing over ten years. In 2014,
the mayor of San Francisco, Ed Lee, outlined an initiative to create 30,000 a¤ordable housing units over six
years to "ensure San Francisco remains a place where people from every background can call home.".
   2
     Previous research suggests households are willing to pay to live near higher income and more educated
neighbors (Bayer et al. (2007); Guerrieri et al. (2014); Diamond (2015)). The quality of the housing stock
also spills over onto the value of neighboring houses (Rossi-Hansberg et al. (2010), Campbell et al. (2011)).
   3
     Depending on the social planner’s preferences, he may want use housing policy to maximize overall social
welfare or only the welfare of the low-income population.
   4
     Section 8 housing vouchers which provide rental subsidies to low income households who rent in the
private rental market is the main alternative federally run low-income housing program.




                                                     1
In contrast, LIHTC construction in neighborhoods with median incomes above $54,000 leads
to housing price declines of approximately 2.5% within 0.1 miles of the development site.
These declines, however, are only seen in high income areas with a minority population of
below 50%.
    To account for these price impacts, we explore how LIHTC development a¤ects other
characteristics of the local neighborhood, in particular demographics and local crime rates.
We …nd that the construction of a LIHTC development leads to increases in the income
of home buyers in low income areas. Conversely, a¤ordable housing development leads to
a decrease in home buyer income in higher income areas with low minority populations.
Examining the impact of LIHTC construction on the share of Black home buyers, we …nd
that the introduction of a¤ordable housing leads to decreased segregation in lower income
areas. Finally, LIHTC development causes declines in both violent and property crime
within low income areas, but not does not increase crime in high income areas.
    We develop a structural model of housing and neighborhood choice and translate these
house price estimates into preference estimates. The average household that desires living
near LIHTC sites in low income areas is willing to pay approximately 6% of their house price
to live 0.1 miles from a LIHTC site. In higher income areas with low minority populations,
on the other hand, the average household who chooses to live near LIHTC is willing to pay
approximately 1.6% of their total house price to avoid living within 0.1 miles of a LIHTC
site.5
    We use these preference estimates along with census data to calculate the local welfare
impact of introducing a¤ordable housing to a particular type of neighborhood. We decom-
pose these e¤ects into the welfare impacts of a¤ordable housing on homeowners, renters,
and absentee landlords.6 Our analysis reveals large possible societal gains from building
a¤ordable housing in low income areas, with construction of LIHTC in low income, low mi-
nority areas increasing total welfare by approximately $116 million. Building LIHTC in low
minority, high income areas leads to losses of approximately $12 million.
    We identify the e¤ect of a¤ordable housing construction on housing prices by exploiting
the timing of when funding is granted for the development along with the exact geographic
location of the a¤ordable housing. Clearly the neighborhoods targeted by developers to
build a¤ordable housing are non-random. However, the exact geographic location of the
   5
     While these households who choose to live near LIHTC sites in high income areas dislike LIHTC prox-
imity, they …nd it optimal to live there since LIHTC proximity also provides a discount on their home prices.
On net, these households prefer to live close to LIHTC sites in high income areas than to live further away.
   6
     Since we don’t have direct data on renters, we assume house prices equal the present discounted value
of rents. Further, we assume that renters’ preferences for LIHTC proximity are the same as homebuyers,
holding race and income …xed.




                                                     2
development site within a broader neighborhood appears to be determined by idiosyncratic
characteristics, such as which exact plot of land was for sale at the time. Further, the timing
of the funding is often out of the hands of the developer since there is substantial uncertainty
in which year the project will be funded.7
    We harness this identi…cation strategy by developing a new econometric method for esti-
mating a di¤erence-in-di¤erences style estimator in a non-parametric setting where treatment
is a smooth function of distance to LIHTC site and time since LIHTC funding. We draw on
new methods developed in statistics (Charnigo et al. 2011, Charnigo and Srinivasan, 2015)
to transform our data on house price levels to data on the derivative of house prices with
respect to distance from LIHTC sites. These transformed data allow us to ‡exibly di¤erence
out very local time trends and neighborhood variation in housing prices. Further, by viewing
house prices as a smooth function of geographic location, we show how to generalize discrete
geographic …xed e¤ects in house prices to a smooth, time-invariant surface of house prices.
    We translate our estimated price e¤ects into households’preferences for living near LI-
HTC. We employ a structural, generalized hedonic model of housing choice along the lines
of Rosen (1974) and Bajari and Benkard (2005) to link observed house prices to individual
preferences for proximity to low income housing. The hedonic model allows us to view real
estate as a continuous choice of quantities of housing and neighborhood characteristics. We
speci…cally focus on the continuous choice of distance in miles to an LIHTC development.
The key advantage of this approach is that it ensures the existence of an equilibrium price
surface, which continuously maps housing and neighborhood characteristics to house prices
without needing to specify the determinants of housing supply.8 As a result of these two
key model properties, an agent’s optimality condition reduces to a simple equation relating
marginal cost of moving further from an LIHTC site to its marginal bene…t, which allows us
to recover preferences on an individual basis.
    The model suggests a straightforward, two-step estimation procedure. First, we non-
parametrically estimate the equilibrium pricing surface, i.e. marginal costs, by studying the
impact of LIHTC-…nanced multifamily construction on local house prices. The model’s opti-
mality condition then allows us to nonparametrically recover the local gradient of the utility
function of each agent. Further parametric assumptions allow for recovery of structural
preference parameters and a global description of each agent’s utility function. Prefer-
ences are then correlated with home buyer demographic information and welfare analysis is
   7
     Developers must apply for LIHTC funds. Acceptance rates vary across states. In California in 2012, 55
developments were funded from an application pool of 118.
   8
     The existence of a continuous mapping between product characteristics and prices is a feature not
shared by standard, discrete-choice models such as a conditional logit models (McFadden, 1973) or Berry,
Levionsohn, and Pakes (1995).




                                                    3
conducted.
    The heterogeneity of LIHTC impacts across neighborhoods with di¤ering incomes has
policy implications when construction of a¤ordable housing is viewed as a place-based policy.
Moving LIHTC properties from higher income to lower income neighborhoods bene…ts both
the residents of the higher and lower income neighborhoods. Of course, the neighborhood
bene…ts of LIHTC must be also be weighed against the cost and bene…ts of the neighbor-
hood to LIHTC tenants. Chetty et al. (2015) …nd that moving young children from high
poverty public housing to low poverty areas increases these childrens’future earnings by a
present discounted value of $100 thousand. This e¤ect is not large enough to overcome our
estimated bene…ts to low-income neighborhoods simply because there are many more low
income households living in a low-income area than in the a¤ordable housing development
itself.
    Previous work studying the welfare e¤ects of place-based policy subsidizing …rm loca-
tions has often found it challenging to identify heterogeneous e¤ects of these policies across
geographic areas. As stated in Glaeser & Gottlieb (2011) "For these externalities to create
a justi…cation for any particular spatial policy, these externalities must be stronger in some
places than in others...Economics is still battling over whether such spillovers exist at all,
and we are certainly not able to document compelling nonlinear e¤ects." We are able to both
document signi…cant spillovers and heterogeneity in these e¤ects across neighborhoods.
    These place-based spillovers due to subsidized housing likely have large economic impacts
across the US, as federal, state and local governments spend over $97 billion dollars a year
on di¤erent forms of housing assistance.9
    A small number of previous studies have examined the impacts of a¤ordable housing on
local neighborhoods. Eriksen and Rosenthal (2010) study the crowd-out e¤ects of subsidized
a¤ordable housing construction on private rental development. More closely related, Baum-
Snow and Marion (2009) use census data and a regression discontinuity approach to study the
e¤ects of LIHTC …nanced developments in low income neighborhoods on new construction,
median incomes, and property values at the census block group level. They also …nd that
housing prices appreciate in low income areas. Schwartz et al. (2006) look at the price impact
of a¤ordable housing in New York City and report positive results. Goujard (2011) performs
a similar study of social housing in Paris. Our study leverages extensive micro data to
study highly local e¤ects of a¤ordable housing in many di¤erent parts of the United States.
By looking across a wide array of neighborhoods and counties, we show how a¤ordable
housing has dramatically di¤erent e¤ects on neighborhood residents based on neighborhood
income and the minority share of the neighborhood population. Previous studies either
  9
      This is more than is spent on unemployment insurance in a typical year.




                                                     4
focus on a single geographic area (Schwartz et al. 2006, Goujard 2011) or only within low
income neighborhoods at a single point in time (Baum-Snow and Marion, 2009). Moreover,
none of these studies utilize a structural framework in conjunction with detailed data on
buyer characteristics to recover and put structure on individual preferences for proximity to
a¤ordable housing.
    More broadly, our paper is related to a literature which examines the spillovers to neigh-
borhoods of housing policies. Rossi-Hanbserg et al. (2010) study the impact of urban
revitalization programs implemented in the Richmond, Virginia area on local land prices.
Campbell et al. (2011) examine the e¤ects of housing foreclosure on housing prices nearby.
Ellen et al. (2013) look at how foreclosures impact local crime rates. Autor et al. (2014,
2015) study the impact of ending rent control on nearby real estate prices and crime rates.
    Finally, a growing literature has found that higher income individuals are willing to
pay more for local neighborhood amenities (Bayer et al (2007), Diamond (2015), Handbury
(2013)). A number of recent papers have also argued that higher income or more educated
neighbors endogenously improve local amenities (Card, Mas, and Rothstein (2008), Bayer et
al (2007), Guerrieri et al (2014), Diamond (2015)). However, previous work has not had ac-
cess to micro-level demographic and housing transaction data. Further, LIHTC development
provides a quasi-experimental shock to the income mix of ones’neighbors and allows us to
identify the distribution of households’preferences for proximity to low-income neighbors.10
    The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides institutional background detail about
the Low Income Housing Tax Credit. Section 3 describes out data sources and Section 4
details the hedonic model of housing choice. Section 5 discusses our estimation procedure for
the pricing surface. We present our reduced form results on price and other neighborhood
characteristics in Section 6. Section 7 presents our preference estimates and conducts welfare
analysis. Section 8 concludes.


2      The Low Income Housing Tax Credit
Since its inception in 1986, the Low Income Housing Tax Credit Program has been an
integral component in fostering the development of multifamily housing throughout the
United States. With an annual tax credit valued at over 8 billion dollars, the program
funded 21 percent of all multifamily developments between the years 1987-2008. Each year,
federal tax credits are allocated to the states based on population. To qualify for a tax credit
  10
    LIHTC development also impacts the overall population density and average age of the neighborhood
housing stock. We can’t fully seperate out preferences for the income level of one’s neighbors from preferences
for new construction or increased density. However, the di¤erential value of LIHTC development across
neighborhoods of di¤erent income levels help zoom in on preferences over the income of one’s neighbors.



                                                      5
under the Low Income Tax Credit Program, federal guidelines require that proposed projects
must rent to tenants who earn no more than 60 percent of the Area Median Gross Income
(AGMI). Additionally, developers must restrict rents, in low-income units to 30 percent of
the income limit for a minimum a¤ordability period of 30 years.
         Note that these criteria are only the minimal requirements as speci…ed by the federal
government. In practice, states almost always receive many more project proposals and tax
credit allocation requests from developers than they have federal allotments, generally on the
order of 2 to 4 times. Each state is therefore required to maintain a “Quali…ed Application
Plan”(QAP) to govern the selection process. These plans usually operate by assigning point
scores to various project characteristics and then allocating tax credits based on point totals
until funds are exhausted. See Appendix A.1 for more details.


3    Data
     We bring together data from a variety of sources. Our …rst dataset is from DataQuick,
which provides detailed public records housing characteristics and transactions data collected
from county assessor and register of deeds o¢ cers. We restrict our analysis to those counties
which have transactions history data dating to at least 1996. This leaves us with a sample
of approximately 16 million transactions located within 1.5 miles of a LIHTC site in a total
of 129 counties in 15 states. Figure 1 provides a map of the counties in our sample. We
merge this dataset with data collected by the United States federal government according to
the provisions of the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA), which provides us with the
race and household income of the homebuyers.
        Information on LIHTC …nanced projects is provided by the Department of Housing
and Urban Development (HUD). This data covers 39,094 projects and almost 2,458,000 low
income housing units placed into service between the years 1987 and 2012. Our analysis
focuses on the 7098 LIHTC projects located in our sample of 129 counties. See Panel B of
Table 1 for summary statistics. Due to DataQuick’s coverage of counties, our sample is from
more dense, urban areas, relative to the overall distribution of LIHTC sites. However, when
comparing the characteristics of LIHTC sites developed in urban areas to our 129 county
subsample, our sample looks quite representative.
        We …nally collect 1990 census data at the tract and block group level. These data
provide information on median income levels and minority population shares.
    Panel A of Table 1 provides summary statistics. Compared to the United States as a
whole, the counties in our sample have a similar black share (11.6% vs 12.1% nationwide),
a signi…cantly higher Hispanic share (15.3% vs 8.3% nationwide), and a median income



                                              6
approximately 18% greater. Median income is higher than the rest of the United States
since our sample comprises urban areas and metropolitan areas in relatively high productivity
areas such as New England, New York and California. Hispanic share is quite large in our
sample since many of our counties are in California and the Southwest, which hosts a large
Hispanic population compared to the rest of the country. Within the census block groups
which receive LIHTC developments, the Hispanic and Black share are even higher at 24.0%
and 23.6%, respectively. The median incomes are also 33% lower in these select block groups
than average block groups within our sample of counties.
    Panel C of Table 1 also provides summary information about locales within 1 mile, 0.5
miles, 0.2 miles, and 0.1 miles of projects …nanced through the Low Income Housing Tax
Credit program. Average housing prices are about 7% lower and average home buyer
incomes are 5% lower within half a mile of a LIHTC site than those within 1 mile of an
LIHTC site. The percent of home buyers which are Black is 11% higher within half a mile
of an LIHTC site than within one mile. It is clear LIHTC development is targeted at lower
income, higher minority share, and lower housing cost areas. However, housing prices, home
buyer incomes, and the Black share of home buyers are quite similar between areas within
0.2 miles of an LIHTC site and those within 0.1 miles. The lack of variation in neighborhood
characteristics at these more …ne geographic measures help substantiate our identi…cation
strategy that precise geographic location of LIHTC development provides quasi-experimental
variation. See Appendix A.2 for more details on all data sources.


4      Model of Housing Choice
Our goal is to formalize a structural, econometric framework which we can use to estimate
preferences for proximity to LIHTC properties and thereby quantify the costs and bene…ts
of a¤ordable housing to surrounding neighborhood residents. We develop a generalized
hedonic model along the lines of Rosen (1974) and Bajari and Benkard (2005). In this
framework, a house j is considered a bundle of characteristics Rj ; Xj; Yj; j : Here Rj 2 R+
denotes the distances to the nearest LIHTC property.11 The (Kc + Kd )-dimensional vector
Xj = (Xj;c ; Xj;d ) 2 RKc RKd denotes physical and location characteristics of the house j.
The vector Xj;c 2 RKc re‡ects characteristics which can, to an approximation, be thought of
as continuously chosen by agents, such as square-footage, lot size, numbers of beds/baths, and
age. The vector Xj;d 2 LXd RKd , with LXd …nite, re‡ects discrete choice variables, such
  11
    We focus on the choice of proximity to the closest LIHTC site to each house to simplify the model.
However, the model can be generalized to allow households to choose to live near multiple LIHTC sites
simultaneously.




                                                  7
as whether the property is a condo or single-family house. The L dimensional categorical
variable Yj 2 LY RL , with LY …nite, re‡ects neighborhood characteristics of the nearest
LIHTC property; in particular, we focus on median income and minority share. This
speci…cation allows the agent to view LIHTC properties in di¤erent types of neighborhoods
as distinct goods with varying impacts on their utility.12 Finally, j 2 RJ is a J dimensional
vector of property and location characteristics of the house which are observable to the home
buyer but not to the econometrician. Such variables might include whether there is a …nished
basement or not. We allow each household to have their own utility function over the housing
and neighborhood characteristics: Ui (R; X; Y; ; c) :13 c 2 R+ is a composite good, whose
price is normalized to one, which represents all other consumption.
    Under this setup, with minimal assumptions on the utility function and no supply side
assumptions, Bajari and Benkard (2005) show that there exists an equilibrium price surface
which is Lipschitz continuous with respect to characteristics and such that there is a single
price for each unique bundle of characteristics. This allow us to write equilibrium house prices
as a mapping from characteristics space pjt = pt (R; X; Y; ). Note that the equilibrium
price function can vary with time. This is because in the hedonic framework each di¤erent
time period is treated as a distinct market, in which market primitives such as consumer
preferences or marginal production costs can change.14
    The home buyers’optimization problem can now be written as:

                   max Ui (R; X; Y; ; c)           such that      pt (R; X; Y; ) + c        yi ;              (1)
                  R;X;Y; ;c


where yi is the income of agent i.
   Household i elects his ideal household and neighborhood bundle (R ; X ; Y ; ; c ) by
maximizing his utility. For the continuous housing and neighborhood characteristics, this can
be written as setting the …rst order conditions to zero. This relates the slope of households’
  12
     For example, a given household may …nd LIHTC proximity desirable when it is built in a low income
neighborhood, but undesirable when it is built in a high income neighborhood.
  13
     We do not incorporate an additive error term, "ij ; to the utility function which is speci…c to both the
house j and the individual i, making this a "pure characteristics model." See Berry & Pakes (2007) for
discussion comparing pure characteristics models to those with product -by-household speci…c unoberved
tastes.
  14
     It is important to emphasize that the existence of an equilibrium price surface is not a trivial result which
holds in any reasonable model one might write down. In a logit model of demand, for example, two di¤erent
products with identical characteristics can have di¤erent prices if …rms have di¤erent costs of production.
The reason for this is that in logit demand models, in fact any standard discrete-choice model, the existence
of the individual speci…c shock "ij ensures that products with di¤erent prices but identical characteristics
will still both have positive demand. Intuitively, the "ij shock means that identical products can’t truly
exist, in the sense that not everyone in the market will agree on their characteristics. That agents do fully
agree on characteristics in the hedonic model imposes structure on the prices.




                                                        8
utility function to the slope of the pricing surface, pt (R; X; Y; ):

                         @Ui (R ; X ; Y ;      ;c )   @pt (R ; X ; Y ;          )
                                                      =                                                 (2)
                                   @R                          @R
                         @Ui (R ; X ; Y ;      ;c )   @pt (R ; X ; Y ;          )
                                                    =                               :                   (3)
                                  @Xc                         @Xc

Thus, in the case of a continuous choice set, knowledge of the equilibrium price function is
su¢ cient to determine marginal rates of substitution at the chosen bundle.
   A¤ordable housing proximity may be viewed as an amenity in some areas, but a dis-
amenity in others. To ensure the utility function is always concave when it is increasing, we
use slightly di¤erent functional forms to represent utility when LIHTC proximity is viewed
as desirable versus undesirable. We parameterize households’ preference for proximity to
LIHTC developments as:

          UiG (R; X; Y; ;c) =         i;Y log (1 + R0;Y R) 1 [R R0;Y ] + ui (X; ) + c                   (4)
                                                  1+R
          UiB (R; X; Y; ;c) =         i;Y log            1 [R R0;Y ] + ui (X; ) + c,                    (5)
                                                1 + R0;Y

where UiG (R; X; Y; ;c) represents utility when living closer to LIHTC is viewed as desirable
and UiB (R; X; Y; ;c) represents utility when living closer to LIHTC is viewed as undesirable.
Here, R is the distance in miles to the nearest LIHTC property, R0;Y is the maximal distance
at which proximity to LIHTC of type Y contributes to agent utility. If an agent lives
more than R0;Y from an LIHTC site, his utility is not impacted. This functional form
ensures utility is always concave when it is increasing and that the utility value of living at
distance R0;Y is equal to zero regardless of whether LIHTC proximity is viewed as desirable
or undesirable. The parameter i;Y re‡ects agent i’s personal preference for proximity to
LIHTC in neighborhood of type Y. Note that individual households view LIHTC properties
in di¤erent types of neighborhoods as distinct goods and can have varying preferences with
respect to them. The function ui (X; ) re‡ects the utility contribution of the house’s
physical and location characteristics.
     We place minimal restrictions on the equilibrium price function. First, we assume that
for any Y 2 LY ; there exists some distance R0;Y , beyond which LIHTC proximity no longer
impacts prices: 15
                                             @pt (R; X; Y; )
                               if R > R0;Y :                  = 0:                          (6)
                                                   @R
  If house prices are increasing with distance to LIHTC, then standard optimization implies
  15
    In the estimation, we will identify R0;Y by …nding the point at which the price gradient is estimated to
equal 0.



                                                      9
that the location choice of agent i with utility UiB who dislike proximity to LIHTC housing
will satisfy the interior …rst-order condition if R < R0;Y :16

                                               i;Y         @pt (Ri ; Xi ; Yi ;   i)
                          if R < R0;Y :               =                               :               (7)
                                           1 + Ri                    @R

    Conversely, in areas in which house prices are decreasing with distance from LIHTC
developments, individuals with utility UiG who like proximity to a¤ordable housing will
satisfy the interior …rst-order condition if R < R0;Y :

                                                i;Y             @pt (Ri ; Xi ; Yi ;       i)
                      if R < R0;Y :                         =                                  :      (8)
                                       1 + R0;Y       Ri                  @R

Individuals who dislike proximity to LIHTC will move out of the area, satisfying Ri > R0;Y :
   The above suggests a two-step procedure for recovering households’preferences for LI-
HTC proximity. First, estimate the equilibrium price function, and in particular its gradient
with respect to LIHTC proximity in each neighborhood type Y. Next, each households0
observed choice of LIHTC proximity Ri and the estimated gradient function are used to
identify the household’s preference for LIHTC proximity i;Y from equations (7) and (8) :


5      Estimating the Equilibrium Price Function
The minimal set of assumptions outlined in the previous section do not provide much guid-
ance to the actual form of the equilibrium price function. It ultimately depends on a variety
of inputs, such as marginal costs and the nature of competition in the housing market which
are not modeled. In particular, we suppose:

                                                 e Y (R; ) + ht (X; ) ;
                            log pt (R; X; Y; ) = m                                                    (9)

where m e Y (R; ) represents the impact of being R miles away from an LIHTC development
built in neighborhood type Y: We allow the price impact of LIHTC development to vary
with ; the number of years since the LIHTC site received government funding. We assume
this price impact of LIHTC development is additively separable from the function ht (X; )
which measures the price impacts of the other physical and neighborhood characteristics.
We are interested in estimating the gradient of me Y (R; ) with respect to R.
    To develop a formal econometric model, we …rst index all of the LIHTC locations by a
  16
     Individuals of type G may also live in these neighborhoods who value proximity to LIHTC housing.
Since prices are decreasing as one moves closer to the LIHTC site in these neighborhoods, such individuals
will optimally locate themselves at the corner solution Ri = 0:



                                                      10
unique l. Each location l will have a type Y 2 LY . We refer to neighborhood l as the
1.5 mile radius circle surrounding LIHTC site l. We refer to each geographic location within
neighborhood l by its polar coordinates (r; ) ; relative to the location of the LIHTC site.17;18
Since housing and neighborhood characteristics (X; ) vary with the geographic location of
the house (r; ) and the year t, there is a mapping from geographic location and time (r; ; t)
to the available characteristics (X; ) at that location:

                                            (X; ) =gl (r; ; t) ;

where gl is a unique vector of functions for each neighborhood l: Plugging this into equation
(9):
                                                   e Y (r; ) + ht (gl (r; ; t)) :
                     log pt (r; gl (r; ; t) ; Y) = m                                     (10)

    If LIHTC development was randomly assigned to geographic locations, then equation
(10) could be estimated by treating ht (gl (r; ; t)) as a residual and non-parametrically esti-
mating the relationship between housing prices and distance to the LIHTC site R and years
since LIHTC funding . However, clearly LIHTC developers target developments to certain
types of neighborhoods and our estimator needs to account for this. To do so, we develop
a di¤erence-in-di¤erences style setup to identify m    e Y (R; ) : We estimate the econometric
speci…cation:
                               e Y (rj ; j ) + l (rj ; j ) + 'l ( j ; tj ) + "jt :
                     log pjt = m                                                          (11)

The non-parametric function l (rj ; j ) denote location "…xed e¤ects." In a standard di¤erence-
in-di¤erence framework, treatment is usually assigned to discrete entities (e.g. people, cities,
…rms), however we generalize this to the continuous case and allow for a smooth surface of
housing prices across geographic locations that do not depend on time.19 The non-parametric
function 'l ( j ; tj ) allows for a time trend for neighborhood l, which also could potentially
vary based on :20 We have assumed that local price trends do not depend on r. "jt captures
  17
     Note that by de…ning geographic locations in polar coordinates (r; ) relative to the LIHTC site l;
Distance to the LIHTC R; is equal to r; the polar coordinate radius coordinate. Thus, R = r:
  18
     We denote the probability density of house locations as f (r; ; t) : We make the technical assumption
that f ( jr; t) = f ( jr; t0 ) for any t 6= t0 :
  19
     One could consider discretizing the geography into something like census tracts or even individual houses
and including census tract or house …xed e¤ects in the regression. However, this su¤ers from a bias/variance
tradeo¤ where if the geographic units are too large, the regression does not adequately control for neighbor-
hood variation in house prices. However if the geographic units are too small (house …xed e¤ects) a large
amount of information is thrown away. In the case of house …xed e¤ects, we would only be able to use repeat
sales of the same houses to identify our estimates, even if there were many houses that only transacted once
but were located right next to each other. The smooth surface of housing prices over geography attempts to
deal with this bias/variance tradeo¤ more e¢ ciently.
  20
     For example, it could be that in some neighborhoods there is more house price appreciate to the north
than to the south for reasons unrelated to LIHTC development. While not controlling for is unlikey to



                                                     11
that some housing and neighborhood characteristics will vary discretely over geographic
location and time, and thus will not be captured by m e Y (rj ; j ) + l (rj ; j ) + 'l ( j ; tj ) :21
     To identify equation (11) we assume that local housing price trends unaccounted for by
our location "…xed e¤ects" l (rj ; j ) and neighborhood time trends 'l ( j ; tj ) are independent
of distance to the LIHTC site, rj ; and year since LIHTC funding; j :

                                    e Y (rj ;
                            E ("jt jm           j) ;   l   (rj ;   j ) ; 'l   ( j ; tj )) = 0:

While the overall neighborhood is likely an endogenous choice by developers, due to highly
local supply constraints such as the exact location of available lots, the placement and
timing of a low-income property is plausibly exogenous with respect to highly local price
trends. Intuitively, we can obtain a consistent estimate of the non-parametric price gradient
by examining price changes close to a LIHTC property vs price changes slightly further away
and then using di¤erences-in-di¤erences to "di¤erence out …xed e¤ects". Furthermore, to
the extent that the treatment e¤ect ultimately decays towards zero with distance within this
area, we can estimate the overall level treatment e¤ect by integrating our estimate of the
gradient.
    While we set up the estimator in non-parametric framework, such a strategy has been
pursued in previous papers, albeit in a more parametric form. This more parametric ap-
proach would compare price changes in an inner circle of certain radius to a price changes
in an outer ring of certain radius that surrounds the inner ring. The inner ring would be
thought to receive the treatment, while the outer ring would act as the control. Examples
of this approach include Currie et al. (2013), Autor et al. (2014), Aliprantis and Hartley
(2014), and Shoag and Veuger (2015).22 The advantage of our framework is that our results
are not sensitive to the choice of inner ring and outer ring radii and it allows for a more
granular estimate of the decay of the treatment e¤ect with distance.
    Standard estimation methods for estimating additively separable non-parametric func-
tions, as we have in equation (11) are very computationally challenging to work with when
there are many additively separable non-parametric functions.23 Instead, we build on new
bias our estimates, it can help with regard to e¢ ciency.
  21
     For example, crossing a school district boundary will lead to a discountinuous jump in school quality,
which will not be fully picked up by l (rj ; j ) ; since we assume l (rj ; j ) is continuous.
  22
     Autor et al. (2014) approachs this problem slightly di¤erently using exponential weighting based on
distance.
  23
     The standard method is a procedure called back-…tting which is a Gauss-Seidel algorithm where one esti-
mates an individual non-parametric function, given a guess of the other additively seperable non-parametric
functions. The procedure loops overs each non-paramteric fucntion, given the best guess of the others until
the method converges. See Hastie and Tibshirani (1990) for more details. This method would be incredibly
computationally challenging as we would have to estimate 2 non paramteric functions for each LIHTC site




                                                           12
methods developed in the statistics literature by Charnigo et al. (2011) and Charnigo and
Srinivasan (2015) which allow us to directly estimate the derivative of me Y (rj ; j ) allowing
us to "di¤erence out" some of additively separable nonparametric functions, which makes
estimation computationally feasible. The idea is to estimate gradients of the pricing surface
using empirical partial derivatives and then to use kernel regression as a smoothing proce-
dure. The key advantage of these methods is that they provide a way to "di¤erence out"
the …xed e¤ects and time trends in a spatial, non-parametric setting, just as one would do
in a fully parametric di¤erences-in-di¤erences design. The procedure provides substantial
computational and e¢ ciency gains over the alternative of estimating the full non-parametric
surface in levels and then taking derivatives. We outline the methodology here.
    First, we create "empirical derivatives" of the log house price surface with respect to
distance r to the LIHTC site at each housing transaction data point (r ; ; t ). Let Ye be the
empirical derivative at (r ; ; t ) within neighborhood l constructed according to:

                                            X
                                            n
                                                          log pa(k; ;r)       log pb(k; ;r)
                                  Ye ;l =           wk                                                                            (12)
                                             k=1
                                                              ra(k; ;r)       rb(k; ;r)
                                                     k
                                   wk =                                                                                           (13)
                                                n ( n + 1) =2


with the observation subscripts recursively de…ned by:

        a (1; ; r) = arg              min           rd ;        b (1; i; r) = arg          max             rd                     (14)
                              fd2Lr; :rd >r +ln g                                   fd2Lr;i :rd <ri ln g

        a (k; ; r) = arg              min                     rd ;    b (k; i; r) = arg            max                       rd   (15)
                              fd2Lr; rd >ra(k    1; ;r)   g                               fd2Lr; :rd <rb(k      1; ;r)   g

    where ln > 0:24
                              (                                                                          )
                                                    (tp              ti )2    t ( p        i)
                                                                                              2
                    Lr;i :=       p 2 f1; :::; ng :                      2 < #n ;                 < #n                            (16)
                                                    (rp              ri )         (rp     ri )2
Equation (12) calculates a numerical derivative with respect to LIHTC distance between a
pair of houses a (k; ; r) and b (k; ; r) by the di¤erence in house prices (log pa(k; ;r) log pb(k; ;r) )
divided by the di¤erence in LIHTC distance (ra(k; ;r) rb(k; ;r) ): Equation (12) calculates these
numerical derivatives for n pairs of houses and creates a weighted average of these with
weights wk : This weighted average is our empirical derivative at (r ; ; t ), Ye :
l along with m e Y (rj ; j ) : This would require iterating over more than 14,000 functions.
   24
      ln ensures we throw away house price transactions extremely close to r : If we have numerical derivatives
from transactions which occur at the exact same location as ri (such as multiple transactions in the same
condo building), the denominator in equation (12) will blow up. Thus, we throw out transaction less then
ln =0.01 miles away from ri :



                                                                13
    Equations (14), (15), and (16) determine which houses to use for the numerical derivative
calculation. Equation (16) …rst determines the set of "eligible" houses to use in the empirical
derivative. Since we are interested in the derivative with respect to LIHTC distance, we
ideally would want to compute the empirical derivatives using houses with identical s and
ts. Essentially, we want to hold and t …xed and zoom in on house price variation only
in the r dimension. Since we cannot choose where to observe house price transactions, we
create a tolerance window within which and t are "approximately" held …xed. Equation
(16) states that houses are in the set eligible for our empirical derivative calculation if both
their squared distance in time from ti and squared distance in angle from i is no more than
#tn and #n ;respectively, their squared distance in LIHTC distance ri : Essentially this means
that houses in the eligible set Lr;i are similar to (r ; ; t ) in the and t dimension, but di¤er
in the r dimension. Visually, this can be thought of house transactions which fall within a
3D "bowtie" around (r ; ; t ) ; as illustrated in Figure 2. #n is a tuning parameter which
determines the width of the bowtie. A large #n allows more house prices to be eligible for the
empirical derivative calculation, but will also add bias since they will have more variation in
the and t dimension. A smaller #n allows less data to be used in the empirical derivative
calculation, leading to more variance. We search for (at most) n nearby transactions within
this "bowtie" of nearby locations.25
    The house prices (a (1; ; r) ; :::; a (k; ; r)) are transactions which are further away from
the LIHTC site than r and are ordered by distance from r : Thus, a (1; ; r) is closer to r
than a (2; ; r). Similarly, the house prices (b (1; ; r) ; :::; b (k; ; r)) are the transactions closer
to the LIHTC site than r and are ordered by proximity to r . Thus, b (1; ; r) is closer to
r than b (2; ; r) : To construct the empirical derivatives, equations (14), (15) state that the
housing transactions are paired together based on how close they are to r : Thus, the …rst pair
of houses used in the empirical derivative calculation would be a (1; ; r) ; the closest house to
(r ; ; t ) and further from the LIHTC site than (r ; ; t ), and b (1; ; r) ; the closest house
to (r ; ; t ) which closer to the LIHTC. Note that these houses must also fall within the
bowtie tolerance region de…ned by equation (16). When constructing empirical derivatives
in each local area, we use only pre-treatment data in constructing pre-treatment derivatives
and only post-treatment data in constructing post-treatment derivatives. This is to ensure
that data from the post-treatment period has no e¤ect on the pre-treatment estimates.
    Once we have transformed our data on house price levels to data on house price deriva-
tives, we smooth these house price derivatives using a standard kernel estimator. De…ne the
  25
     We use n as the maximum number of house price pairs included in the calculation. However, sometimes
there is less than n pairs of house prices in the bowtie region. In this case, we use as many pairs as there are
available in the data. Formally, the number of available house price pairs is a random variable. We address
this in the econometric proofs in the appendix.




                                                      14
Nadaraya-Watson kernel estimate at (r; t):
                                               Pn
                          b l (r; t) = n
                                                 1
                                                 =1 KHn ((r; t) (r ; t )) Ye ;l
                                                P                                             (17)
                                             n 1 n=1 KHn ((r; t) (r ; t ))
where:
                                                          1             r        r t      t
                       KHn ((r; t)       (r ; t )) =             K                ;           (18)
                                                       hr;n ht;n            hr;n       ht;n
and K ( ; ) is the two-dimensional Epichanokov kernel with bandwidths hr;n ; ht;n . for #n > 0:
Thus, b l (r; t) is constructed around each LIHTC site l:
   The following theorem provides a consistent estimate of the gradient treatment e¤ect.

Theorem 1 Suppose:

  1. n ! 1; hn ! 0; ln ! 0;         n   ! 1; #n ! 0

  2. nhn ! 1;     n=   n#2n ! 0; ln2         n   !1

   Letting Tl denote the treatment year of LIHTC site l of type Y. Then the following:

                                     b l (r; Tl + )         bl (r; Tl       1)                (19)

                               e Y (r; )
                              @m                                      e Y (r; 1)
                                                                     @m
is a consistent estimate of      @r
                                         ;   where we assume             @r
                                                                                   = 0.

    The proof of this result, as well as a general discussion of nonparametric derivative
estimation in both the univariate and multivariate setting, are provided in the Appendix
B. This result generalizes Charnigo et al. (2011) and Charnigo and Srinivasan (2015) to
the case where the data are observed at random locations. Charnigo et. al (2011) analyze a
univariate case when the data can be observed at chosen locations. Charnigo and Srinivasan
(2015) analyze the multivariate case where the locations of the data are again …xed. Neither
of these consider the random design, di¤erence in di¤erences setup.
    In our empirical work, we de…ne the treatment year Tl as the year in which funds are allo-
cated for the development project, rather than the year the project is placed in service. We
do this for two reasons. First, prices are forward looking and thus should re‡ect anticipated
neighborhood e¤ects of low income property development when the project is announced.
Second, the construction of the project itself may have direct e¤ects on prices prior to the
development being placed into service, but after the funding is announced. We set n = 5
(the number of house pair used in each empirical derivative); hr;n = 0:3 (the bandwidth for
smoothing in miles); ht;n = 5;(the bandwidth for smoothing in years), #tn = 1:6 (the bow-tie
width in years); #n = 0:4 (the bow-tie width in distance perpendicular to r );and ln = :01


                                                       15
(miles around the empirical derivative location to drop data)26 . With enough house price
transactions around a single LIHTC site, we would be able to estimate the price impacts
for each site individually, however for power reasons we average our estimates across LIHTC
sites of type Y :

                       e\
                      @m Y (r; )    1 X hb                             bl (r; Tl
                                                                                     i
                                 =         l (r; Tl + ) dt                         1) ;
                         @r        NY l2Y

where NY is the number of LIHTC sites of type Y in our data. We use block bootstrapping
over LIHTC neighborhoods to obtain standard errors.


6      Reduced Form Results
6.1     Price E¤ects
We begin by studying the reduced form price e¤ects. For clarity of exposition, we begin by
presenting the nonparametric level estimates obtained by integrating the gradient estimates
as described in the previous section. Figure 3 illustrates the average impact of LIHTC
construction on local house prices across all neighborhoods. First, note that prices leading
up to the LIHTC funding are quite ‡at, validating our identi…cation assumption that ab-
sent LIHTC construction, housing prices very close to the LIHTC site would have trended
similarly to house prices slightly further away. Nonetheless, it appears from Figure 3 that
LIHTC construction has no signi…cant average impact on local house prices. However, this
…gure masks substantial heterogeneity in the price impact of LIHTC development on local
house prices.
    To examine such heterogeneity, we re-estimate the price e¤ects for construction in various
location types Y 2 LY . We begin by dividing the LIHTC sites into four buckets based on
the 1990 census median income of the census block group in which the LIHTC site is located.
The income quartile cuto¤s are $26,017, $38,177, and $54,642 in 2012 dollars. Note that,
consistent with the summary statistics evidence provided in Table 1, the cuto¤ for the top
income quartile is still substantially below the average block group median income of $66,652
for the counties in our sample. Moreover, LIHTC residents must earn no more than 60% of
the local area’s median gross income, which on average across all our counties is 0.6*$66,652
  26
    ln is required since something there can be transactions at the exact same location (in a condo building)
and the distance between the transaction is zero. This is not useful for the empirical derivative calculations
since the denominator of the empirical derivatives (distance between the transactions) would be zero. The
need to drop data very very close to the site of the empirical derivative shows up in the consistency proofs
in the appendix as well.




                                                     16
=$39,991. Thus, the bottom quartile of LIHTC sites have residents earning signi…cantly
below the average income cuto¤, while the top quartile neighborhoods have median incomes
about $15,000 above the average income cuto¤.27
    Figure 4 illustrates the heterogeneity in price impacts. Panel A shows that LIHTC
construction triggers large local price appreciation of approximately 6.5% after 10 years in
the bottom income quartile. Panel B shows that LIHTC development has little impact in
the second income quartile, beyond maybe small appreciation very close to the development
site. We see in panels C and D that construction of a¤ordable housing leads to striking and
markedly di¤erent e¤ects in both the third and fourth income quartiles, with construction
leading to price declines of approximately 3% after 10 years in the third income quartile and
declines of 2.5% in the fourth income quartile. The speed of the price decline in the fourth
income quartile is dramatic, with practically all losses within 0.1 miles of a LIHTC site over
the 10 year period occurring in the …rst year. However, the price declines in income quartiles
3 and 4 "radiate outwards" as time since LIHTC funding increases. At distances of 0.3 to
0.4 miles away from the LIHTC site, there are modest declines in house prices right away,
but they fall over time. It appears the housing market very quickly "prices" the impact
of LIHTC very locally, but it takes 5 to 10 years for the house prices 0.3 to 0.4 miles away
to fully adjust to the shock. In all cases, we do not see strong evidence for pre-trends in
prices, further validating our identi…cation assumption that there are no very local house
price trends correlated with LIHTC development.
    We additionally examine the impact of LIHTC development in high minority areas. In
particular, we restrict to those LIHTC sites located within a census block group that has
a population at least 50% Black or Hispanic based on the 1990 census. We then further
classify these sites based on whether they are in low income areas, de…ned as within the …rst
or second income quartile, or high income areas, de…ned as within the third or fourth income
quartiles.
    Figure 5 illustrates the e¤ects of a¤ordable housing construction in high minority areas.
Low income, high-minority areas see strong price appreciation of approximately 5% after
10 years resulting from LIHTC development, similar to the overall e¤ect we see in the …rst
and second income quartile. Conversely, prices in high income, high-minority areas remain
relatively stable, with no evidence of the house price decline documented above. Thus, the
substantial price depreciation seen in high income areas occurs in those neighborhoods with
minority populations of below 50%.
    We de…ne the short term e¤ect as the average price gradient impact on LIHTC site l
between event years 0 through 5, relative to event years -5 to 0:
 27
      This is an approximate, back of the envelope calcuation. AGMI limits vary county by county.




                                                    17
                                                    Z        5                                     Z   0
                   @ log pshort          1                       b l (r; Tl + ) d              1              bl (r; Tl
                                (r; l) =                                                                                           )d :
                       @r                5               0                                     5       5

Similarly we de…ne the longer term impact of LIHTC sites as the impact in event years 5
through 10, relative to event years -5 to 0:
                                                   Z     10                                        Z   0
                   @ log plong          1                        b l (r; Tl + ) d              1              bl (r; Tl
                               (r; l) =                                                                                            )d :
                       @r               5            5                                         5       5


   We decompose these price gradient e¤ects into di¤erential e¤ects based on income quartile
                               e short (r )
                              @m              e long (r )
                                             @m
and minority share. We de…ne Y@r j and Y@r j as the short term (within 5 years) and
long term (6-10 years) gradients of the price e¤ect with respect to distance (r) of LIHTC
development in neighborhoods of type Y:

                                   @ log pshort (r; l)    e short
                                                         @m Y     (rj )
                                                       =                + "short
                                                                            rl   ;                                                                   (20)
                                          @r                  @r
                                    @ log plong (r; l)    e long
                                                         @m Y (rj )
                                                       =                + "long
                                                                           rl :                                                                      (21)
                                           @r                @r

We allow the neigbhorhood price e¤ects to vary by the income quartile of the neighborhood
(Ylinc ) and whether the neighborhood has a high minority share (Ylminor ) :

         e short
        @m       (rj )         short             short
           Y
                           =   Yli n c
                                         (r) +   m low       (r)    Ylm in o r    1 Ylin c   2 +    short
                                                                                                    m h ig h   (r)    Ylm in o r    1 Ylin c > 2 ;    (22)
             @r
          e long
         @m        (rj )       long              long                                              long
            Y
                           =             (r) +           (r)       Ylm in o r    1 Ylin c    2 +              (r)    Ylm in o r    1 Ylin c > 2 :     (23)
              @r               Yli n c           m low                                             m h ig h




where Ylinc 2 [1; 2; 3; 4] is the income quartile of the neighorbhood surrounding LIHTC site
l and Ylminor is an indicator variable equal to 1 if LIHTC site is located in a high minority
                         long
area. short
       Y in c (r) and Y in c (r) represent the short and long term price gradient impacts of
         l                     l
LIHTC development in low minority areas in income quartile Ylinc at distance r: short mlow (r)
      long
and mlow (r) measure the di¤erential short and long term impacts in high minority areas
                                                   long
within income quartiles 1 and 2. short
                                    mhigh (r) and mhigh (r) measure the di¤erential short and
long term impacts in high minority areas within income quartiles 3 and 4.
    Figures 6 and 7 illustrate our nonparametric estimates in the short-term and long-term of
the price gradient treatment e¤ects given by equations (22) and (23) as well as 90% con…dence
intervals. Here, a negative estimate implies prices are increasing as one moves closer to the
construction site, while a positive estimate implies prices are decreasing as one moves closer.
Note that the results reported in the Q1/Q2 High Minority and Q3/Q4 High Minority plots
are di¤erential e¤ects relative to the low minority e¤ects reported in the Q1-Q4 plots. The
Q1/Q2 High Minority plot illustrates that there may be slightly larger price appreciation



                                                                                18
e¤ects in low income areas when the area is also high minority, however the e¤ect is not quite
statistically signi…cant. Further, the statistically signi…cant negative impact on the price
gradient in the Q3/Q4 High Minority plot demonstrates that high income, high minority
areas su¤er signi…cantly less price depreciation than high income, low minority areas. This
is, of course, consistent with the evidence see in the second panel of Figure 5. High minority
and low income areas receive the most house price appreciation from LIHTC development,
while higher income, low minority areas exhibit house price decline.


6.2    Mechanisms
Taken together, these results seem to imply that LIHTC construction makes low income
neighborhoods more desirable regardless of minority share, while making high income, low
minority share neighborhoods less desirable. There are a variety of possible explanations
for this …nding. Even if LIHTC development is the initial shock that causes these house
price changes, there are likely many indirect mechanisms through which LIHTC impacts the
desirability of the local neighborhood. We begin by using the merged DataQuick-HMDA
data and our nonparametric methods to investigate the impact of LIHTC development on
local demographic change. If local residents have preferences over the demographics of
their neighbors, the in-migration of LIHTC residents may further attract di¤erent types of
residents and these new in-migrants could make the neighborhood more or less desirable.
Figure 8 reports the average treatment e¤ect in levels (not gradients) from years 0 to 10
on home buyer income. Consistent with our price results, we …nd that the introduction
of a¤ordable housing leads to home buyers with higher incomes of approximately 3%-4% in
low income, low minority-share areas. Conversely, such introduction leads to a statistically
signi…cant decrease in home buyer income of approximately 1.5% in low minority, top income
quartile areas. The e¤ects are muted in high minority areas, with low-income high minority
areas not attracting quite as high income home buyers as the low-income non-minority areas.
The high income, high minority areas also do not experience declines in home buyer income,
unlike the high income, low minority areas.
    We next investigate the impact of LIHTC construction on the Black share of home
buyers, with the results presented in Figure 9. The average impact on low income, low
minority share areas is statistically and economically insigni…cant. However, low-income,
high-minority areas do see a statistically signi…cant decrease in the percentage of Black home
buyers. We also see decreases in the Black share of home buyers in the higher income, high
minority areas of 3 percentage points. Therefore, it appears that building a¤ordable housing
in high minority areas may lead to lower racial segregation.




                                             19
   We …nally explore the impact of a¤ordable housing development on local crime rates
in Figure 10. The cities of Chicago, San Francisco, and San Diego provide comprehensive
detailed local crime statistics dating from 2001-2014 in Chicago, 2003-2014 in San Diego, and
2007-2014 in San Francisco. These data provide the type of crime, as well as the date and
the exact location in the city. Since this is a much smaller sample (we have only have 127
LIHTC sites developed in this time frame in these cities), we cut the data only by high/low
income and high/low minority. We …nd both violent and property crime decline in low
income areas, regardless of minority share. However, in higher income areas we do not see
any increase in crime, rather property crime may even fall slightly. Lowering crime in low
income areas appears to be one of the driving mechanisms through which LIHTC improves
low income neighborhoods.28


6.3       Model Estimates
To keep the model parsimonious, we only use the short term and long term price gradient es-
                                                                                  e short (r )
                                                                                 @m
timates to recover households’preferences for LIHTC proximity. We denote these Y@r j
        e long (r )
       @m
and Y@r j ; as in equations (22) and (23).
    Figure 6 plots the estimates of the short-term price gradient e¤ects and Figure 7 plots
the estimates of the long-term price gradient e¤ects. These are labeled the "non-parametric
estimates" in the …gures. To use these estimates within our structural model to recover
preferences, we set the gradient equal to zero at all distances past the point where the
gradient …rst hits the x-axis and crosses zero or the point at which it comes the closest to
zero. These estimates are also shown in Figures 8 and 9.29 We use the point at which the
price e¤ect goes to zero as our estimate of R0;Y ; the distance beyond which household utility
is no longer impacted by LIHTC proximity.
    Using the estimated price gradients, we use equations (5) and (4) to estimate each house-
hold’s preference to live near LIHTC within neighborhood type Y; ^ i;Y : 30

                                    e Ys (rj )
                                   @m                         e Ys (rj )
                                                             @m
              if R    < R0;Y and               > 0 : ^ i;Y =             (1 + Ri );                       (24)
                                      @r                        @r
                                    e Ys (rj )
                                   @m                         @me Ys (rj )
              if R    < R0;Y   and             < 0 : ^ i;Y =               (1 + R0;Y         Ri ) ;       (25)
                                      @r                          @r
  28
     It is not uncommon for LIHTC developments to include live-in 24 hour security guards. Local police
sometimes also set up an outpost within LIHTC developments. These investments may be part of the reason
crime declines.
  29
     Our raw estimates are never statistically di¤erent from zero at any distance past the point where gradient
…rst hits the x-axis.
  30
     We identify each household’s preference for LIHTC proximity within neighborhood of type Y that the
household chose to live in.




                                                      20
where s represents whether the household purchased their home in the short term or long
term after LIHTC development. We designate LIHTC proximity to be desirable within
neighborhoods where LIHTC development caused price appreciation, while we designate
LIHTC proximity as undesirable within areas where it causes price decline.
    We now examine how households’preferences for LIHTC proximity vary with race and
income of home buyers. We measure how much each household is willing to pay (as a share
of their house price) to live 0.1 miles from an LIHTC development. Panel A of Figures 11
and 12 shows that higher income households are willing to pay the most to live close the
LIHTC development in Q1 income areas, conditional on wanting to live in a Q1 income
area. This is true in both high and low minority areas. We …nd minority home buyers are
willing to pay more to live in high minority, Q1 income areas than non-minority home buyers,
while the reverse is true in low minority Q1 income areas. Overall, households choosing to
live near LIHTC site in Q1 income areas are willing to pay about 6% of their house price
to live 0.1 miles from an LIHTC site. The preferences in Q2 areas are essentially zero, as
re‡ected in the essentially zero price e¤ects discussed previously. Within low minority Q3
areas and Q4 areas, we …nd that higher income households are willing to pay slightly more
to avoid living 0.1 miles from an LIHTC site. We also …nd that minority home buyers are
less deterred by LIHTC development in Q3 and Q4 low minority areas than non-minority
home buyers. Overall, these households are willing to pay about 1.6% of their house price to
avoid living within 0.1 miles of LIHTC. Within Q3 and Q4 high minority areas, the e¤ects
are economically insigni…cant, consistent with the economically insigni…cant price e¤ects
discussed previously. Appendix …gure A1 and A2 report similar e¤ects measured in dollars,
instead of in house price percentages, as these will be the numbers more closely linked to
those used in the next section for the welfare calculation. These …gures are dominated by
the fact that higher income households buy more expensive houses, creating a strong link
between home buyer income and willingness to pay for LIHTC proximity.


7      Welfare
We consider the local, long term welfare impact of building a¤ordable housing in a variety of
neighborhood types Y 2 LY ; holding …xed the desirability of all other neighborhoods outside
of the LIHTC area.31 In the pre-period, prior to construction of a LIHTC development, the
local population optimizes over a vector of housing and neighborhood characteristics (X; )
  31
    While we are able to quantify the welfare bene…ts of LIHTC development locally, we cannot account for
potential broader impacts on the city/state as a whole. For example, if LIHTC simply relocated crime to
other neighborhoods in a dispersed manner, we cannot capure the welfare e¤ects of the dispersed impacts
across the whole city.



                                                   21
according to the following problem:

                             max ui (X; ) + c s.t.        h0 (X; ) + c      yi                            (26)

where ui (X; ) is an individual-speci…c utility function and h0 (X; ) is the equilibrium
hedonic price function over characteristics in the pre-period.32 We denote the optimal bundle
of characteristics chosen by household i prior to LIHTC construction as X0;i ; 0;i : Let Rpre
denote the distance from the future LIHTC site at this optimal bundle of characteristics.33
    We assume zero moving costs, such that when a¤ordable housing is built, all individuals
in the local population will reoptimize according to the problem:

       max Ui (R; X; Y; ; c)        such that      p1 (R; X; ) + c      yi + p1 Rpre ; X0;i ;   0;i   ;
       R;X; ;c


where the individual utility function follows the parametric form de…ned in equations (4)
and (5). Here,
                             p1 (R; X; ) = me Y (R) + h1 (X; )

is the new equilibrium hedonic price function , with m e Y (R) = 0 for all R > R0;Y The quan-
tity p1 Rpre ; X0;i ; 0;i in the budget constraint is the revenue received from the sale of the
current home. We denote optimal choices in the post period by agent i as R1;i ; X1;i ; 1;i ; c1;i :
We assume that h1 (X; ) = h0 (X; ) such that all agents choose the same bundle of house
of characteristics (X; ) in the post-period as in the pre-period.
    The welfare impacts of LIHTC construction accrues to homeowners, renters, and absentee
landlords. For homeowners, if Rpre          R0;Y and R1;i      R0;Y , then the welfare impact
   Ui = 0. The e¤ect of LIHTC on utility is zero at distances beyond R0;Y , agents do not
choose an alternative bundle of house characteristics (X; ), as they can obtain their original
bundle of house characteristics for the same price. For homeowners who live at a location
Rpre < R0;Y in the pre-period, but optimally choose R1;i          R0;Y post construction, the
welfare impact is given by the change in prices:

                                                  e Y (Rpre ) :
                                             Ui = m

These households move away from the LIHTC development, but face welfare impacts from
                                                        e Y (Rpre )) they must realize in
the amount of house price appreciation or depreciation (m
  32
     We assume that agents do not anticipate LIHTC development when they choose their optimal bundle
of characteristics in the pre-period.
  33
     Note that Rpre is not chosen by agents in the pre-period, but is a function of the phsyical location of
the optimal bundle X0;i ; 0;i :




                                                    22
order to move.
   For homeowners who optimally choose R1;i < R0;Y , the welfare impact is given by the
resulting utility gain and change in prices. For areas where being closer to LIHTC is desirable
we have:

       Ui =     i;Y   log 1 + R0;Y                 e Y (Rpre )
                                            R1;i + m               e Y R1;i ;
                                                                   m              if Rpre     R0;Y
       Ui =     i;Y   log 1 + R0;Y          R1;i     e Y R1;i ;
                                                     m                               if Rpre > R0;Y :

For areas where being further from LIHTC is desirable we have:


                                1 + R1;i
         Ui =      i;Y   log                    e Y (Rpre )
                                               +m                e Y R1;i ;
                                                                 m              if Rpre     R0;Y
                                1 + R0;Y
                                1 + R1;i
         Ui =      i;Y   log                       e Y R1;i ;
                                                   m                              if Rpre > R0;Y :
                                1 + R0;Y

    Since we do not observe data directly on renters, we must make the assumption that house
prices are equal to the present discounted value of rents. The renter’s utility optimization
is:
                  max Ui (R; X; Y; ; c) such that p1 (R; X; ) + c yi :
                  R;X; ;c

The only di¤erence between the renter’s and home owner’s optimization is that homeowners
receive the revenue from the house sale of their previous residence. This money, for renters,
would go to the landlord in the form of rent payments.
    We …nd that the welfare impacts for renters who optimally choose R1;i < R0;Y in areas
where being closer to LIHTC is desirable are given by:

                               Ui =   i;Y   log 1 + R0;Y    R1;i     e Y R1;i ;
                                                                     m

Renters bene…t from LIHTC proximity, but also face the negative impact of having to pay
higher rents. Within areas where being further from LIHTC is desirable renters’utility is
given by:
                                         1 + R1;i
                          Ui = i;Y log               e Y R1;i :
                                                     m
                                        1 + R0;Y
While these renters do not like living near LIHTC, they are compensated for it by the lower
rents. On net, these renters are made strictly better o¤ since they could have chosen to live
far away from the LIHTC site and receive a utility of zero. The impact is zero for renters who




                                                      23
optimally choose R1;i > R0;Y .34 Finally, the welfare impact on absentee landlords whose
properties are located at R1;i   R0;Y is given by the present value of the change in rents
they collect:
                                      Ui = me Y R1;i :

The impact is zero for landlords with properties located at distances greater than R0;Y since
rents do not change. These impacts are summarized in Tables 2 and 3.
   We aggregate these individual welfare e¤ects to calculate the total welfare impact on
homeowners, renters, and absentee landlords. To this end, let q H ( Y ; R1 ; Race; yjY;R1 < R0;Y )
denote the joint density of preference parameters, distance chosen from the LIHTC site, race,
and income given that the household has chosen to live in a neighborhood of type Y, with
R1 < R0;Y miles from an LIHTC site. This density can be directly estimated from the
merged DataQuick-HMDA data. Then the aggregate welfare impact of a LIHTC site devel-
oped in neighborhood of type Y for homeowners is given by (for each amenity/disamenity
type):
                     XZ
   H
  Uagg;Y   = NH              Y   log 1 + R0;Y     R1;i q H (   Y ; R1 ; Race; yjY;R1   < R0;Y ) d   Y dR1 dy;
                     Race
                     XZ                1 + R1;i
   H
  Uagg;Y   = NH              Y   log               qH (   Y ; R1 ; Race; yjY;R1   < R0;Y ) d   Y dR1 dy
                     Race
                                       1 + R0;Y

where NH is the average number of homeowners who choose to live around a single LIHTC
site in neighborhoods of type Y; within R0;Y miles of the LIHTC site. We measure NH from
the 5-year pooled American Community Survey block group data on the median number of
homeowners per LIHTC site living within R0;Y miles of the LIHTC site of type Y.35 These
numbers are reported in Table A1.
    To calculate the impact for renters we assume that the density of preference parame-
ters and chosen LIHTC distances conditional on race and income is the same as that for
homeowners, that is:

            qR (   Y ; R1 jRace; y; Y;R1   < R0;Y ) = q H (   Y ; R1 jRace; y; Y;R1   < R0;Y ) :

We can then calculate the aggregate welfare impact on renters as (within areas where LIHTC
  34
     This places a lower bound on the welfare impact on each household. For some households, the predicted
welfare e¤ects appear below this bound because the functional form of the utility function is not curved
enough to satisfy the lower bound on renter utility. We truncate the welfare e¤ects for these household to
be equal to the lower bound of zero welfare e¤ects.
  35
     We meaure these household counts for the LIHTC sites used in our estimation, not the entire country.




                                                    24
is viewed as an amenity):
                     XZ
   R
  Uagg;Y   = NR                   Y   log 1 + R0;Y       R1;i     e Y (R1 ) q R (
                                                                  m                  Y ; R1 ; Race; y) d Y dR1 dy
                    Race
                     XZ
           = NR                   Y   log 1 + R0;Y       R1;i     e Y (R1 ) q R (
                                                                  m                  Y ; R1 jRace; y) q
                                                                                                          R
                                                                                                              (Race; y) d   Y dR1 dy
                    Race
                     XZ
           = NR                   Y   log 1 + R0;Y       R1;i     e Y (R1 ) q H (
                                                                  m                  Y ; R1 jRace; y) q
                                                                                                          R
                                                                                                              (Race; y) d   Y dR1 dy
                    Race
                     XZ                                                                                   q R (Race; y)
           = NR                   Y log 1 + R0;Y         R1;i     e Y (R1 ) q H (
                                                                  m                  Y ; R1 ; Race; y)                  d   Y dR1 dy:
                    Race
                                                                                                          q H (Race; y)

In areas where LIHTC is viewed as a disamenity we have:

                  XZ                    1 + R1;i                                                 q R (Race; y)
   R
  Uagg;Y   = NR             Y log                        e Y (R1 ) q H (
                                                         m                   Y ; R1 ; Race; y)                 d    Y dR1 dy:
                  Race
                                        1 + R0;Y                                                 q H (Race; y)

    The joint density of race and income for both renters and homeowners, q R (Race; y) and
q H (Race; y) respectively, are calculated from 5-year pooled American Community Survey
micro data. For the price e¤ects due to LIHTC proximity, m       e Y ; we will use our long
term price estimates, derived from equation 23. Finally, the aggregate impact on absentee
landlords is given by:

                           XZ                                               q R (Race; y)
              ll
             Uagg   = NR              e Y (R1 ) q H (
                                      m                 Y ; R1 ; Race; y)                 d   Y dR1 dy:
                           Race
                                                                            q H (Race; y)

    Panel A of Table 4 reports the average willingness to pay for LIHTC development per
homeowner, renter, and landlord impacted by LIHTC development within neighborhoods of
di¤erent types. Within Q1 income, low minority areas, the average homeowner would be
willing to pay $23,403 for LIHTC development. The average renter would be willing to pay
$6502 and the average landlord would be willing to pay $6011.36 In Q1, high minority areas,
the average homeowner would be willing to pay $16,857, the average renter would be willing
to pay $6475, and the average landlord would be willing to pay $6099. There are substantial
bene…ts to the community from LIHTC development in Q1 income areas. However, the
opposite is true in low minority Q3 and Q4 areas. Within Q4 areas, the average homeowner
would be willing to pay $3972 to deter LIHTC development, the average renter would be
willing to be $67 for LIHTC development and the average landlord would be willing to pay
  36
    The sum of the welfare bene…ts to landlords and renters is less than that of homeowners because renters
tend to be lower income, lowering their willingness to pay.




                                                         25
$2416 to deter LIHTC development. In high minority, Q4 income areas, residents bene…t
from LIHTC development.
    Table 5 scales these numbers to aggregate e¤ects to get total willingness to pay by society
from LIHTC development in di¤erent areas. The units are reported in thousands of dollars.
Since low income areas tend to be quite dense, as evidenced by Table A1, the aggregate
bene…t to homeowners from LIHTC development in Q1 income low minority areas is $57.9
million. The aggregate bene…t to renters is $29.2 million and the bene…t to landlords is
$29.0 million. In total, society would be improved by $116.2 million from a single LIHTC
development in a low income, low minority area. This number is even bigger in low income,
high minority areas, ($211 million), simply because there tend to be more people living close
to LIHTC in these areas. Conversely, development of LIHTC in a Q4, low minority area
leads to an aggregate welfare loss of $12.1 million.
    Viewing LIHTC development as a place based policy, these estimates suggests that there
could be large welfare gains from development to low income areas. However, the location of
a¤ordable housing also in‡uences the welfare of the tenants living in the a¤ordable housing.
Recent work by Chetty et al. (2015) …nds that young children strongly bene…t from growing
up in lower poverty neighborhoods. While the neighborhoods types analyzed in Chetty et al.
(2015) do not map directly into our de…nitions, they report that a child moving out of public
housing and into a low poverty area gains $99,000 in presented discounted value of future
income over a lifetime. If we use this number to benchmark the potential gains to LIHTC
tenants living in a Q4 low minority area versus a Q1 low minority neighborhood, and assume
each apartment has two children in it, the average LIHTC development would improve the
welfare of these children by $26.7 million.37 This is an under estimate of the total welfare
bene…ts to these households, as it only values the increased earnings and not other bene…ts
which have been documented, such as better measures of mental health and lower obesity
rates (Kling et al, 2007). The bene…ts to these tenants ($26.7 million) more than o¤sets
the losses to local residents in these high income areas ($12.1 million). However, there is
an opportunity cost of $116 million by not developing and investing in the lowest income
neighborhoods, which is more than 4 times the welfare bene…ts documented by Chetty et
al. (2015). This makes development of a¤ordable housing in low income areas appear to
improve the economic welfare of many low-income households. We must caveat these points
with the fact that there may likely be diminishing marginal returns to new housing in poor
  37
    We assume the LIHTC remains a¤ordable for 30 years and that each apartment will house a household
with two children for 15 years. Thus, two households will leave in each apartment for 15 years, sequentiailly.
We discount the present value of childrens’income of the 2nd household moving in the apartment 15 years
after it was built by 3%, same discount rate used in Chety et al. (2015). We assume the LIHTC site at 82
apartments.




                                                     26
areas if these policies were scaled substantially, however this is likely also true of the bene…ts
estimated by Chetty et al (2015).


8     Conclusion
In this paper, we study multifamily housing developments funded through the Low Income
Housing Tax Credit (LIHTC) to quantify the costs and bene…ts of a¤ordable housing de-
velopment on surrounding neighborhoods. Leveraging new econometric methods, we …nd
that LIHTC construction has heterogenous e¤ects on local house prices based on neighbor-
hood characteristics. In lower income areas, house prices appreciate substantially over the
long-run in response to the introduction of a¤ordable housing projects. Areas with a high
minority share also experience signi…cant price appreciation when a LIHTC development is
built. On the other hand, prices in areas with higher median incomes and low minority
shares tend to depreciate over the long-run.
    We employ a structural, generalized hedonic model of housing choice to link these esti-
mated price e¤ects to individual preferences for proximity to low income housing. In areas
where a¤ordable housing developments are viewed as an amenity, higher income households
are willing to pay more for proximity. Conversely, higher income households are willing
to pay more to live further away from a¤ordable housing developments in areas where such
properties are viewed as a disamenity.
    Our results show that a¤ordable housing development has large welfare impacts as a
place based policy, which more than o¤set the welfare impacts to tenants living in a¤ordable
housing. Given the goals of many a¤ordable housing policies is to decrease income and racial
segregation in housing markets, these goals might be achieved by investing in a¤ordable
housing in low income and high minority areas, which will then spark in-migration of high
income and a more racially diverse set of residents.




                                               27
   References
Aliprantis, D. (2014). "Assessing the Evidence on Neighborhood E¤ects from Moving to
Opportunity," Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland working paper 10-33R.
Aliprantis, D. and D. Hartley (2014). "Blowing It Up and Knocking It Down: The Local
and Citywide E¤ects of Demolishing High-Concentration Public Housing on Crime," Federal
Reserve Bank of Cleveland working paper 10-22R.
Autor, D., Palmer, C. J., and P. A. Pathak. (2014). "Housing Market Spillovers: Evidence
from the End of Rent Control in Cambridge, Massachusetts," Journal of Political Economy
122(3): 661-717.
Bajari, P. and C. L. Benkard (2005). "Demand Estimation with Heterogeneous Consumers
and Unobserved Product Characteristics: A Hedonic Approach," Journal of Political Econ-
omy 113(6): 1239-1276.
Baum-Snow, N. and J. Marion (2009). "The E¤ects of Low Income Housing Tax Credit
Developments on Neighborhoods," Journal of Public Economics 93(5-6): 654-666.
Bayer, P., F. Ferreira and R. McMillian (2007). "A Uni…ed Framework for Measuring Pref-
erences for Schools and Neighborhoods," Journal of Political Economy 115(4): 588-638.
Berry, S., J. Levinsohn and A. Pakes (1995). "Automobile Prices in Market Equilibrium,"
Econometrica 63(4). 841-890.
Berry, S., & Pakes, A. (2007). "The pure characteristics demand model," International
Economic Review, 48(4), 1193-1225.
Campbell, J. Y., Giglio, S., & Pathak, P. (2011). Forced Sales and House Prices. The
American Economic Review, 2108-2131.
Card, D., Mas, A., & Rothstein, J. (2008). Tipping and the Dynamics of Segregation. The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 177-218.
Charnigo, R., Hall, B., Srinivasan, C. (2011). “A Generalized Cp Criterion for Derivative
Estimation.”Technometrics, 53, 238-253.
Charnigo, R., and C. Srinivasan (2015). "A Multivariate Generalized Cp and Surface Esti-
mation," Biostatistics, 16, 311-325.
Chetty, R., N. Hendren, and L. Katx (2015) "The E¤ects of Exposure to Better Neighbor-
hoods on Children: New Evidence from the Moving to Opportunity Experiment" Harvard
University working paper.
Diamond, R. (2015). "The Determinants and Welfare Implications of US Workers’Diverging
Location Choices by Skill: 1980-2000," American Economic Review, forthcoming.
Ellen, I. G., Lacoe, J., & Sharygin, C. A. (2013). Do foreclosures cause crime?. Journal of
Urban Economics, 74, 59-70.
Goujard, A. (2011).   "The spillovers from social housing, evidence from housing prices,"
LSE working paper.



                                            28
Erikesen, M. (2009). "The market price of Low-Income Housing Tax Credits," Journal of
Urban Economics 66: 141-149.
Erikesen, M. and S. Rosenthal (2010). "Crowd out e¤ects of place-based subsidized rental
housing: New evidence from the LIHTC program," Journal of Public Economics 94: 953-966.
Green, R., S. Malpezzi and K. Seah (2002). "Low Income Housing Tax Credit Housing
Developments and Property Values," The Center for Urban Land Economics Research, Uni-
versity of Wisconsin
Guerrieri, V., E. Hurst and D. Hartley (2013). "Endogenous Gentri…cation and Housing
Price Dynamics.," Journal of Public Economics 100: 45-60.
Handbury, J. (2013). "Are Poor Cities Cheap for Everyone? Non-Homotheticity and the
Cost of Living Across U.S. Cities," University of Pennsylvania working paper.
Kling, J., J. Liebman and L. Katz (2007). "Experimental Analysis of Neighborhood E¤ects,"
Econometrica 75(1): 83-119.
McFadden, D. (1973). "Conditional Logit Analysis of Qualitative Choice Behavior," in
Frontiers of Econometrics, ed. by P. Zarembka. New York: Academic Press.
Owens, R., E. Rossi-Hansberg and P. Sarte (2010).      "Housing Externalities," Journal of
Political Economy 118(3): 409-432.
Rosen, S. (1974). "Hedonic Prices and Implicit Markets: Product Di¤erentiation in Pure
Competition," Journal of Political Economy 82: 34-55.
Rossi-Hansberg, E., Sarte, P. D., & Owens III, R. (2010). Housing Externalities. Journal of
Political Economy, 118(3).
Schwartz, A., I. Ellen, I. Voicu and M. Schill (2006). "The External E¤ects of Subsidized
Housing Investment," Regional Science and Urban Economics 36(2): 697-707.
Sinai, T. and J. Waldfogel (2005). "Do Low-Income Housing Subsidies Increase the Occupied
Housing Stock?" Journal of Public Economics 89(11): 2137-2164.




                                            29
                                          Table 1: Summary Statistics
                                     Panel A: 1990 Census Block Group Data
                                                                       Block Groups with
                               Whole US         Counties in Sample LIHTC Development Sites
1990 Black Share                 0.1212                0.1164                 0.2402
                                [0.2399]             [0.2334]               [0.3121]
1990 Hispanic Share              0.0827               0.1526                 0.2363
                                [0.1668]             [0.2091]               [0.2518]
1990 Median Income               56482                 66652                  44694
                                [28730]               [32620]                [23208]

                                        Panel B: LIHTC Developments
                               All LIHTC      Non-Rural LIHTC       Estimation Sample
Year Funds Allocated             1997.6               1997.7                  2000.8
                                 [6.70]               [6.76]                  [5.55]
# Low Income Units                60.3                 68.5                    82.2
                                 [71.5]               [79.1]                  [86.3]
% Units Low Income                0.97                 0.96                    0.96
                                 [0.13]               [0.14]                  [0.13]
New Construction                  0.63                 0.59                    0.58
                                 [0.48]               [0.49]                  [0.49]
Rehab Existing Building           0.37                 0.41                    0.42
                                 [0.48]               [0.49]                  [0.49]
In Central City                   0.46                 0.61                    0.64
                                 [0.50]               [0.49]                  [0.48]
In Metro,Non-Central City         0.30                 0.39                    0.36
                                 [0.46]               [0.49]                  [0.48]
In Rural Area                     0.24                   0                       0
                                 [0.43]                 [0]                     [0]
Observations                     32799                24843                    6882

                                         Panel C: DataQuick & HMDA Data
                             Transactions<1        Transactions<.5     Transactions<.2        Transactions<.1
                            mi of LIHTC Site      mi of LIHTC Site    mi of LIHTC Site        mi of LIHTC Site
Housing Transaction Price         305610                284742              268217                  270652
                                 [336428]              [380557]            [404520]                [471396]
Housing Transaction Price         323703                302575              284829                  284256
-HMDA Matched                    [319851]              [364203]            [377024]                [411580]
% of Home Buyers Black             0.0612                0.068               0.0735                  0.0726
                                 [0.4670]              [0.4737]            [0.4800]                [0.4802]
Income of Home Buyer               97619                 94375               92649                   93299
                                  [50859]               [51099]             [52625]                 [54365]
Housing Transactions             8164281               3430606              807411                  241875

                               Panel D: Crime Rates within 1 mi of LIHTC Sites
                             Low Minority      High Minority            Low Minority           High Minority
                             Income Q1/2        Income Q1/2             Income Q3/4            Income Q3/4
Annual Violent Crimes            617.1                 586.9                    383.3               453.0
per Square Mile                 [2720.7]             [1557.8]                 [2044.2]            [1154.0]
Annual Property Crimes           2523.2               1083.1                   1495.1               982.3
per Square Mile                 [9701.8]             [2787.6]                 [7155.5]            [2670.2]
Observations                    678030               2452968                  989424              559950
  Note:    All prices inflated to 2012 dollars.                   Standard deviations in brackets.    Crime
  data  covers  San   Diego    2003-2014,  Chicago               2001-2014,  and     San Francisco 2007-2014
  for 127 LIHTC Sites.         An observation for               crime data is a 0.025 square mile area.


                                                      30
                                  Table 2: Welfare Impacts of LIHTC on Households (LIHTC Amenity)

           ∆Ui                  Homeowners                                                Renters                                            Landlords
                 ∗
Rpre   > R0,Y , R1,i > R0,Y     0                                                     0                                                 0
                 ∗                                   ∗          ∗                                              ∗          ∗
Rpre   > R0,Y , R1,i < R0,Y     γi,Y log 1 + R0,Y − R1,i   −m
                                                            fY R1,i                       γi,Y log 1 + R0,Y − R1,i   −m
                                                                                                                      fY R1,i                   0
                                                                                                                                                      
               ∗                fY (Rpre )                                                                                                       ∗
Rpre < R0,Y , R1,i > R0,Y       m                                                         0                                                  m
                                                                                                                                             fY R1,i
                                                                                                                                                
               ∗                                     ∗                                                         ∗        ∗                        ∗
Rpre < R0,Y , R1,i < R0,Y       γi,Y log 1 + R0,Y − R1,i                  fY (Rpre ) −
                                                                        + m               γi,Y log 1 + R0,Y − R1,i −m
                                                                                                                    fY R1,i                  m
                                                                                                                                             fY R1,i
                                              
                                  ∗
                           m
                           fY R1,i
Note: Rpre represents distance of household’s chosen location before LIHTC development from new LIHTC development
        ∗
site. R1,i represents chosen distance from LIHTC development site when household reoptimizes location post LIHTC
development. R0,Y represents max distance at which LIHTC proximity can impact utility. Each row and column pair
represents a different household type. Entry summarizes welfare impact of LIHTC development when agents view LIHTC
proximity as an amenity.


                                Table 3: Welfare Impacts of LIHTC on Households (LIHTC Disamenity)

           ∆Ui                  Homeowners                                                Renters                                            Landlords
                 ∗
Rpre   > R0,Y , R1,i > R0,Y     0                                                       0                                                   0
                                                  ∗
                                               1+R1,i
                                                                                                          ∗
                                                                                                         1+R1,i
                                                                                                                                
                 ∗                                                     ∗                                                   ∗
Rpre >   R0,Y , R1,i   < R0,Y   γi,Y log       1−R0,Y
                                                            −m
                                                             fY       R1,i                γi,Y log       1−R0,Y
                                                                                                                      −m
                                                                                                                       fY R1,i                  0
                                                                                                                                                      
               ∗                fY (Rpre )                                                                                                       ∗
Rpre < R0,Y , R1,i > R0,Y       m                                                         0                                                  m
                                                                                                                                             fY R1,i
                                                 ∗
                                                                                                          ∗
                                                                                                                  
                                               1+R1,i                                                    1+R1,i
                                                                                                                                                  
               ∗                                             fY (Rpre ) − m   ∗                                            ∗                     ∗
Rpre < R0,Y , R1,i < R0,Y       γi,Y log       1−R0,Y
                                                            +m            fY R1,i         γi,Y log       1−R0,Y
                                                                                                                      −m
                                                                                                                       fY R1,i               m
                                                                                                                                             fY R1,i

Note: Rpre represents distance of household’s chosen location before LIHTC development from new LIHTC development
        ∗
site. R1,i represents chosen distance from LIHTC development site when household reoptimizes location post LIHTC
development. R0,Y represents max distance at which LIHTC proximity can impact utility. Each row and column pair
represents a different household type. Entry summarizes welfare impact of LIHTC development when agents view LIHTC
proximity as a disamenity.




                                                                                 31
               Table 4: Mean Utility Benefit per Household from LIHTC Construction

                                        Panel A: Low Minority Areas

                                         Income Q1           Income Q2           Income Q3            Income Q4
Average Benefit per Home Owner             23403                 208                -3636               -3972
Average Benefit per Renter                 6502                  67                  234                  67
Average Benefit per Landlord               6011                  46                 -2843               -2416

                                        Panel B: High Minority Areas
                                         Income Q1           Income Q2           Income Q3            Income Q4
Average Benefit per Home Owner             16857                2414                 996                 3255
Average Benefit per Renter                 6475                  190                 342                  971
Average Benefit per Landlord               6099                 1288                 375                 1090

Note: Mean welfare benefit from LIHTC construction to households who choose to live nearby. Utility is measured in
 2012 dollars. To decompose effect between renters and landlords we assume the present discounted value of future
 rents is equal to house prices.




                                                      32
                  Table 5: Total Utility Benefit to Households from LIHTC Construction

                                         Panel A: Low Minority Areas

                                           Income Q1            Income Q2           Income Q3           Income Q4
Aggregate   Benefit   to   Home Owners       57,945                61.46               -3,789              -9,008
Aggregate   Benefit   to   Renters           29,208                23.87                258                 78.48
Aggregate   Benefit   to   Landlords         29,048                28.42               -3,331              -3,208
Aggregate   Benefit   to   Society           116201                113.7               -6,861             -12,138

                                         Panel B: High Minority Areas
                                           Income Q1            Income Q2           Income Q3           Income Q4
Aggregate   Benefit   to   Home Owners       63,460                1,446               3,615               14,508
Aggregate   Benefit   to   Renters           73,417                314.7               1,903                4,861
Aggregate   Benefit   to   Landlords         74,236                2,672               2,262                5,907
Aggregate   Benefit   to   Society           211113                4,433               7,780               25,277

Note: Total welfare benefit from LIHTC construction to households. Utility is measured in thousands of 2012 dollars.
 To decompose effect between renters and landlords we assume the present discounted value of future rents is equal to
 house prices.




                                                        33
                              Figure 1: Counties Used in Analysis




Note: Counties were selected based on whether the history of housing transaction data began in 1996
 or earlier and had at least an average of 1000 arm-length transactions per year. This gives 129
 counites in 15 states and covers 31% of the US population.




                                               34
             Figure 2: Example of Bowtie Threshold Used in Empirical Derivatives




Note: LIHTC site is located in the middle of the ring. The site marked X is where the empirical
 derivative with respect to LIHTC distance is being measured. Houses inside the shaded region are
 candidates for the empirical derivative calculation.




                                              35
                                                  Figure 3: Average Price Impact of LIHTC




                           0.02


                           0.01
      Log Housing Price




                             0


                          −0.01


                          −0.02


                            1.2
                                    1
                                                                                                           10
                                         0.8
                                                0.6                                              5
                                                        0.4
                                                                                 0
                                                              0.2
                                                                    0   −5
                                  Miles to LIHTC Site
                                                                                     Years Since Funding

Note: Kernel smoothed estimates of log house prices using Nadaraya-Watson estimator with Epanech-
 nikov kernel. Estimates integrate over the estimated derivatives to measure log price levels at a
 given distance from LIHTC site, relative to 1.4 miles away.




                                                                        36
                                                     Figure 4: Price Impact of LIHTC by Neighborhood Median Income
                                            (a) Q1 Income Neighorhoods                                                                              (b) Q2 Income Neighorhoods



                      0.07

                      0.06                                                                                                    0.02

                      0.05
                                                                                                                              0.01
 Log Housing Price




                                                                                                         Log Housing Price
                      0.04

                      0.03
                                                                                                                                0
                      0.02

                      0.01
                                                                                                                             −0.01
                        0

                     −0.01                                                                                                   −0.02
                     −0.02
                       1.2                                                                                                     1.2
                                1                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                       10                                                                                                      10
                                     0.8                                                                                                     0.8
                                             0.6                                            5                                                        0.6                                            5
                                                     0.4                                                                                                     0.4
                                                                            0                                                                                                       0
                                                            0.2                                                                                                     0.2
                                                                   0   −5                                                                                                  0   −5
                              Miles to LIHTC Site                                                                                     Miles to LIHTC Site
                                                                                Years Since Funding                                                                                     Years Since Funding


                                                                                                                                                    (d) Q4 Income Neighorhoods
                                            (c) Q3 Income Neighorhoods


                                                                                                                              0.005
                      0.005
                                                                                                                                 0
                         0

                     −0.005
                                                                                                        Log Housing Price




                                                                                                                             −0.005
Log Housing Price




                      −0.01
                                                                                                                              −0.01
                     −0.015
                                                                                                                             −0.015
                      −0.02

                     −0.025                                                                                                   −0.02

                      −0.03
                                                                                                                             −0.025
                     −0.035                                                                                                     1.2
                        1.2                                                                                                              1
                                                                                                                                                                                                               10
                                 1                                                                                                            0.8
                                                                                                        10
                                      0.8                                                                                                             0.6                                            5
                                              0.6                                            5                                                                0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                    0
                                                      0.4                                                                                                            0.2
                                                                            0
                                                             0.2                                                                                                           0   −5
                                                                                                                                       Miles to LIHTC Site
                                                                   0                                                                                                                     Years Since Funding
                               Miles to LIHTC Site                     −5
                                                                                 Years Since Funding




Note: Kernel smoothed estimates of log house prices using Nadaraya-Watson estimator with Epanech-
  nikov kernel. Estimates integrate over the estimated derivatives to measure log price levels at a
  given distance from LIHTC site, relative to 1.4 miles away. Household median income quartile cut-
  offs are $26017, $38177, and $54642 in 2012 dollars, as reported in the 1990 Census block group of
  the LIHTC site.




                                                                                                       37
    Figure 5: Price Impact of LIHTC by Median Income within High Minority Neighborhoods
                                                     (a) Q1 & Q2 Income, High Minority Neighorhoods




                                       0.05


                                       0.04
                  Log Housing Price




                                       0.03


                                       0.02


                                       0.01


                                          0


                                      −0.01

                                                 1
                                                                                                                    10
                                                      0.8
                                                             0.6                                          5
                                                                     0.4
                                                                                          0
                                                                           0.2
                                                                                 0   −5
                                               Miles to LIHTC Site
                                                                                              Years Since Funding
                                                     (b) Q3 & Q4 Income, High Minority Neighorhoods




                                        0.02

                                       0.015

                                        0.01
             Log Housing Price




                                       0.005

                                          0

                                      −0.005

                                       −0.01

                                      −0.015

                                       −0.02
                                         1.2
                                                 1
                                                                                                                    10
                                                       0.8
                                                              0.6                                          5
                                                                     0.4
                                                                                          0
                                                                           0.2
                                                                                 0   −5
                                               Miles to LIHTC Site
                                                                                              Years Since Funding

Note: Kernel smoothed estimates of log house prices using Nadaraya-Watson estimator with Epanech-
  nikov kernel. Household median income quartile cutoffs are $26017, $38177, and $54642 in 2012
  dollars, as reported in the 1990 Census block group of the LIHTC site.




                                                                                     38
Figure 6: Impact of LIHTC on Derivative of Log House Prices wrt miles from LIHTC vs miles to
LIHTC:
                                                                                   Impacts 0 to 5 years post LIHTC Funding


                                                                Q1 Income Level;               Q2 Income Level                 Q3 Income Level               Q4 Income Level
                                                     0.05                            0.1                            0.12                          0.12

                                                                                                                     0.1                           0.1
                                                       0
                                                                                    0.05
                                                                                                                    0.08                          0.08
                                                    −0.05                                                           0.06                          0.06
                                                                                      0
       Derivative of Log Price wrt Miles to LIHTC




                                                     −0.1                                                           0.04                          0.04

                                                                                                                    0.02                          0.02
                                                                                   −0.05
                                                    −0.15
                                                                                                                      0                             0

                                                     −0.2                           −0.1                         −0.02                           −0.02
                                                            0        0.5     1             0       0.5     1               0       0.5     1             0       0.5     1


                                                            Q1/2 High Minority             Q3/4 High Minority
                                                      0.1                           0.05

                                                     0.05                                                                                90% CI−NonParametric Estimates
                                                                                      0
                                                                                                                                         NonParametric Estimate
                                                       0                                                                                 Truncated Estimate
                                                                                   −0.05
                                                    −0.05

                                                                                    −0.1
                                                     −0.1

                                                    −0.15                          −0.15
                                                            0        0.5     1             0       0.5     1
                                                                                                           Miles to LIHTC

 Note: Kernel smoothed estimates of log house price derivatives with respect to distance to LIHTC
  using Nadaraya-Watson estimator with Epanechnikov kernel. Household median income quartile
  cutoffs are $26017, $38177, and $54642 in 2012 dollars, as reported in the 1990 Census block group
  of the LIHTC site. An LIHTC project is consider high minority share if at least 50% of the cen-
  sus block group where the LIHTC project is located was Black or Hispanic as reported in the 1990
  census. Dashed lines are fully non-parametric estimate and confidence intervals. Solid line repre-
  sents effect truncated to zero for distances beyond which the first time the non-parametric estimate
  crosses zero or gets closest to zero. These price effects are used in structural model of preference es-
  timation. Standard errors estimated using a block-bootstrap with 500 simiulations where sampling
  is done over LIHTC sites. Dashed lines measure 90% confidence interval.




                                                                                                               39
Figure 7: Impact of LIHTC on Derivative of Log House Prices wrt miles from LIHTC vs miles to
LIHTC:
                                                                                   Impacts 6 to 10 years post LIHTC Funding


                                                                Q1 Income Level;               Q2 Income Level                   Q3 Income Level               Q4 Income Level
                                                      0.1                            0.1                              0.12                           0.1

                                                     0.05                                                              0.1                          0.08
                                                                                    0.05
                                                       0                                                              0.08
                                                                                                                                                    0.06
                                         −0.05                                                                        0.06
        Derivative of Log Price wrt Miles to LIHTC




                                                                                      0                                                             0.04
                                                     −0.1                                                             0.04
                                                                                                                                                    0.02
                                         −0.15                                                                        0.02
                                                                                   −0.05
                                                     −0.2                                                               0                             0

                                         −0.25                                      −0.1                          −0.02                            −0.02
                                                            0        0.5     1             0       0.5     1                 0       0.5     1             0       0.5     1


                                                            Q1/2 High Minority             Q3/4 High Minority
                                                      0.1                           0.05

                                                     0.05                             0                                                    90% CI−NonParametric Estimates
                                                                                                                                           NonParametric Estimate
                                                       0                           −0.05                                                   Truncated Estimate


                                         −0.05                                      −0.1

                                                     −0.1                          −0.15

                                         −0.15                                      −0.2
                                                            0        0.5     1             0       0.5     1




 Note: Kernel smoothed estimates of log house price derivatives with respect to distance to LIHTC
  using Nadaraya-Watson estimator with Epanechnikov kernel. Household median income quartile
  cutoffs are $26017, $38177, and $54642 in 2012 dollars, as reported in the 1990 Census block group
  of the LIHTC site. An LIHTC project is consider high minority share if at least 50% of the cen-
  sus block group where the LIHTC project is located was Black or Hispanic as reported in the 1990
  census. Dashed lines are fully non-parametric estimate and confidence intervals. Solid line repre-
  sents effect truncated to zero for distances beyond which the first time the non-parametric estimate
  crosses zero or gets closest to zero. These price effects are used in structural model of preference es-
  timation. Standard errors estimated using a block-bootstrap with 500 simiulations where sampling
  is done over LIHTC sites. Dashed lines measure 90% confidence interval.




                                                                                                                 40
                                                               Figure 8: Impact of LIHTC on Homebuyer Income:
                                                                        Impacts 0 to 10 years post LIHTC Funding


                                                   Q1 Income Level;              Q2 Income Level                Q3 Income Level            Q4 Income Level
                                            0.08                          0.06                          0.015                       0.01

                                                                          0.05                           0.01                      0.005
                                            0.06
                                                                          0.04                          0.005                         0

                                                                          0.03                             0                      −0.005
                                            0.04
                                                                          0.02                        −0.005                       −0.01

                                                                          0.01                          −0.01                     −0.015
                                            0.02
                                                                            0                         −0.015                       −0.02
      Change in Log Income of Homebuyers




                                              0                          −0.01                          −0.02                     −0.025
                                                   0     0.5     1               0     0.5     1                0   0.5     1              0   0.5     1


                                                   Q1/2 High Minority            Q3/4 High Minority
                                            0.01                          0.04

                                              0                           0.03
                                                                                                                          90% CI−NonParametric Estimates
                                           −0.01                          0.02                                            NonParametric Estimate

                                           −0.02                          0.01

                                           −0.03                            0

                                           −0.04                         −0.01

                                           −0.05                         −0.02
                                                   0     0.5     1               0     0.5     1

                                                                                               Miles to LIHTC

Note: Kernel smoothed estimates of log homebuyer income which are black using Nadaraya-Watson
 estimator with Epanechnikov kernel. Household median income quartile cutoffs are $26017, $38177,
 and $54642 in 2012 dollars, as reported in the 1990 Census block group of the LIHTC site. An LI-
 HTC project is consider high minority share if at least 50% of the census block group where the
 LIHTC project is located was Black or Hispanic as reported in the 1990 census. Dashed lines are
 fully non-parametric estimate and confidence intervals. Standard errors estimated using a block-
 bootstrap with 500 simiulations where sampling is done over LIHTC sites. Dashed lines measure
 90% confidence interval.




                                                                                                   41
                                                                   Figure 9: Impact of LIHTC on Black Share of Homebuyers:
                                                                                Impacts 0 to 10 years post LIHTC Funding


                                                               Q1 Income Level;               Q2 Income Level               Q3 Income Level               Q4 Income Level
                                                    0.02                           0.03                          0.01                          0.01

                                                    0.01                           0.02                            0                             0
                                                      0
                                                                                   0.01                         −0.01
                                                   −0.01                                                                                      −0.01
                                                                                     0                          −0.02
                                                   −0.02                                                                                      −0.02
     Percentage Point Change in Black Homebuyers




                                                                                  −0.01                         −0.03
                                                   −0.03
                                                                                  −0.02                         −0.04                         −0.03
                                                   −0.04

                                                   −0.05                          −0.03                         −0.05                         −0.04
                                                           0        0.5     1             0       0.5     1             0       0.5     1             0       0.5     1


                                                           Q1/2 High Minority             Q3/4 High Minority
                                                    0.01                           0.02

                                                      0                            0.01
                                                                                                                                      90% CI−NonParametric Estimates
                                                   −0.01
                                                                                     0                                                NonParametric Estimate
                                                   −0.02
                                                                                  −0.01
                                                   −0.03
                                                                                  −0.02
                                                   −0.04

                                                   −0.05                          −0.03

                                                   −0.06                          −0.04
                                                           0        0.5     1             0       0.5     1
                                                                                                           Miles to LIHTC

Note: Kernel smoothed estimates of percent of homebuyers which are black using Nadaraya-Watson
 estimator with Epanechnikov kernel. Household median income quartile cutoffs are $26017, $38177,
 and $54642 in 2012 dollars, as reported in the 1990 Census block group of the LIHTC site. An LI-
 HTC project is consider high minority share if at least 50% of the census block group where the
 LIHTC project is located was Black or Hispanic as reported in the 1990 census. Dashed lines are
 fully non-parametric estimate and confidence intervals. Solid line represents effect truncated to zero
 for distances beyond which the first time the non-parametric estimate crosses zero or gets closest
 to zero. These price effects are used in structural model of preference estimation. Standard errors
 estimated using a block-bootstrap with 500 simiulations where sampling is done over LIHTC sites.
 Dashed lines measure 90% confidence interval.




                                                                                                           42
                                                                Figure 10: Crime Impacts of LIHTC by Neighborhood Median Income
(a) Property Crime in High Minority Neighorhoods                                                                      (b) Property Crime in Low Minority Neighorhoods
                                               200                                                                                                                  200
Change in Annual Property Crimes per Sq Mile




                                                                                                                     Change in Annual Property Crimes per Sq Mile
                                               100                                                                                                                  100



                                                 0                                                                                                                    0



                                               -100                                                                                                                 -100



                                               -200                                                                                                                 -200



                                               -300                                                                                                                 -300



                                               -400                                                                                                                 -400



                                               -500                                                                                                                 -500
                                                      0   0.2       0.4            0.6            0.8     1   1.2                                                          0   0.2     0.4            0.6            0.8     1   1.2
                                                                          Miles from LIHTC Site                                                                                              Miles from LIHTC Site

                                                                  Income Q1+Q2             Income Q3+Q4                                                                              Income Q1+Q2             Income Q3+Q4


                           (c) Violent Crime in High Minority Neighorhoods                                                                             (d) Violent Crime in Low Minority Neighorhoods
                                               200                                                                                                                  200
Change in Annual Violent Crimes per Sq Mile




                                                                                                                     Change in Annual Violent Crimes per Sq Mile

                                               100                                                                                                                  100




                                                 0                                                                                                                    0




                                               -100                                                                                                                 -100




                                               -200                                                                                                                 -200




                                               -300                                                                                                                 -300




                                               -400                                                                                                                 -400
                                                      0   0.2       0.4            0.6            0.8     1   1.2                                                          0   0.2     0.4            0.6            0.8     1   1.2
                                                                          Miles from LIHTC Site                                                                                              Miles from LIHTC Site

                                                                  Income Q1+Q2             Income Q3+Q4                                                                              Income Q1+Q2             Income Q3+Q4




Note: Kernel smoothed estimates of annual crimes per square mile using Nadaraya-Watson estima-
 tor with Epanechnikov kernel. Estimates integrate over the estimated derivatives to measure log
 crimes per square mile at a given distance from LIHTC site, relative to 1.4 miles away. Household
 median income quartile cutoffs are $26017, $38177, and $54642 in 2012 dollars, as reported in the
 1990 Census block group of the LIHTC site.




                                                                                                                43
                                  Figure 11: Mean Willingness to Pay to Live 0.1 miles from LIHTC: Low Minority Areas


                                       (a) Q1 Income Neighorhoods                                                                          (b) Q2 Income Neighborhoods




                                                                                                     .0009 .00095 .001 .00105 .0011
                 .09
 WTP to live 0.1 mi from LIHTC




                                                                                                       WTP to live 0.1 mi from LIHTC
     .07              .08




                                                                                                                     .00085
                 .06




                                  0          50             100            150                 200                                     0         50             100            150                 200
                                                      Homebuyer Income                                                                                    Homebuyer Income

                                        Non−Minority HomeBuyers          Minority HomeBuyers                                                Non−Minority HomeBuyers          Minority HomeBuyers




                                      (c) Q3 Income Neighborhoods                                                                          (d) Q4 Income Neighborhoods
                                                                                                                     −.0225
                 −.0245
 −.0265 −.026 −.0255 −.025
  WTP to live 0.1 mi from LIHTC




                                                                                                     WTP to live 0.1 mi from LIHTC
                                                                                                      −.024     −.0235      −.023
                 −.027




                                                                                                                     −.0245




                                  0          50             100            150                 200                                     0         50             100            150                 200
                                                      Homebuyer Income                                                                                    Homebuyer Income

                                        Non−Minority HomeBuyers          Minority HomeBuyers                                                Non−Minority HomeBuyers          Minority HomeBuyers




Note: Willingness to pay is measured as a percentage of the hombuyer’s houseprice. Household me-
 dian income quartile cutoffs are $26017, $38177, and $54642 in 2012 dollars, as reported in the 1990
 Census block group of the LIHTC site. Reported preferences are for households who choose to live
 close to LIHTC development.




                                                                                                44
                                      Figure 12: Mean Willingness to Pay to Live 0.1 miles from LIHTC: High Minority Areas


                                           (a) Q1 Income Neighorhoods                                                                        (b) Q2 Income Neighborhoods




                                                                                                                        .012
                               .095
 WTP to live 0.1 mi from LIHTC




                                                                                                         WTP to live 0.1 mi from LIHTC
                       .09




                                                                                                                              .011
            .085




                                                                                                              .01
  .08              .075




                                                                                                                        .009
                                      0          50             100            150                 200                                   0         50             100            150                 200
                                                          Homebuyer Income                                                                                  Homebuyer Income

                                            Non−Minority HomeBuyers          Minority HomeBuyers                                              Non−Minority HomeBuyers          Minority HomeBuyers




                                           (c) Q3 Income Neighborhoods                                                                       (d) Q4 Income Neighborhoods
                                                                                                                        .008
                   −.002
 WTP to live 0.1 mi from LIHTC




                                                                                                         WTP to live 0.1 mi from LIHTC
                        −.003




                                                                                                                               .006
            −.004




                                                                                                               .004
 −.005




                                                                                                                        .002
                   −.006




                                      0          50             100            150                 200                                   0         50             100            150                 200
                                                          Homebuyer Income                                                                                  Homebuyer Income

                                            Non−Minority HomeBuyers          Minority HomeBuyers                                              Non−Minority HomeBuyers          Minority HomeBuyers




Note: Willingness to pay is measured as a percentage of the hombuyer’s houseprice. Household me-
 dian income quartile cutoffs are $26017, $38177, and $54642 in 2012 dollars, as reported in the 1990
 Census block group of the LIHTC site. Reported preferences are for households who choose to live
 close to LIHTC development.




                                                                                                    45
                Table A1: Median # of Households Impacted by LIHTC Development

                                        Panel A: Low Minority Areas

                                           Income Q1          Income Q2           Income Q3          Income Q4
# Renting HHs Impacted by LIHTC              4832.5               621               1171.5              1328
# Owning HHs Impacted by LIHTC                2476                296                1042               2268
Observations                                   658                884                1768               2463

                                       Panel B: High Minority Areas
                                           Income Q1          Income Q2           Income Q3          Income Q4
# Renting HHs Impacted by LIHTC              12171               2075                6028               5422
# Owning HHs Impacted by LIHTC               3764.5               599                3630              4456.5
Observations                                  2248               1817                1267               340

Note: Median number of renting and home owning households living within the area impacted by LIHTC development,
 as meaured in the 2007-2012 ACS. Standard deviation in brackets below. Each observation is a neighborhood around
 a LIHTC development.




                                                       46
                                 Figure A1: Mean Willingness to Pay to Live 0.1 miles from LIHTC: Low Minority Areas


                                      (a) Q1 Income Neighorhoods                                                                        (b) Q2 Income Neighborhoods
                80000




                                                                                                                   600
 WTP to live 0.1 mi from LIHTC




                                                                                                    WTP to live 0.1 mi from LIHTC
                        60000




                                                                                                                    400      500
             40000




                                                                                                           300
 20000




                                                                                                    200            100
                0




                                 0          50             100            150                 200                                   0         50             100            150                 200
                                                     Homebuyer Income                                                                                  Homebuyer Income

                                       Non−Minority HomeBuyers          Minority HomeBuyers                                              Non−Minority HomeBuyers          Minority HomeBuyers




                                      (c) Q3 Income Neighborhoods                                                                       (d) Q4 Income Neighborhoods
                0




                                                                                                                   0
 WTP to live 0.1 mi from LIHTC




                                                                                                    WTP to live 0.1 mi from LIHTC
                                                                                                                            −5000
                        −5000




                                                                                                     −15000 −10000
 −15000     −10000




                                                                                                                   −20000
                −20000




                                 0          50             100            150                 200                                   0         50             100            150                 200
                                                     Homebuyer Income                                                                                  Homebuyer Income

                                       Non−Minority HomeBuyers          Minority HomeBuyers                                              Non−Minority HomeBuyers          Minority HomeBuyers




Note: Willingness to pay is measured in 2012 dollars. Household median income quartile cutoffs are
 $26017, $38177, and $54642 in 2012 dollars, as reported in the 1990 Census block group of the LI-
 HTC site. Reported preferences are for households who choose to live close to LIHTC development.




                                                                                               47
                                      Figure A2: Mean Willingness to Pay to Live 0.1 miles from LIHTC: High Minority Areas


                                           (a) Q1 Income Neighorhoods                                                                        (b) Q2 Income Neighborhoods
                   50000




                                                                                                                        8000
 WTP to live 0.1 mi from LIHTC




                                                                                                         WTP to live 0.1 mi from LIHTC
                         40000




                                                                                                                                 6000
              30000




                                                                                                                     4000
  20000




                                                                                                          2000
                   10000




                                                                                                                        0
                                      0          50             100            150                 200                                   0         50             100            150                 200
                                                          Homebuyer Income                                                                                  Homebuyer Income

                                            Non−Minority HomeBuyers          Minority HomeBuyers                                              Non−Minority HomeBuyers          Minority HomeBuyers




                                           (c) Q3 Income Neighborhoods                                                                       (d) Q4 Income Neighborhoods
                                                                                                                        4000
                               −500
 WTP to live 0.1 mi from LIHTC




                                                                                                         WTP to live 0.1 mi from LIHTC
                                                                                                                                3000
                  −1000




                                                                                                                     2000
   −1500




                                                                                                          1000
                   −2000




                                                                                                                        0




                                      0          50             100            150                 200                                   0         50             100            150                 200
                                                          Homebuyer Income                                                                                  Homebuyer Income

                                            Non−Minority HomeBuyers          Minority HomeBuyers                                              Non−Minority HomeBuyers          Minority HomeBuyers




Note: Willingness to pay is measured in 2012 dollars. Household median income quartile cutoffs are
 $26017, $38177, and $54642 in 2012 dollars, as reported in the 1990 Census block group of the LI-
 HTC site. Reported preferences are for households who choose to live close to LIHTC development.




                                                                                                    48
A      Data & Policy Appendix
A.1      The Low Income Housing Tax Credit
In 1986, Congress passed the Tax Reform Act. As part of this legislation, Congress increased
the Home Mortgage Interest Deduction and modi…ed the treatment of imputed rent and
local property taxes to further incentivize investment in owner-occupied housing. Concerned
that such provisions would decrease the supply of a¤ordable rental housing for low-income
individuals, Congress introduced the Low Income Housing Tax Credit (LIHTC) as part of
the Act to encourage the development of multifamily housing and thus serve as a balancing
measure.
         Each year, federal tax credits are allocated to the states based on population. In
particular, each state receives the in‡ation-adjusted equivalent of $2.30 per resident, as
measured in 2014 dollars. These credits are awarded by state authorities to developers of
quali…ed projects. Developers then sell these credits to investors to raise equity capital for
their projects and reduce the amount of debt they would otherwise have to borrow. Investors
receive a dollar-for-dollar credit against their federal tax liability for a period of 10 years,
provided the property continues to comply with all program guidelines.38
         To qualify for a tax credit under the Low Income Tax Credit Program, federal
guidelines require that proposed projects be for construction or rehabilitation of a residential
rental property and satisfy either one of two low-income occupancy criteria. At least 20
percent of tenants must earn less than 50 percent of the Area Median Gross Income (AGMI),
or alternatively, at least 40 percent of tenants must earn less than 60 percent of AGMI.39 The
AGMI is based on data from the Internal Revenue Service, the American Housing Survey,
and the decennial Census. It is calculated annually by the Department of Housing and
Urban Development (HUD) for all metropolitan areas and counties. If the income of a
household in one of the low income units grows to exceed the relevant income limit, then
the program requires developers to place a low income tenant into the next unit vacated
by a market rate tenant.40 Additionally, developers must restrict rents, including utility
allowance, in low-income units to 30 percent of the relevant income limit, i.e. either 50
percent of 60 percent of AGMI for a minimum a¤ordability period of 30 years.
         Note that these criteria are only the minimal requirements as speci…ed by the federal
government. In practice, states almost always receive many more project proposals and
tax credit allocation requests from developers than they have federal allotments, generally
on the order of 2 to 4 times. Each state is therefore required to maintain a “Quali…ed
Application Plan” (QAP) to govern the selection process. These plans usually operate
by assigning point scores to various project characteristics and then allocating tax credits
based on point totals until funds are exhausted. Such project characteristics include tenant
  38
     Eriksen (2009) studies the market pricing of these tax credits. He …nds that that LIHTC developers in
California received on average $0.73 per $1 of tax credit in the years 1999-2005.
  39
     Actual income limits depend on household size. The 50 percent of AGMI limit is for a base family size
of four members. Income limits are adjusted upward by 4 percentage points for each family member in
excess of four. Limits are adjusted downward by 5 percentage points for each family member short of four.
These limits are multiplied by 1.2 to get the 60 percent income limits.
  40
     Many LITHC propties are comprised 100 percent of low-income units. Clearly, this requirement becomes
super‡uous in such a case.



                                                   49
demographics, location, further funding sources, and structural properties of the building.
Given this latitude the states enjoy in determining selection criteria, many require developers
to go beyond the minimum number of a¤ordable units and the minimum level of a¤ordability.
         The value of tax credits received by selected developers is calculated according to the
project’s “quali…ed basis”, which essentially re‡ects the cost of constructing or rehabilitating
the low-income units. Speci…cally, the project’s “eligible basis”is the value of all depreciable
development costs, such as construction, engineering, soil tests, and utility connection fees. It
does not include land acquisition costs. The quali…ed basis is then calculated by multiplying
the eligible basis by the “applicable fraction.” This is the smaller of two percentages, the
fraction of low income units in the development, or the fraction of total square footage
allotted to low income units. Once the quali…ed basis has been determined, the annual tax
credit is determined by applying the relevant housing tax credit rate. New construction
or substantial rehabilitation projects, which are not otherwise subsidized by the Federal
government, receive a 9 percent credit rate, while all other projects receive a 4 percent credit
rate. These annual credits are then paid out over a period of 10 years.41
         Since its inception in 1986, the Low Income Housing Tax Credit Program has been
an integral component in fostering the development of multifamily housing throughout the
United States. With an annual tax credit valued at over 8 billion dollars, the program funded
21 percent of all multifamily developments between the years 1987-2008.

A.2      Data
A.2.1     DataQuick
     Our …rst dataset is from DataQuick, which provides detailed public records housing
characteristics and transactions data collected from county assessor and register of deeds
o¢ cers. This dataset covers over 109 million properties from 1988-2012 in over 2,300 juris-
dictions and provides information such as sales price, transaction type, loan amount, number
of beds, number of baths, square-footage, lot size, age, etc. The quality of the DataQuick
data is not uniform across the country. Certain states, such as Texas and Utah, do not
require the prices of housing transactions to be a matter of public record. Thus, DataQuick
does not report house prices for those states. Other states, such as Illinois, provide prices
in their records but do not collect information regarding the number of bathrooms. Finally,
not all of the counties covered by DataQuick have records dating back to 1988. Coverage of
a signi…cant number of counties began in 1996.
         We restrict our analysis to those counties which have transactions history data dating
to at least 1996. From this subset, we then restrict to those counties which have at least
an average of 1000 residential arm-length sales per year. This leaves us with a sample of
approximately 16 million transactions located within 1.5 miles of a LIHTC site in a total
of 129 counties in 15 states, concentrated largely in the major metropolitan areas of New
  41
    This calculation is a baseline …gure. Congress passed legislation in 1989 a¤ording state allocating
agencies the option to increase the quali…ed basis by up to 30 percent in both "quali…ed census tracts"
(QCTs) and "di¢ cult development areas" (DDAs). Census tracts with 50 percent of households earning
below 60 percent of AGMI earn quali…ed status, subject to a population restriction which is generally non-
binding. Metropolitan areas with high ratios of fair market rent to AMGI are designated as DDAs. See
Baum-Snow and Marion (2009) for more details.



                                                   50
England, Florida, California, Illinois, North Carolina, Tennessee, the Southwest and the
Paci…c Northwest. Figure 1 provides a map of the counties in our sample.

A.2.2    Home Mortgage Disclosure Act Data
      We merge this dataset with data collected by the United States federal government ac-
cording to the provisions of the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA). Passed in 1975 due
to concerns over redlining in the mortgage market in urban, minority areas, this legislation
requires all lending institutions to report public loan data. Implemented as Regulation C
by the Federal Reserve Board, it was amended in 1989 in response to the Financial Insti-
tutions Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement Act (FIRREA).42 These amendments greatly
expanded the mortgage lenders covered under HMDA and required reporting of signi…cant
demographic information of both loan applicants and borrowers. The government provides
public historical archives of this data covering the period 1991-2012. It includes information
on loan census tract, loan amount, loan provider, and borrower demographics such as race,
income, and sex. Since there is not a unique loan ID on which we can match the DataQuick
data to the HMDA data, we perform a fuzzy merge. In particular, we merge the data ac-
cording to census tract, year, loan amount, and bank name. This results in a match rate
of approximately 80 percent. To examine whether our merge procedure linking the housing
transaction data to the HMDA data introduces selection biases, Table 1 also reports house
prices using both the DataQuick database alone as well as the merged DataQuick-HMDA
database. The housing prices of those matched to the HMDA data are about 10% higher
than the average housing transaction, however this does not vary with distance to a LIHTC
site.

A.2.3    HUD LIHTC Database
     Information on LIHTC …nanced projects is provided by the Department of Housing
and Urban Development (HUD). This data covers 39,094 projects and almost 2,458,00 low
income housing units placed into service between the years 1987 and 2012. Note that the data
therefore re‡ects only those projects approved by the state allocating agencies and not all
project proposals submitted to them. The dataset includes detailed geographic information
regarding the project location, the type of construction, the year the project was placed in
service, the year funds for the project were allocated, and the number of units designated as
low-income. Geocoded information is missing for some of the projects and we exclude from
the sample any projects for which the year funds allocated variable is missing. We are left
with 7098 LIHTC projects located in our sample of 129 counties. See Panel C of Table 1
for summary statistics. Due to DataQuick’s coverage of counties, our sample is from more
dense, urban areas, relative to the overall distribution of LIHTC sites.
  42
   The rule-writing authority of Regulation C was transferred from the Federal Reserve Board to the
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau on July 21, 2011.




                                                51
B      Econometric Proofs
We begin by developing general econometric methods for estimating empirical derivatives.
We will then apply these results to prove Theorem 1 in the main text. We develop our general
econometric results by …rst focusing on the univariate case. This will ease exposition and
provide intuition. Results for the multivariate case follow closely the logic of the univariate
case.

B.1      Univariate Case
Suppose we draw an iid sample of size n from the following nonparametric model

                                              Yi = m (xi ) + "i

where E ("i jxi ) = 0 and V ar ("i jxi ) = 2 : We assume that m (x) is twice continuously
di¤erentiable. The variable xi is distributed according to the continuous density function:

                                     f (x) : [xmin ; xmax ] ! (0; 1) :

We propose the following Nadaraya-Watson kernel estimator for the …rst derivative m0 (xi ) :
                                       P
                               0    n 1 ni=1 Khn (x xi ) Yei
                            b (x) =
                            m           P                                                             (27)
                                     n 1 ni=1 Khn (x xi )
                                            kn;i
                                            X             Yi;+j       Yi;
                                   Yei =
                                                                            j
                                                   wj                           1 [kn;i > 0]
                                             j=1
                                                          xi;+j       xi;   j

                                                           j
                                   wj =                                 ;
                                             kn;i (kn;i + 1) =2

with the observations f(xi;+j ; Yi;+j )gkj=1
                                          n;i
                                              f(xi; j ; Yi; j )gkj=1
                                                                  n;i
                                                                      de…ned recursively by:

                        xi;+1 = arg min x;                            xi;   1   = arg max x
                                           x>xi +ln                                        x<xi ln
                        xi;+j = arg          min          x;      xi;   j   = arg max x
                                           x>xi;+j    1                               x<xi;   j   1



for j = 2; :::; kn;i where ln > 0: Note that Yi;+j = m (xi;+j ) + "i;+j . The random variable kn;i
is de…ned as:

                                    kn;i = min (jLn;i j ; jUn;i j ; n )
                                     Li = fxp : xp < xi ln g
                                     Ui = fxp : xp > xi ln g

for some    n   > 0. We de…ne Khn (x          xi ) as

                                                               1        x        xi
                                   Khn (x       xi ) =            K                    ;
                                                               hn           hn



                                                           52
where K ( ) is a kernel function. We have the following result:
Theorem 2 Assume the random design model above and suppose:
  1. K (u) is bounded, compactly supported, and symmetric
  2. n ! 1; hn ! 0; ln ! 0;             n       !1
                        1
  3. nhn ! 1;      nn       ! 0; ln2    n       !1
        b 0 (x) !p m0 (x) for all x 2 (xmin ; xmax ).
   Then m
   We prove the theorem through a sequence of lemmas. In what follows, we denote the
indicator variable In;i = 1 [kn;i > 0] : We also denote Pi ( ) = P ( jxi ) and Ei [ ] = E [ jxi ] :
Lemma 3 The estimate
                                                              X
                                                              n
                                                          1
                                                     n              Khn (x          xi )
                                                              i=1

converges in probability to f (x) for all x 2 (xmin ; xmax ).
Proof. This is a standard result. See Hardle (1990).
Lemma 4 As n ! 1 ; P (kn;i < 1) ! 0.
Proof. Trivial.
Lemma 5 Conditional on xi = u for any u 2 (xmin ; xmax ), as n ! 1 the di¤erence
 xi;+kn;i xi; kn;i In;i converges in probability to zero.
Proof. Fix > 0. Since ln ! 0, there exists N1 such that for all n > N1 , ln < =4:
Conditional on xi = u, we have:

                     Pi      xi;+kn;i           xi;      kn;i   In;i >              FB (2       n; n     1; p )

where FB ( ; n    1; p ) denotes the binomial distribution and
                                   Z        u    =4                       Z   u+ =2
                             p =                         f (s) ds +                   f (s) ds > 0:
                                        u       =2                        u+ =4


Since n n 1 ! 0 as n ! 1 , there exists N2 such that n n 1 < p =4 for all n N2 . Let
N = max fN1 ; N2 ; 2 ln ( ) =p2 g : Then by Hoe¤ding’s inequality, for all n > N :
                                                                               !
                                                          ((n 1) p      2 n )2
            Pi xi;+kn;i xi; kn;i In;i >         exp     2
                                                                n 1
                                                                                           (n    1) p2
                                                                              exp
                                                                                                2
                                                                              ;

which proves the claim.


                                                                     53
Lemma 6 As n ! 1 , the bias:
                    " n                                                     #
                      1X
                 E          Khn (x                               xi ) Yei         m0 (x) f (x) ! 0:
                      n i=1

Proof. The idea of the proof is to apply a …rst-order Taylor expansion to the empirical
derivatives. We then must show that the remainder term in the expansion converges to zero
as the sample size grows. We can write the bias of the estimator as:
                     " n                     #
                       1X
                   E         Khn (x xi ) Yei     m0 (x) f (x)
                       n i=1
                     2                                               3
                                          kn;i
                       1 Xn               X       Yi;+j Yi; j
              = E4           Khn (x xi )       wj               In;i 5 m0 (x) f (x)
                       n i=1              j=1
                                                  x i;+j x i; j


Denote expectation conditional on the observed sample covariates as Ex [ ] : By applying
Taylor’s theorem, we have
               2                         3
                 kn;i
                X     Yi;+j Yi; j
            Ex 4                    In;i 5
                 j=1
                      x i;+j x i; j

                          kn;i
                          X           xi;+j     xi;   j
               0
        = m (xi )                wj                       In;i
                          j=1
                                      xi;+j     xi;   j

                   kn;i
               1 X m00                  i;i+j   (xi;+j        xi )2         m00       i;i j   (xi       xi; j )2
             +       wj                                                                                            In;i
               2 j=1                                         xi;+j          xi;   j

                                        kn;i
               0         1 X m00                            i;i+j   (xi;+j         xi )2      m00       i;i j   (xi       xi; j )2
        = m (xi ) In;i +       wj                                                                                                    In;i
                         2 j=1                                                    xi;+j       xi;   j


where i;i+j 2 (xi ; xi;+j ) and i;i j 2 (xi; j ; xi ) : By the law of iterated expectations and the
triangle inequality, the bias is thus bounded above by
       " n                               #
          1X
     E         Khn (x xi ) m0 (xi ) In;i       m0 (x) f (x)
         n i=1
          2                                                                                          3
                                kn;i
            1 Xn                X       m00
                                              i;i+j (xi;+j    xi ) 2
                                                                     m  00
                                                                             i;i j (xi xi; j )2
    + E4          Khn (x xi )        wj                                                         In;i 5 :
            n i=1               j=1
                                                             x i;+j  x i;  j


We know that that P (kn;i > 0) ! 1: The …rst term thus goes to zero as n ! 1 according
to the usual proof for consistency of Nadaraya-Watson estimators. See, for example, Hardle
(1990). To show that the second term converges to zero, note …rst that it is bounded above




                                                                    54
by:43
                                                     2                                                               3
                          Z                           Xkn;i                             2                   2
                                                               (xi;+j           xi ) + (xi           xi; j )
          sup jm00 (x)j       jKhn (x       xi )j Ei 4      wj                                                  In;i 5 f (xi ) dxi
            x
                                                             j=1
                                                                               xi;+j xi;         j
                                                     2                                                              3
                          Z                           Xkn;i                          2                      2
                                                               (xi;+j          xi ) + (xi xi; j )
          sup jm00 (x)j       jKhn (x       xi )j Ei 4      wj                                    In;i 5 f (xi ) dxi
            x
                                                         j=1
                                                                              xi;+j xi; j
                                                     2                                   3
                          Z                           Xkn;i
                   00
          sup jm (x)j         jKhn (x       xi )j Ei 4      wj (xi;+j           xi; j ) In;i 5 f (xi ) dxi
            x
                                                         j=1
                          Z
          sup jm00 (x)j       jKhn (x       xi )j Ei     xi;+kn;i       xi;   kn;i   In;i f (xi ) dxi
            x


By Hardle (1990), it thus su¢ ces to show that Ei xi;+kn;i xi; kn;i In;i converges to
zero. But we know by Lemma 5, Pi xi;+kn;i xi; kn;i In;i > 0 converges to zero. Since
 xi;+kn;i xi; kn;i In;i is almost surely bounded, convergence in probability implies Ei xi;+kn;i                                      xi;   kn;i   In
converges to zero as well. This completes the proof.

Lemma 7 As n ! 1 , the variance:
                                                                                    !
                                                     X
                                                     n
                                     V ar n      1
                                                             Khn (x      xi ) Yei        ! 0:
                                                       i=1

Proof. The variance can be decomposed as:
         1     h               i  1 X
           V ar Khn (x xi ) Yei + 2     Cov Khn (x                                      xi ) Yei ; Khn (x       xj ) Yej       (28)
         n                       n i6=j

By the law of total variance:
1     h               i       1h h                       i        h                i i
  V ar Khn (x xi ) Yei =         E V ari Khn (x xi ) Yei + V ar Ei Khn (x xi ) Yei
n                             n
                              1 h 2                     i 1
                          !     E Khn (x xi ) V ari Yei + V ar (Khn (x xi ) m0 (xi ))
                              n                            n
The second term approaches zero as n ! 1 by Hardle (1990). Also by Hardle (1990), for
the …rst term it su¢ ces to show that:

                                                     V ari Yei ! 0:

The idea of the proof is to again expand the empirical derivatives using Taylor’s theorem.
We then use the law of total variance to condition on the observables. We then prove that
 43
      Recall that Ei [ ] = E [ jxi = u] :




                                                                   55
the variance converges to zero. Applying a Taylor expansion, the variance becomes:
                     0               Pkn;i                                               1
                                                "i;+j "i; j
                                       j=1 wj x               I
                                                        xi; j n;i
               V ari @ Pkn;i m00 ( i;i+j )(xi;+j i;+j
                                                   xi )2 m00 ( i;i j )(xi xi; j )2
                                                                                         A
                       + j=1 wj                  xi;+j xi; j
                                                                                   I n;i


Using the law of total variance, this can be decomposed as:
                       0                     hP                            i                                 1
                                                 kn;i      "i;+j "i; j
                                         Ex      j=1 wj xi;+j xi; j In;i
                       B                                                                                     C
                 V ari @             m ( i;i+j )(xi;+j xi )2 m00 ( i;i j )(xi
                                      00                                                  xi;   j)
                                                                                                  2          A          (29)
                          +Ex wj                        xi;+j xi; j
                                                                                                      In;i
                      2      0                                  13
                                kn;i
                               X         "i;+j "i; j
                 +Ei 4V arx @        wj                    In;i A5
                                j=1
                                         x i;+j    x i;  j


We …rst note that                          2                                   3
                                             kn;i
                                            X        "i;+j        "i;   j
                                        Ex 4      wj                        In;i 5 = 0;
                                             j=1
                                                     xi;+j        xi;   j


since E ("i+j jxi;+j ) = E ("i j jxi; j ) = 0: Thus the …rst term in (29) becomes:
                   0 2                                                                                             31
                            kn;i
                            X          m  00
                                              i;i+j (xi;+j      xi )  2
                                                                            m   00
                                                                                    i;i j (xi       xi; j ) 2
            V ari @Ex 4            wj                                                                         In;i 5A
                            j=1
                                                               x i;+j       x  i; j
                2                                                                                       3
                  kn;i
                  X        m 00
                                    i;i+j (xi;+j     xi ) 2
                                                               m  00
                                                                         i;i j (xi       xi; j ) 2
        = Ei 4         wj                                                                          In;i 5
                  j=1
                                                    x i;+j     x i;   j
                  2                                                                                        32
                     kn;i
                    X        m  00
                                       i;i+j (xi;+j     xi ) 2
                                                                  m   00
                                                                            i;i j (xi      xi; j )  2
               Ei 4       wj                                                                          In;i 5
                     j=1
                                                       x i;+j     x  i; j




                                                             56
The …nal term converges to zero by the preceding lemma. The …rst term is:
               20                                                                                     12 3
                  kn;i
                  X       m 00
                                  i;i+j (xi;+j    xi ) 2
                                                             m  00
                                                                          i;i j (xi    xi; j ) 2
            Ei 4@      wj                                                                        In;i A 5
                  j=1
                                                 x i;+j      x i;    j
               20                                                                                       12 3
                  kn;i
                  X         m  00
                                    i;i+j (xi;+j    xi ) 2
                                                              m    00
                                                                            i;i j (xi   xi; j )  2
            Ei 4@      wj                                                                          In;i A 5
                  j=1
                                                  x  i;+j     x   i;   j
                                 20                                                        12 3
                                      kn;i
                          2          X (xi;+j xi ) + (xi xi; j )
                                                            2                       2
             sup m00 (x) Ei 4@             wj                                         In;i A 5
              x
                                      j=1
                                                      x  i;+j      x   i;   j

                                2        h                                      i
                         00                                             2
                 sup m (x)          Ei       xi+kn;i        xi   kn;i       In;i ;
                   x

which approaches zero as n ! 1 by Lemma 5 and almost sure boundedness.                                  Thus, the
…rst term in (29) converges to zero. Turning to the second term in (29):
                                 2        0                                    13
                                             kn;i
                                             X         "i;+j "i; j
                              Ei 4V arx @          wj                     In;i A5
                                             j=1
                                                      x i;+j       x i; j
                                 2                                        3
                                        kn;i
                                       X              wj 2
                          = Ei 42 2                                2 In;i
                                                                          5
                                        j=1
                                             (x  i;+j     x i;  j )
                                      2                                      3
                                        kn;i
                              2  2     X                j 2

                                2
                                   Ei 4                           2     In;i 5
                              4ln       j=1
                                             k 2
                                              n;i  (k n;i  +   1)   =4
                                             2
                                                    2kn;i + 1
                                                 Ei              In;i
                                         3ln2    kn;i (kn;i + 1)
                                          2
                                                   1
                                            Ei 2        In;i
                                         3      ln kn;i
                                          2
                                               1        1
                                              2
                                                    + 2 P (kn;i < n )
                                         3 ln n ln

The …rst term in brackets approaches zero by assumption. For su¢ ciently large n; by apply-
ing n n 1 ! 0 and Hoe¤ding’s inequality as in the previous lemma, we have for su¢ ciently
large n > N :
                          1                1        (n 1) p2N
                             P (kn;i < n )     exp
                         ln2               ln2           2
where:                                           Z                          Z
                                                     u lN                       xmax
                                    pN =                    f (s) ds +                 f (s) ds:
                                                 xmin                         u+lN




                                                                  57
Since ln2     n   ! 1,     nn
                                1
                                    ! 0, and n exp ( n) ! 0, it follows that:
                                                  1
                                                      P (kn;i <    n)   !0
                                                  ln2

as desired.
   Turning to the covariance in equation (28), we apply the law of total covariance:44
                         1 X
                                 Cov Khn (x xi ) Yei ; Khn (x xj ) Yej
                         n2 i6=j
                         n 1 h                                            i
                       =        E Khn (x xi ) Khn (x xj ) Covij Yei ; Yej
                           n
                           n 1                          h i                   h i
                         +       Cov Khn (x xi ) Eij Yei ; Khn (x xj ) Eij Yej
                             n
                         n 1 h                                            i
                       !        E Khn (x xi ) Khn (x xj ) Covij Yei ; Yej
                           n
                           n 1
                         +       Cov (Khn (x xi ) m0 (xi ) ; Khn (x xj ) m0 (xj ))
                             n
                         n 1 h                                            i
                       =        E Khn (x xi ) Khn (x xj ) Covij Yei ; Yej :
                           n

By Hardle (1990), we thus need to show Covij Yei ; Yej converges to zero as n ! 1. This
will be the case as long as the probability that there is overlapping data used to form the
empirical derivatives Yei and Yej goes to zero as n ! 1. This can easily be shown by
Hoe¤ding’s inequality, using the exact same approach as in Lemma 5.
    The previous two lemmas show that the numerator of equation (27) converges in mean-
square error to zero, which implies convergence in probability. The theorem thus follows by
Slutsky’s theorem.

B.2         Multivariate Case
We now extend our estimation procedure to the multidimensional case. Suppose we draw
an iid sample of size n from the following nonparametric model

                                                    Yi = m (Xi ) + "i

where E ("i jXi ) = 0 and V ar ("i jXi ) = 2 : We assume that Xi = (x1;i ; :::xD;i ) 2 RD and m
is twice continuously di¤erentiable in all of its arguments. The variables Xi are distributed
according to the continuous joint density function:

                                                 Y
                                                 D
                                       f (X) :         [xd;min ; xd;max ] ! (0; 1) :
                                                 d=1

  44
       We denote Eij [ ] = E [ jxi ; xj ] and Covij ( ) = Cov ( jxi ; xj ) :




                                                             58
We propose the following Nadaraya-Watson kernel estimator for the …rst derivative @m=@xd :
                                     P
                             b
                            @m    n 1 ni=1 KHn (X Xi ) Yei
                                =     P                                                                                            (30)
                            @xd    n 1 ni=1 KHn (X Xi )
                                               kn;i
                                               X            Ya(j;i;d)             Yb(j;i;d)
                                Yei =                 wj                                      1 [kn;i > 0]
                                               j=1
                                                           xd;a(j;i;d)            xd;b(j;i;d)
                                                               j
                               wj =                                           ;
                                               kn;i (kn;i + 1) =2
                                                                   kn                                      kn
with the observations           Xa(j;i;d) ; Ya(j;i;d)              j=1
                                                                              Xb(j;i;d) ; Yb(j;i;d)        j=1
                                                                                                                 de…ned recursively by:

   a (1; i; d) = arg          min              xd;p ; b (1; i; d) = arg           max             xd;p
                     fp2Ld;i :xd;p >xd;i +ln g                           fp2Ld;i :xd;p <xd;i ln g
   a (j; i; d) = arg             min                xd;p ; b (j; i; d) = arg             max                xd;p
                     fp2Ld;i :xd;p >xd;a(j 1;i;d) g                          fp2Ld;i :xd;p <xd;b(j 1;i;d) g

for j = 2; :::; kn;i where ln > 0 and:
                            (                                                                                       )
                                                    (xq;p                     xq;i )2
                     Ld;i :=      p 2 f1; :::; ng :                                   < #n for all q 6= d
                                                    (xd;p                     xd;i )2

     for some #n > 0: The random variable kn;i is de…ned as:

                                      kn;i = min (jLn;i j ; jUn;i j ; n )
                                       Li = fp 2 Ld;i : xd;p > xd;i + ln g
                                       Ui = fp 2 Ld;i : xd;p > xd;i ln g

for some    n   > 0. Letting Hn = (h1;n ; :::; hD;n ) ; note that:

                                                           1                      x1      x1;i            xD xD;i
                    KHn (X           Xi ) =                               K                      ; :::;                 ;
                                                h1;n               hD;n                h1;n                 hD;n

where K ( ) is a kernel function. We have the following result:

Theorem 8 Assume the random design model above and suppose:

  1. K (u) is bounded, compactly supported, and spherically symmetric.

  2. n ! 1; hn ! 0; ln ! 0;                n   ! 1; #n ! 0
                                       1
  3. nhn ! 1;         n   n#D
                            n
                                 1
                                           ! 0; ln2        n   !1

   Then:
                                                   b
                                                  @m         @m
                                                      (X) !p     (X)
                                                  @xd        @xd



                                                                      59
              Y
              D
for all X 2         (xd;min ; xd;max ) :
              d=1

   We again prove the result in a sequence of lemmas.

Lemma 9 The estimate
                                                      X
                                                      n
                                                  1
                                             n              KHn (X            Xi )
                                                      i=1

                                                                 Y
                                                                 D
converges in probability to f (X) for all X 2                          (xd;min ; xd;max ) :
                                                                 d=1


Proof. This is a standard result. See Hardle (1990).

Lemma 10 As n ! 1 ; P (kn;i < 1) ! 0.

Proof. Unlike the univariate case, we have to do some work to prove this. The issue is that
the "bowtie" may collapse to a line too quickly. Since n ! 1; without loss of generality it
su¢ ces to show that P (jUn;i j < 1) ! 0: We …rst note that since f is a continuous function
from a compact set to (0; 1) it must achieve a minimum, which we denote as > 0: Choose
any M 0: It is then straightforward to check via multiple integration that for n > M + 1:

                                     P (jUn;i j       M)         FB (M ; n           1; p )

where:
                                                      #(D
                                                       n
                                                             1)=2
                                                                    (xd;max xd;i )D
                                           p =
                                                                     D!
By Hoe¤ding’s inequality:
                                                                                         !
                                                                ((n        1) p M )2
                P (jUn;i j        M)         exp            2
                                                                           n 1
                                                                                               M2
                                           = exp            2 (n           1) p2     2p M +         :
                                                                                              n 1
                        1
Since n n#D
          n
            1
                 ! 0; it must be that n#D
                                        n
                                          1
                                            ! 1. It therefore follows that (n 1) p2 !
1: Two two …nal terms in the bracket approach zero. Therefore, P (jUn;i j M ) converges
to zero.

Lemma 11 As n ! 1 , the bias:
                "                                                      #
                      Xn
                                                                             @m
               E n  1
                          KHn (X                            Xi ) Yei             (X) f (X) ! 0:
                                    i=1
                                                                             @xd




                                                                60
Proof. Write the bias as:
                             "  n
                                                  #
                            1X                          @m
                        E         KHn (X Xi ) Yei             (X) f (X)
                            n i=1                       @xd
                          2                                                         3
                           X n            Xkn
                                                      Ya(j;i;d) Yb(j;i;d)               @m
                   =    E4      KHn (X U)       wj                             In;i 5       (X) f (X)
                            i=1           j=1
                                                    x d;a(j;i;d)  x d;b(j;i;d)          @xd

where U = (u1 ; :::; uD ) and dU =du1            duD : Conditioning on the sample and applying
Taylor’s theorem as in the univariate case, we have:
             "k                                     #
               X n
                         Ya(j;i;d) Yb(j;i;d)
          EX        wj                         In;i
               j=1
                       xd;a(j;i;d) xd;b(j;i;d)
             X
             kn X
                D
                             @m      xq;a(j;i;d)      xq;b(j;i;d)
        =              wj        (U)                              In;i
             j=1 q=1
                             @xq     xd;a(j;i;d)      xd;b(j;i;d)
                 X
                 kn X
                                  R    Xa(j;i;d)   Xa(j;i;d) Xi           R Xb(j;i;d)     Xb(j;i;d)     Xi
             +               wj                                                                               In;i
                 j=1 j j=2
                                                            xd;a(j;i;d)   xd;b(j;i;d)

where we have used the multi-index notation with 2 ND and where R ( ) denotes the
remainder of the Taylor expansion. By the triangle inequality, the bias is therefore bounded
above by
                            @m                 @m
    E KHn (X           U)       (U) In;i           (X) f (X)
                            @xd                @xd
        Z                 Xkn X            p
                                   @m
    +       KHn (X     U)              (U) #n In;i f (U) dU
                          j=1 q6=d
                                   @xq
                             2                                                                                                   3
        Z                      Xkn X
                                           R Xa(j;i;d) Xa(j;i;d) Xi                R Xb(j;i;d)    Xb(j;i;d)   Xi
    +       KHn (X     U) Ei 4          wj                                                                           In;i f (U) dU5 :
                               j=1
                                                               xd;a(j;i;d)         xd;b(j;i;d)
                                       j j=2


The …rst term converges to zero by the usual consistency proof for multivariate Nadaraya-
Watson estimates and since P (kn;i > 0) ! 1 . We can bound the remainder according to
the Taylor uniform bound. The second term converges to zero since #n ! 0 as n ! 1:
The …nal term is therefore bounded above by:
                                                      2                                                      3
                                 Z                     X kn X
                                                                      Xa(j;i;d) Xi + Xb(j;i;d) Xi
        sup sup jD m (X)j            jKHn (X   U)j Ei 4           wj                                    In;i 5 f (U) dU
     j j=2 X                                            j=1 j j=2
                                                                               xd;a(j;i;d) xd;b(j;i;d)
                                 Z                       Pkn                      p
        sup sup jD m (X)j            jKHn (X   U)j Ei      j=1 wj 1 + (D        1) #n + D (D 1) #n
                                                                                                       f (U) dU;
     j j=2 X                                                         xd;a(j;i;d) xd;b(j;i;d) In;i

which converges to zero by Hoe¤ding’s inequality as in the univariate case and since #n ! 0
as n ! 1.




                                                             61
Lemma 12 As n ! 1 , the variance:
                                                                               !
                                                   X
                                                   n
                                  V ar n       1
                                                         KHn (X     Xi ) Yei       ! 0:
                                                   i=1

Proof. The proof follows exactly as in the univariate case, applying the multidimensional
Taylor formula in place of the unidimensional Taylor formula.
   The numerator of equation (30) converges in mean-square error to zero, which implies
convergence in probability. The theorem follows by Slutsky’s theorem.

B.3       Proof of Theorem 1
Given the previous results, the proof is straightforward. The only complication is that
2-dimensional (only in r and t) smoothing is used in the Nadaraya-Watson estimator, rather
than 3-dimensional smoothing. It is straightforward, however, from the work above to see
that:45
                                                   Z 2
              b l (r; Tl + ) !   p @ e
                                     m Y (R;   )         @ l (r; )
                                                 +                 f ( jTl + ; r) d
                                       @R            0      @r
                                   Z 2
             b l (r; T 1 ) ! p           @ l (r; )
                                                   f ( jTl 1; r) d
                                     0      @r

By the assumption in footnote 18, f ( jTl + ; r) = f ( jTl                         1; r) ; so:

                              b l (r; Tl + )        b l (r; Tl             e Y (R; )
                                                                          @m
                                                                  1) !p              ;
                                                                             @R
as desired.




 45                            e Y (R; 1)
                              @m
      Recall that we assume       @R        = 0:



                                                           62
