NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

IMAGE VERSUS INFORMATION:
CHANGING SOCIETAL NORMS AND OPTIMAL PRIVACY
S. Nageeb Ali
Roland Bénabou
Working Paper 22203
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22203

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2016

We are grateful for helpful comments to Alberto Alesina, Jim Andreoni, Navin Kartik, Raphael
Levy, Alessandro Lizzeri, Kristof Madarasz, Stephen Morris, Justin Rao, Joel Sobel and PierreLuc Vautrey. We thank Edoardo Grillo, Tetsuya Hoshino, Charles Lin and Ben Young for superb
research assistance. Benabou gratefully acknowledges financial support from the Canadian
Institute for Advanced Research. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by S. Nageeb Ali and Roland Bénabou. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Image Versus Information: Changing Societal Norms and Optimal Privacy
S. Nageeb Ali and Roland Bénabou
NBER Working Paper No. 22203
April 2016
JEL No. D62,D64,D82,H41,K42,Z13
ABSTRACT
We analyze the costs and benefits of using social image to foster virtuous behavior. A Principal
seeks to motivate reputation-conscious agents to supply a public good. Each agent chooses how
much to contribute based on his own mix of public-spiritedness, private signal about the value of
the public good, and reputational concern for appearing prosocial. By making individual behavior
more visible to the community the Principal can amplify reputational payoffs, thereby reducing
free-riding at low cost. Because societal preferences constantly evolve, however, she knows only
imperfectly both the social value of the public good (which matters for choosing her own
investment, matching rate or legal policy) and the importance attached by agents to social esteem
and sanctions. Increasing publicity makes it harder for the Principal to learn from what agents do
(the “descriptive norm”) what they really value (the “prescriptive norm”), thus presenting her
with a tradeoff between incentives and information aggregation. We derive the optimal degree of
privacy/publicity and matching rate, then analyze how they depend on the economy’s stochastic
and informational structure. We show in particular that in a fast-changing society (greater
variability in the fundamental or the image-motivated component of average preferences),
privacy should generally be greater than in a more static one.

S. Nageeb Ali
411 Kern Bldg, Penn State University
University Park, PA 16802
nageeb@psu.edu
Roland Bénabou
Department of Economics
and Woodrow Wilson School
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
rbenabou@princeton.edu

If you have something that you don’t want anyone to know, maybe you shouldn’t be
doing it in the …rst place.”
(Google CEO Eric Schmidt, CNBC, 2009).
The trend toward elevating personal and downgrading organizational privacy is mysterious to the economist... The law should in general accord private business information greater protection than it accords personal information. Secrecy is an important method of appropriating social bene…ts to the entrepreneur who creates them
while in private life it is more likely to conceal discreditable facts... The economic
case for according legal protection to such information is no better than that for
permitting fraud in the sale of goods.
(Judge Richard Posner, “The Right of Privacy,” 1977, pp. 401-405).

1

Introduction

1.1

Why Privacy?

Visibility is a powerful incentive. When people know that others will learn of their actions,
they contribute more to public goods and charities, are more likely to vote, give blood or save
energy. Conversely, they are less likely to lie, cheat, pollute, make o¤ensive jokes or engage in
other antisocial behaviors.1 Compared to other incentives such as …nancial rewards, …nes and
incarceration, publicity (good or bad) is also extremely cheap. So indeed, following the implicit
logic of Google’s CEO and a number of scholars before him, why not publicize all aspects of
individuals behavior that have important external e¤ects, leveraging the ubiquitous desire for
social esteem to achieve better social outcomes?
This question is important for institutional design, and of growing policy relevance. Many
public and private entities already use esteem as a motivator, such as the military, which
o¤ers medals for valor; businesses, which recognize the “employee-of-the-month”; and charities
publicizing donors’names on buildings and plaques. On the sanctions side, many U.S. states
and towns use updated forms of the pillory: televised “perp walks,” internet posting of the
identities and pictures of people convicted or even just arrested for a host of o¤ences (tax
evasion, child support delinquency, spousal abuse, drunk driving, etc.); publishing the licence
plates of cars photographed in areas of drug tra¢ cking or prostitution; and sentencing o¤enders
to “advertise”their deeds by means of special clothing, signs in front of their houses or paid ads
in the newspaper. While less common in other advanced countries, such “shaming punishments”
are on the rise there as well as tax authorities, regulators and the public come to perceive the
1
On public goods, see, e.g., Ariely, Bracha, and Meier (2009), DellaVigna, List, and Malmendier (2012),
Ashraf, Bandiera, and Jack (2012) or Algan et al. (2013); on voting, see Gerber, Green, and Larimer (2008), and
on blood donors, Lacetera and Macis (2010).

1

legal system as unable to discipline major tax evaders and rogue …nanciers.2
With advances in “big data,” face recognition, automated licence-plate readers and other
tracking technologies, the cost of widely disseminating what someone did, gave, took or even just
said is rapidly falling to zero –it is in fact maintaining privacy and anonymity that is becoming
increasingly expensive.3 The trends described above are therefore likely to accentuate, whether
impulsed by budget-constrained public authorities, activist groups or individual whistleblowers
and “concerned citizens.” A number of scholars in law, economics and philosophy have in
fact long argued for a more systematic recourse to public marks of honor (Cooter (2003),
Brennan and Pettit (2004), Frey (2007)) and shame (Kahan (1996), Kahan and Posner (1999),
Reeves (2013), Jacquet (2015)), on grounds of both e¢ ciency and expressive justice. R. Posner
(1977, 1979) carries the argument to its extreme, arguing that there should be essentially
zero privacy protection for facts concerning individuals whatever their nature (e.g., sexual
behaviors, religious or political opinions, decades-old o¤enses or medical conditions), including
no attorney or spousal exemptions from testimony and no right not to self-incriminate. In this
view, market forces will always ensure that any “irrational” discrimination based on revealed
attributes and actions is quickly eliminated, leaving only e¢ cient uses of the information that
create reputational incentives for socially bene…cial behavior.
Yet there remains substantial unease at the idea of shaming as a policy tool, and more
generally a widespread view that a society with zero privacy would be “unlivable.” Since the
foundational article of Warren and Brandeis (1890) a broad right of privacy has progressively
been enshrined in most countries’constitutions, though its practical content varies across places,
times and judicial interpretations. Besides the general attachment to anonymous voting as
indispensable to democracy (Brennan and Pettit (1990), however, argue that publicizing votes
would better align then with the general interest, versus private ones), there are also many
instances where social institutions preserve privacy, even though publicity could o¤er a powerful
tool to curb free-riding and other “irresponsible”behaviors. During episodes of energy or water
rationing, local authorities do not publish lists of overusers (the media, on the other hand, often
reports on the most egregious cases). In the consumption of publicly provided or funded health
care, there is no policy to “out” those who impose the highest costs as the result of partially
controllable behaviors such as smoking, poor diet, or addictions. On the contrary, there are
2
In Greece, tax authorities have released lists of major corporate and individual tax evaders. In Peru, businesses convicted of tax evasion can be shut down, with a sign plastered in front; conversely, municipalities publish
an “honor list”of households who have always paid their property taxes on time (Del Carpio (2014)). In France,
a July 2014 law allows judges …nding a …rm or an individual guilty of undeclared employment to post, for up to
two years, their names and professional addresses on an internet “black list” hosted by the Ministry of Labor.
Shaming can also be spontaneously organized by activists, as with the “Occupy Wall Street” movement, or the
hacking of Ashley Madison’s list of user identities. There is even a growing movement of frustrated parents
posting videos on the internet and social media to publicly shame their misbehaving children.
3
A ‡ourishing image-ransoming industry is even developing in the United States. These “shame entrepreneurs”
operate by re-posting on high-visibility websites the o¢ cial arrest “mugshots” from police departments and
municipalities all across the country, then asking the people involved for a hefty fee in order to take down
the post concerning them. (Segal (2013)). There are also more established companies serving businesses by
“managing” their on-line reputations in consumer forums, blogs, etc.

2

strong legal protections for patient con…dentiality. Governments often expunge criminal records
after some time or conceal them from private view (for instance, prohibiting credit bureaus
from reporting past arrests), and a major debate over the “right to be forgotten” is ongoing
with search-engine and social-media companies.
There is obviously a case for protecting individuals’information from the eyes of parties with
potentially malicious intent: undemocratic government repressing dissenters, …rms using data
on consumer’s habits and spending patterns to engage in price discrimination or exploitation,
hackers intent on identity theft and rivals seeking to steal trade secrets. While these issues are
undeniably important, we focus here on identifying very di¤erent costs of transparency, related
to evolving social norms and the adaptation of formal institutions. As we shall see, these imply
that even when the principal is fully benevolent, incurs no direct cost to publicizing behaviors,
and doing so always leads agents to provide more public goods, it is optimal to maintain or
protect a certain degree of privacy. This remains a fortiori true under less ideal conditions.

1.2

Our Framework

The key idea is that while publicity is a powerful and cheap instrument of control it is also a
blunt one, generating substantial uncertainty both for those subject to it and, most importantly,
for those who wield it. Our argument builds on two complementary mechanisms:
1. Ine¢ cient variability in the power of social image. The rewards and sanctions generated
by publicizing an individual’s actions stem from the reactions that this knowledge elicits
from his family, peers, or neighbors. These social incentives thus involve the emotional
responses of many people as well as their degree of coordination, which makes their severity hard to predict and …ne-tune a priori (E. Posner (2000)). Depending on place, time,
group, o¤ense and individual contingencies, the feared response may go from mild ostracism to mob action, be easy or hard to escape, etc.4 Variability in the strength of
agents’concerns about social image and sanctions will, in turn, generate ine¢ cient variations in compliance (not re‡ecting true variations in social value), which become ampli…ed
as individual behaviors are made more visible or salient.5
2. Rigid and maladaptive public policy. Public stigmatization has long been used to repress
non-believers, mixed-race relationships, single-mothers, homosexuals, etc. But, of course,
the purpose at the time was precisely to discourage such behaviors, widely considered immoral and socially nefarious, and accordingly also punished by the law. The real problem
4

On such instability and indeterminacy in collective-action outcomes, see Lohmann (1994) and Kuran (1997).
The current “explosion” of shaming on social media is a good example of this variability. In many instances, the
resulting costs to the punished party (loss of job and family, suicide) ended up being wildly disproportionate to
the perceived o¤ense. Sometimes there is even a backlash, where individuals who played a key role in coordinating
a shaming that “went too far” are themselves publicly shamed on the same media (Ronson (2015)).
5
Similar e¤ects of variability occur if social sanctioning involves (convex) resource costs, or if agents are risk
averse. We abstract from these channels, since they would lead to very similar results as those we focus on.

3

is that societal preferences change unpredictably due to technology, enlightenment, migration, trade, etc. In order to learn how policy –the law and other institutions, taxes and
subsidies, etc.–should be adapted to recent evolutions, an imperfectly informed principal
must assess societal preferences from prevailing behaviors and mores. If individuals feel
too constrained by the fear of social stigma and sanctions from others, these preference
shifts will remain hidden, or be revealed too slowly. The result will be a rigidi…cation
and maladaptation not only in private conduct –excessive conformity–but also in public
policy, doubly impacting the e¢ ciency of resource allocation.
Full reversals of societal preferences, where some behavior like overt racism, sexism or
domestic violence goes from “normal” to deeply scorned, or on the contrary from intensely
stigmatized to widely acceptable, like divorce, cohabitation (“living in sin”), homosexuality
or drug use, are relatively common in modern societies and sometimes quite sudden. It is
thus all but certain that some conducts generally seen as abhorrent and shameful today will
become perfectly mundane within a couple of decades, and vice-versa. Uncertainty lies only in
which ones it will be and which way the cursor will move. Possible candidates of both types
include organ sales, prostitution, extramarital and other parallel relationships, eating meat and
wearing animal products, atheism and apostasy, transhumanistic enhancements and others we
cannot yet conceive of. Ignoring that what constitutes a public good, a heinous deed or a
wide-ranging externality (and hence also a proper signal of prosociality) is subject to important
and unpredictable shifts, is the fundamental error of “minimal-privacy” advocates such as R.
Posner, who in the process explicitly equate social conformity with the common good:
“At one level, Bloustein [an earlier law scholar advocating for the right to privacy]
is saying merely that if people were forced to conform their private to their public
behavior there would be more uniformity in private behavior across people –that is to
say, people would be better behaved if they had less privacy. This result he considers
objectionable apparently... for reasons he must consider self-evident since he does
not attempt to explain them.” (R. Posner (1977), pp. 401-405).
We will show that the problem with low privacy lies not in increased uniformity of individual
behaviors (it may in fact have the opposite e¤ect, generating ine¢ cient image-seeking variations)
but in the reduced informativeness of aggregate behavior, which impedes everyone –in particular,
the legislator– from learning and adapting to recent evolutions in societal preferences. Even
for behaviors that remain unambiguously bad or good from a social point view (drunk driving,
tax compliance, etc.), moreover, the tradeo¤ we identify remains. As long as their relative
importance to social welfare ‡uctuates over time (with sign unchanged), a policymaker will
need to learn of these evolutions through shifts in aggregate behavior, so as to appropriately
redirect limited …nancial or enforcement resources.6
6
Only for actions which the Principal always wants to deter maximally (corner solution), obviating the need
to ascertain anything about how they a¤ect agents, does the e¤ect vanish; heinous murders may be such a case.

4

Formally, we study a Principal interacting with a continuum of agents in a canonical context
of public-goods-provision or externalities. Agents have private signals about the quality of the
public good, and their collective information, suitably aggregated, is a precise signal of its social
value. Each chooses how much to contribute, based on his own mix of public-spiritedness, information and reputational concern for appearing prosocial. The Principal can amplify or dampen
these reputational payo¤s, and hence total contributions, by making individual behavior more
or less visible to the community. While this entails little cost (none, for simplicity), she faces
an informational problem: because societal preferences change, she knows only imperfectly the
social value of the public good and the importance attached by agents to social esteem or sanctions. Learning about public good quality or externalities is important for choosing her own
(e.g., tax-…nanced) contribution, matching rate or other policy, such as the law. If the Principal
suppresses image motivations by making contributions anonymous, she can precisely infer societal preferences from agents’aggregate behavior. However, each individual will then free-ride
to a greater extent, leaving her with a greater share of the burden in achieving the desired level
of public-good provision. On the other hand, if she leverages social image to spur compliance,
she exacerbates her own signal-extraction problem by making aggregate behavior more sensitive
to variations in the importance of social esteem. The Principal thus faces a tradeo¤ between
using image as an incentive and gaining better information on societal preferences.7
We …rst study agents’equilibrium behavior and learning under any …xed level of publicity,
establishing a surprisingly simple benchmarking result for how social inferences take place in
this complex environment (multidimensional signaling and heterogenous, higher-order beliefs).
We then consider the Principal’s optimal choice of publicity and the tradeo¤s arising from
agents’ responses. We show that a positive level of privacy must always be maintained and
fully characterize its comparative statics, as well as those of the Principal’s second-stage policy
(matching rate) with respect to her cost of funds, the idiosyncratic and aggregate variances of
agents’ preferences, and both sides’ quality of information. We show in particular that in a
fast-changing society (greater variability in the fundamental or the image-motivated component
of average preferences), privacy should be greater than in a more static or “traditional” one,
where preferences vary mostly across individuals but are stable at the societal level.

1.3

Applications

From social norms to formal institutions. Formal laws and institutions most often crystallize
from preexisting community standards, norms and practices, which inform designers about what
behaviors are generally deemed to generate positive or negative externalities. These change over
time, sometimes quite radically and very fast. Where behavior is highly constrained by the fear
7

The point applies more generally to any incentive to which agents respond strongly on average (e¤ectiveness)
but to a degree that is hard to predict ex-ante and parse out ex-post (uncertainty). As discussed earlier, this is
much more a feature of social sanctions than of monetary incentives, on which many tradeo¤s are observable.
Thus, it is arguably easier to estimate a stable response of tax compliance to …nes and audit probabilities than to
posting the names of evaders on a shame list. Absent such an asymmetry between formal and informal incentives,
our model provides further reasons why high-powered incentives, of any kind, can be counterproductive.

5

of social stigma, assessing social preferences and shaping laws by what people do (“descriptive
norm”) can be a very poor indicator of what they really value (“prescriptive norm”).
Similar issues arise in the debate over freedom of speech versus “political correctness.”
Reputational concerns lead people to refrain from acts and speech considered to be o¤ensive
(Loury (1994), Morris (2001)), so activist groups, media outlets and institutions like universities
commonly use publicity (and rules) to curtail such behaviors.8 Without su¢ cient privacy
protections, however, what people have really come to think will be learned only too late.
Public good provision, charitable donations. We cast the model in terms of a classical
benchmark: providing the “right kind” of public goods in a cost-e¤ective manner. This also
facilitates comparison with previous work. Community leaders, philanthropists and foundations
often rely on constituents’and activists’degree of involvement to identify the value of investing
in local schools, parks, transportation, or development projects in remote parts of the world.
This is also why the practice of matching individual contributions is common among sponsors,
as are “leadership” gifts used as signals of worth for subsequent donors (Vesterlund (2003),
Andreoni (2006)). Publicly recognizing and honoring individuals’or NGO’s e¤orts encourages
commitment, but also makes it a less precise signal of true social value.
Consumer and corporate social responsibility. Firms are increasingly pressured or shamed by
activists into behaving “responsibly”on issues of environmental impact, child labor, workplace
safety, treatment of animals, etc. To the extent that such reputational incentives make up for
de…cient regulation or Pigovian taxation they are bene…cial, but the strong conformity e¤ects
they create make it hard for consumers and investors to know which practices are truly socially
valuable and which ones are just “greenwashing”. The same applies to “green”and “fair trade”
consumer goods, typically heavily advertised and often conspicuously consumed.
Agency incentives. Representatives in a sales team can often privately observe how well the
product …ts customer needs. Publicizing individual sales records leads them to exert more e¤ort
in promoting it, thus alleviating the moral-hazard problem (Larkin (2011)), but it deprives the
…rm of valuable feedback: seeing high sales, it may not realize that its product needs further
development without which success will be short-lived, or that it involves hidden risks.
Leadership. As emphasized in the literature on corporate culture, a key role of leadership
is to coordinate expectations and e¤orts toward goals that re‡ect shared objectives and beliefs
(Kreps (1990), Hermalin and Katz (2006), Bolton, Brunnermeier, and Veldkamp (2013)). Our
analysis highlights how a leader faces the challenge of using publicity to align agents’ goals
and values with those of the organization, while also allowing enough dissent and contrarian
behavior for her (and others) to learn how these should adapt over time.
Political activism. The Principal can also stand for an electorate, while agents are activists
and informational lobbies exerting e¤ort to persuade voters about some drastic reform. When
8

Thus, a recent activist campaign in Brazil tracks down the geotagged locations of people who post racist
comments on social media, then reposts them on giant billboards and public buses in the immediate neighborhood
of the source (with names and pro…le pictures blurred, however).

6

the media makes their actions more visible, activists are willing to take more costly steps, so
publicity again provides incentives. At the same time, activism is discounted to a further extent
as being “attention-seeking,” and indeed may not o¤er much useful information.9

1.4

Related Literature

Our study relates to several parts of the large literature examining the impact of transparency
on individual and collective decision-making, and thus ultimately on institutional design.
A …rst strand focuses on signaling, especially in a public-goods context.10 Our model builds
on Bénabou and Tirole (2006) who study how incentives, whether material or social, can
undermine individual’s reputational returns derived from a prosocial activity. We develop
this basic framework in two important, more aggregate directions. First, a Principal explicitly
chooses how much agents know about each other’s behavior, internalizing their equilibrium
responses. Second, she is imperfectly informed about the social value of the activity, generating
a tradeo¤ between image incentives and information aggregation that is a novel feature of our
model.11 Also closely related is Daughety and Reinganum (2010), who study how making
actions fully public can result in the overprovision of public goods, whereas making them fully
private can result in underprovision. We consider the problem of a Principal who can adjust
continuously how much privacy to accord individuals, faces uncertainty about they will respond
to it and, most importantly, cares about the informational content of their behavior.12
Transparency is also a central issue when experts, judges, or committee members have
career concerns over the quality of their information (rather than their prosociality), as they
may distort their advice or actions in order to appear more competent. A …rst e¤ect, working
toward conformity or “conservatism,” arises when agents have no private knowledge of their
own ability: they will then make forecasts and choices that aim to be in line with the Principal’s
prior (Prendergast (1993), Prat (2005), Bar-Isaac (2012)), or with the views expressed by more
“senior” agents thought to be a priori more knowledgeable (Ottaviani and Sørensen (2001)).
When competence is a private type, on the other hand, the incentive to signal it generates
“anti-conformist” or activist tendencies: agents will overreact to their own signals, excessively
contradict seniors or reverse precedents, etc.; which of the two forces dominates then depends
on the details on game’s information and strategic structure (Levy (2005, 2007)), Visser and
9

Lorentzen (2013), for instance, studies how China’s government relies on public protests as a signal of local
corruption. Our point is that media attention to these protests helps mitigate collective action problems, but
also interferes with information transmission when activism becomes image-driven.
10
See, e.g., Bernheim (1994), Corneo (1997), Harbaugh (1998), Ellingsen and Johannesson (2008) and Andreoni
and Bernheim (2009).
11
Excessive constraints on behavior (commitment devices, monitoring with threats of punishment) can also
interfere with learning about agents’ individual types, rather than with information aggregation over the state
of the world; see, e.g., Bénabou and Tirole (2004), Ichino and Muehlheusser (2008) and Ali (2011).
12
Daughety and Reinganum (2010) also show that waivable privacy rights do not help reduce wasteful signaling.
Bénabou and Tirole (2011) show, on the other hand, that if the value of image (e.g., the “going rate” to have
one’s name on a university or hospital building) is known to the Principal, tax incentives can be adjusted to
o¤set any reputation-motivated distortions in the level or allocation of contributions. This is another reason why
the fact that here the Principal’s not knowing the exact value of image is important here.

7

Swank (2007)). On the normative side, whether conformity or exaggeration is worse for the
Principal, and whether she prefers transparency or anonymity for the agents, turns on how her
loss function weighs “getting things wrong” in more likely states of the world versus more rare
ones (Fox and Van Weelden (2012), Fehrler and Hughes (2015)). In our framework, agents’
incentives to signal their types increase rather than decrease conformity, and the latter has
simultaneously positive (mean-contribution) and negative (excessive variance and informationgarbling) e¤ects. Another key di¤erence is that the strength of image concerns, which is common
knowledge in nearly all of the signaling literature, is here one of the key sources of uncertainty.13
As stated earlier we do not deal here with government snooping, consumer exploitation by
…rms, the theft of identity or trade secrets, which all involve principals seeking to misuse agents’
data (see Acquisti, Taylor, and Wagman (2016) for a survey). Our focus is instead on what
private citizens know about each other’s behaviors and on the social value of privacy even when
the Principal may be benevolent (though we also allow her not to be).14 Finally, in emphasizing
how laws emerge from evolving social norms, our paper relates to a growing literature on how
formal and informal institutions shape each other (e.g., Bénabou and Tirole (2011), Jia and
Persson (2013), Besley, Jensen, and Persson (2014), Acemoglu and Jackson (2016)).

2

Model

We study the interaction between a continuum of small agents (i 2 [0; 1]) and a single large
Principal (P ), each of whom chooses how much to contribute (in time, e¤ort or money) to a

public good. Depending on the context, these actors may correspond to: (i) a government and
its citizens; (ii) a charitable organization and potential donors; (iii) a pro…t-maximizing …rm
and workers who care to some degree about how well it is doing, whether out of pure loyalty
or because they have a stake in its long-run survival.
A. Agents. Each agent i selects a contribution level ai 2 R; at cost C (ai )

a2i =2. An individ-

ual’s utility depends on his own contribution, from which he derives some intrinsic satisfaction
(or “joy of giving”), on the total provision of the public good, which has quality or social usefulness indexed by , and on the reputational rewards attached to contributing. Given total
private contributions a and the Principal contributing aP ; Agent i’s direct (non-reputational)
payo¤ is
Ui (vi ; ; w; ai ; a; aP )

(vi + ) ai + (w + ) (a + aP )

C (ai ) :

(1)

The …rst term corresponds to his intrinsic motivation, which includes both an idiosyncratic
13

Bénabou and Tirole (2006) study signaling agents with heterogenous (privately known) image-concerns, and
Fischer and Verrecchia (2000) and Frankel and Kartik (2014) agents with heterogenous payo¤s to misrepresenting
their actions. In such settings, greater visibilty makes each individual’s observed behavior less informative about
his true motivations. In none of these papers is there any aggregate uncertainty, nor a Principal who seeks to
incentivize agents and/or learn from their behavior.
14
For the same reason we abstract from concerns that public shaming constitutes cruel humiliation that negates
other important societal values such as human dignity. See, e.g., Posner (1998) for such arguments and Bénabou
and Tirole (2011) for an analysis of expressive law, including the case of “cruel and unusual punishments.”

8

component vi and the common shift factor ; re‡ecting the idea that people like to contribute
more to socially valuable projects than to less useful ones.15 Agent i’s baseline valuation vi is
distributed as N v; s2v and privately known to him. The second term in (1) is the value derived
from the public good, which we take to be similar across individuals, without loss of generality.
We assume v < w; ensuring that intrinsic motivations alone do not solve the free-rider problem.
The quality or social value of the public good is a priori uncertain, with agents and the
Principal starting with common prior belief that
i receives a private noisy signal,

is distributed as N

;

2

: Each agent

+ "i ; in which the error is distributed as N 0; s2 ,

i

independently of the signals of others. Here and throughout the paper, we use the following
mnemonics: aggregate variabilities are denoted as

2;

cross-sectional dispersions as s2 :

Each agent cares about the inferences that members of his social and economic networks will
draw about his intrinsic motivation, vi : he wishes to appear prosocial, a good citizen rather than
a free-rider, dedicated to his work, etc.16 The importance of a good reputation varies across
individuals, communities and periods; it is greater, for instance, for people engaged in longrun relationships based on trust than where exchange occurs through impersonal markets and
complete contracts. Social enforcement –punishing or shunning perceived free-riders, rewarding
model citizens–also relies on mobilizing emotional reactions and achieving group coordination,
both of which are hard to predict. We denote the strength of agent i’s reputational concerns as
i

(specifying below how it a¤ects his payo¤s) and allow it to be distributed cross-sectionally

as N ( ; s2 ) around the group average ; which itself varies as N ( ;
held by agents and Principal alike. We assume that

2)

around a common prior

is large enough that, with very high

probability, the fraction of agents who desire a positive reputation is close to 1.
Formally, an agent i’s complete type is a triplet (vi ; i ;
components to be independent of each

other.17

i );

for tractability, we take the three

An individual j observing i’s contribution ai

does not know to what extent it was motivated intrinsically (high vi ), by a high signal about
the value of the public good (high
use his own signal

j

i ),

or by a strong image motive (high

and reputational concern

j

(since ( i ;

j)

i ):

and ( i ;

j)

He can, however,

are correlated), as

well as the realized average contribution a; to form his assessment E[vi jai ; a;

j;

j]

of player i:

Thinking ahead, Agent i uses his ex-ante information to forecast the how he will be judged by
others. The average social image that he can anticipate if he contributes ai = a is thus
R (a; i ;

i)

Ea;

i;

i

Z

1

0

We assume that a social image R (a; i ;
v], where

i

i)

E [vi ja; a;

j;

j ] dj

i;

i

:

yields for agent i a net payo¤ of

re‡ects his baseline concern for social esteem and x

15

(2)
i x[R (a; i ;

i)

0 parametrizes the degree

We model agents’preferences as separable in intrinsic motivation and quality for analytical tractability, but
the basic insights are robust to relaxing this assumption; see Section 2.1. for a discussion.
16
These concerns may be instrumental (appearing as a more desirable employee, mate, business partner or
public o¢ cial), hedonic (feeling pride rather than shame, basking in social esteem), or a combination of both.
17
In particular, if i was correlated with vi or i the inference problems of agents and Principal would no
longer have a linear-normal structure.

9

of visibility and memorability of individual actions, which can be exogenous or under the
Principal’s control. Accounting for both direct and image-based payo¤s, agent i chooses ai to
solve
maxfE [Ui (vi ; ; w; ai ; a; aP )j
ai 2R

i]

+ x i [R (ai ; i ;

i)

v]g:

(3)

B. Principal. The Principal’s …nal payo¤ is a convex combination of agents’total utility and
her own private bene…ts and costs from the overall supply of the (quality-adjusted) public good:
Z

V (a; aP ; )

1

(vi + ) ai di + (w + )(a + aP )

In the …rst term,

1

C(ai )di

0

0

+ (1

Z

) [b(w + )(a + aP )

kP C(aP )] :

(4)

2 [0; 1] captures the extent to which Principal internalizes agents’intrinsic

“joy of giving”utility, relative to their material payo¤s. As to image gains and losses, by Bayes’
R1
rule (or the law of iterated expectations) they sum to zero across agents ( 0 R (ai ; i ) di = v);
so whether or not the Principal internalizes this part of aggregate utility is irrelevant. In the

second term, kP is the Principal’s cost of directly contributing, relative to that of agents, while
b 2 R represents any private bene…ts she may derive from the total supply of public good. It
will be useful to denote

'

+ (1

!

(w + )'

)b;

(5)
(1

)(v + ):

(6)

The coe¢ cient ' is the Principal’s total gain per (e¢ ciency) unit added to the total supply
of public good a + aP ; whatever its source. The coe¢ cient ! is her net expected utility from
each marginal unit of the good provided speci…cally by the agents, taking into account that
when

> 0 she internalizes: (i) a fraction

(ii) a fraction

of their intrinsic satisfaction from doing so;
R1
of their marginal contribution cost 0 C 0 (ai )di = a; which absent reputational

incentives they would equate to their intrinsic marginal bene…t, v + :

Put di¤erently, ! represents the wedge between the Principal’s expected value of agents’
contributions and the latter’s expected willingness to contribute spontaneously. To make the
problem non-trivial we shall assume that ! > 0; so that, on average, the Principal does want
to increase private contributions (or norm compliance). To cut down on the number of cases
we shall focus the exposition on the case where b > 0; which in turn implies that ' > 0 and
@!=@ =

+(1

)b > 0; meaning that “higher quality”is indeed something that the Principal

values positively. Her preferences over the quality of the public good are thus congruent with
those of the agents, even though her preferences over the level and sharing of its supply may
be quite di¤erent.18
18

The model and all analytical results also allow for b < 0 (even potentially ' < 0; ! < 0 and @!=@ < 0);
however. This corresponds to Principal who intrinsically dislikes the activity that agents consider socially valuable
–political opposition, cultural resistance, etc.

10

Our framework includes as special cases:
(a) For

= 1; a purely benevolent, “sel‡ess” Principal.

(b) For

= 1=2 and b = 0; a standard social planner, who values equally agents’and her own

costs of provision. The latter could also be those incurred by the rest of society, e.g., due
to a shadow price of public funds.
(c) For

= 0; a purely sel…sh Principal, such as a pro…t-maximizing …rm that uses image to

elicit e¤ort provision from its employees.
In order to set her own provision aP e¢ ciently, the Principal must learn about . A key
piece of data she observes is the aggregate contribution or compliance rate a; which embodies
information about both aggregate shocks,
Principal shares agents’prior
obtain an independent signal

N

about the quality of the public good and may also

+ "P ; with error distributed as N (0; s2;P ): Her prior for

P

the importance of image is N ( ;

;

and , generating a signal-extraction problem. The
2

2 ):

These beliefs incorporate all the information previously

obtained the Principal, for instance by polling agents about the quality of the public good or
the importance of social image.19
C. Timing. The game unfolds as follows:
1. The Principal chooses the level of observability of individual behavior, x, that will prevail
among agents. Conversely, 1=x represents the degree of privacy.
2. Each agent learns his private signal about quality,
to him,

i,

i,

and how important social esteem is

then chooses his contribution ai :

3. The aggregate contribution a is publicly observed.
4. The Principal observes her own signal

P:

5. The Principal chooses her contribution aP ; and the total supply a + aP is enjoyed by all.
We focus, for tractability, on Perfect Bayesian Equilibria in which an agent’s contribution
is linear in his type, (vi ; i ;

i ):

This will be shown to imply that an equivalent formulation of

the Principal’s decision problem is:
(a) Given any x; optimally set a baseline investment level she will provide (based on her
own signal) and a matching rate on private contributions: aP = aP (x;

P)

+ m(x)a:

(b) Based on ex-ante information only, set x optimally.
19

This information is typically limited: polling is costly (see Auriol and Gary-Bobo (2012) on the optimal
sample size or number of representatives) and invites strategic responses from agents who would like the Principal
to contribute more (Morgan and Stocken (2008), Hummel, Morgan, and Stocken (2013)). Allowing the Principal
to obtain an independent, noisy signal of would also not a¤ect our analysis.

11

2.1

Discussion of the Model

At the core of our model are two related tensions between the bene…ts of publicity (which,
on average, improves provision of public goods and economizes on costly incentives) and the
distortions it generates in agents’and the Principal’s decisions:
1. Agent’s contributions become driven in larger part by variations in their social-image
concerns, rather than by their signals concerning the social value of the public good.
2. A Principal who does not precisely know the extent to which agents care about social
payo¤s must use publicity carefully, lest it make their behavior excessively conformist
–that is, too uncorrelated with the true quality of the public good, and too di¢ cult to for
her to learn from.
To identify these forces as cleanly as possible we made a number of simplifying assumptions.
Separability in Intrinsic Motivation and Quality The model features multidimensional
signaling with a single-dimensional action space, which leads to pooling between types with high
intrinsic motivation vi ; favorable information

i

and strong image concerns

i.

Moreover, each

agent lacks information about others’signals and so cannot perfectly anticipate how they will
interpret his actions. Social incentives thus involve both multidimensional heterogeneity and
higher-order uncertainty, making the problem a complex one. Specifying agents’ preferences
as separable in intrinsic motivation and public-good quality allows us to keep it tractable and
derive simple, closed-form solutions. The basic tradeo¤ between incentives and information
would, however, apply even with complementarity between these dimensions.
Timing of Information and Publicity
and then observe her signal

P

Having the Principal …rst set the degree of publicity

allows us to abstract from an “Informed Principal” problem.

Were the timing reversed, her choice of x would convey information about the quality of the
public good, which is a di¤erent strategic force from that of interest here.20 The choice of
publicity / privacy would then also commingle the Principal’s motive to learn from agents with
her incentive to signal to them.
Principal’s Policy

The Principal chooses her provision level aP after agents make their

decisions, but all results are identical when she commits in advance to a matching rate on
private contributions. This invariance re‡ects the fact that each ai is negligible in the aggregate,
together with the assumption (implicit in how aP enters (1)) that agents derive intrinsic utility
only from their own contribution, and not from the induced matching.21 For simplicity, and to
20

Papers studying an informed-principal problem in related contexts include Bénabou and Tirole (2003),
Sliwka (2008), Van der Weele (2013) and Bénabou and Tirole (2011), who study how laws shape norms, whereas
we focus here on the complementary mechanism of how norms shape laws.
21
There is no “right answer” on what these preferences should be: the limited evidence on this question.
Harbaugh, Mayr, and Burghart (2007) suggests that while induced contributions from some outside source do
generate some intrinsic satisfaction, it is markedly less than that associated to own contributions.

12

focus squarely on the e¤ects of publicity, we abstract from the use of price incentives to induce
compliance. More generally, material incentives entail both direct and indirect costs that limit
the extent to which they can be used.22

3

Equilibrium Behavior: How Agents Respond to Publicity

We analyze here the social equilibrium between agents that obtains for any given level of
publicity. This is an interesting question in its own right, especially with each individual facing
both …rst-order uncertainty about the population means

and

and higher-order uncertainty

about the beliefs of others, which in turn determine how his actions are likely to be judged.
Maximizing his utility (3), each agent chooses his contribution level ai to satisfy:
C 0 (a) = vi + E[ j i ] + x

i

@R(a; i ; )
:
@a

(7)

This equation embodies the agent’s three basic motivations: his baseline intrinsic utility from
contributing, his posterior belief about the quality of the public good, and the impact of contributions on his expected image. To form his optimal estimate of ; he combines his private
signal and prior expectation according to
E[ j i ] =
where

=

2=

2

i

+ (1

) ;

(8)

+ s2 is the signal-to-noise ratio in his inference. We show that when agents

use linear strategies, @R(a; i ; )=@a is constant, leading to a unique outcome.
Proposition 1. (Equilibrium behavior and benchmarking) Fix x
linear equilibrium, in which an agent of type (vi ; i ;
ai (vi ; i ;
where

2 =( 2

+ s2 ) and

i)

= vi +

i

+ (1

i)

0: There is a unique

chooses
) +

ix

(x) ;

(9)

(x) is the unique solution to
(x) =

s2v
+ s2v +

x2 (x)2 s2

2 s2

:

(10)

The resulting aggregate contribution (or compliance level) is
a (x; ; ) = v +

+ (1

) + x (x):

A su¢ cient-statistic result. Greater intrinsic motivation vi ; better perceived quality
a stronger image concern

i

(11)
i

and

naturally lead an agent to contribute more. Most remarkable,

however, is the simplicity of the social-image computations that emerge from this complex
22

We can thus also de…ne ! as the wedge left after the Principal has already used any standard incentives at
her disposal. Note also that it will always be optimal to use some positive level of publicity as an additional
incentive: the gain is initially …rst-order, whereas the induced distortions are second-order.

13

setting, as re‡ected by the common marginal impact (x) that an additional unit of contribution
has on one’s expected image. This is also, intuitively, the signal-to-noise ratio faced by an
observer when trying to infer someone’s type vi from their action, knowing that behavior
re‡ects private preferences, private signals and image concerns according to (9).
Strikingly, the expected image return is the same for all agents, even though they have very
di¤erent information sets –namely, di¤erent signals ( i ;
and ; hence also of the

j ’s

and

j ’s

i)

that are predictive of the average

which observers will have at their disposal to extract

vi from ai ; using (9). The reason for this result is a form of benchmarking: an observer j
does not need to separately estimate and …lter out the contributions of
only that of the linear combination

i

+

ix

ix

i

(x) jai ; a;

j;

j;

j]

j]

Agent i’s ex-post reputation will thus be a linear function of ai
@R (a; i ;

i ),

i ) =@a

i

to ai ; but

+ x (x) ; hence
and E [ i ja; a;

j;

j]

does not, so all observers

of agent i again share the same beliefs about his motivation: E[vi ja; a;
his own ( i ;

and

(x) ; and for this purpose

also a; is a su¢ cient statistic. Put di¤erently, whereas E [ i ja; a;

both depend on j’s private type, E[ai

i

j;

j]

= E[vi ja; a]:23

a only, implying in turn that

while critical to forecast a itself ex-ante, will not a¤ect the marginal return:
= (x) :

Put di¤erently, when ai is judged against the benchmark a; contributions above average
(say) must re‡ect a higher than average preference, signal, or image concern:
ai

a = vi

v+ (

i

) + x (x)(

i

):

(12)

Observers assign to each source of variation a weight proportional to its relative variance,
conditional on a; so that:
E [vi j ai ; a] = (1

) v + (v + ai

a) = v + (ai

a) ;

(13)

where (x) is given, as a …xed point, by (10).
In anonymous settings, x = 0; or when there is no idiosyncratic variance in the value of
image, s2 = 0; the problem simpli…es further, leading to a value
=

s2v
:
s2v + 2 s2

(14)

The overjusti…cation e¤ ect. When image concerns di¤er, x2 s2 > 0; the informativeness of
individual behavior is further reduced by the possibility that it might have been motived by
image-seeking (a high

i );

thus

(x) < (0)

; with a slight abuse of notation. This “over-

justi…cation e¤ect” is ampli…ed as actions become more visible, resulting in a partial crowding
out:

(x)

x (x); and thus also a(x); increase less than one for one with x:

23
To see that this is far from obvious a priori, note that it would no longer be the case if a itself was observed
with noise, or subject to small-sample variations from a …nite number of agents. These represent potentially
interesting extensions of the current model.

14

Proposition 2. (Comparative statics of social interactions) In equilibrium:
(1) The social-image return (x) is strictly increasing in the dispersion of agents’preferences
s2v ; decreasing their aggregate variability
agents’ image concerns

s2 ;

2;

in the level of publicity x and in the dispersion of

and U -shaped in the quality of their signals, s2 :

(2) The impact of visibility on contributions, (x)

x (x), is strictly increasing in x, with

limx!1 (x) = +1; and it shares the properties of (x) with respect to all variance parameters.
The same is true of the aggregate contribution a(x); as long as

> 0:24

The …rst two properties are quite intuitive. First, signaling motives are ampli…ed by a greater
cross-sectional dispersion s2v in the preferences vi that observers are trying to infer. Second,
decreasing the variance
private information

i

2

of the aggregate shock means that each agent is less responsive to his

(as it is more likely to be noise), so individual variations in contribution

are again more indicative of di¤erences in intrinsic motivation. The attribution-garbling role of
di¤erences in image concerns, s2 ; was explained earlier.
The last comparative static is more novel and subtle: the U-shape of

and

in s2 re‡ects

the idea that reputational e¤ects are strongest when agents have the same interim belief about
the quality of the public good. This occurs when their private signals are either very precise
(s ! 0) and hence all close to the true ; or on the contrary very imprecise (s ! 1),

leading them to put a weight close to 1 on the common prior : In both cases, di¤erences in
contributions re‡ect di¤erences in intrinsic motivation much more than in information about
; which intensi…es the signaling game and thereby raises contributions.
As (x) ! 1 the equilibrium becomes fully revealing, with each agent’s social image exactly

matching his actual preference: E [vi j ai ] = vi : Yet his contribution exceeds by x

i

that which

he would make, were his type directly observable: the contest for status traps everyone in an
expectations game where they cannot a¤ord to contribute less than the equilibrium level.
Exogenous variations in privacy. Inspection of (11) already makes apparent the key tradeo¤s: a higher x increases aggregate contributions a(x) but also causes them to vary ine¢ ciently,

and most importantly reduces their reliability as an indicator of what actually constitutes the
social good ( ): This last point applies to any observer, and in a dynamic setting we can think
of each generation trying to learn what is “the right thing to do” from the behavior of its
elders. Propositions 1-2 imply that, in low-privacy environments such as small villages, early
societies and other close-knit groups, social norms and formal institutions will be slow to adapt
and often remain ine¢ cient for a long time. Principals who can in‡uence the general level of
privacy will naturally take the above tradeo¤ into account, a case we now turn to formally.
24

This restriction means that agents want to perceived as prosocial, rather than antisocial; since
be large, this case occurs with probability close to 1.

15

is taken to

4

Optimal Publicity and Matching Policies

We model the degree of public visibility and memorability of agents’ actions as a parameter
x 2 R+ that scales reputational payo¤s up or down to x i R (a; i ;

i) :

To focus on how a

social value of privacy arises endogenously, we assume that the Principal can vary x costlessly.
While the costs of honori…c ceremonies, medals, public shame lists, etc., are non-zero, they are
trivially small compared to direct spending on public goods, subsidies or law enforcement.

25

We uncover three distinct motivations for the Principal to grant agents some degree of
privacy, and to isolate each one, we consider in turn:
(a) A simple benchmark without any variability in image motives,
(b) A case where

2

2

= 0:

> 0 but the Principal, like the agents, observes the realization of

once x has been set, but prior to choosing aP :
(c) The main setting of interest, in which the Principal is uncertain about the realizations
of both aggregate shocks,

and :

These three nested cases provide insights into, respectively: (a) how the Principal would set
publicity if she could …ne-tune its impact x perfectly; (b) the “variance e¤ect” that emerges
when she cannot do so but observes

ex post; (c) the “information-distortion e¤ect”that arises

when publicizing behavior generates a signal-extraction problem.
To further simplify the exposition, we will focus until Section 4.4 on the case in which all
agents share the same value for social image:

i

=

; for every i; or equivalently s2 = 0:

This assumption (almost universal in the literature on signaling) will most clearly highlight the
role of aggregate variability in reputational concerns, which is key to the Principal’s learning
problem. Agents’social-learning problems, meanwhile, become simpler, with the image return
(x) reducing to the constant

4.1

given by (14).

Fine-Tuned Publicity: An Image-Based Pigovian Policy

Consider …rst the simple case where agents’ image motive is invariant: both they and the
Principal believe with probability 1 that
contribution a, the Principal perfectly infers
ap =

=

; so

2

= 0: Upon observing the aggregate

by inverting (11), allowing her to optimally set

(w + )[ + (1
kP (1
)

where ' was de…ned in (5). This full revelation of

)b]

=

(w + )'
;
kP (1
)

(15)

also makes the Principal’s own signal

P,

received at the interim stage, redundant. Anticipating this at the ex-ante stage, the expectations
of ;

and a she uses in choosing x are thus simply her priors ;

and a
~(x) = v +

+x

:

Substituting into the objective function (4) and di¤erentiating with respect to x leads to an
25

This cost advantage is one of the main arguments put forward by proponents of publicity and shame (e.g.,
Kahan (1996), Brennan and Pettit (2004), Jacquet (2015)) As mentioned earlier, given technological evolutions
it may soon be reducing x from its laissez-faire level (protecting privacy) that necessitates costly investments.

16

optimal level of
xF B =

(w + )'

(v + ) (1

)

=

!

> 0;

(16)

where the superscripts stands for “First Best” and the wedge ! > 0 was de…ned in (6).26
Image-based Pigovian policy. Consider in particular a Principal who values the public good
exactly like the agents but puts no weight on their “warm-glow” utilities from contributing:
= 0 and either b = 1 or

= 1: The optimal level of visibility is then
xF B =

w

v

:

(17)

This corresponds to a “Pigovian”image subsidy which the Principal …ne-tunes to exactly o¤set
free-riding, i.e. the gap between the public good’s social value w and agents’average willingness
to contribute voluntarily, v: More generally, by using publicity as an incentive according to
(16), the Principal is able to achieve her preferred overall level of public-good provision, fully
o¤setting the wedge !; just as she would with monetary subsidies.

4.2

Accounting for Variability in the Image Motive

When there are variations in the average importance of social image,

2

> 0; the Principal can

no longer …nely adjust publicity ex ante to achieve precise control of agents’ compliance and
achieve her …rst-best through (15)-(16). We show below that this leads her, even if she observes
the realization of

ex post, to moderate her use of visibility as an incentive mechanism.

A principal who learns the realization of
a; to infer the true

(once x has been set) is again able, upon observing

by inverting (11). As before, she will thus ignore her signal

P

and set

aP without error, according to (15). For any choice of publicity x; however, the aggregate
contribution a(x) = v +

+x

will now re‡ect not only the realized quality of the public

good ; but also variations in : Using the distribution of a(x) we can derive the Principal’s
expected payo¤ from x; denoted E V~ (x). Relegating that derivation to the Appendix (A.7), we
focus here on the corresponding optimality condition, which embodies two opposing e¤ects:
dE V~ (x)
=
dx

( )!
| {z }

Incentive E¤ect

|

x

2

2

{z

+

2

Variance E¤ect

}

:

(18)

The two terms clearly show the tradeo¤ between leveraging social pressure to promote compliance and the ine¢ cient, image-driven variations in aggregate contributions that arise from
greater publicity. To the extent ( ) that the Principal internalizes the costs thus borne by the
agents, she also loses from this Variance E¤ ect.

26

This result is a special case in the proof of Proposition 3 below.

17

Proposition 3. (Incentive and variance e¤ ects) When the Principal faces no ex-post
uncertainty about

(symmetric information), she sets publicity level
!
2+

xSI =

=

2

xF B
1 + 2=

2

;

(19)

where xF B was de…ned in (16). This optimal xSI is increasing in w, , , b and
in v;

s2v

and

2;

and U -shaped in

s2

2;

decreasing

and in 1= :

The variance e¤ect makes publicity a blunt instrument of social control, as emphasized by
E. Posner (2000), so the Principal naturally wields it more cautiously than under the Pigovian
policy: xSI < xF B ; for all

4.3

> 0:

Publicity and Information Distortion

We now turn to the main setting of interest, in which the Principal does not observe the realization of

and therefore faces an attribution problem: the overall contribution or compliance rate

a re‡ects both public-good quality
value of

and social-enforcement concerns,

. Using her expected

to invert (11), she now obtains a noisy (but still unbiased) signal of
^

1

a

v

x

(1

)

x

= +

(

)

;

N

x2

2 2
2

:
!

:

(20)

Greater publicity makes the aggregate contribution less informative (in the Blackwell sense),
as it magni…es its sensitivity to variations in image concerns, . This Information-Distortion
E¤ ect will cause the Principal to makes mistakes in setting her contribution aP –or any other
second-stage decision, such as tax incentives, laws, etc. Moderating this informational loss is
the fact that she also receives a private signal
interim estimate with mean

P

and variance
2

P

2
;P

=

2

+ s2;P
2

=

2

+ s2;P

!

!2

P , allowing
2
;P :

P

s2;P

+

s2;P

her to update her prior beliefs to an

2

+ s2;P

!

s2;P

+

2

+ s2;P

;
!2

(21)
2

:

(22)

Combining this information with the signal ^ inferred from a, the Principal’s posterior expectation of

is
E [ ja;

P]

= [1

(x)]

P

+ (x) ^;

(23)

where the weight
(x)

2 2
;P
;
2 2 + x2 2 2
;P

(24)

measures the relative precision of ^; or equivalently the informational content of compliance a:
18

The signal-garbling e¤ect of publicity for the Principal is clearly apparent from the fact that
decreases with x:27 After observing a; the Principal optimally sets aP = ' (w + E [ ja; aP ]) =(1
)kP ; substituting in (20) and (23) yields:

Proposition 4. (Optimal matching) The Principal’s contribution policy is equivalent to
setting a baseline investment aP (x;

P)

(given in the Appendix) and a matching rate
(x)'
kP (1
)

m(x)

(25)

on private contributions a. The less informative is a (in particular, the higher is publicity x);
the lower is the matching rate.
Conditioning on the true realizations of

and , (11), (20) and (23) imply that the Princi-

pal’s forecast error is equal to
E [ ja;

P]

= [1

(x)]

+

P

(x)x

(

):

(26)

Her ex-ante expected payo¤ is reduced, relative to the symmetric-information benchmark, by
a term proportional to the variance of these forecasting mistakes, which simple derivations in
the Appendix (A.11) show to be proportional to her loss of information:
EV (x) = E V~ (x)

'2

2
;P

2(1

[1

)kP

(x)] :

(27)

The Principal’s …rst-order condition is now
dEV (x)
=
dx

dE V~ (x)
{z }
| dx

Incentive and Variance E¤ects

|

'2
2 (1

2 2

(x)2 x:
}

)k
{z P

(28)

Information-Distortion E¤ect

The …rst term, previously explicited in (18), embodies the bene…cial incentive e¤ect of visibility
and its variability cost. The new term is the (marginal) loss from distorting information, which
naturally leads to a lower choice of publicity than the optimal Pigovian policy, and even below
the symmetric-information benchmark of Section 4.2.
Proposition 5. (Optimal privacy) When the Principal is uncertain about the importance
of social image, the optimal degree of publicity x 2 0; xSI solves the implicit equation
!

x=
(

2

+

2)

+

'

1
(1

27

(x) 2

:

(29)

)kP

In a more general context (departing from linear strategies), if agents’ behavior involves discrete bunching
increases in x could sometimes make a more informative, by “breaking down”atoms of pooling. In this (somewhat
less interesting) case, the Principal’s cost of using publicity naturally declines.

19

In general, (29) could have multiple solutions, because the cost of information distor(x)2 x; is hump-shaped in

tion is not globally convex: the marginal loss, proportional to

x:28 While there may thus be multiple local optima, all are below xSI (the optimum absent
information-distortion issues), and therefore so is the global optimum x : All also share the
same comparative-statics properties, which we shall analyze in Section 5 for the more general
model where agents may di¤er in how they value reputation.

4.4

Allowing for Heterogeneous Image Concerns

When people di¤er in how image-driven they are, s2 > 0; agents’inference and decision problems become more complex (though still fully tractable, as shown in Proposition 1), due to the
overjusti…cation e¤ect. This heterogeneity, on the other hand, has no impact on the Principal’s
learning problem: as seen from (11), idiosyncratic di¤erences in

i ’s

wash out in the aggregate

contribution a(x); implying:
Corollary 1. At any given level of x; the informational content (x) of aggregate compliance
~ (x)
a(x); the Principal’s optimal matching rate m(x) and her informational loss EV (x) EV
from not observing the aggregate realization

remain the same as in (24), (25) and (27)

respectively, except that x is replaced everywhere by x (x) = (x):
Relegating derivations to the Appendix, the marginal e¤ect of publicity on the Principal’s
payo¤ now takes the form
1 dEV (x)
=!
0 (x)
dx

2

(x)

2

+

'2
2 (1

+ s2

2

)kP

(x) (x)2 ;

(30)

showing how s2 worsens the variance e¤ect by creating ine¢ cient individual di¤erences in
behavior, but does not a¤ect (keeping …xed agents’ inferences about each other, i.e.

) the

Principal’s informational loss concerning : Setting dEV =dx to 0 yields the following results.
Proposition 6. When the Principal is uncertain about the importance of social image, the
optimal degree of publicity x 2 0; xSI solves the implicit equation
x =

(x )

0
@

!
(

2

2

+

+ s2 ) +

('

(x )= )2
(1 )kP

1

A;

(31)

where (x) is given by (10) and (x) remains given by (24). The solution is thus identical to
that in Proposition 5, except, that

2

is replaced by

2

+ s2 and

by (x) everywhere.

As before, (31) could have multiple solutions but all stable ones, including the global optimum x ; are below xSI (the level of visibility in the “symmetric uncertainty” benchmark) and
share the same comparative-statics properties, to which we now turn.
28

By (24), it equals x=(1 + Ax2 )2 ; where A
p
increasing up to x = 1= 3A; then decreasing.

2

2

=

20

2

2
;P :

Simple derivations show this function to be

5

Comparative Statics of the Optimal Policy Bundle

Let us now examine how the Principal’s choice of publicity x and matching rate m
(x )=[ kP (1

=

)] depend on key features of the environment.

A. Basic results. From (30) it is clear that @ 2 EV =@x@! > 0 and @ 2 EV =@x@kP > 0, leading
to the results summarized in Table I below. These properties are quite intuitive. For instance,
a principal who faces a higher costs of own funds, or who internalizes agents’warm-glow utility,
wants to encourage private contributions. She therefore makes behavior more observable and,
as it becomes less informative, also reduces her matching rate.
Optimal publicity x

Optimal matching rate m

Increasing

Decreasing

Ex ante expected quality

Increasing

Decreasing

Weight on agents’warm-glow

Increasing

Decreasing

Baseline externality

w

Average intrinsic motivation

v

Decreasing

Increasing

Principal’s relative cost

kP

Increasing

Decreasing

Table I: Comparative-Static E¤ects of First-Moment Parameters

We next turn to the dependence of the optimal policies on second-moment parameters of
cross-sectional heterogeneity and aggregate variability.
B. Heterogeneity in intrinsic motivation. An increase in s2v directly raises the variability of
individual contributions, and this has both costs and bene…ts for the Principal. To the extent
that she weighs agents’warm glow positively she appreciates variability, but on the other hand
su¤ers from internalizing its e¤ect on their total contribution cost.29
In addition to these direct e¤ects, a rise in s2v also increases the marginal impact of contributions on image (x) and thus the incentive to contribute,

(x) = x (x). For …xed x,

this a¤ects all three components of the Principal’s tradeo¤: it raises average contributions but
further increases their sensitivity to , and consequently also worsens the information loss (
declines). When publicity is optimally chosen, however, these three e¤ects balance out exactly:
because (x) and x enter EV only through the product x (x) we can think of the Principal as
directly optimizing over the value of : Changing s2v therefore only has a direct e¤ect on her
payo¤. For the same reason, the Principal responds at the margin only to the direct (variance)
e¤ect of an increase in s2v : she reduces x to partially o¤set it, so as to keep (x) constant. Since
s2v in‡uences

and m only through the value of (x), both remain unchanged.

Proposition 7. The optimal publicity x choice is decreasing in s2v ; the variance of intrinsic
motivation in the population, while the optimal matching rate m is independent of it. The
Principal’s expected payo¤ (at the optimal x ) changes with s2v proportionately to (

1=2):

29
spread in vi increases the bene…t term
R 1Since in equilibrium each ai is increasing in vi ; a mean-preserving
R1 2
v
a
d
in
(4),
but
it
also
magni…es
the
cost
term
(
1=2)
a
d
:
i
i
i
i
i
0
0

21

C. Variability in societal preferences. Comparative statics with respect to

2

are less

straightforward, as it matters through two very di¤erent channels: it represents the Principal’s ex-ante uncertainty about ; but also the extent to which agents disregard their signal
and follow the common prior. To neutralize the second e¤ect and highlight the Principal’s
tradeo¤ between raising a and learning about ; let us focus here on the limiting case in which
agents’private signals are perfect, or more generally far more informative than their prior, so
that s =

0 or, equivalently,

1: In this case, (x) becomes independent of

enters (30) only by raising (x), through its e¤ect on

s2;P ;

2;

which then

see (10), (21) and (24). Therefore:

Proposition 8. When agents’private signals about the quality of the public good are su¢ ciently
more precise than their prior over it (s2 =
2

with ex-ante uncertainty

2

small enough), the optimal visibility x decreases

over ; while the optimal matching rate

increases with it.

D. Variability in the importance of social image or social enforcement.
2

1. Average social image concern. An increase in

does not a¤ect

or (x); so it leaves

the incentive e¤ect of visibility unchanged. For …xed publicity x, it naturally makes a less
informative about , so

(x) declines. It also leads to a higher variance e¤ect, so for both
2

reasons the Principal is worse o¤. The e¤ects of

on the optimal publicity and matching

rate, on the other hand, are generally ambiguous: by (28), the marginal information cost is
proportional to

2

2 (x);

(x)

which can be seen from (24) to be hump-shaped in

2;

given x:

Somewhat surprisingly, the Principal may thus use more publicity when the source of “noise”
in her learning problem increases. Such a “paradoxical” possibility (con…rmed by simulations)
only arises for intermediate values of
2

imum), however. When

2

(where the marginal information cost is near its min-

is su¢ ciently low or high, on the contrary, the information e¤ect

goes in the same direction as the variance e¤ect, leading the Principal to reduce publicity, the
more unpredictable is agents’sensitivity to it –as one would expect.
Another (more straightforward) case in which the result is unambiguous is when kP is large
enough: since the Principal will not contribute much anyway, information is not very valuable
to her, so as
'2 =

kP

2

rises her main concern is the variance e¤ect. In what follows we shall denote

27 (1

)

2

:

Proposition 9. Variability in the importance of social image,

2;

has the following e¤ ects on

the Principal’s payo¤ s and decisions:
(1) The Principal’s payo¤ is decreasing in
(2) If kP
exist

and

(3) As

2:

kP ; the optimal level of publicity x also decreases with
such that x is decreasing in

2

if either

<

or

tends to +1, x tends to 0 (full privacy), while as

the …rst-best level

xF B

2

that solve (x) = !=

+

s2

2:

Otherwise, there

> :
tends to 0, x approaches

:

2. Heterogeneity in image concerns. An increase in s2 magni…es the variance e¤ect (second
term in (30)) but, for given x, in‡uences the image incentive (x) in complex ways (see (10)).
22

As a result, its net e¤ect on the optimal degree of publicity and matching rate is ambiguous.
Due to an envelope-theorem result, however, it is always the case that:
Proposition 10. The Principal’s expected payo¤ is strictly decreasing in s2 .
E. Precision of private signals
1.

Principal’s signal.

When the noise s2;P a¤ecting her independent information in-

creases, the Principal is naturally worse o¤. To see how she responds, note from (28) that
s2;P appears only in the information-distortion e¤ect, through (x); thus, from (24), we have
@ 2 EV (x)=@x@s2;P < 0: This is again intuitive: as the Principal becomes less well-informed
about agents’preferences, she reduces publicity so as to learn more from their behavior. Since
increases with s

;P

and decreases with x, it follows that so does the optimal matching rate:

a Principal with access to less independent information relies more on agents’ behavior as a
guide for her own actions.
Proposition 11. The Principal’s payo¤ and optimal publicity choice x decrease with the
variance of her information, s2;P , whereas her optimal matching rate m increases with it.
2. Agents’signals. The quality of agents’private information has more ambiguous e¤ects.
At a given level of x; greater idiosyncratic noise s2 reduces everyone’s responsiveness to their
private signal, and thereby also the informativeness of aggregate contributions. At the same
time, recall from Proposition 2 that the reputational return

is U -shaped in s2 : the level, vari-

ance and informativeness of agents’contributions are thus non-monotonic in s2 ; and therefore
so are the Principal’s optimal level of publicity and matching rate.
We can again say more when agents’common prior over
private signal: as s =
involves x and

! 0;

is far less informative than their

approaches 1 and the Principal’s optimality condition (30)

only through their product (x) = x (x); while s2 enters it only through (x):

It follows that the optimal value of

is independent of s ; while the associated x must rise with

it so as to maintain that constancy. Therefore, we have:
Proposition 12. When agents’private signals about the quality of the public good are far more
precise than their prior over it (s2 =
in the variance of their signals,

s2 .

2

su¢ ciently small), the Principal’s payo¤ is decreasing

Her optimal choice of publicity is increasing in s2 , and her

optimal matching rate is independent of it.
Table II summarizes the results from the preceding propositions.

s2v
2
2

s2;P
s2

Optimal publicity x

Optimal matching rate m

Decreasing

Invariant

Decreasing, for s =

su¢ ciently small

Decreasing outside [ ; ]; or if kP

kP

Decreasing
Increasing, for s =

Increasing, for s =

su¢ ciently small

Increasing outside [ ; ]; or if kP
Increasing

su¢ ciently small

Invariant

Table II: Comparative-Statics E¤ects of Second-Moment Parameters

23

kP

6

Conclusion

We studied the tradeo¤ between the incentive bene…t of publicizing individual behaviors that
constitute public-goods (or bads) and the costs which reduced privacy imposes on society (or
any other Principal) when the overall distribution of preferences is subject to unpredictable
shifts and evolutions.
First, such imperfect knowledge renders publicity hard to …ne-tune, generating ine¢ cient
variations in both individual and aggregate behavior. Second, leveraging social-image concerns
makes it even harder to infer from prevailing norms the true social value of the public good or
conduct in question. Among other results, we thus showed that where societal attitudes (what
behaviors agents regard as socially desirable or undesirable) and/or technologies for monitoring
and norms enforcement (means of communication and coordination, e.g., social media) are prone
to signi…cant change, a higher degree of privacy is optimal: policy-makers can then better learn,
by observing overall compliance, how taxes and subsidies, the law or other institutions should be
adapted. When preferences over public goods and reputation remain or have become relatively
stable, conversely, visibility should be raised.
There are several directions in which the analysis could be further developed. A …rst one is
an overlapping-generations environment in which the value of the public good, and possibly also
the strength of reputational concerns, evolve stochastically over time. Compared to our current
setup, such an explicitly dynamic analysis will introduce interesting lifecyle e¤ects. First, older
agents are less responsive to publicity (and more to fundamental information), since their past
record is already indicative of their type, whereas younger agents are more keen to signal their
motivation through their actions. Second, older agents may be better informed than young
ones (provided they observe signals in both periods of life), which as we saw has a U-shaped
e¤ect on reputational incentives.
A second extension would be to examine mechanisms by which principals may alleviate the
informational problem we identify. This could for instance involve a two-stage procedure, in
which agents …rst choose their participation levels anonymously –thereby revealing the state–
then, in a second stage, are asked to contribute. Such dynamic procedures may lead to e¢ ciency
gains because: (a) information is better revealed in the …rst stage; (b) in the second stage, image
is even more responsive to contributions than before, as the informational e¤ect (rationalizing
a low contribution as possibly re‡ecting a low private signal) is eliminated. Of course, such
mechanisms may not be feasible in all contexts.

24

7

Appendix

Proofs of Proposition 1 on p. 13 and Proposition 2 on p. 14
Consider linear strategies of the form ai = A

i

+ Bvi + C

i

+ D; implying that a = A +

Bv + C + D. We …rst establish the following result.
Claim 1 (Benchmarking). The expectation E[vi j j ;
to:

E[vi j j ;

j ; a; ai ]

j ; a; ai ]

is independent of ( j ;

Bs2v
(ai
B 2 s2v + C 2 s2 + A2 s2

=v+

j)

and equal

a):

(A.1)

Proof. Subtracting a from ai , and re-arranging, we obtain Bvi = Bv +(ai a) (C"i +A"i ),
where "i and let "i denote

and

i

respectively. Observe that (Bvi ; ai a; a;

i

j;

j ; C"i +

A"i ) is jointly normally distributed: every linear combination of these components is a linear
combination of a set of independent normal random variables, and therefore has a univariate
normal distribution. Because a,

j,

and

j

are uncorrelated to both C"i + A"i and ai

a, and

these variables are jointly normally distributed, it follows from independence that
E[C"i + A"i jai ; a;
Observe that
vi
ai
and therefore, E[vi j j ;

!

N

a

j; a

v
0

!

j;

;

j]

= E[C"i + A"i jai

s2v

a]:

Bs2v

Bs2v B 2 s2v + B 2 s2 + A2 s2

!!

;

(A.2)

ai ] equals the expression in (A.1).

From Claim 1 it follows that
R (ai ; i ;

i)

= E [E [vi jai ; a] j i ;
"

!

Bs2v
v+ 2 2
(ai
A s + B 2 s2v + C 2 s2

=E

where

i]

a) j i ;

i

#

=v+

Bs2v
[ai
A2 s2 + B 2 s2v + C 2 s2

2=

+ s2 : Utility maximization then yields the …rst-order condition:

2

ai = vi +
Therefore, B = 1, C =

i

+ (1

, D = (1

Af

) +x

i

i

+ (1

) g

Bv

Bs2v
A2 s2 + B 2 s2v + C 2 s2

Cf

!

) , and A = xs2v = A2 s2 + s2v +

i

:

+ (1

) g

D];

(A.3)
2 s2

. Substituting

A = x (x) yields
(x) =

s2v
x2 (x)2 s2 + s2v +

25

:
2 s2

(A.4)

It remains to show that for each choice of x, (x) is unique. Given x, (x) solves the equation
=

s2v
x2 2 s2 + s2v +

2 s2

:

The right-hand side is continuous and decreasing in , clearly cutting the diagonal at a unique
solution (x): Furthermore, (x) must be strictly decreasing in x, strictly increasing in s2v ,
strictly decreasing in s2 and in

2

2 =[s

and U -shaped in s (noting that s =

2 =s

+

]):

To derive comparative statics, note that (x) = x (x) solves the implicit equation
x= [

2

(s2 =s2v ) +

2 2

s =s2v + 1];

(A.5)

which makes clear that (x) is strictly increasing in x; with limx!1 (x) = +1:
Proof of Proposition 3 on p. 18
For each agent i, ai = x
Let a

x

+v+

+vi +

i +(1

) , and therefore a( ; )

)kP ; independently of x (recall that '

)'=(1

)kP as the expected Principal’s contribution.

Integrating over

2

)): Let us de…ne aP

+ (v + )(a) + (w + )(a + aP ) +
2

)b (w + )(a + aP ) +

[a2 +

+ b(1

(w +

and , we obtain from (4):

s2v +

2

.

perfectly from a and so will set aP = (w +

)'=(1

+ (1

+v+ +

represent the expected aggregate contribution.

Since the Principal observes ; she an infer

E V~ (x) =

x

2

(

2

+ s2 ) + s2v + x2

+

2 2

2

+

2'

(1

)kP

2'

(1

)kP

(1

]

)kP
2

(A.6)
"

a2P +

2

'

2

(1

)kP

#

:

(A.7)

Di¤erentiating yields:
dE V~ (x)
=f
dx
=!
For all

(v + ) + (w + ) + (1
x 2(

2

+

2

)b(w + )g

):

x

+v+

+x

2 2

(A.8)

> 0; the expression is strictly concave in x; therefore the …rst-order condition described

in (18) characterizes the unique optimum. Equating the right-hand-side to zero yields (19),
which simpli…es to (16) when

2

= 0:

Proof of Proposition 4 on p. 19
The formula for m(x) follows directly from the reasoning in the text. As to the baseline

26

investment,
aP (x;

P)

=

'(w + (1

(x))E[ j

(x)

P]

(1

(v + x

+ (1

) ))

)kP

;

(A.9)

it follows from the same equations, together with (21).
Proof of Proposition 5 on p. 19
For every , were the Principal to observe
choose a contribution level of (w + )'=(1
aP = (w +E[ ja;

P ])')=(1

or the realization of , recall that she would

)kP : When she is unable to observe

)kP ; which makes clear how the forecast error

or , she sets
E [ ja;

P]

;

derived in (26), generates ine¢ cient deviations from full-information optimality. Note that
E

2

)2

= (1

2
;P

x= )2

+(

2

2
;P

=

h

)2 +

(1

2

2 2= 2

and used the fact that x2

where we abbreviated (x) as

i
1) =

(1=

=

2
;P

2
;P

(1

(1

) ; (A.10)

)= .

Therefore, in a state , the distribution of the Principal’s contribution is
(w + )'
;
(1
)kP

N

(1

!

2

'

2
;P

)kP

(1

) ;

and its variance e¤ectively increases the Principal’s expected cost by
(1

)kP
2

"

(1

#

2

'

2
;P

)kP

(1

) =

'2
2(1

For given x and for every realization of , note that E[

2
;P

)kP

(1

):

(A.11)

j ] = 0. Therefore, it follows by

inspection that all the other terms in the Principal’s payo¤ (A.7) remain unchanged from the
case where she knows , and (27) thus characterizes the change in payo¤s. Note also that
2
;P

d
=
2 dx

2
;P

=

2
;P

2

0
B
@

2 2
2 2
;P

2

2 2
;P
2 2 2
2 2
;P

x

+ x2
!

2 2

1

C
2 xA =

2 2 2x

=

2

2
;P

(1

)

x

:

Therefore
@EV
@E V~
=
@x
@x
=(

2 2 2x

'2
(1

) (w + )'

)kP

2

(v + )(1

!
)

x

2

2

+

2 2 2x

'2

2

(1

)kP

2

!

;

(A.12)

27

which corresponds to (29). Recall now that E V~ (x) is strictly concave in x and maximized
at x
~ > 0: Therefore, @EV =@x < @E V~ =@x < 0 for all x
x
~; and at x = 0, @EV =@x =
~
@E V =@x > 0: Consequently, the global maximum of EV on R is reached at some x 2 (0; x
~)
where @EV =@x = 0:

Proof of Proposition 6 on p. 20
We proceed again in two stages, starting with the benchmark of “symmetric uncertainty”
where the Principal, like the agents, learns the realization of (the average)

after x has been

set. Then, we incorporate the information-distortion e¤ect.
Claim 2. When the Principal faces no ex-post uncertainty about
she sets a publicity level

x
~SI

and observes it perfectly,

given by the unique solution to
x
~SI =

!
+

(xSI )

2

2

+ s2

;

(A.13)

which is lower than xF B and strictly decreasing in s2 : The aggregate contribution is

a( ; ) = v +
which decreases with s2 for all

+ (1

) +

"

!=
2 + s2 =

1+

2

#

;

(A.14)

> 0: The Principal’s utility is decreasing in s2 :

Proof. Proposition 1 shows that, given any x; the equilibrium among agents is the same
as in the case where s2 = 0; except that

is replaced everywhere by

(x) ; or equivalently x

by (x) = x (x) in all type-independent expressions (…rst and second moments), while at the
individual level x is replaced by
Let us denote by
mean value of

a0i

vi +

i
i

(x):

+ (1

) + x (x) the value of ai corresponding to the

= ; or equivalently the value of ai in the original (homogeneous- ) model
where we simply replace by (x): Similarly, let V~ 0 (x) (respectively, V 0 (x)) be the utility level
i

the Principal would achieve if agents behaved according to a0i and she observes (respectively,
does not observe) the realization of the average :
We can obtain E V~ 0 (x) directly by replacing

with (x) in the expression (A.7) giving

EV (x); and similarly dEV 0 (x)=dx by replacing x with (x) and

with

0 (x)

in the expression

(A.8) for dEV (x)=dx :
dE V~ 0 (x)
=!
dx

0

0

(x)

(x) (x)

2

+

2

= 0:

In the Principal’s actual loss function (4), however; the heterogeneity in agents’
erates an additional loss due to ine¢ cient cost variations, equal to ( =2)E[(ai )

2

i ’s gen(a0i )2 ] =

( =2) (x)2 s2 : Therefore, when the Principal observes the realization of , the optimal (symmetric-

28

information) value of x is given by the …rst-order condition
dE V~
=!
dx

0

0

(x)

2

(x) (x)

or

2

+

!

x
~SI =

2

2

+

+ s2 = 0;

(A.15)

;

+ s2

(A.16)

which is equivalent to (A.13). Furthermore, the right-hand side is strictly decreasing in s2 and
(x) was shown to be strictly increasing in x, so x
~SI must be decreasing in s2 . Since a ( ; ) is
strictly increasing in

> 0; a is then decreasing in s2 for every

(x ) as long as

and

> 0:

We now extend the results to the case where the Principal does not know the mean image
concern

when setting her contribution. Corollary 1 allows us to simply combine (A.15) and

(27) to obtain the relevant version of her …rst-order condition:
dEV
=
dx

0

0

(x) !

2

(x) (x)

2

+

+ s2 +

'2
2(1

2
;P

)kP

0

(x) = 0:

Recalling that
(x)

2 2
;P
2 2
;P

+ (x)2

0

)

2

(x) =

this yields

2

2

!

(x ) =
(

2

2

+

s2 )

+

+

'

1
(1

(x) 0 (x) (x)2 ;

2 2
;P

;
(x) 2

(A.17)

)kP

which is equivalent to (31).
Proof of Proposition 7 on p. 21
Denote x (x) by z and note that EV (x) can be reformulated as
V(z) = s2v

2

+z !

2

z2(

2

+

2

in which
~ (z)

+ s2 )

'2
2(1

2 2
;P
2 2
;P

+ z2

2

2
;P

)kP

[1

;

~ (z)] + C;

(A.18)

(A.19)

and C is a constant that is independent of s2v and z. Therefore, the optimal z solves the
…rst-order condition
!

z(

2

+

2

2

+s )+

'2
2(1

2
;P

)kP

~ 0 (z) = 0:

(A.20)

Notice that none of these terms depend on s2v , and so the optimal z is independent of s2v .
29

Therefore, for each sv , the optimal x (sv ) (x (sv ); sv ) is constant. This fact automatically
implies that in equilibrium, changes in s2v do not in‡uence

or the matching rate.

Because the Principal maintains constancy of x (sv ) (x (sv ); sv ), it follows from (A.4) that
increases in sv must strictly increase (x (sv ); sv ). Therefore, x (sv ) (x (sv ); sv ) remains unchanged only if x (sv ) is decreasing in sv : Finally, it follows from (A.18) that d[EV (x (s2v ); s2v )]=ds2v =
(

1=2) :

Proof of Proposition 8 on p. 22
= 1 in (30), @ 2 EV =@x@

Setting

2 ),

decreases (x) (recall that in this limiting case, (x) is independent of
not increase with

2.

< 0 implies that x is decreasing in

Decreasing x

so if (x ;

) did

the right-hand-side of (30) could not remain equal to zero. Thus, at the

optimal x , (x ;

) must increase with

.

Proof of Proposition 9 on p. 22
2

The negative impact of increasing

on payo¤s is clear: for every

and x, changes in

2

have no e¤ect on a but increase the variance of aggregate contributions and the information
cost. To consider their impact on optimal publicity, observe from (30) that
@ 2 EV
=
@x@ 2
in which
@
@

0

2 2
2

=

2 2

'2 0 (x) (x)
2 (1
)kP

(x) (x)

(x)2
2
(x)2 2

+

=

2

2

(x)2
2 + (x)2

+2

2

2

d
d

;

2

(1

=

(A.21)

)
2

:

(A.22)

Thus,
@ 2 EV
=
@x@ 2

0

'2
2 (1

(x) (x)

2

)kP

(2

1) :

(A.23)

This expression is non-positive if and only if
(1

) 2 kP
'2

Because

2 (1

2

(1

2 ):

(A.24)

2 ) takes on a maximum value of 1=27; a su¢ cient condition is that the left-

hand side of the equation above exceeds 1=27. In this case, @x=@

2

< 0 for all values of

:

Intuitively, when kP is large enough the value of information for the Principal is small (she
does not have much of a decision to make), so whether a higher

2

improves or worsens the

information e¤ect, it is dominated by its worsening of the variance e¤ect.
If the condition is not satis…ed, then monotonicity generally does not hold everywhere, but:
(a) As

2

tends to 0; (x (

bounded above: x (
(b) As

2

2)

2 );

2)

approaches 1; because by Proposition 5, x (

< x. Therefore, (A.24) holds for

tends to 1; x (

2)

2)

remains

2)

remains

small enough.

must tend to 0 fast enough that the product

2x

(

bounded above. Otherwise, equation (28) shows that the …rst-order condition @EV =@x = 0

30

cannot hold, as the marginal variance e¤ect and the marginal information-distortion e¤ects
both become arbitrarily large. It then follows that that
(x (

2 );

2)

tends to 1: Thus, for

2

2

x (

2) 2

tends to 0, and therefore

large enough (A.24) holds, and x (

2)

decreases to 0:

Proof of Proposition 10 on p. 23
Since x enters EV only through (x) = x (x); the Principal’s problem is again equivalent
to optimizing over the value of

; so the indirect e¤ects of s2 on the optimized objective

function EV (x (s2 ); s2 ) cancel out at the …rst order, leaving only the direct (variance) e¤ect
(

=2) (x)2 < 0:

Proof of Proposition 12 on p. 23
As

! 1,

converges to 1 and therefore, (x; s ) converges to a solution to the equation
=

s2v
;
x2 2 s2 + s2v + s2

(A.25)

for each x. Note that this must be strictly decreasing in s2 : By inspection, x and (x) enter
all terms in (30) only through their product (x): Therefore, to study how the optimal x (s )
and the Principal’s welfare depend on s2 , we can follow the same steps as in he proof of
Proposition 7, leading to d [EV (x (s ); s )] =ds =

s2 =2 < 0: Finally, since the Principal

keeps x (s ) (x (s ); s ) constant as s increases, it follows from (A.25) that (x (s ); s ) must
decrease in s . To compensate, x (s ) must then be increasing in s :

References
Acemoglu, daron and Matthew O. Jackson Jackson. 2016. “Social Norms and the Enforcement of Laws.”
MIT mimeo .
Acquisti, Alessandro, Curis Taylor, and Liad Wagman. 2016. “The Economics of Privacy.” Journal of
Economic Literature (forthcoming).
Algan, Yann, Yochai Benkler, Mayo Fuster Morell, and Jérôme Hergueux. 2013. “Cooperation in a
Peer Production Economy: Experimental Evidence from Wikipedia.” In Workshop on Information
Systems and Economics. 1–31.
Ali, S Nageeb. 2011. “Learning Self-Control.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 126 (2):857–893.
Andreoni, James. 2006. “Leadership Giving in Charitable Fund-Raising.” Journal of Public Economic
Theory 8 (1):1–22.
Andreoni, James and B. Douglas Bernheim. 2009. “Social Image and the 50–50 Norm: A Theoretical
and Experimental Analysis of Audience E¤ects.” Econometrica 77 (5):1607–1636.
Ariely, Dan, Anat Bracha, and Stephan Meier. 2009. “Doing Good or Doing Well? Image Motivation
and Monetary Incentives in Behaving Prosocially.” American Economic Review 99 (1):544–555.

31

Ashraf, Nava, Oriana Bandiera, and Kelsey Jack. 2012. “No margin, No mission.” A Field Experiment
on Incentives for Pro-Social Tasks, CEPR Discussion Papers 8834.
Auriol, Emmanuelle and Robert J. Gary-Bobo. 2012. “On the Optimal Number of Representatives.”
Public Choice 153 (3-4):419–445.
Bar-Isaac, Heski. 2012. “Transparency, Career Concerns, and Incentives for Acquiring Expertise.” BE
Journal of Theoretical Economics 12 (1):1–15.
Bénabou, Roland and Jean Tirole. 2003. “Intrinsic and Extrinsic Motivation.” Review of Economic
Studies 70 (3):489–520.
— — — . 2004. “Willpower and Personal Rules.” Journal of Political Economy 112 (4):848–886.
— — — . 2006. “Incentives and Prosocial Behavior.” American Economic Review 96 (5):1652–1678.
— — — . 2011. “Laws and Norms.” NBER Working Paper 17579.
Bernheim, B. Douglas. 1994. “A Theory of Conformity.” Journal of Political Economy 102 (5):841–877.
Besley, Tomothy, Anders Jensen, and Torsten Persson. 2014. “Norms, Enforcement, and Tax Evasion.”
IIES mimeo .
Bolton, Patrick, Markus K Brunnermeier, and Laura Veldkamp. 2013. “Leadership, Coordination, and
Corporate Culture.” Review of Economic Studies 80 (2):512–537.
Brennan, Geo¤rey and Philip Pettit. 1990. “Unveiling the Vote.” British Journal of Political Science
20 (3):311–333.
— — — . 2004. The Economy of Esteem. Oxford University Press New York.
Cooter, Robert D. 2003. “The Donation Registry.” Fordham Law Review 72 (5):1981–1989.
Corneo, Giacomo G. 1997. “The Theory of the Open Shop Trade Union Reconsidered.” Labour Economics 4 (1):71–84.
Daughety, Andrew F. and Jennifer F. Reinganum. 2010. “Public Goods, Social Pressure, and the Choice
Between Privacy and Publicity.” American Economic Journal: Microeconomics 2 (2):191–221.
Del Carpio, Lucia. 2014. “Are The Neighbors Cheating? Evidence from a Social Norm Experiment on
Property Taxes in Peru.” INSEAD.
DellaVigna, Stefano, John List, and Ulrike Malmendier. 2012. “Testing for Altruism and Social Pressure
in Charitable Giving.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 127 (1):1–56.
Ellingsen, Tore and Magnus Johannesson. 2008. “Pride and Prejudice: The Human Side of Incentive
Theory.” American Economic Review 98 (3):990–1008.
Fehrler, Sebastian and Niall Hughes. 2015. “How Transparency Kills Information Aggregation.” IZA
Discussion Paper No. 9027.
Fischer, Paul E. and Robert E. Verrecchia. 2000. “Reporting Bias.” Accounting Review 75 (2):229–245.

32

Fox, Justin and Richard Van Weelden. 2012. “Costly Transparency.” Journal of Public Economics
96 (1):142–150.
Frankel, Alex and Navin Kartik. 2014. “Muddled Information.” Columbia University.
Frey, Bruno S. 2007. “Awards As Compensation.” European Management Review 4 (1):6–14.
Gerber, Alan S., Donald P. Green, and Christopher W. Larimer. 2008. “Social Pressure and Voter
Turnout: Evidence from a Large-Scale Field Experiment.” American Political Science Review
102 (1):33–48.
Harbaugh, William T. 1998. “What do Donations Buy? A Model of Philanthropy Based on Prestige
and Warm Glow.” Journal of Public Economics 67 (2):269–284.
Harbaugh, William T., Ulrich Mayr, and Daniel R. Burghart. 2007. “Neural Responses to Taxation and
Voluntary Giving Reveal Motives for Charitable Donations.” Science 316 (5831):1622–1625.
Hermalin, Benjamin E. and Michael L. Katz. 2006. “Privacy, Property Rights and E¢ ciency: The
Economics of Privacy as Secrecy.” Quantitative Marketing and Economics 4 (3):209–239.
Hummel, Patrick, John Morgan, and Phillip C. Stocken. 2013. “A Model of Flops.” RAND Journal of
Economics 44 (4):585–609.
Ichino, Andrea and Gerd Muehlheusser. 2008. “How Often Should you Open the Door?: Optimal Monitoring to Screen Heterogeneous Agents.” Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 67 (3):820
–831.
Jacquet, Jennifer. 2015. Is Shame Necessary? New Uses for an Old Tool. Pantheon Books, Random
House.
Jia, Ruexie and Torsten Persson. 2013. “Individual vs. Social Motives in Identity Choice: Theory and
Evidence from China.” IIES and UCSD mimeo .
Kahan, Dan M. 1996. “Between Economics and Sociology: The New Path of Deterrence.” Michigan
Law Review 95 (5):2477–2497.
Kahan, Dan M. and Eric A. Posner. 1999. “Shaming White-Collar Criminals: A Proposal for Reform
of the Federal Sentencing Guidelines.” Journal of Law and Economics 42 (1):365–392.
Kreps, David M. 1990. “Corporate Culture and Economic Theory.” In Perspectives on Positive Political
Economy, edited by James E. Alt and Kenneth A. Shelpsle. Cambridge Univ Press, 90–143.
Kuran, Timur. 1997. Private Truths, Public Lies: The Social Consequences of Preference Falsi…cation.
Harvard University Press.
Lacetera, Nicola and Mario Macis. 2010. “Social Image Concerns and Prosocial Behavior: Field Evidence
from a Nonlinear Incentive Scheme.” Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 76 (2):225–237.
Larkin, Ian. 2011. “Paying 30K for a Gold Star: An Empirical Investigation Into the Value of Peer
Recognition to Software Salespeople.” Harvard Business School.

33

Levy, G. 2005. “Careerist Judges and the Appeals Process.” RAND Journal of Economics 36 (2):275–
297.
— — — . 2007. “Decision Making in Committees: Transparency, Reputation, and Voting rules.”American
Economic Review 97 (1):150–168.
Lohmann, Susanne. 1994. “Information Aggregation through Costly Political Action.” American Economic Review 84 (3):518–30.
Lorentzen, Peter L. 2013. “Regularizing Rioting: Permitting Public Protest in an Authoritarian Regime.”
Quarterly Journal of Political Science 8 (2):127–158.
Loury, Glenn C. 1994. “Self-Censorship in Public Discourse: A Theory of “Political Correctness" and
Related Phenomena.” Rationality and Society 6 (4):428–461.
Morgan, John and Phillip C. Stocken. 2008. “Information Aggregation in Polls.” American Economic
Review 98 (3):864–896.
Morris, Stephen. 2001. “Political Correctness.” Journal of Political Economy 109 (2):231–265.
Ottaviani, Marco and Peter Sørensen. 2001. “Information Aggregation in Debate: Who Should Speak
First?” Journal of Public Economics 81 (3):393–421.
Posner, Eric A. 1998. “Symbols, Signals, and Social Norms in Politics and the Law.” Journal of Legal
Studies 27 (2):765–797.
— — — . 2000. Law and Social Norms. Harvard University Press.
Posner, Richard A. 1977. “The Right of Privacy.” Georgia Law Review 12:393–422.
— — — . 1979. “Privacy, Secrecy, and Reputation.” Bu¤ alo Law Review 28:1–55.
Prat, Andrea. 2005. “The Wrong Kind of Transparency.” American Economic Review 95 (3):862–877.
Prendergast, Canice. 1993. “A Theory of “Yes Men".” American Economic Review 83 (4):757–70.
Reeves, Richard V. 2013. “Shame is Not a Four-Letter Word.” New York Times .
Ronson, Jon. 2015. “How One Stupid Tweet Blew Up Justine Sacco’s Life.” New York Times .
Segal, David. 2013. “Mugged by a Mug Shot Online.” New York Times .
Sliwka, Dirk. 2008. “Trust as a Signal of a Social Norm and the Hidden Costs of Incentives Schemes.”
American Economic Review 97 (3):999–1012.
Van der Weele, Joel. 2013. “The Signalling Power of Sanctions in Social Dilemmas.” Journal of Law,
Economics and Organization 28 (1):103–25.
Vesterlund, Lise. 2003. “The informational Value of Sequential Fundraising.” Journal of Public Economics 87 (3):627–657.
Visser, Bauke and Otto H. Swank. 2007. “On Committees of Experts.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
122 (1):337–372.
Warren, Samuel D and Louis D Brandeis. 1890. “The Right to Privacy.” Harvard Law Review :193–220.

34

