NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE 'PUPIL' FACTORY:
SPECIALIZATION AND THE PRODUCTION OF HUMAN CAPITAL IN SCHOOLS
Roland G. Fryer, Jr
Working Paper 22205
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22205

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2016

I thank Terry Grier and Andrew Houlihan, for help and guidance in conducting the experiment. I
am grateful to Will Dobbie, Richard Holden, Simon Jaeger, Andrei Shleifer, Jörg Spenkuch, and
Chad Syverson for helpful comments and suggestions. Meghan Howard and Rucha Vankudre
provided exceptional project management oversight. Tanaya Devi, Lisa Phillips, and Brecia
Young provided excellent research assistance. Financial Support from Eli Broad and the Edlab’s
Advisory Group is gratefully acknowledged. Correspondence can be addressed to the author by
email at rfryer@fas.harvard.edu. The usual caveat applies. The views expressed herein are those
of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Roland G. Fryer, Jr. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

The 'Pupil' Factory: Specialization and the Production of Human Capital in Schools
Roland G. Fryer, Jr
NBER Working Paper No. 22205
April 2016
JEL No. D24,I20,J0
ABSTRACT
Starting in the 2013-2014 school year, I conducted a randomized field experiment in fifty
traditional public elementary schools in Houston, Texas designed to test the potential productivity
benefits of teacher specialization in schools. Treatment schools altered their schedules to have
teachers specialize in a subset of subjects in which they have demonstrated relative strength
(based on value-add measures and principal observations). The average impact of teacher
specialization on student achievement is -0.042 standard deviations in math and -0.034 standard
deviations in reading, per year. Students enrolled in special education and those with younger
teachers demonstrated marked negative results. I argue that the results are consistent with a model
in which the benefits of specialization driven by sorting teachers into a subset of subjects based
on comparative advantage is outweighed by inefficient pedagogy due to having fewer interactions
with each student. Consistent with this, specialized teachers report providing less attention to
individual students (relative to non-specialized teachers), though other mechanisms are possible.

Roland G. Fryer, Jr
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center 208
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
rfryer@fas.harvard.edu

I. Introduction
Smith (1776) begins his analysis of the wealth of nations with the causes and
consequences of the division of labor among workers.1 Through his famous analysis of pin
factories in 18th century England, Smith (1776) demonstrated the power of specialization in
economics by arguing that in traditional production processes, factories would produce one
pin per day per worker. Yet, by streamlining the eighteen-step process of pin production into
nine individual tasks, the factory could produce 4,800 pins per worker.
Another striking example of the potential productivity gains from the division of
labor is the assembly line approach to automobile production. In assembly line production,
workers, machines and parts are sequentially organized and workers add parts to the
machine as it moves from work station to work station. Henry Ford broke the assembly task
into 84 discrete steps and trained workers to do just one step to increase his factories’
productivity. This reduced the production time of a car from 12.5 hours to 93 minutes.
Production figures compiled from the Model T Comprehensive Encyclopedia show that
production before the assembly line was introduced in 1913 averaged 68,773 cars per year.
In 1913, production increased to 170,211 cars in a year (McCalley, 1989).
In almost every modern industry, comparative advantage is used to maximize
productivity. Goods produced by individual craftsmen have become so rare due to their
relatively high cost that they now represent a niche “artisanal” market.
The basic economics is intuitive. Specializing in the production of a subset of the
tasks necessary to produce a final output allows workers to gain efficiency in that task. Smith
identifies three main channels through which division of labor leads to efficiency
gains. First, dividing a larger task into smaller tasks allows each worker to gain skill in his
designated task that he would not otherwise be able to attain. Additionally, reducing the
number of tasks each worker must manage reduces transition times from one task to the

1 Although Adam Smith popularized the notion of division of labor through his theory on the pin factory, he
did not pioneer the notion. In 380 BC, Plato discussed in The Republic how the volume and quality of
production could be improved through the division of labor (Silvermintz, 2010). This early discussion of the
division of labor is not surprising given the intuitive nature of dividing tasks within a household and dividing
occupations within a town. As technologies improved, the division of labor became more extensive. By the mid
fifteenth century, The Venetian Arsenal was producing ships by using the river as an assembly line (Lane,
1992). Workers at each port were responsible for different parts of the ship that were added on as the ships
moved down river. Sir William Petty (1992) documented similar innovations in the Dutch shipping industry in
the seventeenth century.

1

next during which productivity is lost. Lastly, division of labor allows individuals to focus
their full attention on a couple of simple tasks that increases the likelihood of technological
innovation.
But pupils are not pins – and the production of human capital is far more complex
than assembling automobiles. Whether specialization can increase productivity in schools is
an important open question in the design of primary and secondary schooling. Indeed, there
seems to be considerable disagreement across countries. Of the thirty-four OECD countries,
only ten use specialized teachers in classrooms in elementary schools. Of the twenty-four
countries that don’t use specialized teachers Austria, Hungary, Norway, Portugal, Latvia, and
Israel depart even further from teacher specialization. The average teacher in these countries
stays with the same group of elementary school children for at least 3 years. This model of
production is in stark contrast to how economists typically think about the division of labor,
though consistent with the philosophical views of Marx (1844) and Thoreau (1854). If
schools can increase the efficiency of human capital production by altering the allocation of
teachers to subjects taught, simple policy changes might increase human capital at trivial
costs.
Starting in the 2013-2014 school year, I conducted a randomized field experiment in
fifty traditional public elementary schools in Houston, Texas, designed to test the potential
productivity benefits of teacher specialization and shed light on what mechanisms drive the
results. Treatment schools altered their schedules to have teachers specialize in a subset of
the following subjects – math, science, social studies and reading – based on each teacher’s
strengths (assessed by the principal of each school). Schools then submitted specialization
plans along with a written justification for each plan. Principals assigned teachers to subjects
based on the principal’s judgment of each teacher’s comparative advantage. This judgment
was based on either teacher value-added measures, classroom observations, or
recommendations (for teachers new to the district or new to teaching).
In obtaining the optimal allocation of teachers to subjects, schools were constrained
by how many teachers they had teaching a certain grade and language. The school district
would not allow sorting teachers across schools, across grade-levels within a school, or
across languages taught, because of the difficulties in extrapolating teacher effectiveness

2

across these categories.2 With these constraints, there were 2-4 teachers available to teach a
given grade and language group in over 80% of cases. Based on this availability, teams of
teachers were designated within schools and grades. After reviewing school’s
departmentalization plans, we recommended further changes in teaching assignment for less
than five percent of the cases and half of our recommendations were accepted; the teacher
assignments in which principals did not accept our recommendation were all judgment calls
for which we deferred. Control teachers continued the status quo.3
The results of the experiment are surprisingly inconsistent with the positive effects of
specialization typically known to economists. In the first year of the experiment, the impact
of attending an elementary school in which teachers were specialized was -0.073σ (0.036) in
math and -0.067σ (0.030) in reading. In the second year of treatment, treatment effects were
more precisely estimated zeros. Pooled across years, students in treatment elementary
schools score 0.042σ (0.023) lower in math and 0.034σ (0.021) lower in reading, per year,
relative to students in control elementary schools. The math score is statistically significant.
Students who might be particularly vulnerable – such as those enrolled in special
education or those who are taught by inexperienced teachers– demonstrate particularly
negative impacts of treatment. For special education students, the impact of treatment is
−0.156σ (0.056) in math and -0.199σ (0.046) in reading. For non-special education students,
the impact of treatment is -0.047σ (0.029) in math and −0.038σ (0.027) in reading. The pvalue on the difference is 0.055 in math and 0.002 in reading. Students who were taught by
younger teachers also demonstrated large negative treatment effects.
Beyond test scores, treatment schools, on average, are 0.016 more probable to have
students exhibiting more problem behaviors and attending 0.35 fewer days of schools.
I argue that familiarity with student type explains a portion of the results. A benefit
of specialization is that teachers are allowed to teach a subset of subjects in which they are
(relatively) effective. A cost is that teachers in our experiments had, on an average, more

Due to the large number of Spanish speaking students in Houston, there are bilingual classrooms, transitional
bilingual classrooms, and English as a Second Language classrooms in elementary schools. Bilingual classrooms
provide instruction primarily in Spanish in lower grades with increasing amounts of instruction in English
added to instruction as the student advances to the upper grades. Transitional bilingual classrooms provide a
bridge for limited English proficiency students to English-only instruction. The English as a Second Language
program is offered to those students with a home language other than Spanish.
3 If there were any departmentalized classes in control schools, they were kept as such.
2

3

total students in a day than in control schools – raising the costs of individually tailoring
pedagogy. To better understand how the experiment altered teacher behaviors, a teacher
survey was administered to glean information on lesson planning, teacher relationships with
students, enjoyment of teaching, and teaching strategies. Teachers in treatment schools are
significantly less likely to report providing tailored instruction for their students. All other
survey outcomes on teaching strategy were statistically identical between treatment and
control.
Taken together, the experiment highlights a potentially important tradeoff between
the positive effects of specialization and the costs of tailoring pedagogical tools to fit student
needs. I highlight this formally in the next section, which provides a brief review of the
literature on the costs and benefits of specialization and combines the major hypotheses
together in a simple equilibrium model. Section III provides details of the randomized field
experiment and its implementation. Section IV describes the data, research design, and
econometric model used in the analysis. Section V presents estimates of the effect of teacher
specialization on student achievement and other outcomes. Section VI provides some
discussion around how well the results of the experiment concord with the model. The final
section concludes. There are two online appendices: Appendix A contains technical proofs;
Appendix B describes how I construct my samples and defined key variables used in the
analysis.
II. The ‘Pupil’ Factory
In this section, I review some of the major hypotheses about how teacher
specialization may affect the production of human capital.
A.

The Benefits of Teacher Specialization

Teacher specialization in schools may increase productivity for several reasons. First,
if a teacher specializes in teaching a particular subject, there is more time to master subject
specific content and pedagogy and more time to stay aware of advancements in the field.
Second, specialization reduces the number of subjects a teacher is responsible for, allowing
them to focus more energy on lesson planning and other subject-specific
investments. Third, some argue that specialization increases teacher retention due to

4

reduced workload and reduced likelihood of teaching an unfamiliar subject.4 Additionally,
specialization offers a way to sort teachers by their comparative advantage and can increase –
mechanically – average Teacher Value-Added (TVA) in each subject without having to make
any staff changes. Finally, since specialization is the status quo in the upper grades,
familiarizing students with it in elementary school may help ease the transition from
elementary to middle school (Chan and Jarman 2004).
B. The Costs of Teacher Specialization
Becker and Murphy (1994) suggest that there are also potential costs to the division
of labor; including coordination costs, principal agent problems between workers, and lack
of economies of scale. Specialization occurs through the reorganization of existing staff.
Teachers teach a larger number of students, but only teach a couple of subjects.
Consequently, one potential cost is that each teacher has less time to get to know and
understand any individual student (Anderson, 1962). This lack of information may increase
the cost of tailoring pedagogy to fit student need. Additionally, specialization usually
necessitates a student moving classrooms throughout the day. Frequent transitioning
between classes may prevent teachers from having full information on a student’s “state of
the world” for that particular day. For instance, if pedagogical tool A is best used in state A
and pedagogical tool B is best used in state B, having inferior information on the state of the
world will yield inefficiencies in production. 5 Increased transition times between classes also
decreases valuable instructional time (McGrath and Rust, 2002). Finally, teachers will have a
harder time coordinating to ensure rules are enforced consistently and uniformly (Anderson,
1962). Behavior modification exercises such as assigning punishment based on a student’s
infractions for a day may be less effective when the teacher does not spend the full day with
the student.

4 Teacher retention was not significantly different between treatment and control schools. Table 5 displays the
treatment effect on teacher retention in treatment versus control schools. The treatment effect for fraction of
teachers retained between 2013-2014 and 2014-2015 is statistically insignificant.
5 Relatedly, evidence suggests that there is a cost associated with care of patients across multiple physicians. For
instance, a doctor giving continuous care to a patient will be more familiar with the patient’s condition. After
the doctor’s shift, it may take time to update the new doctor on the patient’s condition. Hence, some argue it is
better for the entire care of a patient to be covered by a single physician rather than by specialists (Van
Walraven et al. 2004). This intuition may be particularly important in other processes that also involve
production of human capital where knowledge of an individual is an important input in production.

5

I cannot credibly identify the separate impact of each of these potential costs and
benefits. Instead, this paper’s goal is to produce credible estimates of the net impact of
teacher specialization. The resulting “reduced form” will likely reflect a number of the
potential channels highlighted above.

C. A Model
I now incorporate some insights from the literature into a simple model that is
designed to better understand the experiment. As mentioned above, I cannot formally test
between the various channels that teacher specialization may impact student achievement.
Thus, I abstract away from all but the bare essentials in an effort to make the model crisp.
The two key channels driving the tradeoff in the model are the benefits from specialization
that accrue from sorting teachers based on their comparative advantage and costs of not
tailoring pedagogy to student type. Adding the other channels into the model is trivial and
not particularly illuminating.
The Basic Building Blocks
Let there be a large finite set, 𝑁, of agents referred to as “students” and one agent
referred to as the “teacher.” Nature moves first and assigns teaching knowledge 𝐻 to the
teacher, and a type, 𝜏$ , to each student. I assume that student type is a pair 𝛼$ , 𝜃$ , where
𝜃$ ∈ 𝜃, 𝜃 represents innate ability and 𝛼$ ∈ 𝛼, 𝛼 denotes a student idiosyncratic type,
𝑗 ∈ {1,2, … 𝑁}. Each student observes 𝜏$ and chooses effort 𝑒$ ∈ ℝ2 .
The teacher observes his own teaching knowledge 𝐻, student’s ability 𝜃$ and
student’s effort level 𝑒$ . He does not observe students’ idiosyncratic types 𝛼$ but instead,
receives noisy signals {𝑠$4 , 𝑠$5 , … . , 𝑠$7 } about 𝛼$ for 𝑇 time periods. Algebraically, signals are
equal to the true idiosyncratic types plus some normal noise: 𝑠$9 = 𝛼$ + 𝜀$9 , where
𝜀$9 ~𝑁(0, 𝜎A5 ).
After receiving 𝑁×𝑇 signals about 𝛼$ ’s from 𝑁 students for 𝑇 time periods, the
teacher “sets a dial” 𝑥 ∈ ℝ. This assumption is motivated by the model described in
Jovanovic and Rousseau (2001). One can think of setting dial 𝑥, in this context, as the

6

teacher choosing his teaching pedagogy to maximize total student achievement.
Payoffs
We assume that student achievement is related to observable and unobservable
parameters in the manner described in Jovanovic and Rousseau (2001). Let 𝑌$ denote student
achievement of pupil j: 𝑌$ = 𝑓 𝑒$ , 𝜃$ , 𝐻 − (𝛼$ − 𝑥)5 , where 𝑓 is smooth, continuous, and
increasing in its arguments. Thus, higher student achievement can be achieved by either
increasing student effort 𝑒$ , ability 𝜃$ , or teacher’s knowledge 𝐻, and by decreasing the
absolute distance between the teacher’s choice of pedagogy 𝑥 and the student’s idiosyncratic
type 𝛼$ . Therefore, the payoff that the teacher receives by setting a dial 𝑥 ∈ ℝ is equal to the
total achievement of 𝑁 students:

H
$I4 𝑌$ =

𝑓 𝑒$ , 𝜃$ , 𝐻 − (𝛼$ − 𝑥)5 .6

Student payoffs depend on how much effort is exerted and the costs and benefit of
that effort choice. In symbols: 𝑓 𝑒$ , 𝜃$ , 𝐻 − 𝛼$ − 𝑥

5

− 𝑘 𝑒$ , where 𝑘 𝑒$ denotes costs

of effort. I assume that costs of effort are increasing and convex:

KL MN
KMN

> 0 𝑎𝑛𝑑

K S L MN
KMN S

>

0.
Strategies
The teacher’s strategy is to choose a teaching pedagogy 𝑥: ℝHU7 → ℝ after
observing 𝑁×𝑇 signals about 𝛼$ ’s from 𝑁 students for 𝑇 time periods. A student’s strategy
is a mapping from their innate ability to an effort choice: 𝑒: 𝜃, 𝜃 × 𝛼, 𝛼 → ℝ2 .
Expected Payoffs
The teacher maximizes expected student achievement from his class after observing
signals about students’ 𝛼$ ’s. Let 𝑆$ denote a 1×T vector of signals for student j. Total
expected student achievement conditional on observing a stream of signals 𝑆$ is given by:
(1)

6

H
$I4 𝐸

𝑌$ 𝑆$ )=

H
$I4 𝑓

𝑒$ , 𝜃$ , 𝐻 − 𝐸

5

𝛼$ − 𝑥 | 𝑆$ .

In a previous version of the model, I allowed student effort to depend on the dial set, x, by writing the payoff

function as: H
$I4 𝑌$ = 𝑓 𝑒$ , 𝜃$
same qualitative results.

𝐻 − 𝛼$ − 𝑥

5

. This model is significantly more complicated but yields the

7

If the signal vector provided the teacher full information on students’ idiosyncratic
types, it is straightforward to demonstrate that, when maximizing student achievement, the
teacher sets the dial equal to the weighted average of 𝛼$ ’s:

H ZN
$I4 H .

However, by assumption, the teacher does not receive full information on students’
idiosyncratic types. He has some prior beliefs about types and updates his beliefs according
to Bayes rule. To illustrate, assume 𝑡 = 1 and let the teacher’s prior about any student’s
idiosyncratic type be given by 𝛼$ ~𝑁(𝜇Z , 𝜎Z5 ). At the end of the period, the teacher receives
𝑠$4 for each student and updates his prior on 𝛼$ . Since the normal learning model is
generally easier to think about in terms of precision, let ℎ =

4
^S

denote a measure of how

tight a distribution is.
Manipulating notation, the signal and the prior can be written as: 𝑠$9 ~𝑁 𝛼$ ,
𝛼$ ~𝑁 𝜇Z ,

4
_a

4
_`

and

, respectively. The posterior belief about 𝛼$ after receiving signal 𝑠$4 is given

by 𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑜𝑟9I4 : 𝛼$ |𝑠$4 ~𝑁

_a fa 2 _` gNh
_a 2_`

,

4
_a 2_`

. Extending to 𝑡 = 𝑇 and deploying a bit

of algebra, one can rewrite this as:
𝐸 𝛼$ 𝑠$4, 𝑠$5, … 𝑠$7 =

(2)

_a fa 2_` j
ikh gNi
_a 27_`

Equilibrium
An equilibrium is a pair of strategies, 𝑥 ∗ and 𝑒$∗ , for all j, such that each is a best
response to the other. Assuming risk neutrality, the teacher will choose 𝑥 to maximize total
expected student achievement. Using equations (1 and 2), the optimal dial is 𝑥 ∗ (𝑆$ ) =
o
Nkh m

ZN nN )

H

as the 𝑒 ∗ →

, where 𝐸 𝛼$ 𝑆$ =
Kp
KMN

−

KL
KMN

_a fa 2_` j
ikh gNi
_a 27_`

. Equilibrium student effort can be written

= 0.

Teacher Specialization
In the current model, teacher specialization is akin to receiving fewer signals about
students’ idiosyncratic types. In traditional elementary classrooms, teachers are with the same
set of students all day. Conversely, when teachers specialize, they teach a subset of subjects

8

(half, say) and teach significantly more students (double, say). For simplicity and
transparency, I assume that without teacher specialization, 𝑇 → ∞ and with teacher
specialization, 𝑇 → 0.7

Proposition 1: With teacher specialization, total student achievement increases if teacher’s knowledge, H,
increases such that:
(3)

H
$I4 𝑓

𝑒$ , 𝜃$ , 𝐻g −

H
$I4 𝑓

𝑒$ , 𝜃$ , 𝐻rg > 𝑁 𝜇Z −

H ZN
$I4 H

5

Proof – See Appendix A.
Proposition 1 provides a formal description of the costs and benefits of teacher
specialization. In words, the proposition highlights that student achievement will increase
under specialization whenever the human capital benefit of sorting teachers based on
comparative advantage –

H
$I4 𝑓

𝑒$ , 𝜃$ , 𝐻g −

inefficient “dial setting” -- 𝑁 𝜇Z −

H ZN
$I4 H

5

H
$I4 𝑓

𝑒$ , 𝜃$ , 𝐻rg is larger than the cost of

. This provides the essence of the problem. 8

Other potential costs of specialization – such as less time with teachers due to
frequent classroom transitions – can be added without changing the basic economics. A
similar argument applies to the benefit side. For instance, a potentially important benefit of
specialization is that teachers have more time to master pedagogical tools specific to their
subjects. I have assumed that teacher capacity is fixed. In a fuller model, one might allow the
law of motion of teacher ability to be affected by the number of classes they teach.
III. Background and Field Experiment Details
Houston Independent School District (HISD) is the seventh largest school district in
America with more than 200,000 students in almost 300 schools. Eighty-eight percent of
HISD students are black or Hispanic. Approximately 80 percent of all students are eligible

These limiting cases are a matter of mathematical convenience. The results also hold for any 𝑇 > 0 if one
assumes that teachers who are specialized have a signal vector that is first order stochastically dominated by the
signal vector received by non-specialized teachers.
8 One might argue that the formulation of the tradeoff is more about different types of specialization – there
might be specialization in the traditional sense of comparative advantage and specialization in the task of
getting to know students in a more nuanced manner. Since this is more about semantics than substance, I
chose to articulate the decision in the starkest terms.
7

9

for free or reduced-price lunch and roughly 30 percent of students have limited English
proficiency.
To begin the field experiment, we followed standard protocol. First, we garnered
support from the district superintendent and other key district personnel. The district then
provided a list of 62 schools that were eligible for randomization into the teacher
specialization experiment.9 I removed twelve of these schools because either they were part
of another experiment or because their particular school model was antithetical to the
notion of teacher specialization (e.g. Montessori).10 Our final experimental sample consists of
fifty schools – twenty-five treatment and twenty-five control – that were randomly allocated
vis-à-vis a matched-pair procedure (details to follow).
After treatment and control schools were chosen, treatment schools were alerted that
they would alter their schedules to have teachers specialize in a subset of the following
subjects – math, science, social studies and reading – based on each teacher’s strengths.
Schools then sent in specialization plans along with a written justification for each plan.
Principals assigned teachers to subjects based on the principal’s perception of each teacher’s
comparative advantage. This perception was based on either TVA measures, classroom
observations, or recommendations (for teachers new to the district or new to teaching).
Schools were constrained as to how many teachers they had teaching a certain grade
and language since teachers were prohibited from switching between these categories. Given
these grade-level and language constraints, there were 2-4 teachers available to teach a given
grade and language group in over 80% of cases. Based on this availability, teams of teachers
were designated within schools and grades. Teachers were not permitted to teach both math
and reading. In the modal case of a two teacher team, one teacher taught math and science
and one teacher taught reading and social studies. Otherwise, one teacher taught reading,
one teacher taught math, and the teachers shared teaching duties for social studies and
science. Some teacher teams had three teachers where one taught math, one taught reading
and the third taught science and social studies. Students had different teachers for different
subjects, but stayed with the same group of classmates for all subjects.

When choosing a list of experimental schools, the district, besides allowing for schools with minority and low
achieving students, focused on schools that had the capacity to sort teachers to teach specialized subjects
10 Montessori education encourages teachers to teach for long hours fostering the development of
environments that develop a child’s natural psychological, physical and social development (http://amshq.org)
9

10

After reviewing schools’ departmentalization plans, I recommended further changes
in teaching assignment for 25 out of 520 teachers. I made recommendations for changes
only in cases where the principal’s decision seemed to contradict Houston’s calculated TVA
for the 2011-2012 school year or author-calculated TVA for 2012-2013 school year. Schools
then sent updated departmentalization plans and 14 of our recommended changes were
agreed upon by the school. In the remaining eleven cases, the principals indicated their
choices and arguments justifying their decisions. For instance, we recommended that a 3rd
grade teacher might be better suited to reading than math in a particular elementary school
but the school decided to keep original assignments stating that the teacher was better suited
to math based on summer school observations.11
Table 1 describes differences between treatment and control elementary schools and
all other elementary schools in HISD across a set of covariates gleaned from administrative
data. The descriptive differences between participating (treatment and control) and nonparticipating schools is consistent with the fact that the leadership of HISD preferred
elementary schools that were predominantly minority and low-achieving to enter the
experimental sample. Students in experimental schools are less likely to be white, more likely
to be black, less likely to be Asian, more likely to be economically disadvantaged, more likely
to be in a special education program, less likely to be gifted, and have lower pre-treatment
test scores in math and reading. Thus, the results estimated are likely more applicable to
urban schools with high concentrations of minority students.
IV. Data, Research Design, and Econometric Framework
Data
We use administrative data provided by the Houston Independent School District
(HISD). The main HISD data file contains student-level administrative data on approximately
200,000 students across the Houston metropolitan area in a given year. The data includes
information on student race, gender, free and reduced-price lunch status, behavior, and
attendance for all students; state math and reading test scores for students in third through
fifth grades; and Stanford 10 subject scores in math and reading for elementary school
students. Behavior data records student behavioral incidents resulting in a serious disciplinary
11

Based on survey responses, the average fraction of specialized teachers in control schools is 54.2%. The
corresponding fraction in treatment schools is 89.9%.

11

action such as a suspension or an expulsion. I have HISD data spanning the 2010-2011 to
2014-2015 school years. I also collected data from a survey administered to teachers at the end
of the 2013-2014 school year. 418 (80 % response rate) treatment teachers and 343 (70%
response rate) control teachers completed the survey. See Online Appendix A for details on
the outcomes used from the survey.
The state math and reading tests, developed by the Texas Education Agency (TEA),
are statewide high-stakes exams conducted in the spring for students in third through eleventh
grade.12 Students in fifth grade must score proficient or above on both tests to advance to the
next grade. Because of this, students in the fifth grade who do not pass the tests are allowed
to retake it approximately one month after the first administration. We use a student’s first
score unless it is missing.13
All public school students are required to take the math and reading tests unless they
are medically excused or have a severe disability. Students with moderate disabilities or limited
English proficiency must take both tests, but may be granted special accommodations
(additional time, translation services, alternative assessments, and so on) if they meet certain
requirements set by the Texas Education Agency. In our analysis, the test scores are
normalized (across the school district) to have a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one
for each grade and year.14
We use a parsimonious set of controls to help correct for pre-treatment differences
between students in treatment and control schools. The most important controls are reading
and math achievement test scores from the three years prior to the start of the experiment, which
we include in all regressions (unless otherwise noted), and are also referred to throughout the
text as “baseline test scores”. We also include one indicator variable for each baseline test
score that takes on the value of one if that test score is a Spanish version test and zero

Sample tests can be found at http://www.tea.state.tx.us/student.assessment/released-tests/ .
Using their retake scores, when the retake is higher than their first score, does not significantly alter the
results. Results available from the author upon request.
14 Among students who take a state math or reading test, several different test versions are administered to
accommodate specific needs. These tests are designed for students receiving special education services who
would not be able to meet proficiency on a similar test as their peers. STAAR-- L is a linguistically
accommodated version of the state mathematics, science and social studies test that provides more linguistic
accommodations than the Spanish versions of these tests. According to TEA, STAAR--Modified and STAAR-L are not comparable to the standard version of the test and thus, we did not use them for our main analysis.
We did, however, investigate whether treatment influenced whether or not a student takes a standard or nonstandard test (see Appendix Table 1).
12

13

12

otherwise. Baseline scores are STAAR test scores for students in grades three through five in
the baseline year and Stanford 10 for students in grade K-2 in the baseline year.
Other individual-level controls include gender; a mutually exclusive and collectively
exhaustive set of race indicator variables; and indicators for whether a student is eligible for
free or reduced-price lunch or other forms of federal assistance, whether a student receives
accommodations for limited English proficiency, whether a student receives special education
accommodations, or whether a student is enrolled in the district’s gifted and talented
program.15
To supplement HISD’s administrative data, a survey was administered to all teachers
in both treatment and control at the end of the 2013-2014 school year. The data from the
survey includes questions about lesson planning, relationship with students and interaction
with parents and guardians of students. Teachers were given a $20 Amazon.com gift card for
completing the survey and principals were informed that they would also receive a $40
Amazon.com gift card if they were able to get teacher participation above 80% at their campus.
Approximately seventy percent of control teachers completed the survey while the
corresponding fraction for treatment teachers was eighty percent.
Research Design
To partition the set of interested schools into treatment and control, we used a
matched-pair randomization procedure. Recall, fifty schools entered our experimental
sample from which we constructed twenty-five matched pairs. Following the
recommendations in (Abadie and Imbens, 2011), control and treatment groups were
balanced on a variable that was correlated with the outcomes of interest – past standardized
test scores. First, the full set of fifty schools were ranked by the sum of their mean reading
and math test scores in the previous two years. Then, we designated every two schools from

15 A student is income-eligible for free lunch if her family income is below 130 percent of the federal poverty
guidelines, or categorically eligible if (1) the student’s household receives assistance under the Food Stamp
Program, the Food Distribution Program on Indian Reservations (FDPIR), or the Temporary Assistance for
Needy Families Program (TANF); (2) the student was enrolled in Head Start on the basis of meeting that
program’s low-income criteria; (3) the student is homeless; (4) the student is a migrant child; or (5) the student
is identified by the local education liaison as a runaway child receiving assistance from a program under the
Runaway and Homeless Youth Act. HISD Special Education Services and the HISD Language Proficiency
Assessment Committee determine special education and limited English proficiency status respectively.

13

this ordered list as a “matched pair” and randomly selected one member of the matched pair
into the treatment group and one into the control group.
Columns (1) and (2) of Table 2 display descriptive statistics on individual student
characteristics of all HISD students in third through fifth grade. The first column provides the
mean for each variable for control school students. The second column provides the
difference between the treatment and the control group, which we estimate by regressing the
variable on a treatment indicator and matched pair fixed effects. Of the 14 student-level
variables, only 1 is statistically significant at the 5% level. 5.6 percent of control students record
a behavioral incident while 8.3 percent of treatment students record being involved in a
behavioral incident.16
Econometrics
To estimate the causal impact of our treatment on outcomes, we estimate both intentto-treat (ITT) effects and Local Average Treatment Effects (LATEs). Let Zi be an indicator
for assignment to treatment, let Xi denote a vector of baseline variables (consisting of the
demographic variables in Table 2) measured at the individual level, let 𝑓 ∙ represent a
polynomial including 3 years of individual test scores in both math and reading prior to the
start of treatment and their squares. All of these variables are measured pre-treatment. Moreover, let
γg denote a grade-level fixed effect and Ψm a matched-pair fixed effect.
The Intent-to-Treat (ITT) effect, τITT, using the twenty-five treatment and twenty-five
control schools in our experimental sample can be estimated with the following equation:
(4)

Yi, m, g, yr = α + τITT · Zi + f (Yi, TR-1 , Yi, TR-2 , Yi, TR-3) + βXi + γg + Ψm + ηyr + εi, m, g, yr

where TR represents the treatment year.
Equation (4) identifies the impact of being offered a chance to attend a treatment school,
τITT, where students in the matched-pair schools correspond to the counterfactual state that
would have occurred for the students in treatment schools had their school not been randomly
selected. I focus on a fixed population of students. A student is considered treated (resp.

16

See Online Appendix A for details on how each variable was constructed.

14

control) if they were in a treatment (resp. control) school in the pre-treatment year and not in
an exit grade (e.g. 5th grade). All student mobility after treatment assignment is ignored. Note
that because Equation (4) is estimated on first through fifth graders and treatment assignment
was determined in the pre-treatment year, students selecting into treatment is not a concern.
Yet, in any experimental analysis, a potential threat to validity is selection out of
sample. For instance, if schools that implement teacher specialization are more likely to have
low (resp. high) performing students exit the sample, then our estimates will be biased
upwards (resp. downwards) – even under random assignment. We find that 9.27% of
treatment student observations are missing a test score relative to 10.92% of control
students, a difference of 1.65%. Thus, despite attrition rates being around 10.06%, the
difference in attrition between treatment and control is sufficiently small that Lee (2009)
bounds on treatment effects remain qualitatively the same – and quantitatively similar – as
the ITT treatment effects. This issue is addressed in more detail in the following section.
Under several assumptions (e.g. that treatment assignment is random, control schools
are not allowed to participate in the program and treatment assignment only affects outcomes
through program participation), we can also estimate the causal impact of attending a treatment
school. This parameter, commonly known as the Local Average Treatment Effect (LATE),
measures the average effect of attending a treatment school on students who attend as a result
of their school being randomly selected. We estimate two different LATE parameters through
two-stage least squares regressions, using random assignment as an instrumental variable for
the first stage regression. The first LATE parameter uses an indicator variable, EVER which
is equal to one if a student attended a treatment school for at least one day. More specifically,
in the 2014 specification, EVER is equal to one if a student attended a treatment school for
at least one day in the 2013-2014 school year and zero otherwise and uses test scores from
2014 as an outcome. In the 2015 specification, EVER is equal to one if a student attended a
treatment school for at least one day in 2013-2014 or 2014-2015 and zero otherwise and uses
test scores from 2015 as an outcome. In the pooled specification, EVER is equal to one if a
student attended a treatment school for at least one day in 2013-2014 or 2014-2015 and zero
otherwise and uses test scores from both 2014 and 2015 as an outcome. The second stage
equation for the two-stage least squares estimate therefore takes the form:
(5)

Yi, m, g, yr = α + ΩEVERi, m, g, yr + f (Yi, TR-1 , Yi, TR-2 , Yi, TR-3) + βXi + γg + ηyr + Ψm + εi, m, g, yr
15

and the first stage equation is:
(6)

EVERi, m, g, yr = α + λZi + f (Yi, TR-1 , Yi, TR-2 , Yi, TR-3) + βXi + γg + ηyr + Ψm + εi, m, g, yr

where all other variables are defined in the same way as in Equation (1). When Equation (5) is
estimated for one year only, Ω (referred to as 2SLS (Ever) in tables) provides the cumulative
treatment effect in that year. When Equation (5) is estimated across multiple years, as in the
pooled estimates, Ω provides the weighted average of the cumulative effects of attending a
treatment school.
Our second LATE parameter is estimated through a two-stage least squares regression
of student achievement on the intensity of treatment. More precisely, we define TREATED
as the number of years a student is present at a treatment school. The second stage equation
for the two-stage least squares estimate therefore takes the form:
(7) Yi, m, g, yr = α + 𝛿TREATEDi, m, g, yr + f (Yi, TR-1 , Yi, TR-2 , Yi, TR-3) + βXi + γg + ηyr + Ψm + εi, m, g, yr
and the first stage equation is:
(8) TREATEDi, m, g, yr = α + λ ·Zi + f (Yi, TR-1 , Yi, TR-2 , Yi, TR-3) + βXi + γg + ηyr + Ψm + εi, m, g, yr
The first stage equation is equivalent to Equation (6), but with TREATED as the dependent
variable. In the 2014 specification, TREATED ranges from zero to one and uses test scores
from 2014 as an outcome. In the 2015 specification, TREATED ranges from zero to two and
uses test scores from 2015 as an outcome. In the pooled specification, TREATED ranges
from zero to two and uses test scores from both 2014 and 2015 as an outcome. Therefore, δ
provides the average yearly effect of participating in our experiment.
V. Teacher Specialization and the Production of Human Capital in Schools
Table 3 presents a series of estimates of the impact of teacher specialization on
reading and math state test scores. The rows provide estimates for different outcomes and
each set of columns coincides with a different empirical model that is being estimated. Test
16

scores are normalized to have mean 0 and standard deviation 1 across the entire school
district by grade and year, so treatment effects are presented in standard deviation units.
Standard errors, clustered at the school level, are in the parentheses below each estimate
along with the number of observations. All regressions include grade, year and matched-pair
fixed effects.
Columns (1) and (2) present ITT estimates of the impact of teacher specialization on
math and reading achievement state test scores for the 2013-2014 and 2014-2015 school
years, respectively. In the first year of the experiment, the impact of being offered the chance
to attend an elementary school in which teachers were specialized was -0.062σ (0.031) in
math and -0.057σ (0.026) in reading. In the second year of treatment, treatment effects were
smaller and measured with a bit more noise which rendered them statistically insignificant.
Pooling across years, which is shown in column (3), students in treatment elementary
schools score 0.051σ (0.028) lower in math and 0.041σ (0.027) lower in reading relative to
students in control elementary schools. The math score is statistically significant.
Columns (4) and (5) present LATE estimates for the cumulative effect of actually
attending a treatment school for at least one day in one of the school years. Column (6)
contains the pooled estimate. The average cumulative effect of attending a treatment school
for at least one day in any of the school years is -0.058σ (0.032) in math and -0.046σ (0.030)
in reading. Columns (7) through (9) present yearly LATE estimates which capture the effect
of actually attending any treatment school. Thus, to calculate the total effect of the
intervention one multiplies the estimates by two. The impact of teacher specialization is
−0.042σ (0.023) in math and -0.034σ (0.021) in reading, per year. Thus, at the end of the
two-year experiment encompassing 18 school months, students with specialized teachers
were approximately one month behind students with non-specialized teachers – implying
that specialization reduces production efficiency by 6 percent.
These results are surprisingly inconsistent with the positive effects of division of labor
typically known to economists though, as Proposition 1 illustrates, might be consistent with
a model in which specialization results in inefficient dial setting – though other mechanisms
are possible.
Another, perhaps even more transparent, way to look at the data is to graph the
distribution of treatment effects for each matched pair-grade cell, which is depicted in Figure

17

1. We control for demographic observables and baseline test scores by estimating equation (4)
for each matched pair and grade. We then collect the treatment coefficients from this equation
and plot a kernel density curve for them. The results echo those found in Table 3. In math, 38
out of 75 match pair by grade level cells have negative results. In reading, 35 out of 75 match
pair by grade level cells have negative effects.
Attendance and Behavioral Incidence
Consistent with the impact on test scores, there is a positive effect on student
suspensions and a negative effect of treatment on attendance. Specifically, treatment schools,
on average, have a 0.016 (0.001) higher probability of student suspension due to poor
behavior in the treatment year and 0.003 (0.000) lesser number of years in attendance.
Heterogeneous Treatment Effects
Table 4 explores the sensitivity of the estimated treatment effects across predetermined subsamples of the data. The negative effects of teacher specialization are
remarkably robust, though there is some evidence that students who are more likely to need
individual attention – e.g. students with special needs – do particularly poorly when teachers
are specialized. The coefficient on treatment for students with special needs is −0.156σ
(0.056) and the effect for students without special needs is −0.047σ (0.029) in math; the
respective estimates in reading are −0.199σ (0.046) and −0.038σ (0.027). Both differences
are statistically significant.
The results become more interesting when the data are partitioned by pre-treatment
teacher age at the time of intervention. Teachers age at the time of intervention was culled
from the district’s administrative records. Consistent with the findings above, treatment
effects are more negative and pronounced for younger teachers – those who one might
consider more “at-risk.” Dividing the sample of teachers into terciles – based on their age –
we find that the treatment effect on the youngest tercile of teachers is −0.174σ (0.041) in
math and −0.208σ (0.052) in reading. In comparison, the treatment effect on the oldest
tercile of teachers is 0.025σ (0.063) in math and −0.077σ (0.078) in reading. The p-value for
the treatment coefficient being different for all three terciles is 0.000 in math and 0.030 in
reading.

18

VI. Robustness Checks
In this subsection we explore the robustness of our results under two potential
threats to our interpretation of the data.
Attrition and Bounding
A concern for estimation is that we only include students for which we have posttreatment test scores. If students in treatment schools and students in control schools have
different rates of selection into this sample, our results may be biased. Appendix Table 1
compares the rates of attrition of students in treatment schools and students in control
schools. The first panel uses whether or not a student has a missing math score as an
outcome. The numbers reported in the columns (2), (4) and (6) are the coefficients on the
treatment indicator. The second panel has whether or not a student has a missing reading
score as an outcome. To see whether attrition affects our estimates, we compute Lee (2009)
bounds in Appendix Table 2, which calculates conservative bounds on the true treatment
effects under the assumption that attrition is driven by the same forces in treatment and
control, but that there are differential attrition rates in the two samples. Under the Lee
method, children are selectively dropped from either the treatment or control group to
equalize response rates. This is accomplished by regressing the outcome variable on baseline
controls and treatment status, and storing the residuals. When the probability of missing an
outcome is higher for the control group, then treatment children with the highest residuals are
dropped. When the probability of missing an outcome is higher for the treatment group,
then control children with the lowest residuals are dropped. In our case, however, because
the attrition rates are quite similar between treatment and control, qualitatively the treatment
effects remain unchanged.
Alternative Specifications
In our main analysis we use matched-pair fixed effects and clustered standard errors
as a way of obtaining consistent standard errors. Yet, this may not correct for school-level
heterogeneity. This heterogeneity is uncorrelated with treatment due to random assignment,
but could affect inference (Moulton 1986, 1990). Table 5 presents estimates after running

19

(population-weighted) school level regressions of the impact on test scores in the treatment
year.
The pooled ITT effect on math scores is −0.083σ (0.002) and on reading scores is
−0.071σ (0.002). If anything, these school-level regressions are more negative than the
estimates at the individual level. Similarly, the impact of treatment on behavioral incidence is
0.016 (0.001) and -0.003 (0.000) on attendance.
Alternative ‘Low Stakes’ Test Scores
Jacob (2005) demonstrates that the introduction of accountability programs increases
high-stakes test scores without increasing scores on low-stakes tests, most likely through
increases in test-specific skills and student effort. It is important better understand whether
the results presented above are being driven by actual losses in general knowledge or
whether specialized teachers are simply more inefficient at high-stakes test preparation.
To provide some evidence on this question, I present data from the Stanford 10.
Houston is one of a handful of cities that voluntary administers a nationally normed test for
which teachers and principals are not held accountable – decreasing the incentive to teach to
the test or engage in other forms of manipulation. The math and reading tests are aligned
with standards set by the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics and the National
Council of Teachers of Reading, respectively.17
Table 6 presents estimates of impact of teacher specialization on Stanford 10 math
and reading scores. As in the state test results, the impact of teacher specialization is, if
anything, negative. Panel A displays results for grades three through five. This sample
matches the one in the main specifications as state tests are only administered in Houston in
grades three through eight. Columns (1) and (2) present ITT estimates of the impact of
teacher specialization on math and reading achievement state test scores for the 2013-2014
and 2014-2015 school years, respectively. In the first year of the experiment, the impact of
being offered the chance to attend an elementary school in which teachers were specialized

17Math tests include content testing number sense, pattern recognition, algebra, geometry, and probability and
statistics, depending on the grade level. Reading tests include age-appropriate questions measuring reading
ability, vocabulary, and comprehension. More information can be found at
http://www.pearsonassessments.com/HAIWEB/Cultures/en-us/Productdetail.htm?Pid=SAT10C.

20

was -0.061σ (0.027) in math and -0.061σ (0.027) in reading. These estimates are nearly
identical to those from the main specifications displayed in Table 3.
In the second year of treatment, treatment effects were smaller and measured with a
bit more noise which rendered the math effect statistically insignificant. Pooling across years,
which is shown in column (3), students in treatment elementary schools score 0.040σ (0.027)
lower in math and 0.056σ (0.023) lower in reading relative to students in control elementary
schools. The reading score is statistically significant. The results from first and second grade,
displayed in panel B, are qualitatively similar but have even larger standard errors.
Permutation Tests
We have run several regressions with various outcomes in differing subsamples to
measure treatment effects. The problem of multiplicity can lead one to incorrectly reject
some null hypothesis purely by chance. To correct for this, we conduct a nonparametric
permutation test as in Rosenbaum (1988). We re-randomized the sample 10,000 times
between matched pairs at the school-level, like the original randomization. We re-ran the
ITT regressions with the new, synthetic treatment assignments and recorded the new
treatment effects. Appendix Figures 1 plot the actual observed ITT treatment effect against
the distribution of simulated treatment effects for various outcomes. The key results with
strong statistical significance – for instance, the negative effect on reading and math scores
in the first year of treatment – are easily visualizable in Appendix Figures 1. Together, these
results confirm the basic facts described throughout; teacher specialization, if anything,
lowers student achievement.
VII. Interpreting the Data Through the Lens of the Dial-Setting Model
The experiment designed and evaluated in the previous sections generated a set of
new facts. Sorting teachers in a way that allows them to teach a subset of subjects of relative
strength has, if anything, negative impacts on test scores, negative impacts on attendance,
and increases suspensions due to ill-advised behavior. Moreover, these impacts seem
particularly stark for students with special needs and students taught by younger teachers.
Recall, Proposition 1 describes the conditions under which teacher specialization
may lead to higher academic achievement. The key inequality is: (A) the increase in teacher

21

knowledge due sorting on comparative advantage versus (B) suboptimal pedagogy due to
inefficient dial-setting. On one side of the ledger, (A), specialization should lead teachers
with weakly higher TVA scores to provide better instruction to students. On the other side,
(B), because teachers have less time, and hence, fewer interactions with their students they
may “set the dial” sub-optimally leading to less effective instructional strategies.
The increase in student achievement caused due to teacher sorting on comparative
advantage can be indirectly computed. Panel C in table 4 displays treatment effects for
subgroups divided on the basis of how different a teacher’s TVA is in the subject that he is
sorted to teach versus the average TVA across all subjects the teacher used to teach before.
We create terciles based on this difference and conduct ITT regressions on the pooled
sample. As table 4 shows, teachers who are in the first tercile (or, who stand to gain the least
from sorting) have the largest decreases in student achievement. For math, the treatment effect
in this tercile is -0.185σ (0.031) while for reading, the treatment effect is -0.104σ (0.047). The
corresponding treatment effects for the third tercile, or for teachers who stand to gain the
most from sorting, is 0.008σ (0.044) in math and 0.035σ (0.034) in reading. Treatment
effects across the three terciles are significantly different from each other at the 5% level.
Unfortunately, it is exceedingly difficult to test whether or not teachers correctly “set
the dial.” The survey evidence collected from treatment and control teachers provides an
indirect way of assessing this portion of the theory. Survey data was collected at the end of
2013-2014 school year and was designed specifically to gather information on teaching
strategies and interactions between teachers and their students.
Appendix table 3 reports treatment effects from our least-squares ITT specification
(in column 2) and a Logistic regression (in Column 3) on teaching pedagogies: whether the
teacher had personal relationships which each of his students, if the teacher feels that he
gives students’ individual attention, if rules are consistently enforced in the school, and if the
teacher is enthusiastic about teaching a subject. For each of these outcomes, a variable is
coded as 1 if teacher agrees with the statement to any extent and 0 otherwise. I also present
impacts for the percentage of time spent on lesson differentiation for treatment versus
control teachers.
There is some suggestive evidence that inefficient dial-setting may explain a portion
of the results. Treatment teachers are 0.02 (0.03) less likely to report they “know” their
students (control mean = 81.6%) and 0.041 (.02) less likely to report providing them with
22

individual attention (control mean = 62.5%). Only the latter is statistically significant. In
contrast, there was no effect of treatment on whether rules are consistently enforced in
school, teacher’s reported enthusiasm for teaching or how much they attempted to
differentiate their lessons.
These data are broadly consistent with the model developed in Section II, or any
model in which having less time and attention to devote to each student is a cost of teacher
specialization.
An important caveat to the above survey results is that there is a ten percentage
point difference between treatment and control in response rates to the survey. Thus, any
standard bounding procedure that takes this differential response rate into account will
contain estimate intervals that are too large to be informative (See Appendix table 4).
VIII. Conclusion
Division of labor is a basic economic concept – the power of which, to date, has not
been quantified vis-à-vis the production of human capital. In simple production processes –
such as pins – there can be large positive gains from specialization. In schools however,
having teachers specialize may increase the quality of human capital available to teach
students through sorting, but may lead to inefficient pedagogical choices.
Empirically, I find that teacher specialization, if anything, decreases student
achievement, decreases student attendance, and increases student behavioral problems. This
result is consistent with the dial-setting model if teachers received fewer signals about their
students’ types after being departmentalized and the change in teacher value-added due to
sorting was not large enough. I provide some suggestive evidence for this, though other
mechanisms are possible.
These results provide a cautionary tale about the potential productivity benefits of
the division of labor when applied to human capital development.

23

References
Abadie, A., & Imbens, G. W. (2011). Bias-corrected matching estimators for average
treatment effects. Journal of Business & Economic Statistics.
Anderson, R. C. (1962). The case for teacher specialization in the elementary
school. The Elementary School Journal, 253-260.
Becker, G. S., & Murphy, K. M. (1994). The division of labor, coordination costs,
and knowledge. In Human Capital: A Theoretical and Empirical Analysis with Special Reference to
Education (3rd Edition) (pp. 299-322). The University of Chicago Press.
Chan, T. C., & Jarman, D. (2004). Departmentalize Elementary Schools.
Principal, 84(1), 70-72.
Jacob, B. A. (2005). Accountability, incentives and behavior: The impact of highstakes testing in the Chicago Public Schools. Journal of public Economics, 89(5), 761-796.
Jovanovic, Boyan, and Peter L. Rousseau. (2001). Why Wait? A Century of Life
before IPO. American Economic Review, 91(2): 336-341.
Lane, F. C. (1992). Venetian ships and shipbuilders of the Renaissance. John Hopkins
University Press.
Lee, David S. (2009). “Training, wages, and sample selection: Estimating sharp
bounds on treatment effects”. The Review of Economic Studies, 76(3), 1071-1102.
Marx, K. (2012). Economic and philosophic manuscripts of 1844. Courier Corporation.
McCalley, Bruce W. (1989). The Model T Ford Encyclopedia, 1909-1927: A
comprehensive guide to the volution and changes of the major componenets of the Model T
Ford. Model T Ford Club of America. 1989
McGrath, C. J., & Rust, J. O. (2002). Academic achievement and between-class
transition time for self-contained and departmental upper-elementary classes. Journal of
Instructional Psychology, 29(1), 40.
Moulton, B. R. (1986). Random group effects and the precision of regression
estimates. Journal of econometrics, 32(3), 385-397.
Moulton, B. R. (1990). An illustration of a pitfall in estimating the effects of
aggregate variables on micro units. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 334-338.
Petty, W. (1992). Political arithmetick, or a discourse concerning the extent and value of lands,
people [and] buildings. R. Clavel.

24

Rosenbaum, Paul R. (1988). Permutation tests for matched pairs with adjustments
for covariates. Applied Statistics (1988): 401-411.
Silvermintz, D. (2010). Plato’s Supposed Defense of the Division of Labor: A
Reexamination of the Role of Job Specialization in the Republic. History of Political
Economy, 42(4), 747-772.
Smith, A. (1937). An Enquiry into the wealth of nations [1776]. Strahan and Cadell,
London.
Thoreau, H. D. (1854). Walden; or, Life in the Woods.Boston, MA: Ticknor and Fields.
Van Walraven, C., Mamdani, M., Fang, J., & Austin, P. C. (2004). Continuity of care
and patient outcomes after hospital discharge. Journal of general internal medicine, 19(6), 624-631.

25

Table 1: Summary Statistics and Balance Tests for Non-Experimental and Experimental Schools
Non Experimental Experimental vs.
Mean
Non Exp. Sample
(1)
(2)
Female
0.491
0.005
(0.006)
White
0.102
-0.088∗∗∗
(0.018)
Black
0.179
0.186∗∗∗
(0.049)
Hispanic
0.661
-0.050
(0.054)
Asian
0.045
-0.039∗∗∗
(0.008)
Other Race
0.013
-0.008∗∗∗
(0.002)
Economically Disadvantaged
0.788
0.147∗∗∗
(0.029)
Limited English Proficiency
0.444
-0.042
(0.039)
Special Education
0.067
0.008
(0.005)
Gifted and Talented
0.241
-0.078∗∗∗
(0.019)
Baseline Attendance Rate
97.401
-0.479∗∗∗
(0.151)
Baseline Behavioral Incidents
0.039
0.029∗∗∗
(0.008)
Pre-treatment Std. Math Score (STAAR & Stanford)
0.130
-0.443∗∗∗
(0.059)
Pre-treatment Std. Reading Score (STAAR & Stanford)
0.086
-0.312∗∗∗
(0.056)
Number of Clusters (schools)
Number of Students

124
32,866

174
45,581

Notes: The table describes summary statistics and balance tests for pre-treatment characteristics. Column (1) presents means for students attending
grades 3 through 5 outside the experimental sample in 2013-2014. Column (2) presents the difference between attending grades 3 though 5 in the
experimental sample versus the non experimental sample. This difference is estimated using an OLS regression of each pre-treatment characteristic
on an indicator for being assigned to the experimental group. Standard errors, reported in parentheses, are clustered at the level of the school at
time of treatment assignment. *. **, and *** denote significance at the 90%, 95%, and 99% confidence levels, respectively. We use State of Texas
Assessments of Academic Readiness (STAAR) test scores for students in grades 3-5 and Stanford 10 test scores for students in grades K-2. The last
two rows provide summary statistics for an aggregated baseline score taking STAAR tests for students in grades 3-5 and Stanford 10 for students in
grades K-2.

Female

Table 2: Student Baseline Characteristics
Control Mean
(1)
0.492

White

0.012

Black

0.367

Hispanic

0.608

Asian

0.008

Other Race

0.005

Economically Disadvantaged

0.933

Limited English Proficiency

0.391

Special Education

0.078

Gifted and Talented

0.169

Baseline Attendance Rate

97.018

Baseline Behavioral Incidents

0.056

Pre-treatment Std. Math Score (STAAR & Stanford)

-0.304

Pre-treatment Std. Reading Score (STAAR & Stanford)

-0.223

Frac. Specialized Teachers (Survey Response)

0.542

Number of Clusters (schools)
Number of Students

25
6,019

Treatment vs Control
(2)
0.005
(0.007)
0.006
(0.006)
0.009
(0.048)
-0.012
(0.050)
-0.003
(0.003)
0.001
(0.001)
0.003
(0.012)
0.013
(0.033)
-0.004
(0.006)
-0.010
(0.013)
-0.227
(0.159)
0.027∗∗∗
(0.009)
-0.015
(0.035)
-0.009
(0.026)
0.357∗∗∗
(0.004)

50
12,715

Notes: The table describes summary statistics and balance tests for pre-treatment characteristics. Column (1) presents means for students attending
grades 3 through 5 in a control school in 2013-2014. Column (2) presents the difference between attending grades 3 though 5 in a treatment school
versus attending in a control school. This difference is estimated using an OLS regression of each pre-treatment characteristic on an indicator for
being assigned to the treatment group controlling for matched pair fixed effects. Standard errors, reported in parentheses, are clustered at the level
of the school at time of treatment assignment. *. **, and *** denote significance at the 90%, 95%, and 99% confidence levels, respectively. We use
State of Texas Assessments of Academic Readiness (STAAR) test scores for students in grades 3-5 and Stanford 10 test scores for students in grades
K-2. We present summary statistics for an aggregated baseline score taking STAAR tests for students in grades 3-5 and Stanford 10 for students in
grades K-2. For the last row we use a survey response to calculate the fraction of specialized teachers in treatment versus control schools. See Data
Appendix for a detailed construction of all variables.

2014
(1)

Table 3: The Effect of Treatment on State Test Scores
ITT
2SLS (Ever)
2015
Pooled
2014
2015
Pooled
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)

2014
(7)

2SLS (Years)
2015
Pooled
(8)
(9)

Math

-0.062∗∗
(0.031)

-0.033
(0.035)

-0.051∗
(0.028)

-0.070∗∗
(0.034)

-0.039
(0.040)

-0.058∗
(0.032)

-0.073∗∗
(0.036)

-0.021
(0.021)

-0.042∗
(0.023)

Reading

-0.057∗∗
(0.026)

-0.018
(0.030)

-0.041
(0.027)

-0.064∗∗
(0.028)

-0.021
(0.034)

-0.046
(0.030)

-0.067∗∗
(0.030)

-0.011
(0.018)

-0.034
(0.021)

11,266

10,683

21,949

11,266

10,683

21,949

11,266

10,683

21,949

0.891∗∗∗
(0.009)

0.865∗∗∗
(0.011)

0.878∗∗∗
(0.009)

0.850∗∗∗
(0.010)

1.608∗∗∗
(0.023)

1.218∗∗∗
(0.017)

Observations

Average Years
Of Treatment

Notes: This table presents estimates of being enrolled in or attending a treatment school on STAAR math and reading test scores. Here treatment is defined as
attending a treatment school as the last school in 2012-2013. The sample is restricted each year to those students who are attending grades 3 through 5 and have
both valid math and reading scores. Columns (1), (2), and (3) report Intent-to-Treat (ITT) estimates. Columns (4), (5), and (6) report 2SLS estimates and use
treatment assignment as an instrument for having ever attended a treatment school. Columns (7), (8), and (9) report 2SLS estimates and use treatment assignment
to instrument for the number of years spent in a treatment school. Columns (1), (4) and (7) use 2013-2014 score as the outcome variable. Columns (2), (5)
and (8) use 2014-2015 score as the outcome variable. Columns (3), (6) and (9) use scores from both 2013-2014 and 2014-2015 as the outcome variable. The
dependent variable in all specifications is state test score, standardized to have a mean of zero and standard deviation one by grade and year. All specifications
adjust for the student-level demographic variables summarized in Table 2, student-level math and reading scores (3 years prior to 2013-2014) and their squares,
and indicator variables for taking a Spanish baseline test. All specifications have grade year, and matched-pair fixed effects. Average years of treatment provides
the first stage coefficient of instrumenting treatment with 2SLS (Ever) or 2SLS (Years) treatment variable. This number can be used to scale the ITT estimate into
other estimates i.e. dividing the 2014 ITT estimate with 0.891 produces the 2014 2SLS (Ever) estimate. Standard errors (reported in parentheses) are clustered at
the level of the school at time of treatment assignment. *, *, and *** denote significance at the 90%, 95%, and 99% confidence levels, respectively.

Full Sample

Table 4: Sensitivity Analysis or Extension of the Basic Model
Math
p-value Observations
Reading
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
-0.051∗
0.079
21,949
-0.041
(0.028)
(0.027)

Panel A: Demographics
Male
Female

Black
Hispanic

Economically Disadvantaged: Yes
Economically Disadvantaged: No

LEP: Yes
LEP: No

Special Education: Yes
Special Education: No

-0.056∗∗
(0.027)
-0.041
(0.033)

0.046

10,779

0.214

11,106

-0.031
(0.025)
-0.055
(0.039)

0.212

7,534

0.168

13,918

-0.044
(0.030)
-0.101∗∗∗
(0.036)

0.140

20,522

0.007

1,363

-0.051
(0.049)
-0.056∗∗
(0.023)

0.300

9,460

0.020

12,425

-0.156∗∗∗
(0.056)
-0.047
(0.029)

0.008

667

0.108

21,218

p-value
(5)
0.131

Observations
(6)
21,949

0.124

10,779

0.197

11,106

0.038

7,534

0.381

13,918

-0.033
(0.028)
-0.080∗∗∗
(0.029)

0.232

20,522

0.009

1,363

-0.044
(0.052)
-0.037∗∗
(0.018)

0.409

9,460

0.041

12,425

-0.199∗∗∗
(0.046)
-0.038
(0.027)

0.000

667

0.175

21,218

-0.041
(0.026)
-0.039
(0.030)
-0.045∗∗
(0.021)
-0.033
(0.038)

Full Sample

Table 4: Sensitivity Analysis or Extension of the Basic Model
Math
p-value Observations
Reading
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
-0.051∗
0.079
21,949
-0.041
(0.028)
(0.027)

Panel B: Prior Achievement
Gifted: Yes
Gifted: No

Baseline Test Tercile: T1
Baseline Test Tercile: T2
Baseline Test Tercile: T3

Panel C: Teacher Characteristics
Teacher Age Tercile: T1
Teacher Age Tercile: T2
Teacher Age Tercile: T3

Difference in TVA Tercile: T1
Difference in TVA Tercile: T2
Difference in TVA Tercile: T3

-0.024
(0.038)
-0.066∗∗
(0.030)

0.528

3,905

0.031

17,980

-0.012
(0.026)
0.013
(0.032)
-0.023
(0.027)

0.647

8,696

0.699

7,291

0.404

5,525

-0.174∗∗∗
(0.041)
0.107∗∗
(0.049)
0.025
(0.063)

0.000

1,926

0.033

1,741

0.695

1,696

0.000

3,896

0.718

3,537

0.860

3,833

-0.185∗∗∗
(0.031)
-0.021
(0.059)
0.008
(0.044)

p-value
(5)
0.131

Observations
(6)
21,949

-0.019
(0.041)
-0.054∗∗
(0.027)

0.649

3,905

0.047

17,980

-0.003
(0.024)
0.013
(0.029)
0.024
(0.030)

0.916

8,214

0.668

7,751

0.430

5,629

-0.208∗∗∗
(0.052)
0.072
(0.087)
-0.077
(0.078)

0.000

2,070

0.413

1,744

0.330

1,649

0.031

4,562

0.002

2,793

0.314

3,911

-0.104∗∗
(0.047)
-0.107∗∗∗
(0.033)
0.035
(0.034)

Notes: This table presents pooled ITT estimates of the effect of being enrolled in a treatment school on STAAR math and reading test scores in different subgroups
of the sample. Panels A and B split the sample according to student characteristics while Panel C splits the sample according to teacher characteristics. For teacher
age, the entire sample of teachers from HISD district were divided into terciles based on their ages. For teachers’ difference in Teacher Value Added (TVA),
we calculated the difference between the TVA of the subject that a treatment teacher actually taught in 2013-2014 and the average TVA across all subjects that
the treatment teacher used to teach before. These differences were averaged per treatment school. Then, treatment schools were divided into terciles based on
the mean difference in TVA. Control schools received the same tercile as the treatment school in their own matched pair. All specifications follow the pooled
specification from Table 3. All standard errors, located in parentheses, are clustered at the level of the school at time of treatment assignment. *. **, and ***
denote significance at the 90%, 95%, and 99% confidence levels, respectively.

Table 5: The Effect of Treatment on Outcomes, School-Level Regressions
2014
2015
Pooled
(1)
(2)
(3)
Panel A: Student Achievement
Math
-0.096∗∗∗ -0.085∗∗∗ -0.083∗∗∗
(0.002)
(0.003)
(0.002)
-0.081∗∗∗
(0.002)

-0.057∗∗∗
(0.003)

-0.071∗∗∗
(0.002)

11,266

10,683

21,949

-0.002∗∗∗
(0.000)

-0.003∗∗∗
(0.000)

-0.003∗∗∗
(0.000)

12,713

11,667

24,380

0.016∗∗∗
(0.001)

–
(–)

0.016∗∗∗
(0.001)

Observations

12,713

–

12,713

Teacher Retention

-0.021
(0.042)

–
(–)

-0.021
(0.042)

50

–

50

Reading

Observations
Panel B: Alternate Outcomes
Attendance (in years)

Observations
Behavioral Incidents

Observations

Notes: This table presents the estimates of being enrolled in a treatment school on school-level averages of STAAR test scores and other alternate outcomes. Panel A presents ITT estimates on math and
reading scores. Panel B presents ITT estimates on average attendance rates (measured in years), average
behavioral incidents and teacher retention. Teacher retention is calculated as the fraction of teachers
retained between 2012-2013 and 2013-2014 per school. See Data Appendix for a detailed construction
of all variables. Column (1) uses outcomes from 2013-2014, column (2) uses outcomes from 2014-2015,
and column (3) uses outcomes from both years. The specifications follow the main OLS specification
from Table 3 at the school-level rather than the individual level. The mean of demographic controls is
taken at the school level. The school-level mean of student’s 2010-2011, 2011-2012, and 2012-2013
test scores are taken for controls. School level means of attendance rates and behavioral incidents are
included when the outcome variable is attendance rate and behavioral incidents, respectively. *, **, and
*** denote significance at the 90%, 95%, and 99% confidence levels, respectively.

Table 6: The Effect of Treatment on Stanford 10 Test Scores
ITT
2SLS (Ever)
2014
2015
Pooled
2014
2015
Pooled
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Panel A: Grades 3 - 5
Math

Reading

Observations
Panel B: Grades 1 - 2
Math

Reading

Observations
Panel C: All Grades
Math

Reading

Observations

2014
(7)

2SLS (Years)
2015
Pooled
(8)
(9)

-0.061∗∗
(0.027)

-0.004
(0.032)

-0.040
(0.027)

-0.068∗∗
(0.030)

-0.005
(0.037)

-0.046
(0.030)

-0.072∗∗
(0.032)

-0.002
(0.020)

-0.034
(0.022)

-0.061∗∗
(0.027)

-0.036∗
(0.021)

-0.056∗∗
(0.023)

-0.069∗∗
(0.030)

-0.042∗
(0.023)

-0.064∗∗
(0.026)

-0.072∗∗
(0.031)

-0.023∗
(0.013)

-0.048∗∗
(0.019)

11840

9424

21264

11840

9424

21264

11840

9424

21264

0.013
(0.037)

-0.074∗
(0.042)

-0.008
(0.034)

0.015
(0.041)

-0.088∗
(0.049)

-0.010
(0.039)

0.015
(0.044)

-0.049∗
(0.027)

-0.009
(0.035)

-0.021
(0.034)

-0.071
(0.054)

-0.030
(0.032)

-0.024
(0.038)

-0.085
(0.062)

-0.035
(0.036)

-0.025
(0.040)

-0.047
(0.035)

-0.031
(0.032)

8192

2317

10509

8192

2317

10509

8192

2317

10509

-0.038
(0.027)

-0.006
(0.030)

-0.030
(0.026)

-0.043
(0.030)

-0.008
(0.034)

-0.035
(0.029)

-0.045
(0.031)

-0.004
(0.019)

-0.027
(0.023)

-0.052∗∗
(0.024)

-0.035
(0.022)

-0.049∗∗
(0.023)

-0.059∗∗
(0.027)

-0.041
(0.025)

-0.056∗∗
(0.026)

-0.062∗∗
(0.028)

-0.022
(0.014)

-0.044∗∗
(0.021)

20032

11741

31773

20032

11741

31773

20032

11741

31773

Notes: This table presents estimates of the effect of being enrolled in a treatment school on Stanford 10 test scores. The sample and specification is
identical to that used in Table 3. All standard errors, located in parentheses, are clustered at the level of the school at time of treatment assignment.
*, **, and *** denote significance at the 90%, 95%, and 99% confidence levels, respectively.

Notes: These figures plot a kernel density curve for matchpair by grade treatment coefficients. Treatment coefficients are obtained by
regressing the math STAAR score or reading STAAR score on student demographics, baseline test scores and year fixed effects for each
matched pair and grade. The figures also display an xline at 0 for comparison.

Figure 1: Matchpair Specific Treatment Effects

