                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       THE ECONOMICS OF BANK SUPERVISION

                                    Thomas M. Eisenbach
                                      David O. Lucca
                                    Robert M. Townsend

                                     Working Paper 22201
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w22201


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    April 2016




For valuable comments, we thank Doug Diamond and Mark Flannery, as well as audience
members at the New York Fed Conference on Supervising Large & Complex Financial
Institutions. Emily Eisner provided excellent research assistance. Any errors are our own. The
views expressed in this paper are solely the responsibility of the authors and should not be
interpreted as reflecting the views of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, anyone else
associated with the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Thomas M. Eisenbach, David O. Lucca, and Robert M. Townsend. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Economics of Bank Supervision
Thomas M. Eisenbach, David O. Lucca, and Robert M. Townsend
NBER Working Paper No. 22201
April 2016
JEL No. D82,G21,G28

                                          ABSTRACT

We study bank supervision by combining a theoretical model distinguishing supervision from
regulation and a novel dataset on work hours of Federal Reserve supervisors. We highlight the
trade-offs between the benefits and costs of supervision and use the model to interpret the relation
between supervisory efforts and bank characteristics observed in the data. More supervisory
resources are spent on larger, more complex, and riskier banks. However, hours increase less than
proportionally with bank size, suggesting the presence of technological scale economies in
supervision. The data also show reallocation of supervisory hours at times of stress and in the
post-2008 enhanced supervisory framework for large banks, providing evidence of constraints on
supervisory resources. Finally, we show theoretically limits to assessing supervisory success
based on ex-post outcomes, as well as benefits of ex-ante commitment policies.


Thomas M. Eisenbach                              Robert M. Townsend
Federal Reserve Bank of New York                 Department of Economics, E52-538
33 Liberty St                                    MIT
New York, NY 10045                               77 Massachusetts Avenue
thomas.eisenbach@ny.frb.org                      Cambridge, MA 02139
                                                 and NBER
David O. Lucca                                   rtownsen@mit.edu
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
33 Liberty Street
New York, NY 10045
david.lucca@ny.frb.org
1     Introduction
Much policy debate in recent years has focused on bank supervision and regulation. In
order “[t]o promote the financial stability of the United States,” the 2010 Dodd Frank Act
(DFA) introduced a number of provisions aimed in particular at the largest and most
complex banking organizations.1 While the academic literature has paid increasing at-
tention to bank regulation, work on bank supervision remains limited, partly reflecting
the opacity of supervisory activities that stems from supervisors’ reliance on confiden-
tial information. In this paper, we first develop an abstract framework characterized by
incentive problems and asymmetric information between banks and banking authori-
ties. Observability and verifiability of bank information and actions distinguish regu-
latory from supervisory activities. Second, we use information from a unique dataset
of hours spent by Federal Reserve bank examiners overseeing U.S. bank holding com-
panies matched to banks’ characteristics. We use the data to illustrate details of the
supervisory process and interpret key empirical relations using the theoretical model.
    Prudential supervision is closely related to, but distinct from, regulation of banking
organizations. Regulation involves the development and promulgation of the rules un-
der which banking organizations operate as well as their enforcement in the court of
law. The distinguishing features of bank supervision are: (i) the assessment of the safety
and soundness of banks through monitoring and exams, and (ii) the use of this infor-
mation to request corrective actions from banks should their conditions or practices be
deemed unsafe or unsound.
    In our theoretical framework, the incentive problem between authorities and banks,
which creates the need for regulation and supervision, is rooted in the bank’s limited
liability. Banks only value payoffs conditional on being solvent while banking authori-
ties value asset payoffs in all states of the world (micro-prudential objectives) and take
into account spillovers (macro-prudential, or financial stability, objectives).
    In differentiating between regulation and supervision, we assume that regulation
is “coarse” and can only be contingent on verifiable information while supervision is
“discretionary” and can be contingent on non-verifiable information. Regulation can
therefore restrict banks’ activities ex-ante (for example, a ban on the trading of phys-
    1 TheDFA contains a large number of regulatory changes both in the context of financial stability and
consumer protection. In terms of financial stability, the DFA established the Financial Stability Oversight
Committee (FSOC) with the authority to designate systemically important institutions. The DFA also
mandated the Federal Reserve Board and other federal banking regulatory authorities to issue tighter
regulations for the largest institutions related to the level of regulatory capital, proprietary trading and
stress testing, among others.


                                                     1
ical commodities) and respond to asset payoffs ex-post (for example, the imposition
of penalties after a breach of a capital requirement). Supervision can respond to in-
terim signals about bank actions and influence asset payoffs before they are realized.
In practice, a gray area can exist between supervision and regulation, as exemplified by
stress testing and the fact that some supervisory activities involve compliance with reg-
ulations (see, for example Goldsmith-Pinkham, Hirtle, and Lucca, 2016). In its purest
form, regulation is written into law and enforced through courts, and therefore requires
verifiability (Maskin, Laffont, and Hildenbrand, 1982).
    In our setting, a bank’s balance sheet and returns are verifiable. Regulation can im-
pose capital requirements that increase loss absorption and provide skin in the game
ex-ante as well as provide discipline in risk management by imposing costs ex-post
should the requirements be breached. In contrast to regulation, supervision can col-
lect information about bank’s actions through costly monitoring, leading to an interim
signal, which in the data we proxy with the bank’s supervisory rating. The interim sig-
nal is informative to banking authorities and allows improved outcomes compared to
when only regulation is present. However, we assume that the signals are noisy and can
prove to be incorrect. After accounting for the informativeness of the signal, supervi-
sion can respond to its realization and influence asset payoffs before they are realized.
In practice these supervisory interventions are taken by communicating to banks “mat-
ters requiring attention” (MRAs) and “matters requiring immediate attention” (MRIAs)
as discussed in Eisenbach et al. (2015). Although the supervisory signal is informative
on average, it can point to the wrong interim action on occasions, in which case the
supervisory intervention would also prove incorrect.
    We assume that both supervisory monitoring and intervention are costly for the
banking authority. The optimally chosen supervisory strategy therefore has to trade off
benefits and costs of supervision. Even though more supervision may always be better
when only considering its benefits, optimal supervision will be limited overall with
higher intensity warranted only if it results in higher marginal benefits than marginal
costs.
    Given these trade-offs, our model predicts that intervention efforts are higher for
riskier banks, which are those with a worse observed signal. Consistent with this pre-
dictions, we find empirically that Fed supervisors’ efforts increase between 70 and 140
percent for banking organizations where the confidential supervisory rating indicates
moderate to extreme levels of concerns (rating of 3, 4 or 5).
    In light of the large size heterogeneity of U.S. banking organizations, we study in

                                           2
detail how supervisory efforts scale with bank size. Our model reveals that two op-
posite effects are at play. If the optimal intensity of supervision is independent of bank
size, then technological scale economies of supervision would suggest that supervisory
hours increase less than proportionally with bank size. However, the optimal intensity
of supervision may increase with bank size, for example if spillovers are sufficiently
large for large banks. Such increasing optimal intensity competes with potential tech-
nological scale economies such that supervisory hours may increase more than propor-
tionally with bank size.
    In the empirical analysis, we confirm that hours are increasing in bank size. Al-
though, as discussed in the paper, we do not necessarily measure hours of all supervi-
sory staff, the data at our disposal suggest that institutions with assets below a (trend-
adjusted) threshold of $10 billion of consolidated assets are allocated about 100 hours
per calendar quarter compared to about 1,500 for institutions above that asset thresh-
old. While increasing with size, the elasticity of supervisory hours with respect to asset
size is always close to or less than 1 across a number of different specifications. This in-
cludes the post-2008 subsample, which has been characterized by heightened concerns
about spillovers from stress at large and complex banking institutions. This evidence
points to the existence of economies of scale in bank supervision that are sufficiently
strong to outweigh the effect of enhanced supervision for larger banks. The result also
suggests that, in terms of realized hour allocations, banks in our sample do not appear
to having grown to be “too large to be supervised.” A direct implication of this finding
is that aggregate supervisory costs would increase if large banks were broken up, al-
though these costs are clearly not the only factor to be considered when assessing bank
size from a financial stability perspective.
    Because measurement of supervisory hours are imperfect, we compare estimates on
Fed supervisory hours to those implied by schedule of assessment fees that the Office
of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) charges banks it supervises. As stated by
the OCC, the schedule reflects its estimated costs for supervising banks of different
characteristics. Assessment fees are also increasing with a bank’s supervisory rating
and size, with an elasticity that is again less than 1, and sensitivities that are very close
to those we obtain on Fed supervisory hour data.
    In terms of monitoring technology, we find no evidence that efforts in the form of
Fed hours are increasing in a bank’s number of employees after controlling for its asset
size, consistent with the model assumption that bank supervision is concerned with
monitoring assets and processes as opposed to individual bank employees. Accord-

                                             3
ingly, we find evidence that supervisory efforts are increasing in bank complexity as
measured by the number of legal entities within a given holding company. Finally, we
observe that while for the largest institutions, supervisory efforts are stable over the
course of a year, those at the smallest institutions oscillate with a peak around the time
of annual full-scope examinations.
    We next study the interaction between regulation and supervision by first consid-
ering, in the model, an exogenous shift in regulatory capital requirements. The model
predicts that the direct effects of such a tightening of regulation is a decrease in su-
pervisory monitoring (substitutes) but an increase in supervisory intervention (comple-
ments), leaving ambiguous the effect on overall supervisory efforts. We also consider an
exogenous increase in the size of bank spillovers in the banking authority’s preferences,
which arguably are a better characterization of the post-2008 framework of higher capi-
tal requirements and enhanced supervision, and find that in this case both supervisory
monitoring and intervention increase.
    In the data, we study the enhanced regulatory and supervisory framework in the
post-2008 sample period, where we find that both capital requirements and supervisory
hours increased for the largest banking organizations. Although as noted above the
elasticity of hours with respect to assets before and after 2008 is quite similar, our point
estimates suggest a post-2008 level increase in average hours of about 60% at the larger
institutions—after controlling for size and ratings. In contrast, we estimate a decline in
the average hours spent by supervisors at the smallest institutions that we interpret as
evidence of substitution due to limited available resources.
    When we extend the theoretical framework to multiple banks, it predicts that—
within each size group—supervisory efforts are reallocated from banks with good sig-
nals to those with bad signals. In addition, there will be significant reallocation of hours
from small banks to large banks in times when bad signals are clustered at larger banks
since implementing the same intensity of supervision at a large bank requires more
hours. Accordingly, we find in the data that when the fraction of bank assets in distress
(rating of 3, 4 or 5) in a Fed district increases, supervisory hours are allocated away from
smaller institutions.
    Finally, we use our model to understand how supervisory efforts can be evaluated
based on ex-post outcomes. In particular, we show that based on only observing a bank
default it is not obvious whether bank misbehavior and/or supervisory mistakes are a
more likely cause than the inherent risk of a bank’s activities. In addition, we discuss
issues of supervisory incentives as well as time consistency problems that may impede

                                             4
the effectiveness of supervision both ex-ante and ex-post.

Related literature: The existing literature typically derives the need for supervision
and regulation of banks from the special nature of banks as opposed to other firms and
the resulting frictions. As for any debt-financed firm, a bank’s limited liability raises
basic moral hazard issues (Jensen and Meckling, 1976). However, there are limits to the
ability of markets to provide the necessary discipline (Flannery, 1998; Rochet, 2004).
The main debt of banks is in the form of deposits which impedes the functioning of
market discipline through various channels. For example, the sequential service con-
straint inherent in deposit contracts creates strategic complementarities among deposi-
tors that can lead to inefficient runs (Diamond and Dybvig, 1983). To address the prob-
lem of runs, depositors are insured which eliminates their incentive to monitor the bank
and creates a need for supervision/regulation (for example Mishkin, 2001). Alterna-
tive approaches view supervision/regulation as more effective monitoring than that of
small, dispersed and uninformed depositors (Dewatripont and Tirole, 1994) or point
to market incompleteness specific to banks’ business models as a rationale for supervi-
sion/regulation (Merton, 1995). Since the financial crisis of 2008-09, the literature has
focused more on macro-prudential as opposed to micro-prudential regulation, mean-
ing not only on the default risk of an individual bank in isolation but also taking into
account “systemic” effects such as spillovers of defaults on other banks and the econ-
omy more widely (for example Acharya, 2009; Brunnermeier et al., 2009; Tirole, 2013).
    Few papers in the literature explicitly distinguish between supervision and regula-
tion or focus on supervision. Supervision then takes on a number of different roles: au-
diting bank asset values to detect breaches of capital requirements (Rochet, 2007); pre-
venting the bank from taking observable but non-verifiable actions (Dewatripont and
Tirole, 1994); incentivizing the bank to take the right non-observable actions through
punitive interference after bad, verifiable outcomes (Marshall and Prescott, 2001, 2006);
incentivizing proper risk taking and information disclosure through ex-post interven-
tion (Harris and Raviv, 2012); and screening different risk-types of banks by offering
a menu of admissible combinations of risk taking and required bank capital (Prescott,
2004). Motivated by the inclusion of supervision as a pillar in the Basel framework, some
papers study the interaction of supervision and regulation. For example, Bhattacharya
et al. (2002) study the optimal combination of random supervisory exams and closure
rules conditional on exam results; Decamps et al. (2004) have supervisors choosing in-
tervention thresholds to maintain adequate incentives for bank risk taking and study

                                           5
the effects of ex-post liquidity assistance and forbearance.
   Some empirical work studies the information produced by bank examinations, for
example, when compared to off-site monitoring (Cole and Gunther, 1995), conditional
on positive/negative findings (Berger and Davies, 1998) or relative to publicly avail-
able information (Hirtle and Lopez, 1999). In addition, there is a small literature taking
on the challenge of identifying effects of supervision on bank outcomes (for example
Hirtle, Kovner, and Plosser, 2016, and references therein).

    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Sections 2 and 3 describe the theoretical
model and the data, respectively, that are used throughout the paper. Section 4 studies
the main determinants of supervisory attention. Section 5 investigates the interactions
of supervision and regulation and how they change over time. Section 6 focuses on the
issues of supervising multiple banks with limited resources. Section 7 discusses how
supervision can be evaluated based on ex-post outcomes. Section 8 concludes.


2     Model
We first propose a general setup in Section 2.1 that contains a range of elements of super-
vision and regulation that can be interpreted through an economic lens. The purpose of
explicitly specifying a model is to translate the features of supervision and regulation in
practice into concepts familiar to economists from theories of asymmetric information
and contracting.
    We propose an abstract framework with an incentive problem between banks and
the authority responsible for regulation and supervision where there is asymmetric
information and issues of observability vs. verifiability that allow us to meaningfully
distinguish regulation from supervision.
    We then specialize the setup in Section 2.2 to focus on supervision rather than reg-
ulation and make several simplifying assumptions for analytical tractability.


2.1   General setup
We propose a general setup involving both supervision and regulation. In particular,
we define what a bank is, what projects it has and what actions it can take, and how
those affect its payoff. We then define the banking authority’s payoff and how it differs
from the banks’, providing a rational for supervision/regulation. Finally, we distinguish
supervision and regulation as two sets of tools that can affect the bank in different ways.

                                             6
                Figure 1: Model timeline without supervision or regulation

                                                  Bank

                Balance sheet
                 A−D = E

                   Activity                      Action                     Return on A
                    F∈F                          a∈A                         ∼ F ( x | a)




    Our model is essentially static and is meant to capture the interaction of banks and
supervisors over a certain period, for example one year. We therefore focus on a se-
quence of events within a single period and leave the analysis of dynamics over mul-
tiple periods for future research. We first describe the primitives of the model without
supervision/regulation.

Bank: There is a set of banks i = 1, . . . , I that start the period with assets Ai , debt Di
and equity Ei . Bank i has available a range of activities Fi ∈ Fi it can engage in where
Fi represents the c.d.f. of gross return xi on the bank’s assets in activity Fi .2 We think of
activities very broadly, such as making loans, trading securities, writing derivatives and
subdivisions and combinations thereof. Once the activity F is in place, the bank has to
take an action a ∈ A that influences the distribution of its asset return x, that is F ( x | a).
We think of the action a as akin to risk management, that is reducing the variance of x,
and the relevant set of actions A could depend on the activity F.
     The asset return x is realized at the end of the period and determines whether the
bank is solvent or not. Figure 1 illustrates the timeline without supervision or regula-
tion. Given assets A and debt with face value D, a bank is solvent at the end of the period
if its equity is positive, Ax − D ≥ 0, and insolvent otherwise. We denote by U (c, a) the
bank’s utility which depends on its monetary payoff c at the end of the period as well as
its action a, for example through effort costs. The bank’s expected payoff in the absence
  2 To   simplify notation, we drop the index i for a specific bank unless explicitly analyzing multiple
banks.




                                                    7
of supervision or regulation is therefore:

                         Z   D                             Z ∞
                             A
                                  U (0, a) dF ( x | a) +    D
                                                                 U ( Ax − D, a) dF ( x | a)
                             −∞                             A

                             with      F ∈ F, a ∈ A                                               (1)

Note that we assume that while the bank’s monetary payoff is 0 in case of default, the
effort cost has to be borne irrespective of the bank’s solvency since the action a is taken
before the realization of x. By not distinguishing between the bank’s shareholders and
managers, we abstract away from potential incentive problems within the bank.

Banking authority: The banking authority can differ from the banker in three ways.
First, while the bank only values its cash flow conditional on being solvent, the banking
authority values payoffs to the bank and its creditors, ( Ax − D ) + D = Ax. This compo-
nent represents micro-prudential objectives, in the sense that the authority cares about
the financial health, or safety and soundness, of a single bank.3 Second, the banking
authority also cares financial stability per se, representing macro-prudential objectives,
in that it takes into account spillovers from banks to the rest of the economy. We capture
this in reduced form with positive spillovers P( A) > 0 from a bank operating success-
fully and negative spillovers − N ( A) < 0 of a bank failing. Note that spillovers depend
on the bank’s size A since a larger bank with more assets causes more spillovers. Finally,
the banking authority could have a different utility V 6= U over payoffs, for example
with more risk aversion or with more weight on tail outcomes. The banking authority’s
expected payoff in the absence of supervision or regulation is therefore:

                Z   D
                                                   Z ∞            
                    A
                         V Ax − N ( A) dF ( x | a) + D V Ax + P( A) dF ( x | a)                   (2)
                    −∞                                            A


Regulation and supervision: For the purposes of our model, we link the distinction
between regulation and supervision to the difference between verifiability and observ-
ability.4 In its purest form, regulation is written into law and enforced through courts,
   3 Ingeneral equilibrium and with complete markets, the pricing of the bank’s debt would force it to
take into account the creditor’s payoff. We follow the banking literature in assuming that markets are
incomplete, for example due to deposit insurance or coordination problems among small creditors (see
the discussion in the literature review).
   4 See Maskin, Laffont, and Hildenbrand (1982) for a discussion of the concepts of verifiability and

observability.



                                                           8
and therefore requires verifiability. In our model, we assume that the bank’s initial bal-
ance sheet variables A, D, E are verifiable so regulation can impose ex ante constraints
on the balance sheet, such as a capital requirement ρ requiring a minimum ratio be-
tween equity capital and assets, E/A ≥ ρ. In economic terms, this provides both loss
absorption capacity and incentives through “skin in the game.” We further assume that
the activities a bank is engaged in are verifiable so regulation can limit ex-ante the avail-
able activities to a subset Fe ⊂ F , for example allow lending and trading but not insur-
ance. The 1933 Glass-Steagall Act and the Volcker Rule in the 2010 DFA are examples
of such broad regulatory restrictions. In economic terms, this imposes some bounds
on the risks available but can’t rule out risk entirely. Finally, we assume that the real-
ization of the bank’s asset return x at the end of the period is verifiable so regulation
can be active ex-post, contingent on the realization of x. Since the capital requirement
ρ has to be satisfied at the end of the period as well, or Ax − D ≥ ρAx, it is possible for
the bank to violate the capital requirement without defaulting, Ax − D ∈ (0, ρAx ). In
this case, regulation can impose ex-post costs R on the bank even if it remains solvent.
In economic terms, the combination (ρ, R) provides incentives through a disciplining
effect.5
    In contrast to regulation, we assume supervision has discretion and only requires
observability.6 We assume that while none of the bank’s possible actions a ∈ A are ver-
ifiable, some are observable by supervisors while some are neither verifiable nor ob-
servable. For example, supervisors may be able to observe if a bank’s risk managers
participate in important meetings but not whether they are diligent in raising concerns.
The supervisors can therefore prevent risk managers from not doing their work at all
but still have to rely on incentives to ensure the work is done properly. Formally, this
means that supervision can prevent some observable actions, that is restrict the action
set to some subset Ae ⊂ A. In economic terms, this makes for easier incentivizing by
eliminating some “tempting” actions.7
    In areas where even observability fails, we assume that supervision can collect infor-
   5 In principle, regulation could condition on x more generally, that is with an ex-post cost/transfer
R( x ). We abstract away from such issues since they have already been explored in the literature on reg-
ulation.
   6 An important part of supervision is to ensure compliance with regulations (see, for example Rochet,

2007; Eisenbach et al., 2015; Goldsmith-Pinkham et al., 2016). We focus on the elements of supervision
that are independent from regulation.
   7 In principle, it is not clear where to draw the line between an activity F and an action a. For the

purposes of our model, we implicitly draw the line between verifiability and observability. Everything
verifiable corresponds to F while everything observable (and unobservable) corresponds to a.



                                                   9
mation through monitoring effort s1 , for example an on-site examination that involves
gathering information and distilling it into a supervisory rating. We can think of this
rating as an interim signal r that is informative about the bank’s action a and therefore
its riskiness, the distribution of the final return x conditional on a. In economic terms,
to the extent that the signal is a sufficient statistic for a with respect to x, supervision is
more efficient in incentivizing the bank than regulation is contingent on final cash-flow
x.
    We then assume that after observing the signal r about the bank’s action a but before
the realization of the return x, supervision can react to the interim information with su-
pervisory actions s2 . For example, most Fed supervisory actions today are accounted
for by “matters requiring attention” and “matters requiring immediate attention,” or
MRAs and MRIAs, through which which Fed supervisors mandate banks remediation
of issues or activities that have been deemed unsafe and unsound.8 In terms of the
model, these remedial actions affect the distribution of the final payoff, F ( x | a, s2 ), in a
way similar to a, that reduces the variance of x. In addition, we assume that supervisory
intervention s2 also affects the bank’s utility directly, U (z, a, s2 ), for example because the
supervisory remedies involve extra work for the bank. Importantly, both supervisory
monitoring s1 and supervisory intervention s2 are costly and therefore affect the bank-
ing authority’s utility, V (z, s1 , s2 ). Figure 2 illustrates the timeline with supervision and
regulation.
    Taking into account the elements of regulation and supervision, the expected pay-
offs of a bank and the banking authority, (1) and (2), respectively, change as follows. For
the bank, the expected payoff becomes

             Z ∞   Z   D
                                                           
                       A
                            U 0, a, s2 (r ) dF x a, s2 (r )
              −∞       −∞
                            Z      D
                                                                                    
                                (1− ρ ) A
                       +        D
                                            U Ax − D − R, a, s2 (r ) dF x a, s2 (r )
                                A
                                Z ∞
                                                                                   !
                                                                                
                            +          D
                                             U Ax − D, a, s2 (r ) dF x a, s2 (r ) dκ (r | a, s1 )
                                    (1− ρ ) A

              with     E ≥ ρA, F ∈ Fe , a ∈ Ae,

where s2 (r ) denotes the supervisory intervention conditional on a rating r and κ (r | a, s1 )
  8 Beside MRAs and MRIAs, supervisors have a number of different supervisory actions at their dis-
posal ranging from informal to formal actions (see Goldsmith-Pinkham et al., 2016, for example).


                                                           10
              Figure 2: Model timeline with supervision and regulation

                                  Bank         Supervision             Regulation


             Balance sheet
             A − D ≥ ρA

                Activity                          Action                            Return on A
                 F ∈ Fe                           a ∈ Ae                            ∼ F ( x | a, s2 )


                       Limit ac-         Monitoring        Signal           Intervention
                     tions Ae ⊂ A         effort s1        r | a, s1         effort s2 (r )

          Capital re-                                                                       Response if
         quirement ρ                                                                       Ax − D < ρA

         Limit activ-
         ities Fe ⊂ F



denotes the c.d.f. of the rating r conditional on the bank’s action a and the supervisory
monitoring effort s1 . Comparing this expression to the one in (1), we note several differ-
ences: (i) constraints on the ex-ante balance sheet, set of activities and set of actions, (ii)
costs for breaching the capital requirement ex-post, (iii) supervisory monitoring leading
to a rating, and (iv) return distribution and utility affected by supervisory intervention
conditional on rating.
    For the banking authority, the expected payoff becomes

    Z ∞ Z ∞      Z   D
                                                                     
                     A
                          V Ax − N ( A), s1 , s2 (r ) dF x a, s2 (r )
      −∞ −∞          −∞
                          Z ∞
                                                                                    !
                                                                               
                     +     D
                                V Ax + P( A), s1 , s2 (r ) dF x a, s2 (r )              dκ (r | a, s1 ) d∆( a),
                           A



where ∆( a) denotes the c.d.f. of the bank’s unobservable action a ∈ Ae ⊂ R from the
point of view of the banking authority. We assume that the penalty R is welfare-neutral.
   Of course, many more elements could be added to the model. For example, we could
assume that regulation is able to impose a penalty on the bank even in case of default.
Alternatively, we could consider prevention of default through a bailout that benefits
the bank’s existing management implying a positive payoff in case of insolvency. More
generally, there is a big gray area in practice between what is regulation and what is su-

                                                      11
pervision. For example stress testing has elements of regulation as it specifies scenarios
and clear cutoffs for banks’ simulated performance. On the other hand, stress testing
has elements of supervision as it involves qualitative assessments of banks’ models and
processes. For the purposes of this paper, we try to strike a balance between addressing
what we consider key elements of supervision and maintaining a tractable model that
allows for clear intuition about the main mechanisms.


2.2    Simplifying assumptions
To keep the analysis tractable, we make several simplifying assumptions about the gen-
eral setup laid out in the previous section. First, we assume that both the bank and
the supervisor are risk neutral and that their utilities are additively separable between
payoffs and effort costs.9 For the bank, we assume that its action a and the supervisor’s
intervention s2 have effort costs C a and C s2 , respectively, so that

                            U (c, a, s2 ) = c − C a ( a, A) − C s2 (s2 , A).

Similarly, for the supervisor, we assume that its monitoring s1 and intervention s2 have
effort costs C 1 and C 2 , respectively, so that

                            V (c, s1 , s2 ) = c − C 1 (s1 , A) − C 2 (s2 , A)

Note that the actions a and s2 affect the distribution of the bank’s gross return x, which
does not depend on bank size. Similarly, s1 serves to generate a signal about a. We there-
fore account for the effect of bank size on costs by including A as an explicit argument
of the cost functions for the bank and the supervisor. For example, diligent risk man-
agement, measured by its effect on the return distribution, is more costly for assets of
$10 billion than for assets of $1 billion. Since our data is on supervisory hours, it would
be natural to limit the supervisor’s costs, such as those of monitoring, to the hours nec-
essary to achieve monitoring intensity s1 on assets of size A and an hourly wage w, or
C 1 (s1 , A) = w × h1 (s1 , A). However, we prefer to maintain general cost functions C 1
and C 2 that can also include non-monetary costs, for example discomfort experienced
by the supervisor when having to confront a bank.
   9 Since
         our focus is on supervision, we will refer to the banking authority as the supervisor. As we
discuss more below, this abstracts somewhat but not fully from incentive problems on the supervisor’s
part—as in “who monitors the monitors” (Hurwicz, 2007).



                                                   12
     Next, we assume that the bank’s action a and the supervisory intervention s2 affect
only the riskiness of the bank’s return x but not its mean, that is they correspond to risk
management. Denoting partial derivatives by subscripts, this means for m = a, s2 that
Fm ( x | a, s2 ) < 0 if x < E[ x ] and Fm ( x | a, s2 ) > 0 if x > E[ x ], and therefore Fxm > 0. In
addition, since F is bounded between 0 and 1, we assume that both a and s2 can reduce
the bank’s probability of default but at a decreasing rate, Fmm ( x | a, s2 ) > 0 if x < E[ x ]
and Fmm ( x | a, s2 ) < 0 if x > E[ x ]. Lastly, we assume that a and s2 are substitutes in
affecting F so the sensitivity of the default probability to supervisory intervention is
higher if the bank’s risk management effort is lower, Fas2 > 0.
     While the supervisor is able to observe whether risk management is taking place
at all—and can ensure that it is—it is not possible to perfectly observe whether risk
management is too lax or not. We therefore assume that based on observability, the
supervisor effectively limits the choice set A for the bank’s action a to two actions,
{ a, a} = Ae ⊂ A, where the high action a is the “good” action, proper risk manage-
ment, while a is the “bad” action, lax risk management.
     Supervisory monitoring s1 can provide some information about which action a the
bank chooses. Given the binary choice set { a, a} for the bank, we assume that supervi-
sory monitoring s1 produces a binary signal (the supervisory rating) r ∈ {r, r }. Impor-
tantly, the signal is not perfect but has precision λ with respect to the bank’s action:

                                      Pr[r | a] = Pr[r | a] = λ

The supervisory monitoring effort s1 influences the precision λ; for simplicity, we as-
sume that the supervisor can choose the precision directly (λ = s1 ).
    Next, we make some intuitive assumptions about the shape of the cost functions
C 1 and C 2 . First, we assume that both are increasing and convex in the supervisory ef-
fort, that is Cs > 0 and Css > 0. For monitoring s1 , a more precise signal is costly and
increasingly so since precision λ is bounded above by 1. For intervention s2 , reducing
risk is costly and increasingly so since the variance of x is bounded below by 0. Sec-
ond, we assume that costs are increasing and weakly concave in bank size, or C A > 0
and C AA ≤ 0. Achieving the same signal precision or risk reduction for a larger bank
incurs more costs. However, costs don’t grow more than proportionally with size as re-
flected by the fact that for example any bank has at most one chief risk officer or that
larger banks tend to have larger and not just more loans.10 This assumption implies
  10 See Kovner, Vickery, and Zhou (2014) for evidence of similar patterns in banks’ own operating costs.




                                                  13
technological scale economies in supervision. Third, we assume that the cross-partial
derivative is positive, that is C As > 0. Here it is important to remember that s1 and s2 are
scale-free: The total cost of achieving a given “intensity” of monitoring or risk reduction
is higher for banks with more assets, C A > 0; therefore, the total cost of increasing the
intensity is naturally higher for banks with more assets, C As > 0.
    Finally, in an effort to limit the number of moving parts in the analysis, we don’t
explicitly consider banks’ choice of initial balance sheet A, D, E or its choice of activity F.
For simplicity we assume that banks’ initial balance sheet composition is scale invariant
by setting leverage D/A ≡ ` for all A.


3    Data description
Four data sources are used in the empirical analysis of this paper: hours data for su-
pervisory staff at the Federal Reserve, examination information and supervisory rating
information from the National Examination Database (NED), financial data for domes-
tic bank holding companies (BHCs) and fee-schedule information of the Office of the
Comptroller of the Currency (OCC). We discuss each data source and then present sum-
mary statistics for the variables included in the regressions.
    We obtain information on hours spent by Federal Reserve supervisory staff from an
internal database tracking information on staff activity and time allocation. The Federal
Reserve supervises state member banks (SMBs) and all bank holding companies on
a consolidated basis. In our analysis we only include BHCs. The hours data starts in
1998 and end in 2014. The information is self-reported by supervisory employees on a
weekly basis, and the database aims at recording each employee’s time allocation across
activities ranging from monitoring banking institutions through examination or other
activity, and other administrative and support responsibilities. Reported monitoring
activity includes information on the monitored institution through its regulatory entity
number (or RSSD ID).
    In practice, however, hours information is not always complete. First, the Federal
Reserve System consists of 12 distinct districts and the Board of Governors, and report-
ing practices across districts may differ. We account for these differences with district
fixed effects. Second, we access information on hours pre-2000 for only a handful of
districts, and have information on all districts only starting in 2006. Finally, supervi-
sory work at the smallest institutions is often recorded using a generic bank portfolio
assignment, as opposed to an institution RSSD number. By cross-checking hours in-

                                              14
formation with independent information on the timing of supervisory inspection from
NED, it appears that consistent monitoring information with valid supervised-entity
information is only available for institutions with assets of about $750 million or more;
we therefore only include institutions with at least $1 billion in assets. For each insti-
tution, we aggregate data by quarter, so that the resulting supervisory hours data is a
dataset uniquely identified by a quarter and the supervised institution’s RSSD ID.
    We match hours information to two other data sources. First, we obtain information
on bank characteristics, such as size, share of loans to total assets and employee counts,
from public FR Y-9C reports, which are used to assess and monitor the financial con-
dition of holding company organizations on a consolidated basis. The minimum asset
requirement for Y-9C reporting increased from $150 million earlier in the sample to $500
million in 2006:Q1, but as discussed above we only include banks with assets greater
than $1 billion.
    In addition, we match supervisory hours to confidential rating information. Bank
holding companies are assigned a 1-to-5 rating under the “RFI/C(D)” rating system,
with lower numbers indicating fewer issues, and thus a better rating. Banks with a
rating of 1 or 2 are considered in satisfactory condition and present few significant su-
pervisory concerns. Banks with a 3, 4, or 5 rating present moderate to extreme levels
of regulatory concerns. The letters in the rating system indicate different components
considered in the rating assignment—“R” is for risk management, “F” is for financial
condition, “I” is for potential impact of the non-depository entities in the holding com-
pany on the depository institution(s) in the holding company, “C” is for the composite
rating (that is the overall rating considering and weighing the ratings on “R”, “F” and
“I”), and “D” is the rating assigned to the depositories (for example commercial banks
or thrifts) owned by the holding company. Prior to 2004, BHCs received supervisory
ratings known as BOPECs, an acronym which stood for five areas of supervisory con-
cern: conditions of the BHC’s bank subsidiaries, other nonbank subsidiaries, parent
company, earnings, and capital adequacy. BOPECs were also assigned on a 1-to-5 scale,
and BOPECs and RFI/C(D) rating levels have similar supervisory interpretations. As a
result, we splice these measure together, but we include time effects in the regressions
to account for possible changes in levels pre and post rating changes.
    Finally, we use data on supervisory fees assessed on federally chartered commer-
cial banks by the OCC. As the hours data discussed above can be noisy, we use this
information to assess validity of the main findings obtained with the hours data. The
OCC supervises nationally chartered commercial banks as well as federal savings asso-

                                           15
ciations (FSAs) since 2011 following the integration of the Office of Thrift Supervision
(OTS) into the OCC. Similar to the Federal Reserve, the OCC is a self-funded agency
that does not depend on the congressional appropriation process. But while the Federal
Reserve funds its supervisory activities through net interest margins earned on its se-
curities portfolio (or seigniorage), the OCC levies assessments, fees, and other charges
on federally chartered banks to meet the expenses of carrying out its supervisory ac-
tivities. The OCC assesses semi-annual fees on its supervised entities under 12 U.S.C.
13 and 12 CFR 8. The fee schedule is adjusted by the OCC each year and determines
fees as a function of bank size and bank risk, as measured by (confidential) supervisory
ratings. We obtain data on the fee schedule from the OCC’s public website.11
    Table 1 provides summary statistics for the variables included in the regression spec-
ifications by whether banks’ assets are above or below a $10 billion asset threshold ad-
justed for the growth rate of industry assets. As shown in the first column of the table,
on average, Fed supervisors allotted about 490 hours per calendar quarter to supervis-
ing a holding company in our sample. In terms of an 8-hour work day, and 63 work
days per quarter, these hours can be converted into about a full-time examiner being
assigned to the holding company. But large institutions have on average three times as
many hours assigned (column 3), while smaller ones about a fifth.12 As we will see in
the next sections, hours at smaller institutions tend to also be heavily concentrated at
times of full-scope examinations.


4      Supervisory monitoring and intervention
We first study the determinants of optimally chosen supervisory efforts s1 and s2 using
our model and then study the key relationships in the data on Fed supervisory hours.


4.1     Theoretical analysis
We first study the determinants of supervisory efforts s1 and s2 at an individual bank.
Analyzing our model by backwards induction, we start with the supervisory interven-
    11 www.occ.treas.gov/topics/examinations/assessments-and-fees/index-assessments-fees.

html. See also Kisin and Manela (2014) for another work using this same information.
   12 This calculation excludes hours (that may be substantial) that have not been booked by the examiner

to a specific institution. In addition, the day-count translation would underestimate an actual headcount
because it abstracts from time-off and other administrative or training activities that an examiner may be
involved when not assigned to a bank.



                                                   16
tion s2 conditional on the observed signal r. Then we proceed to the bank’s choice of a
given the supervisory monitoring s1 and intervention strategy s2 (r ). Finally, we study
the supervisory monitoring s1 that determines the precision of the signal, taking into
account the bank’s response. Our subgame perfect approach imposes time consistency
on the supervisory actions. As we discuss in Section 7.2, supervisors would be better off
ex-ante if they were able to commit to a strategy that is suboptimal ex-post and therefore
time-inconsistent.

Supervisory intervention: The supervisory intervention s2 has to be conditional on
the signal r received about the bank’s action a. Given the signal precision λ, the prob-
ability that the bank took the bad action a, and therefore has high risk, conditional on
the signal realization r ∈ {r, r } is given by Bayes’ rule. We denote this conditional prob-
ability by κ ∈ {κ, κ }:

                                                (1 − λ) Pr[ a]
                         Pr[ a | r ] =                                =: κ
                                       λ 1 − Pr[ a] + (1 − λ) Pr[ a]
                                                   λ Pr[ a]
                         Pr[ a | r ] =                                =: κ
                                       λ Pr[ a] + (1 − λ) 1 − Pr[ a]

   For a given κ, the supervisor’s expected payoff when choosing s2 is given by:
                                                                                  
               (1 − κ ) E[ Ax ] + 1 − F (` | a, s2 ) P( A) − F (` | a, s2 ) N ( A)
                                                                                
                  + κ E[ Ax ] + 1 − F (` | a, s2 ) P( A) − F (` | a, s2 ) N ( A)
                     − C 2 ( s2 , A )

For either action a ∈ { a, a}, the supervisor payoff is the expected asset return plus
the expected spillover, which is positive if the bank survives and negative if the bank
defaults. The supervisor’s first order condition for the optimal s2∗ is then:
                                                                               
          − (1 − κ ) Fs2 (` | a, s2∗ ) + κFs2 (` | a, s2∗ )       P( A) + N ( A) = Cs22 (s2∗ , A)   (3)

The left-hand side of equation (3) is the marginal benefit of intervention s2 : Since ` <
1 < E[ x ], we have Fs2 (` | a, s2 ) < 0, that is supervisory intervention reduces the prob-
ability of default; for the marginal benefit, the reduction in expected default probabil-
ity is multiplied by the total spillover losses of default vs. non-default, P( A) + N ( A).
The right-hand side is the marginal cost of intervention s2 at a bank of size A. As dis-


                                                    17
cussed in Section 2.2, the costs C 2 (s2 , A) certainly include the hours h2 (s2 , A) necessary
to achieve a level s2 of intervention at a bank of size A. In addition, the costs (and there-
fore marginal costs) could include, for example the non-monetary discomfort experi-
enced by the supervisor when imposing intervention measures that the bank disagrees
with. If these non-monetary marginal costs are high, the trade-off in the first-order con-
dition (3) leads to low levels of intervention—just as if the monetary costs are high or
supervisory resources scarce. Since our data is on supervisory hours, we assume that
total costs are proportional to hours, C 2 (s2 , A) ∝ h2 (s2 , A).
    We are interested in the effect of perceived riskiness and of bank size on supervisory
hours spent on intervention. Since κ is the conditional probability of high risk, the effect
of riskiness on hours is given by:

                           d 2 ∗             d 2 ∗                        ds∗
                             h ( s2 , A ) ∝    C (s2 , A) = Cs22 (s2∗ , A) 2                           (4)
                          dκ                dκ                            dκ

Since Cs22 > 0, the sign is determined by that of ds2∗ /dκ, that is how the intensity of
intervention depends on the posterior about the bank’s risk. Implicit differentiation of
the first-order condition (3) yields:
                                                                                 
     ds2∗                    Fs2 (` | a, s2∗ ) − Fs2 (` | a, s2∗ ) P( A) + N ( A)
          =                                                                    
     dκ     (1 − κ ) Fs2 s2 (` | a, s2∗ ) + κFs2 s2 (` | a, s2∗ ) P( A) + N ( A) + Cs22 s2 (s2∗ , A)

The denominator is positive since Fs2 s2 > 0 and Cs22 s2 ≥ 0. The numerator is positive
since Fas2 > 0, or the sensitivity of the default probability to supervisory intervention
greater at a than at a. We therefore have ds2∗ /dκ > 0 which implies more supervisory
intervention if the bank is riskier, that is after a bad signal than after a good signal. Since
there are two possible signal realizations r ∈ {r, r }, we have a supervisory intervention
strategy s2∗ (r ) = s2 and s2∗ (r ) = s2 with s2 > s2 .

Conjecture 1. Riskier banks receive more supervisory attention because of a higher level of
intervention.

    What can we say about the probability of default F (` | a, s2 ) that results from the
four possible combinations of bank actions a ∈ { a, a} and supervisory interventions
s2 ∈ {s2 , s2 }? This question is important not only because it affects the following anal-
ysis but in and of itself because it sheds light on the trade-offs involved in supervisory
intervention.


                                                   18
Proposition 1. Under optimally chosen supervision, the default probabilities for the four pos-
sible combinations of bank action a ∈ { a, a} and supervisory intervention s2 ∈ {s2 , s2 } satisfy
the following ranking:

                      F (` | a, s2 ) > F (` | a, s2 ) > F (` | a, s2 ) > F (` | a, s2 )

Proof. See Appendix A.

    There is clear intuition behind this ranking of the four default probabilities. First, it
is clear that not intervening when necessary leads to the highest possible default prob-
ability F (` | a, s2 ). Second, in case the bank chooses the good action a, the “right” super-
visory response s2 results in a higher default probability than the “wrong” response s2
so that F (` | a, s2 ) > F (` | a, s2 ). While this may seem unintuitive at first, it is due to the
fact that intervention is costly: The optimal supervisory response is chosen trading off
costs and benefits so high intervention is only worthwhile after a bad signal where it has
high expected benefit. Third, the fact that intervention is costly also implies that s2 will
never fully “offset” the effect of a so that F (` | a, s2 ) > F (` | a, s2 ). Even though we have
assumed that supervision could fully correct a bank’s mistakes, the fact that it is costly
means that optimal supervision will not attempt to fully correct a bank’s mistakes.
    We now turn to the effect of bank size on supervisory hours for intervention, we
have:
                     d 2 ∗               d 2 ∗               2 ∗               2 ∗            ds2∗
                         h ( s2 , A ) ∝    C ( s 2 , A ) = C A ( s 2 , A ) + C s2 ( s 2 , A )      (5)
                   dA                   dA                                                    dA
In contrast to the effect of risk on supervisory hours in (4), the effect of assets has a direct
and an indirect part. The first, direct part is the increase in hours when increasing the
size of the bank while maintaining the same level of intervention; this part is purely
technological. The second part is the change in hours if the first-order condition (3)
implies different optimal levels of intervention for different bank sizes.
    The second derivative tells us if the increase in hours is proportional, more than
proportional, or less than proportional to the increase in assets:

         d2 2 ∗               d2 2 ∗             2
           2
             h ( s 2 , A ) ∝    2
                                  C (s2 , A) = C AA (s2∗ , A)
        dA                   dA                                                                       
                                                           2                                     ds∗       ds2∗
                                                   +     C As   (s2∗ ,   A) + Cs22 s2 (s2∗ ,   A) 2               (6)
                                                              2                                  dA        dA
                                                                            d2 s2∗
                                                       + Cs22 (s2∗ , A)
                                                                            dA2


                                                    19
This expression has a number of terms. The first is the most straightforward, captur-
ing the curvature of the required hours with respect to size while keeping the level of
intervention constant. This part is purely technological and negative.

Conjecture 2. Technological scale economies suggest that supervisory hours spent on interven-
tion increase less than proportionally with bank size.

     The second and third term on the right-hand side of (6) depend on how the optimal
level of intervention s2∗ —which is scale free—changes with bank size. Since we have
  2
C As 2
       > 0 and Cs22 s2 > 0, the second term is determined by the sign of ds2∗ /dA (unless
ds2∗ /dA is very negative). If optimal risk reduction is higher for larger banks (ds2∗ /dA >
                                                                   2 < 0).13 Now consider
0) the second term is positive and goes against the first term (C AA
the effect of bank size on the optimal level of intervention. Implicit differentiation of the
first-order condition (3) yields:
                                                                                   2 (s∗ , A)
     ds2∗   − (1 − κ ) Fs2 (` | a, s2∗ ) + κFs2 (` | a, s2∗ ) P0 ( A) + N 0 ( A) − C As 2  2
          =                                                                    
     dA                               ∗                      ∗                      2      ∗
             (1 − κ ) Fs2 s2 (` | a, s2 ) + κFs2 s2 (` | a, s2 ) P( A) + N ( A) + Cs2 s2 (s2 , A)

As before, the denominator is positive so the sign depends on the numerator:

            ds2∗
                 >0 ⇔
            dA
                                                                                   2
            − κFs2 (` | a, s2∗ ) + (1 − κ ) Fs2 (` | a, s2∗ ) P0 ( A) + N 0 ( A) > C As 2
                                                                                          (s2∗ , A)

The left-hand side is the increase in spillovers P and N for larger banks while the right-
hand side is the increase in marginal cost of intervention for larger banks. We see that
stronger intervention at larger banks (ds2∗ /dA > 0) is more likely the more the two
spillovers, P and N, increase with bank size.

Conjecture 3. If spillovers increase sufficiently strongly with bank size, then the optimal in-
tensity of intervention increases with bank size, suggesting that supervisory hours spent on
intervention increase more than proportionally with bank size.

   How total supervisory hours for intervention scale with bank size therefore depends
on two potentially competing effects: technological scale economies of supervision and
the effect of scale on the trade-off between marginal benefits and costs of supervision.
  13 The   third term depends on whether s2∗ is convex or concave in A.




                                                     20
Supervisory monitoring: Given the intervention strategy s2 (r ) derived above, we now
consider the bank’s choice of a and then the supervisor’s choice of monitoring intensity
s1 . We denote the bank’s expected utility from taking action a and then being subject to
supervisory intervention s2 by U ( a, s2 ):
                                                           
                           U ( a, s2 ) = 1 − F (` | a, s2 ) E[ Ax − D | x > `]
                                                                         
                                                  `
                                         − F 1−ρ a, s2 − F (` | a, s2 ) R
                                              − C a ( a, A) − C s2 (s2 , A)

   Given the signal r ∈ {r, r } and corresponding supervisory interventions s2 ∈ {s2 , s2 },
the bank has an incentive to take the good action a if:

                  λU ( a, s2 ) + (1 − λ) U ( a, s2 ) ≥ λU ( a, s2 ) + (1 − λ) U ( a, s2 )                     (7)

The left-hand side of condition (7) is the bank’s expected payoff from choosing a: With
probability λ, the supervisor will observe the right signal r (low risk) and choose the
appropriate low level of intervention s2 ; with probability 1 − λ, however, the supervisor
will observe the wrong signal r (high risk) and mistakenly choose the high level of
intervention s2 > s2 . The right-hand side of condition (7) is the bank’s expected payoff
from choosing the bad action a, where s2 is the correct supervisory response and s2
means the supervisors don’t catch the bank and therefore don’t intervene appropriately.
    Solving condition (7) for λ, we see that the bank chooses the good action as long as
the signal is sufficiently precise, that is the supervisor is sufficiently likely to correctly
observe the bank’s riskiness:14

                                                    U ( a, s2 ) − U ( a, s2 )
                        λ ≥ Λ :=
                                      U ( a, s2 ) − U ( a, s2 ) + U ( a, s2 ) − U ( a, s2 )

We assume that the supervisor has some uncertainty about the difference in the bank’s
effort cost C a between the actions a and a. This can also be uncertain from the bank’s
perspective—the only important feature is that the bank knows its payoff difference at
the time of choosing a while the supervisor doesn’t so that there remains some uncer-
tainty about which action the bank chooses. This implies that the supervisor doesn’t
  14 For this cutoff to be well-behaved, we need (i) U ( a, s2 ) > U ( a, s2 ), that is getting away with shirking
is better than being disciplined when behaving, (ii) U ( a, s2 ) > U ( a, s2 ), that is when behaving it’s better
if the supervisor knows, and (iii) U ( a, s2 ) > U ( a, s2 ), that is when shirking it’s better if the supervisor
doesn’t know.


                                                        21
know the cutoff Λ precisely but views it as distributed according to a c.d.f. G.15
    For a given precision λ, the supervisor knows that the bank will choose a if Λ ≤ λ,
that is with probability G (λ), and a if Λ > λ, that is with probability 1 − G (λ). In
either case, the supervisor will sometimes make mistakes due to observing the wrong
signal: If the bank chooses a, the supervisor observes the wrong signal and mistakenly
intervenes with probability 1 − λ while if the bank shirks, the supervisor mistakenly
doesn’t intervene with probability 1 − λ.
    Similarly to U , we denote the supervisor’s expected payoff conditional on the bank’s
action a and the supervisory intervention s2 by V ( a, s2 ):16
                                                    
          V ( a, s2 ) = E[ Ax ] + 1 − F (` | a, s2 ) P( A) − F (` | a, s2 ) N ( A) − C 2 (s2 , A)

The supervisor’s expected payoff when choosing the effort s1 to set λ, therefore is:
                                                                      
                             G (λ) λV ( a, s2 ) + (1 − λ) V ( a, s2 )
                                                                              
                                + 1 − G (λ) λV ( a, s2 ) + (1 − λ) V ( a, s2 )
                                    − C 1 (λ, A)

The first part corresponds to the states of the world where the bank chooses a, which
happens with probability G (λ); the supervisor then ends up choosing s2 with proba-
bility λ and s2 with probability 1 − λ. The second part corresponds to when the bank
chooses a, which happens with probability 1 − G (λ); the supervisor then ends up choos-
ing s2 with probability 1 − λ and s2 with probability λ.
    The supervisor’s first order condition for the optimal s1∗ = λ∗ is then:
                                                                                            
  G 0 (λ∗ ) λ∗ V ( a, s2 ) + (1 − λ∗ ) V ( a, s2 ) − λ∗ V ( a, s2 ) − (1 − λ∗ ) V ( a, s2 )        (8)
                                                                                          
          + G (λ∗ ) V ( a, s2 ) − V ( a, s2 ) + 1 − G (λ∗ ) V ( a, s2 ) − V ( a, s2 ) = Cλ1 (λ∗ , A)

Similar to the first-order condition (3) for intervention s2 , this first-order condition for s1
equalizes the marginal benefit of increased monitoring (left-hand side) with its marginal
cost (right-hand side). The marginal benefit has two parts: First, a more precise signal
makes it more likely that Λ ≤ λ so that the bank chooses the right action a. Second,
  15 Suppose  from the supervisor’s perspective C a ( a, A) − C a ( a, A) = ∆C + ε where ε is uncertain with
some c.d.f. G (ε). Then ε drops out of the denominator of Λ but remains in the numerator so that Λ is
            b
                                                                                                                            
uncertain with c.d.f. G (Λ) = 1 − G  b Λ (U ( a, s2 ) − U ( a, s2 ) + U ( a, s2 ) − U ( a, s2 )) − U ( a, s2 ) + U ( a, s2 ) .
  16 Note that V ( a, s ) contains the cost of s but not the cost of s .
                       2                        2                          1



                                                             22
a more precise signal makes it more likely that the supervisor receives the right signal
and implements the correct response.17
   Similar to the case of intervention, we are interested in the effect of bank size on
supervisory hours spent on monitoring. For the first derivative, we have:

                    d 1 ∗          d 1 ∗           1                         dλ∗
                      h (λ , A) ∝    C (λ , A) = C A (λ∗ , A) + Cλ1 (λ∗ , A)
                   dA             dA                                         dA

Analogous to equation (5), the expression has two parts, the increase in hours when
increasing the size of the bank while maintaining the same level of precision and the
change in hours if the first-order condition (8) implies different optimal levels of preci-
sion for different bank sizes.
   The second derivative tells us if the increase is proportional or not:

         d2 1 ∗            d2 1 ∗           1
            h ( λ , A ) ∝     C (λ , A) = C AA (λ∗ , A)
        dA2               dA2                                                                          
                                                                  1                1             dλ∗        dλ∗
                                                          +     C Aλ (λ∗ ,   A) + Cλλ (λ∗ ,   A)                      (9)
                                                                                                 dA         dA
                                                                               d2 λ ∗
                                                              + Cλ1 (λ∗ , A)
                                                                               dA2

This expression has the same terms as the analogous expression (6) for C 2 . The first
captures the curvature of the cost function with respect to size giving us the same tech-
nological scale economies as for supervisory intervention.

Conjecture 4. Technological scale economies suggest that supervisory hours spent on monitor-
ing increase less than proportionally with bank size.

    Also analogous to supervisory intervention, the second and third term on the right-
hand side of (9) depend on how the optimal level of monitoring λ∗ —which is scale
free—changes with bank size.18 However, in contrast to the analysis for intervention
above, the effect of bank size A on the optimal level of supervisory monitoring precision
λ∗ is not straightforward. We can implicitly differentiate the first-order condition (8) to
  17 For a unique optimal λ∗ , we want the left-hand side of (8) to be decreasing in λ∗ . Jointly sufficient
conditions for this are (i) G 00 (λ∗ ) ≤ 0 and (ii) V ( a, s2 ) − V ( a, s2 ) < V ( a, s2 ) − V ( a, s2 ). For a symmetric
distribution G, the first condition is satisfied if G (λ∗ ) ≥ 1/2, that is if in equilibrium the bank is more
likely to choose a than a. The second condition says that choosing the correct supervisory intervention
is more important when the bank chooses a than when it chooses a. We assume both conditions to be
satisfied.
   18 The third term depends on whether λ∗ is convex or concave in A.




                                                           23
get:
                              dλ∗    ∂
                                       LHS(8) − C Aλ
                                                  1 (λ∗ , A)
                                  = ∂A∂
                              dA   − ∂λ∗ LHS(8) + Cλλ
                                                   1 (λ∗ , A)


Note that the left-hand side of (8) is decreasing in λ∗ and that we have C Aλ  1 > 0 and
  1 > 0. The remaining term, the derivative of the left-hand side of (8) with respect to
Cλλ
A, is the effect of bank size on the marginal benefit of precision to the supervisor, that
is of increasing the likelihood of the bank choosing a and of the supervisor choosing
the right intervention s2 . Given that the marginal cost of more precision is increasing in
scale (C Aλ
         1 > 0), we see that to warrant higher precision at larger banks, the marginal

benefit not only has to be increasing in A, it has to increase more than the marginal cost:

                         dλ∗                 ∂            1
                             >0       ⇔        LHS(8) > C Aλ (λ∗ , A)
                         dA                 ∂A

Conjecture 5. If spillovers increase sufficiently strongly with bank size, then the optimal inten-
sity of monitoring increases with bank size, suggesting that supervisory hours spent on moni-
toring increase more than proportionally with bank size.

Summary of theoretical results: Our model points to two competing effects that de-
termine whether hours spent on monitoring (s1 ) and intervention (s2 ) should increase
more or less than proportionally with a bank’s asset size. On the one hand, the ex-
istence of technological scale economies would imply that supervisory hours increase
less than proportionally with size. On the other hand, higher optimal intensity of super-
vision at larger banks would imply that hours increase more than proportionally. The
effect of technological scale economies is unambiguous. In contrast, the competing ef-
fect of changing intensity requires that banks’ spillovers to the economy are sufficiently
greater for larger banks in order to outweigh the higher costs of changing intensity.


4.2    Empirical evidence
Fed supervisory hours: Table 2 presents our baseline regression specification of log
supervisory hours on log bank assets and a range of controls. The coefficient on log
assets captures the elasticity of supervisory hours with respect to bank assets, that is if
hours increase proportionally with assets, the coefficient would be equal to 1 and if less
than proportionally, less than 1.
   The elasticity of supervisory hours to bank assets is 0.96 (column 1) and 0.68 (column


                                               24
2) when including bank fixed effects. In other words, the pooled and within variation
in the data suggests an elasticity close to, or less, than 1. This means that a bank with
$10 billion in assets receives less than twice the amount of attention than a bank with
$5 billion in assets. Interpreting this terms of our model, the fact that hours increase
less than proportionally with size is evidence of technological scale economies in su-
pervision, that is achieving a certain intensity of supervision requires less supervisory
resources per dollar of assets at a large bank than at a small bank (Conjectures 2 and 4).
The empirical finding of an overall size-coefficient less than 1 does not rule out the pos-
sibility that larger banks warrant and receive a higher intensity of supervision, which
would—on its own—imply a size coefficient greater than one (Conjectures 3 and 5).
However, if this effect exists, it appears quantitatively dominated by the technological
scale economies.
     To assess the linearity of the estimated relation between supervisory hours and bank
size, Figure 4 shows binned scatter plots and the relationship implied by the linear
specification without (column 1, left-figure-panel) and including bank fixed effects (col-
umn 2, right-figure-panel). As is evident from the figure, the estimated relation between
hours and assets is approximately linear in log-scale.
     Riskier banks, as measured by their supervisory rating, also display increased su-
pervisory attention, as predicted by Conjecture 1 (column 1 pooled, column 2 within).
For example, compared to a bank with the best possible rating of 1, which is the left-
out category in the regression, a bank of the same size but with a rating of 3 receives
70% more hours (within variation), an effect roughly equivalent to doubling the size of
the bank. A bank rated the worst-possible 5 receives 136% additional hours, roughly
equivalent to the baseline hours of a bank three times its size.
     In practice, an important component of supervision that is also reflected in the hours
measure, is ensuring that a bank is in compliance with regulations as well as assessing
its internal processes. We expect these components of supervision, as well as the mon-
itoring and intervention captured by our model, to demand more resources the more
complex a banking organization is. Because complexity and size are often related, the
elasticity of supervisory hours to size may be measuring the joint effect of banks’ size
and complexity. We attempt to control for the effect of organizational complexity by
controlling the log number of legal entities within each bank holding company (see
Appendix B for an exact definition). Hours display a statistically significant elasticity
with respect to bank complexity of 0.26 (column 3, pooled variation) and 0.14 (column
4, within variation), consistent with the idea that some possible economies of scale are

                                            25
lost as banks become more complex. Also, including the complexity measures lowers
the estimated size-elasticity to 0.77 in the pooled variation regression. As bank com-
plexity does not vary much and is thus mostly accounted for by the fixed effect, the
size-elasticity of hours is largely unaffected by the inclusion of the complexity measure.
    In sum, the baseline regression specification of Table 2 implies the elasticity of su-
pervisory hours with respect to assets is less than one, and that riskier banks as well as
more complex banks require additional attention.

OCC assessment fees: To validate further the conclusions drawn from the hours data,
we compare the estimated elasticities of supervisory hours with respect to bank size
and risk to those of assessment fees collected by the Office of the Comptroller of the
Currency (OCC) on its supervised entities. In contrast to the hours data, this fee data
is a more direct measure of the supervisory cost function as fees are expressed in dol-
lar terms. However, because of potential cross-subsidies across different bank-size or
risk categories, the assessment schedule may not be directly informative of the super-
visory production function at an institution level. We find that size and risk elasticities
of assessment fees turn out to be very similar to those estimated on Federal Reserve
supervisory hours.
    The OCC’s base assessment is calculated using a table with eleven categories, or
brackets, each of which comprises a range of asset-size values. In addition to the base
amount, which is the same for every bank in its asset-size bracket, the fee includes a
marginal amount, which is computed by applying a marginal assessment rate to the
assets in excess of the lower bound of the asset-size bracket. The marginal assessment
rate declines as asset size increases, “reflecting economies of scale in bank examination
and supervision” (Federal Register Vol. 79, No. 81, April 28, 2014).
    Table 3 provides summaries for semiannual assessments (meaning that annual fees
are twice as large) as a function of assets in 2007 and 2014 that we obtain from OCC
bulletins. The 2014 fee structure includes a new bracket for the largest banks, with as-
sets greater than $250 billion. This additional bracket was introduced to help the OCC
recover additional costs associated with supervising large and complex banks. Start-
ing in 2001, the OCC began imposing a surcharge of 25% on their original (size-based)
assessment for national banks with a 3, 4, or 5 rating, to “reflect the increased cost of
supervision” (OCC 2000-30). By 2004, the size of the surcharge had been increased to
50% for 3-rated banks and to 100% for 4- or 5-rated banks.19
 19 With the exception of the addition of the $250 billion asset bracket, asset brackets and base/marginal



                                                  26
    We apply the fee structure to the universe of nationally chartered commercial banks
using asset information as of 2006:Q4 and 2013:Q4 (relevant periods for fee calculations
in 2007 and 2014) and compute the implied scale economies pre- and post-2008 by re-
gressing log fees on log assets and controls in Table 4. The elasticity of OCC fees to
assets is 0.7 which is nearly identical to the within-bank estimate using Fed hours data
(see Table 2, column 2). The increase in OCC fees with respect to bank risk is similar
although not as steep as the estimated increase in Fed hours. Relative to a 1-rated in-
stitutions, fees increase by about 40% on average for 3-rated institutions and by about
70% for 4- or 5-rated institutions.
    In Figure 5, we present a binned scatter plot and the linear relationship obtained
when regressing OCC fees on bank assets (in log scale). Comparing these results with
those obtained using Fed supervisory hours (Figure 4), we again see a very similar
pattern. We discuss changes in the OCC fee schedule post-2008 in the next sections.


4.3    Additional determinants of supervisory hours
To investigate further the determinants of supervision in practice, we first consider the
sensitivity of supervisory hours with respect to alternative measures of bank size and
complexity. We then study seasonal clustering of supervisory hours.
    The model assumes that supervisory efforts are devoted to acquiring information
(monitoring), and enforcing corrective actions (intervention), related to the riskiness of
a bank’s assets. Consistently in our main specification (Table 2), we relate hours to a
bank’s risk and size in terms of its assets. Alternatively, one could consider a model
where supervisors are monitoring bank employees to ensure that they exert reason-
able effort. We directly consider this alternative by expanding the set of regressors in
the baseline regression specification of Table 2 to include the log of a bank’s total em-
ployees. We see a statistically significant elasticity of about 0.2 in the pooled estimation
(Table 5, column 1), which is no longer significant when considering within-bank vari-
ation (column 2). This indicates that the sensitivity to a bank’s head count is either rela-
tively small or not significant, justifying the focus on assets in our model and empirical
analysis.
    Besides the organizational complexity in our baseline specification (number of le-
gal entities), the complexity of the consolidated balance sheet may also be important.
fee schedules prior to 2007 were stable over time, except for an annual inflation adjustment. Both inflation
adjustment and rating surcharges were capped at $20 billion, prior to 2014, and at $40 billion thereafter.



                                                    27
To account for this possibility, we consider two measures of asset complexity: (i) the
share of loans to total assets, which is higher for traditional, less complex banking orga-
nizations, and the concentration of the bank’s activities as measure by the Herfindahl
index of the share of the asset categories. We find that neither measure of balance sheet
complexity enters significantly in our estimated regressions (columns 3 and 4).
    Finally, we consider in more detail the temporal distribution of supervisory atten-
tion at an individual bank over the course of a year. In the extreme, supervision could
be done either “continuously” such that hours are stable over the year, or in a “punctu-
ated” fashion such that hours spike at certain points during the year. While continuous
supervision would seem more effective, resource constraints would be a rationale for
using a punctuated approach. This would rotate focused attention from bank to bank,
concentrating resources mainly on the full scope examinations, which are mandated by
law to be completed annually.
    To study this question empirically, we use information on whether a bank is un-
dergoing a full-scope examination and include a dummy variable for whether such
an event occurs in a given quarter. We interact this indicator variable with another for
large and smaller institutions. The point estimates (Table 5, columns 5 and 6) imply that
supervisory efforts increase during a full scope examination, with the larger banks ex-
periencing an increase of about 100%, and the smaller banks of about 200%. Figure 6
uses information at monthly frequency to provide additional detail on the temporal
distribution of supervisory attention. For each asset-size group, the chart plots aver-
age monthly hours (orange, right scale) against time measured relative to the month
in which a full scope examination ends. Average hours for each bank and examination
event are relative to those at time t-6. The blue bars in each chart denote (right scale)
denote the probability with which a bank is subject to a full-scope or other examination.
As shown by these bars, the probability increases (and reaches 1) as time approaches to
0 and then drops. For small BHCs, hours increase by a factor of about 4.5, as opposed
to large banks for which the increase is by a factor close to 1. This evidence suggests
that supervision for the larger BHCs is conducted mainly continuously, while for the
smaller institutions attention is punctuated and displays periodic patterns.


5    Interaction of supervision and regulation over time
We now turn to the interaction between bank supervision and regulation—in the form
of capital requirements. We first study whether, in our model, regulation is a comple-

                                            28
ment or substitute to the two components of supervision: monitoring and intervention.
Motivated by the changes in both regulation and supervision following the financial
crisis of 2008-09, we then consider how changes in model parameters—spillovers, in
particular—affect optimal supervision and its dependence on bank characteristics such
as size.


5.1    Theoretical analysis
While we take regulation in our setup as exogenous, it can interact with optimal super-
vision. The bank has to fulfill the capital requirement ρ both ex-ante (A − D ≥ ρA) as
well as ex-post (Ax − D ≥ ρAx). In addition, regulation imposes a cost R conditional
on violating the ex-post capital requirement. To understand whether supervision is a
complement or substitute to regulation, we consider the effect of a change in regulation
on the optimal level of supervision.
    Suppose banks fulfill the ex-ante requirement exactly, that is A − D = ρA which
implies ` = 1 − ρ.20 Then changes in the capital requirement ρ have direct effects on
the supervisor payoff because the change in bank capitalization affects the probability
of default F (` | a, s2 ) = F (1 − ρ | a, s2 ). In addition, changes in ρ have indirect effects
on the supervisor payoff through changes in the bank’s behavior. Both the direct and
indirect effect imply that optimal supervisory efforts would respond to a change in ρ.
    Consider first the effect of ρ on the bank’s incentives. For ` = 1 − ρ, the bank’s
expected payoff from taking action a and facing supervisory intervention s2 becomes:
                                                        
                    U ( a, s2 ) = 1 − F (1 − ρ | a, s2 ) E[ Ax − D | x > 1 − ρ]
                                                                       
                                  − F (1 | a, s2 ) − F (1 − ρ | a, s2 ) R
                                      − C a ( a, A) − C s2 (s2 , A)

Raising the capital requirement increases the bank’s initial equity and therefore reduces
the probability of default and the bank’s exposure to low returns, providing for more
“skin in the game.” In addition, raising ρ increases the probability of violating the re-
quirement ex-post conditional on not defaulting.21
   Since with a higher capital requirement the bank has more “skin in the game” and
  20 Allowing    for a buffer β above the ex-ante capital requirement, that is A − D = (ρ + β) A or ` =
1 − (ρ + β), does not affect our results.
   21 Since ρ is both the ex-ante (binding) and ex-post requirement, the unconditional probability of vio-

lating it ex-post is simply the probability of an asset return x < 1 which doesn’t depend on ρ.


                                                   29
a higher conditional probability of facing the penalty R, the condition (7) is relaxed, in-
creasing the probability that the bank chooses the good action a. From the point of view
of the supervisor this corresponds to a decrease in the left-hand side of the first-order
condition (8) so the optimal level of monitoring λ∗ decreases. Supervisory monitoring
and regulatory capital requirements are therefore substitutes.
     We now turn to the interaction of capital requirements and supervisory intervention
s2 . Consider the first-order condition for intervention (3) with a binding ex-ante capital
requirement, that is ` = 1 − ρ:
                                                                                 
    − κFs2 (1 − ρ | a, s2∗ ) + (1 − κ ) Fs2 (1 − ρ | a, s2∗ )       P( A) + N ( A) = Cs22 (s2∗ , A)   (10)

Since Fxs2 > 0, the direct effect of raising the capital requirement is to increase the
left-hand side of the first-order condition (10) so the optimal level of intervention s2∗
increases. Intuitively, raising the capital requirement moves the default threshold 1 − ρ
further into the left tail of the distribution F, where the effect of s2 is stronger. The
marginal benefit of supervisory intervention therefore increases, warranting a higher
level of intervention. In contrast to supervisory monitoring, supervisory intervention
and regulatory capital are therefore complements.

Conjecture 6. The direct effects of a tightening of regulation in the form of a higher capital re-
quirement are a decrease in supervisory monitoring (substitutes) but an increase in supervisory
intervention (complements).

    The difference in the interaction of capital requirements and monitoring vs. inter-
vention are surprising but intuitive. Capital requirements and monitoring both improve
the bank’s incentives which makes them substitutes. In contrast, intervention works
mainly on the probability of default. Since tighter regulation makes intervention more
effective, the two are complements. Whether the substitutability or the complementar-
ity dominates when considering total supervisory hours is ambiguous.

Changes since 2008: One interpretation of the concurrent changes to regulation and
supervision following the financial crisis of 2008-09 is a change in the actual or per-
ceived spillovers of a bank operating or failing, N ( A) and P( A), respectively. In fact,
the total difference in surplus between a successful and a failed bank, P( A) + N ( A), ap-
pears as part of the marginal benefit of both supervisory monitoring and intervention
in the first-order conditions (3) and (8).


                                                    30
Conjecture 7. An increase in supervisory concern about spillovers suggests higher supervisory
monitoring and intervention.

    For supervisory intervention, the marginal benefit is a reduction in the expected
spillover loss due to a reduced probability of default. If the spillovers are larger, the
marginal benefit of intervention is greater and warrants an increase in the level of in-
tervention to rebalance marginal benefit and marginal cost. For supervisory monitor-
ing, the marginal benefit is an increase in both the likelihood that the bank chooses the
“good” action a and the likelihood that the supervisor correctly observes the bank’s
action and therefore chooses the correct intervention. Both are more important, if the
spillovers are larger, and therefore warrant more supervisory monitoring.22


5.2    Empirical evidence
For the empirical analysis we use the Tier 1 capital ratio—one of the most important
tools for bank regulation— to measure a bank’s regulatory capital. The observed level
of regulatory capital held by a bank is typically above the minimum by an additional
buffer chosen by the bank. In addition, changes in the observed capital are not only
due to changes in the minimum requirement but also due to the bank’s realized prof-
its and losses. This complicates the analysis of the interaction between regulation and
supervision since banks making losses and having low capital levels are more likely
to face supervisory intervention. In other words, a negative relation between supervi-
sory hours and capital levels may not be an indication of substitution between the two
policies.
    Splitting the analysis into small and large banks, we find significant coefficients of
opposite signs for the relationship between supervisory hours and bank capital: the
coefficient for small banks is negative, while that for large banks is positive (Table 6,
column 1). The negative coefficient for small banks is consistent both with substitu-
tion between regulation and supervision and with losses signaling trouble at the bank
and therefore higher supervisory attention. However, when controlling for supervisory
ratings—a more precise measure of banks in trouble—the negative coefficient for small
banks loses its significance (column 2). For small banks, therefore, our empirical results
are similarly ambivalent as the theoretical analysis (Conjecture 6).
  22 Thisresult is similar to Bhattacharya et al. (2002) where exam frequency and capital requirements
are substitutes in preventing bank risk taking but higher fundamental risk requires higher capital re-
quirements and/or more frequent exams.


                                                 31
    For large banks, the positive coefficient on Tier 1 capital remains significant even after
controlling for ratings (column 2). All regression specifications in Table 6 include bank
fixed effects, meaning that the coefficients are only identified by within-bank variation
rather than cross-sectional differences. The positive coefficient for large banks could
therefore be evidence either of overall complementarity between regulation and su-
pervision (Conjecture 6) or of an exogenous change that leads to an increase in both
supervisory attention and regulatory capital levels at the largest banks (Conjecture 7).
    A key change in capital requirements took place after 2008 as the largest banks were
required to hold more capital because of stress testing (CCAR and DFAST), as well as
various mandatory capital buffers and planned surcharges such as those for “global
systemically important bank holding companies” (12 CFR 217). As shown in Figure 7,
larger banks used to hold significantly less capital than their smaller counterparts pre-
2008, but this difference has essentially disappeared post-2008 as the largest banks have
increased their capital ratios. Splitting the sample into pre- and post-2008 illustrates this
effect (Table 6, columns 3 and 4) as the positive coefficient on the Tier-1 ratio for large
banks is entirely driven by the post-2008 sample.
    Given the increase in supervisory efforts post-2008, it is interesting to study the ex-
tent to which the elasticity of hours to bank size increased over that sample. To that end,
we extend the baseline regression specification to include an interaction term between
log assets and a dummy variable marking the post-2008 sample. Hours sensitivity in-
creased by a relatively small amount of about 0.1 in absolute terms in the post-2008
period (Table 7, columns 1 and 2). The level increase in hours for the largest banks is no-
table and on the order of 60% (columns 3 and 4). Interestingly, however, hours spent at
the smallest institutions (≤ $10 billion) declined by about 20-30%. In Figure 8, we illus-
trate this effect graphically. We first estimate residuals from our baseline specification
without bank fixed effects (Table 2, column 1). We then average residuals of log-hours
by quarter and size-group and plot their evolution over time. Residuals for the largest
banks (blue) are about 50% larger in the post-2008 sample, as opposed to the smaller
institutions, for which we observe a decline.
    While it is possible to conceive that post-2008 supervisors became less concerned
about the smallest institutions at the same time that attention increased at the largest
banks, an alternative explanation is that supervisory resources are scarce and relatively
inelastic in the short run. An increase in the optimal relative attention to large banks
can then only be implemented by an absolute reduction of attention at small banks. To
shed light on this question, we compare these results on hours with the pre/post-2008

                                             32
elasticity of OCC fees to size.
    As discussed in Section 4.2, the overall elasticities of OCC fees to bank size and
risk are very similar to those of Fed hours. If the decline in Fed supervisory hours at
small banks is due to lower concerns, we would expect to see a similar decline in the
size-elasticity of OCC fees for small banks. If, however, the decline is due to limited re-
sources, we would not expect any change in OCC fees for small banks. In 2008, the OCC
introduced an additional fee bracket for banks with assets greater than $250 billion to
cover increasing costs associated with the supervision of large and complex banks. The
elasticity of fees to bank assets is modestly affected by this additional bracket (Table 4,
column 2), but on average, fees are about 50% higher in 2014 than in 2007 for banks with
assets greater than $10 billion (column 3), while for smaller banks fees are essentially
unchanged. In addition, the increase in fees for large banks matches very closely the
increase in hours of Fed supervisors post-2008.


6     Supervisory efforts when dealing with multiple banks

6.1   Theoretical analysis
In the theoretical analysis so far, we have considered the optimal level of a supervisory
action s ∈ {s1 , s2 } for a single bank without explicitly taking into account the fact that
the supervisors have to allocate resources across multiple banks. For both monitoring
and intervention, the supervisory action has some benefit and cost when the cost is
proportional to hours. Denoting the benefit of action s with a bank of size A generically
as V(s, A), the supervisor’s problem for an individual bank has the structure
                                  
                               max V(s, A) − wh(s, A) ,
                                 s

which yields first-order conditions (3) and (8) of the form

                                     Vs (s, A) = whs (s, A).                           (11)

    In practice, supervisors have to deal with multiple banks and are allocating a given
budget of available hours H. Note that we can invert the hourly cost function h to infer
the level of supervisory action s = h−1 ( H, A) that results from an allocation of H hours
to a bank of size A. Then we can state the problem of allocating hours across a set of



                                               33
banks as:                  n
                                   −1
                                                          o
                  max ∑i V h            ( Hi , Ai ), Ai         subject to      ∑i Hi ≤ H
                  { Hi }

With a Lagrange multiplier µ on the budget constraint, this yields first-order conditions
of the form
                                                 1
                         Vs ( s i , A i )                 = µ for all i.              (12)
                                          h s ( si , Ai )
   Comparing the first-order conditions (11) and (12) we see that they are structurally
equivalent and that the wage w in the individual-bank version is simply the “shadow”
wage represented by the Lagrange multiplier µ in the multiple-banks version. This
means that all the comparative statics we derive above using the individual-bank ver-
sion carry over to the multiple-bank version.
   In addition, the first-order conditions require that the ratio of marginal benefit to
marginal cost be equalized across banks:

                               Vs ( s i , A i )   Vs ( s j , A j )
                                                =                    for all i, j           (13)
                               h s ( si , Ai )    hs (s j , A j )

Since the two actions s1 and s2 happen sequentially—first monitoring to collect infor-
mation, then intervention conditional on the information—satisfying condition (13) for
both requires reallocating supervisory hours after the signals {ri } are realized.

Conjecture 8. With limited resources, supervisory attention has to be conditionally reallocated
towards banks with bad signals and away from banks with good signals.

    Conditional on bank size A, more intervention is required after a bad signal than
after a good signal, s2 > s2 . With limited resources, this means that supervisory hours
are reallocated from banks with good signals to banks with bad signals.


6.2   Empirical evidence
So far we have presented two empirical results that are consistent with limited resources
and reallocation of attention across banks. Table 5 provided evidence that supervisory
efforts are clustered during scheduled examinations and are lower at other times, espe-
cially for the smaller banks. In addition, in Table 7, we provided evidence that while su-
pervisory efforts have increased at the largest institutions post-2008, they have declined
at smaller institutions. Here we provide an additional test, motivated by Conjecture 8,


                                                       34
                Figure 3: Event tree leading to conditional default probabilities

                                          G (λ∗ )                 1 − G (λ∗ )



                              1 − λ∗            λ∗                 λ∗           1 − λ∗


                           F (` | a, s2 ) < F (` | a, s2 ) < F (` | a, s2 ) < F (` | a, s2 )


that attention is reallocated from banks with good ratings to banks with bad ratings
and that this effect is particularly strong if the stressed banks are large.
    We assume that that, in the short run, resources are relatively fixed within each of
the twelve Federal Reserve districts, allowing us to study the impact of supervisory
attention at one bank when other banks in the same district warrant relatively more
attention because they are under stress. At the district level, we therefore compute the
share of assets in distress (assets of banks rated 3, 4 or 5) and study its effect on hours
at large and small banks.23 As shown in columns 3 and 4 of Table 8, we find that an
increase in stress at other banks in the district implies a decline of attention at a given
small bank, while we do not find a significant effect at large banks (after controlling
for the post-2008 change in attention). This provides evidence of resource constraints
forcing reallocation of attention, as predicted by Conjecture 8. The point estimates imply
that attention at a small bank would decline by between 30 and 60% if all remaining
banks in a district became stressed.


7      Assessing supervisory outcomes ex-post

7.1     How can things go wrong?
If we observe a bank default, what can we infer about the likely cause? Was it just the
result of a tail realization in asset returns? Did, instead, the bank misbehave, the super-
visor not notice, or a combination of the two? Figure 3 lists the possible combinations of
the bank’s action a ∈ { a, a} with supervisory response s2 ∈ {s2 , s2 } and the resulting
probability of default F (` | a, s2 ). For example, given optimal supervisory monitoring
λ∗ , the bank chooses the bad action a with probability 1 − G (λ∗ ). The supervisor no-
    23 When   calculating the share, we always exclude the bank under observation.



                                                         35
tices this and responds with s2 with probability λ∗ , resulting in a default probability
F (` | a, s2 ).
    The default probabilities in the figure are ranked left-to-right from smallest to largest
(see Section 4.1 for the ranking). Since the default probability is highest if the bank
chooses a and the supervisor mistakenly chooses s2 one may conclude that this com-
bination is the likeliest cause when observing a bank failure. However, this reasoning
would ignore the fact that F (` | a, s2 ) is a conditional probability, that is the probability
of default conditional on a and s2 . Since the likelihood of the event sequence a and s2 is
                
  1 − G (λ∗ ) (1 − λ∗ ), we know that the unconditional probability of observing a bank
failure due to the bank taking high risk and the supervisor not noticing is given by:
                                          
                               1 − G (λ∗ ) (1 − λ∗ ) F (` | a, s2 )

   While it the conditional default probabilities F (` | a, s2 ) can clearly be ranked from
smallest to largest (Proposition 1), it is much harder to clearly rank the unconditional
default probabilities

                         P ( a, s2 ) ≡ Pr[ a] × Pr[s2 | a] × F (` | a, s2 )

Proposition 2. Under optimal supervision, only an incomplete ranking of unconditional de-
fault probabilities is possible:

                                         P ( a, s2 ) > P ( a, s2 )                        (14)
                                  and P ( a, s2 ) > P ( a, s2 )                            (15)
    The first inequality, (14), states that we are more likely to observe a default where
the bank chose the “bad” action a and the supervisor intervened appropriately with s2
than a default where the bank chose the “good” action a and the supervisor mistakenly
intervened with s2 . The second inequality, (15), states that a default where the bank
chose the “good” action and the supervisor intervened appropriately with s2 is also
more likely than one with ( a, s2 ). Both inequalities therefore involve the probability of
a bank failure where the bank chose the low-risk action a but the supervisor received
the wrong signal and chose to intervene with s2 , further reducing the bank’s risk. As
discussed in Section 4.1, this combination leads to the lowest conditional probability of
default. Inequalities (14) and (15) tell us that such a bank failure is less likely than either
case of correct supervisory response, ( a, s2 ) and ( a, s2 ), respectively.


                                                36
    The one unconditional default probability missing from the inequalities (14) and (15)
is the one corresponding to the most troublesome scenario, where the bank takes high
risk but it goes undetected by the supervisor, ( a, s2 ).

Corollary 1. Without making further assumptions on parameters and functional forms, we
cannot infer from a bank failure whether the scenario ( a, s2 ) was a more or less likely than any
of the other three possibilities, ( a, s2 ), ( a, s2 ), and ( a, s2 ).



7.2    Supervisory incentives and time inconsistency
Our analysis of the sequence of supervisory choice s1 , bank choice a and supervisory
choice s2 has been subgame perfect: The intervention strategy s2 (r ) is optimal condi-
tional on the signal, the bank’s action a is optimal given s1 and taking into account the
response s2 , and, finally, supervisory monitoring s1 is optimal taking into account both
its effect on a and s2 . We have therefore imposed time consistency on the supervisor.
Instead, we could imagine a supervisor able to commit to an intervention strategy s2 (r )
that may be suboptimal ex-post in order to improve the bank’s incentives ex-ante.
    In the subgame perfect analysis, the intervention s2 takes as given the bank’s action
and only trades off the benefit of more intervention—a reduction in the probability of
default—against the costs of intervention in terms of hours (equation (3)). In particular,
the supervisor does not take into account the effect of s2 on the bank’s incentives (7)
where more intervention creates slack and therefore makes it more likely that the bank
chooses the good action a.

Conjecture 9. Given the ability to commit to an intervention strategy that may be suboptimal
ex-post, the supervisor could do better than under a constraint of time consistency.

   With commitment, the supervisor would choose a strategy s̃2 (r ) taking into account
the effects on the bank’s incentives and therefore a which is an additional benefit of
more intervention and therefore worth additional supervisory costs C 2 . However, once
the bank’s action is taken and the supervisor receives the signal r, the level of inter-
vention s2 no longer has incentive effects and the supervisor’s cost-benefit trade-off is
purely about affecting the probability of default. The higher level of intervention that
was ex-ante optimal will no longer be optimal ex-post.24
  24 For
       a similar result, see Decamps et al. (2004) who find that the effectiveness of market discipline is
reduced if supervisors lack commitment against forbearance.


                                                   37
8       Conclusion
This paper provides a new perspective on bank supervision by combining a theoreti-
cal framework and an empirical investigation that speak to the objectives and resource
constraints of supervision. Our model uses building blocks from the theory of contracts
and incomplete information to derive key implications of an optimally chosen supervi-
sion strategy. Taking into account that any supervisory strategy is subject to resource
constraints, we highlight the trade-off between the costs and benefits of supervision
and derive comparative statics that are confirmed in the data.
    As is to be expected, we find that larger banks receive more attention in the form
of supervisory hours than smaller banks. However, hours increase less than propor-
tionally with size. Through the lens of the model, this is evidence of technological
scale economies in supervision that outweigh the effect of increased concerns about
the largest banks.
    When studying resource allocation with multiple banks, we also find evidence of
substitution effects of supervisory efforts indicating binding resource constraints. We
also directly measure how the post-2008 new regulatory and supervisory framework
for large and complex banks has resulted in an increase in resources allocated to the
largest institutions.
    Much of the literature studying the role of regulation and supervision in the 2008
financial crisis has focused on possible policy distortions arising from institutional de-
sign (Agarwal et al., 2014; Carletti et al., 2015), incentive problems (Lucca et al., 2014)
or time inconsistency, for example in the context of “too big to fail.” This paper takes a
complementary approach by focusing on the limits and trade-offs of supervision based
on limited resources. But the model can speak to some issues of supervisory incen-
tives as well. For example, the non-verifiability of the supervisors’ information opens
up the possibility of incentive problems for the supervisors themselves. Our model al-
lows supervisory costs to include non-monetary costs, for example opportunity costs of
foregone private benefits, and therefore implicitly allows for a wedge between the strat-
egy chosen by the supervisor and one chosen by a social planner. However, there are
potentially much richer incentive issues in the spirit of “who monitors the monitors”
(Hurwicz, 2007) that could be considered but are beyond the scope of this paper.25



    25 See,
        for example, Masciandaro and Quintyn (2013) for an extensive survey on the governance of
supervision.


                                              38
References
Acharya, V. V. (2009). A theory of systemic risk and design of prudential bank regula-
  tion. Journal of Financial Stability 5(3), 224–255.

Agarwal, S., D. Lucca, A. Seru, and F. Trebbi (2014). Inconsistent regulators: Evidence
 from banking. The Quarterly Journal of Economics.

Berger, A. N. and S. M. Davies (1998). The information content of bank examinations.
  Journal of Financial Services Research 14(2), 117–144.

Bhattacharya, S., M. Plank, G. Strobl, and J. Zechner (2002). Bank capital regulation
  with random audits. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 26(7), 1301–1321.

Brunnermeier, M. K., A. Crockett, C. A. Goodhart, A. Persaud, and H. S. Shin (2009).
  The fundamental principles of financial regulation.

Carletti, E., G. Dell’Ariccia, and R. Marquez (2015). Supervisory incentives in a banking
  union. Working Paper.

Cetorelli, N. and S. Stern (2015). Same name, new businesses: Evolution in the bank
  holding company. Liberty Street Economics Blog (September 28, 2015).

Cole, R. A. and J. W. Gunther (1995). A camel rating’s shelf life.

Decamps, J.-P., J.-C. Rochet, and B. Roger (2004). The three pillars of basel ii: optimizing
 the mix. Journal of Financial Intermediation 13(2), 132 – 155. Bank Capital Adequacy
 Regulation under the New Basel Accord.

Dewatripont, M. and J. Tirole (1994). The prudential regulation of banks. MIT Press.

Diamond, D. W. and P. H. Dybvig (1983). Bank runs, deposit insurance, and liquidity.
  Journal of Political Economy 91(3), 401–419.

Eisenbach, T. M., A. Haughwout, B. Hirtle, A. Kovner, D. O. Lucca, and M. C. Plosser
  (2015). Supervising large, complex financial institutions: What do supervisors do?
  FRB of New York Staff Report (729).

Flannery, M. J. (1998). Using market information in prudential bank supervision: A
  review of the u.s. empirical evidence. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 30(3), 273–
  305.

Goldsmith-Pinkham, P., B. Hirtle, and D. O. Lucca (2016). Parsing the content of bank
 supervision. Working Paper.

Harris, M. and A. Raviv (2012). How to get banks to take less risk and disclose bad
 news. Chicago Booth Research Paper (12-55).


                                            39
Hirtle, B., A. Kovner, and M. Plosser (2016). The impact of supervision on bank perfor-
  mance. Working Paper.

Hirtle, B. J. and J. A. Lopez (1999). Supervisory information and the frequency of bank
  examinations.

Hurwicz, L. (2007). But who will guard the guardians? Nobel Prize Lecture.

Jensen, M. C. and W. H. Meckling (1976). Theory of the firm: Managerial behavior,
  agency costs and ownership structure. Journal of Financial Economics 3(4), 305–360.

Kisin, R. and A. Manela (2014). Funding and incentives of regulators: Evidence from
  banking. Working Paper.

Kovner, A., J. Vickery, and L. Zhou (2014). Do big banks have lower operating costs?
  Federal Reserve Bank of New York Economic Policy Review 20(2), 1–27.

Lucca, D., A. Seru, and F. Trebbi (2014). The revolving door and worker flows in banking
  regulation. Journal of Monetary Economics 65(0), 17 – 32.

Marshall, D. A. and E. S. Prescott (2001). Bank capital regulation with and without
 state-contingent penalties. Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 54(1),
 139–184.

Marshall, D. A. and E. S. Prescott (2006). State-contingent bank regulation with un-
 observed actions and unobserved characteristics. Journal of Economic Dynamics and
 Control 30(11), 2015–2049.

Masciandaro, D. and M. Quintyn (2013). The evolution of financial supervision: the
 continuing search for the holy grail. SUERF 50th Anniversary Volume Chapters, 263–
 318.

Maskin, E., J. Laffont, and W. Hildenbrand (1982). The theory of incentives: An
 overview. In Advances in Economic Theory (invited lectures from the 4th World Congress
 of the Econometric Society). Cambridge University Press.

Merton, R. C. (1995). A functional perspective of financial intermediation. Financial
 Management, 23–41.

Mishkin, F. S. (2001). Prudential supervision: Why is it important and what are the
 issues? In Prudential Supervision: What Works and What Doesn’t, pp. 1–30. University
 of Chicago Press.

Prescott, E. S. (2004). Auditing and bank capital regulation. Federal Reserve Bank of
  Richmond Economic Quarterly 90(4), 47–63.

Rochet, J.-C. (2004). Macroeconomic shocks and banking supervision. Journal of Finan-
  cial Stability 1(1), 93–110.

                                           40
Rochet, J.-C. (2007). Why Are there So Many Banking Crises? The Politics and Policy of Bank
  Regulation. Princeton University Press.

Tirole, J. (2013). Financial regulation. In Rethinking Macro Policy II: First Steps and Early
  Lessons.




                                             41
Table 1: Summary statistics. This table presents summary statistics for the variables
included in the regression specifications. Large (small) BHCs are defined in terms of
assets above (below) a $10 billion asset threshold adjusted for the growth rate of indus-
try assets. For detailed variable definitions see Section 3 and Appendix B.

                                                   All        Small BHCs       Large BHCs
                                           Mean      StDev    Mean    StDev   Mean     StDev
    Hours                                   489       1368      98     177     1447     2255
    Assets ($ millions)                    36040     188494   2541    1754    118050   336230
    Log(Hours)                              4.15      2.16     3.35   1.74      6.11    1.82
    Log(Assets)                             8.44      1.50     7.66   0.57     10.34    1.37
    Rating                                  1.99      0.78     2.01   0.82      1.92    0.64
    Log(N BHC Subsidiaries)                 2.48      1.30     1.92   0.77      3.83    1.36
    Log(N BHC Employees)                    6.99      1.47     6.24   0.65      8.82    1.31
    HHI, asset concentration                0.51      0.10     0.53   0.10      0.47    0.10
    Loan Share                              0.66      0.12    0.67    0.11     0.62     0.13
    Ongoing Full Exam                       0.28      0.45     0.24   0.43      0.37    0.48
    Large BHC                               0.29      0.45       0      0        1       0
    Tier 1 Capital Ratio                   11.83      3.23    12.16   3.26     11.03      3
    Share of District Assets in Distress    0.18      0.27     0.19   0.28      0.14    0.24
    Observations                           16372              11624            4748




                                               42
Table 2: Baseline regression. This table presents estimates of supervisory hours on bank
size (assets), complexity (number of subsidiaries) and dummy variables for supervisory
ratings. Sample is 1998Q1-2014Q4. Standard errors clustered by bank reported in brack-
ets. Significance: ∗ p < 0.1, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01

                                                     Log(Hours)
                                           (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)
               Log(Assets)               0.96∗∗∗   0.68∗∗∗   0.77∗∗∗   0.62∗∗∗
                                          [0.02]    [0.11]    [0.04]    [0.12]
               Log(N BHC Subsidiaries)                       0.26∗∗∗   0.14∗∗
                                                              [0.04]    [0.07]
               Rating = 2                0.23∗∗∗   0.15∗∗    0.22∗∗∗   0.13∗∗
                                          [0.05]    [0.06]    [0.05]    [0.06]
               Rating = 3                0.94∗∗∗   0.70∗∗∗   0.89∗∗∗   0.66∗∗∗
                                          [0.09]    [0.09]    [0.08]    [0.09]
               Rating = 4                1.30∗∗∗   1.07∗∗∗   1.25∗∗∗   1.03∗∗∗
                                          [0.11]    [0.11]    [0.11]    [0.11]
               Rating = 5                1.61∗∗∗   1.36∗∗∗   1.52∗∗∗   1.29∗∗∗
                                          [0.16]    [0.16]    [0.15]    [0.16]
               District, Date FEs?        Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes
               Bank FEs?                  No        Yes       No        Yes
               Adj. R2                    0.49      0.56      0.51      0.57
               Obs.                      17969     17969     17235     17235
               Distinct BHCs              785       785       727       727




                                           43
Table 3: OCC general assessment fee schedule. This table shows the OCC assesment
fee schedule on federally chartered commercial banks and savings association as a func-
tion of asset size. Source: 12 CFR 8 and OCC bulletins.

 If the amount of the total balance sheet    The Semiannual Assessment will be:
 assets (consolidated domestic and foreign
 subsidiaries) is: ($ millions)
                                         Year 2007
 Over      But Not Over                      This Amount ($)   Plus          Of Excess Over
                                                                             ($ millions)
 0         2                                 5,480             0             0
 2         20                                5,480             0.000227454   2
 20        100                               9,574             0.000181963   20
 100       200                               24,131            0.000118274   100
 200       1,000                             35,958            0.000100078   200
 1,000     2,000                             116,020           0.000081883   1,000
 2,000     6,000                             197,903           0.000072785   2,000
 6,000     20,000                            489,043           0.000061932   6,000
 20,000    40,000                            1,356,091         0.000050403   20,000
 40,000                                      2,364,151         0.000033005   40,000

                                         Year 2014
 Over      But Not Over                      This Amount ($)   Plus          Of Excess Over
                                                                             ($ millions)
 0         2                                 5,997             0             0
 2         20                                5,997             0.000236725   2
 20        100                               10,258            0.000189379   20
 100       200                               25,408            0.000123092   100
 200       1,000                             37,717            0.000104156   200
 1,000     2,000                             121,041           0.000085218   1,000
 2,000     6,000                             206,259           0.000075749   2,000
 6,000     20,000                            509,255           0.000064454   6,000
 20,000    40,000                            1,411,611         0.000048553   20,000
 40,000    250,000                           2,382,671         0.000033132   40,000
 250,000                                     9,340,391         0.0000328     250,000




                                             44
Table 4: OCC general assessment semiannual fee regressions. This table shows the
relation between OCC general assessments as a function of commercial banks’ assets
and ratings. The fees are calculated for the universe of all federally chartered commer-
cial banks that filed Call Reports in 2006:Q4 and 2013:Q4 using the fee schedule in Ta-
ble 3 and rating surcharges discussed in Section 4.2. Assets are actual, while ratings are
generated from a uniform distribution. The $10 billion asset threshold is expressed in
nominal terms.

                                                           Log(Fees)
                                                   (1)        (2)        (3)
                  Log(Assets)                    0.70∗∗∗    0.69∗∗∗    0.68∗∗∗
                                                  [0.00]     [0.00]     [0.00]
                  Post-2008 × Log(Assets)                   0.01∗∗∗
                                                             [0.00]
                  Post-2008 × (Assets ≥ $10bn)                         0.47∗∗∗
                                                                        [0.03]
                  Post-2008 × (Assets < $10bn)                         0.03∗∗∗
                                                                        [0.00]
                  Rating = 2                     -0.01∗     -0.01∗     -0.01∗
                                                  [0.01]     [0.01]     [0.01]
                  Rating = 3                     0.40∗∗∗    0.40∗∗∗    0.40∗∗∗
                                                  [0.01]     [0.01]     [0.01]
                  Rating = 4                     0.68∗∗∗    0.68∗∗∗    0.68∗∗∗
                                                  [0.01]     [0.01]     [0.01]
                  Rating = 5                     0.69∗∗∗    0.69∗∗∗    0.69∗∗∗
                                                  [0.01]     [0.01]     [0.01]
                  Constant                         -0.03      -0.02     0.04∗
                                                  [0.02]     [0.02]     [0.02]
                  Adj. R2                         0.99       0.99       0.99
                  Obs.                            2866       2866       2866
                  Distinct NAs                    1772       1772       1772




                                            45
Table 5: Supervisory production function regression. This table presents estimates of
supervisory hours on alternative measures of bank size (employees) and complexity
(loan share and asset concentration) as well as dummy variables indicating whether
a banking institution is undergoing a full-scope examination. Large (small) BHCs are
defined in terms of assets above (below) a $10 billion asset threshold adjusted for the
growth rate of industry assets. Sample is 1998Q1-2014Q4. Standard errors clustered by
bank reported in brackets. Significance: ∗ p < 0.1, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01

                                                          Log(Hours)
                                     (1)          (2)     (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)
    Log(Assets)                    0.59∗∗∗   0.53∗∗∗    0.80∗∗∗   0.63∗∗∗   0.79∗∗∗   0.65∗∗∗
                                    [0.08]    [0.16]     [0.03]    [0.12]    [0.04]    [0.12]
    Rating = 2                     0.23∗∗∗   0.13∗∗     0.22∗∗∗   0.13∗∗    0.14∗∗∗     0.05
                                    [0.05]    [0.06]     [0.05]    [0.06]    [0.05]    [0.06]
    Rating = 3                     0.90∗∗∗   0.66∗∗∗    0.90∗∗∗   0.67∗∗∗   0.71∗∗∗   0.51∗∗∗
                                    [0.08]    [0.09]     [0.09]    [0.09]    [0.08]    [0.08]
    Rating = 4                     1.26∗∗∗   1.02∗∗∗    1.26∗∗∗   1.03∗∗∗   1.03∗∗∗   0.84∗∗∗
                                    [0.11]    [0.11]     [0.11]    [0.11]    [0.10]    [0.11]
    Rating = 5                     1.54∗∗∗   1.29∗∗∗    1.54∗∗∗   1.29∗∗∗   1.23∗∗∗   1.03∗∗∗
                                    [0.15]    [0.16]     [0.15]    [0.17]    [0.15]    [0.16]
    Log(N BHC Subsidiaries)        0.24∗∗∗   0.13∗∗     0.23∗∗∗   0.14∗∗    0.26∗∗∗   0.16∗∗
                                    [0.04]    [0.07]     [0.04]    [0.07]    [0.04]    [0.06]
    Loan Share                                            -0.27     0.48
                                                         [0.52]    [0.77]
    Asset Conc. (HHI)                                     0.44      -0.50
                                                         [0.56]    [0.76]
    Log(N BHC Employees)           0.21∗∗      0.12
                                   [0.08]     [0.16]
    Ongoing Exam × (Large BHC)                                              0.98∗∗∗   0.83∗∗∗
                                                                             [0.07]    [0.07]
    Ongoing Exam × (Small BHC)                                              1.98∗∗∗   2.08∗∗∗
                                                                             [0.04]    [0.04]
    District, Date, Ongoing FEs?    Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes
    Bank FEs?                       No         Yes       No        Yes       No        Yes
    Adj. R2                         0.51       0.57      0.49      0.55      0.62      0.68
    Obs.                           17234      17234     16846     16846     17235     17235
    Distinct BHCs                   727        727       716       716       727       727




                                             46
Table 6: Supervisory efforts and capital. This table extends the baseline regression
specification in Table 2 to include controls for a bank’s tier 1 capital ratio interacted with
a dummy for asset size. Large (small) BHCs are defined in terms of assets above (below)
a $10 billion asset threshold adjusted for the growth rate of industry assets. Sample is
1998Q1-2014Q4. Standard errors clustered by bank reported in brackets. Significance:
∗ p < 0.1, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01


                                                         Log(Hours)
                                       (1)             (2)         (3)           (4)
     Log(Assets)                     0.34∗∗∗         0.50∗∗∗     0.35∗∗∗       0.51∗∗∗
                                      [0.11]          [0.10]      [0.12]        [0.16]
     Rating = 2                                         0.08        0.02          0.15
                                                      [0.06]      [0.07]        [0.11]
     Rating = 3                                      0.50∗∗∗     0.51∗∗∗       0.54∗∗∗
                                                      [0.09]      [0.13]        [0.13]
     Rating = 4                                      0.81∗∗∗     1.48∗∗∗       0.75∗∗∗
                                                      [0.11]      [0.33]        [0.14]
     Rating = 5                                      1.13∗∗∗     2.00∗∗∗       1.10∗∗∗
                                                      [0.16]      [0.35]        [0.20]
     T1 Ratio × (Small BHC)          -0.03∗∗∗          -0.01       -0.00         -0.01
                                       [0.01]         [0.01]      [0.02]        [0.01]
     T1 Ratio × (Large BHC)           0.05∗∗∗        0.06∗∗∗       0.03        0.09∗∗∗
                                       [0.01]         [0.01]      [0.02]        [0.02]
     District, Date, Ongoing FEs?     Yes         Yes              Yes           Yes
     Bank FEs?                        Yes         Yes              Yes           Yes
     Adj. R2                          0.68        0.69             0.69          0.73
     Obs.                            17329       17329            9559          7770
     Distinct BHCs                    772         772              590           610
     Dates                        19981.20144 19981.20144      19981.20084   20091.20144




                                                47
Table 7: Changes in supervisory efforts by size over time. This table extends the base-
line regression specification in Table 2 to include interactions of asset size and size dum-
mies with a post-2008 dummy. Large (small) BHCs are defined in terms of assets above
(below) a $10 billion asset threshold adjusted for the growth rate of industry assets.
Sample period is reported below each column. Standard errors clustered by bank re-
ported in brackets. Significance: ∗ p < 0.1, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01

                                                       Log(Hours)
                                     (1)             (2)         (3)          (4)
      Log(Assets)                  0.93∗∗∗         0.65∗∗∗     0.90∗∗∗      0.62∗∗∗
                                    [0.03]          [0.12]      [0.02]       [0.07]
      Post-2008 × Log(Assets)      0.10∗∗∗         0.13∗∗∗
                                    [0.03]          [0.03]
      Rating = 2                   0.16∗∗∗           0.08      0.14∗∗∗        0.08
                                    [0.05]          [0.06]      [0.05]       [0.06]
      Rating = 3                   0.74∗∗∗         0.54∗∗∗     0.64∗∗∗      0.48∗∗∗
                                    [0.08]          [0.08]      [0.07]       [0.08]
      Rating = 4                   1.09∗∗∗         0.93∗∗∗     1.01∗∗∗      0.87∗∗∗
                                    [0.11]          [0.11]      [0.10]       [0.10]
      Rating = 5                   1.34∗∗∗         1.16∗∗∗     1.33∗∗∗      1.16∗∗∗
                                    [0.16]          [0.15]      [0.16]       [0.15]
      Post-2008 × (Large BHC)                                  0.61∗∗∗      0.65∗∗∗
                                                                [0.09]       [0.10]
      Post-2008 × (Small BHC)                                 -0.32∗∗∗     -0.19∗∗∗
                                                                [0.05]       [0.05]
      District, Ongoing FEs?        Yes            Yes         Yes           Yes
      Date FEs?                     Yes            Yes         No            No
      Bank FEs?                     No             Yes         No            Yes
      Adj. R2                       0.61           0.68        0.61          0.68
      Obs.                         17969          17969       17969         17969
      Distinct BHCs                 785            785         785           785
      Dates                     19981.20144    19981.20144 19981.20144   19981.20144




                                              48
Table 8: Substitution effects. This table extends the baseline regressions specification in
Table 2 to include each bank’s district share of other assets in distress (banks rated 3, 4 or
5). Large (small) BHCs are defined in terms of assets above (below) a $10 billion asset
threshold adjusted for the growth rate of industry assets. Sample is 1998Q1-2014Q4.
Standard errors clustered by bank reported in brackets. Significance: ∗ p < 0.1, ∗∗ p <
0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01

                                                          Log(Hours)
                                              (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)
            Log(Assets)                     0.92∗∗∗     0.66∗∗∗   0.89∗∗∗     0.61∗∗∗
                                             [0.02]      [0.10]     [0.02]     [0.10]
            Rating = 2                      0.17∗∗∗       0.07    0.17∗∗∗       0.08
                                             [0.05]      [0.06]     [0.05]     [0.06]
            Rating = 3                      0.74∗∗∗     0.51∗∗∗   0.72∗∗∗     0.52∗∗∗
                                             [0.08]      [0.08]     [0.08]     [0.08]
            Rating = 4                      1.08∗∗∗     0.87∗∗∗   1.10∗∗∗     0.92∗∗∗
                                             [0.10]      [0.11]     [0.11]     [0.11]
            Rating = 5                      1.40∗∗∗     1.14∗∗∗   1.43∗∗∗     1.20∗∗∗
                                             [0.16]      [0.15]     [0.16]     [0.15]
            Share Distress × (Small BHC)    -0.62∗∗∗   -0.54∗∗∗   -0.40∗∗∗   -0.31∗∗∗
                                             [0.10]      [0.10]     [0.10]     [0.10]
            Share Distress × (Large BHC)    0.87∗∗∗     0.72∗∗∗      0.12       0.12
                                             [0.17]      [0.15]     [0.18]     [0.16]
            Post-2008 × (Large BHC)                                0.76∗∗∗    0.69∗∗∗
                                                                    [0.11]     [0.12]
            District, Date, Ongoing FEs?      Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
            Bank FEs?                         No         Yes        No         Yes
            Adj. R2                           0.61       0.68       0.62       0.69
            Obs.                             17943      17943      17943      17943
            Distinct BHCs                     780        780        780        780




                                             49
Figure 4: Relation between supervisory hours and assets. This figure presents a binned
scatter plot and the fitted line of supervisory hours on BHC size obtained when con-
trolling for rating, district and date-quarter dummies (column 1 of Table 2, left-panel)
as well as bank fixed effects (column 2 of Table 2, right-panel).




                               1000                                        1000
  Quarterly Hours, log scale




                                100                                         100




                                 10                                         10

                                         1           10        100                  1            10        100
                                      Assets ($billions, log scale)               Assets ($billions, log scale)




                                                                      50
Figure 5: Relation between OCC semiannual fees and assets. This figure presents a
binned scatter plot and the fitted line of OCC fees on commercial bank assets as com-
puted in Table 4 on assets.



                                          1000
           Fees ($thousands, log scale)




                                           100




                                            10
                                                 .01   .1                   1          10
                                                       Assets ($billions, log scale)




                                                              51
Figure 6: Hours around examinations. This figure shows the average time pattern of su-
pervisory hours around the month when a bank’s full-scope examination ends. Hours
(orange line) are plotted relative to their level at month t-6. Vertical bars denote the fre-
quency of full-scope or other supervisory examinations. Large (small) BHCs are defined
in terms of assets above (below) a $10 billion asset threshold adjusted for the growth
rate of industry assets.
                                                      (a) Small BHCs
                                   1




                                                                                          5
             Examination frequency
                             .75




                                                                                                       4
                                                                                          Relative hours
                       .5




                                                                                                 3
               .25




                                                                                          2
                       0




                                                                                          1
                                       -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4              5   6
                                              Time from end of exam (months)

                                              Frequency of ongoing examamination (left)
                                              Mean hours relative to t - 6 (right)

                                                      (b) Large BHCs
                                   1




                                                                                          5
             Examination frequency
                             .75




                                                                                                       4
                                                                                          Relative hours
                       .5




                                                                                                 3
               .25




                                                                                          2
                       0




                                                                                          1




                                       -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4              5   6
                                              Time from end of exam (months)

                                              Frequency of ongoing examamination (left)
                                              Mean hours relative to t - 6 (right)



                                                            52
Figure 7: Tier 1 ratio against bank assets. This figure presents a binned scatter plot and
the fitted line of tier 1 capital ratio (percent) to BHC assets for the subsample pre-2009
(orange) and post-2009 (blue).

                                                   14
            Tier 1 ratio, percent




                                                   12



                                                   10



                                                    8
                                                           1                        10                         100
                                                                       Consolidated Assets ($billions, log scale)

                                                                                 Pre 2009      Post 2009



Figure 8: Average supervisory hour residuals over time. This figure shows the time
series of residuals of the baseline regression (column 1, Table 2) of the log of supervisory
hours on the log(assets) and other controls. The residuals are averaged by date and
whether the BHC is large or small on that date. Large (small) BHCs are defined in terms
of assets above (below) a $10 billion asset threshold adjusted for the growth rate of
industry assets.

                                                    1
            Log Quarterly Hours (model residual)




                                                                                                    2008:Q4

                                                   .5




                                                    0




                                                   -.5
                                                         1999   2001     2003     2005      2007   2009    2011      2013   2015

                                                                                Small BHC             Large BHC



                                                                                      53
A     Proofs and additional material
Proof of Proposition 1. Since a < a and s2 < s2 and F is decreasing in a, s2 for x = `,
we have:
                            F (` | a, s2 ) = max
                                               ∗
                                                 F (` | a, s2 )
                                                  a,s2

Given s2 > s2 , we have:
                                   F (` | a, s2 ) < F (` | a, s2 )
Next, consider the case of a perfectly informative signal. Then the first-order condi-
tion (3) yields:
                                                          
                         − Fs2 (` | a, s2 ) P( A) + N ( A) = Cs22 (s2 , A)        (16)
                                                              2
                  and − Fs2 (` | a, s2 ) P( A) + N ( A) = Cs2 (s2 , A)            (17)

With s2 > s2 , we have Cs22 (s2 , A) > Cs22 (s2 , A) so the left-hand sides of (16) and (17)
imply:
                              − Fs2 (` | a, s2 ) > − Fs2 (` | a, s2 )                   (18)
Since a and s2 are perfect substitutes, we have F ( x | a, s2 ) = F̂ ( x | a + s2 ). Then (18)
implies that a + s2 < a + s2 and therefore

                                   F (` | a, s2 ) > F (` | a, s2 )

With a less than perfect signal, s2 is slightly lower and s2 slightly higher which strength-
ens the inequality.                                                                       

Detail on Conjecture 5. To get a sense of how the marginal benefit of more preci-
sion varies with bank size, note that the left-hand side of the first-order condition (8) is
increasing in four differences in expected utility for the supervisor:
                                                                                      
            V ( a, s2 ) − V ( a, s2 ) = F (` | a, s2 ) − F (` | a, s2 ) P( A) + N ( A)
                                                                              
                                            + w h2 ( s2 , A ) − h2 ( s2 , A )              (19)
                                                                                      
            V ( a, s2 ) − V ( a, s2 ) = F (` | a, s2 ) − F (` | a, s2 ) P( A) + N ( A)
                                                                              
                                            − w h2 ( s2 , A ) − h2 ( s2 , A )              (20)
                                                                                        
            V ( a, s2 ) − V ( a, s2 ) = − F (` | a, s2 ) − F (` | a, s2 ) P( A) + N ( A)
                                                                              
                                            + w h2 ( s2 , A ) − h2 ( s2 , A )              (21)
                                                                                      
            V ( a, s2 ) − V ( a, s2 ) = F (` | a, s2 ) − F (` | a, s2 ) P( A) + N ( A)
                                                                              
                                            − w h2 ( s2 , A ) − h2 ( s2 , A )              (22)

All four utility differences consist of a difference in expected spillovers and a difference
in supervisory costs. The first two differences, (19) and (20), capture the utility impact


                                                54
of a higher likelihood of action a. This always leads to a lower default probability and
therefore lower spillover losses; if the signal is right, (19), it also means cost savings
while if the signal is wrong it is reduced by unnecessary additional costs, (20). The
second two differences, (21) and (22), capture the utility impact of fewer supervisory
mistakes. Note that “getting it right” leads to a higher default probability for a and a
lower default probability for a. Overall, we see that whether the benefit of precision (the
left-hand side of (8)) is increasing in bank size, and sufficiently so that dλ∗ /dA > 0, is
not straightforward. Ceteris paribus, it is more likely the more the two spillovers, N ( A)
and P( A), increase with A.                                                              

Proof of Proposition 2. We have assumed that λ∗ > 1/2 and G (λ∗ ) > 1/2, and we
know that Pr[ a | r ] > Pr[ a | r ]; therefore we have:
                                               
                                  1 − G ( λ ∗ ) λ ∗ > G ( λ ∗ ) (1 − λ ∗ )

With the ranking of conditional default probabilities in Proposition 1 we can therefore
rank
                           
                1 − G (λ∗ ) λ∗ F (` | a, s2 ) > G (λ∗ ) (1 − λ∗ ) F (` | a, s2 )
                   and    G (λ∗ ) λ∗ F (` | a, s2 ) > G (λ∗ ) (1 − λ∗ ) F (` | a, s2 ).

All other comparisons involve a mismatched ranking between the probabilities Pr[ a],
Pr[s2 | a], and/or F (` | a, s2 ), making a ranking of the products Pr[ a] × Pr[s2 | a] × F (` | a, s2 )
impossible without further assumptions.                                                           


B     Detailed variable definitions
Hours and Rating: See the discussion in Section 3.

Ongoing Full Exam: A dummy indicator for whether a full-scope exam is ongoing for
    a holding company in a given quarter. Source: NED confidential data.

Assets ≥ 10bn: An indicator for whether a bank has total assets greater than $10 bil-
     lion. The size threshold is deflated by the aggregate growth rate in BHC assets to
     account for growing size of BHCs. Asset data from FR-Y9C, item BHCK2170.

Tier 1 Capital Ratio: Tier 1 Capital Ratio from FR-Y9C. Tier 1 Risk-based capital di-
      vided by risk-weighted assets from FR-Y9C. Basel I (pre-2014) BHCK8274/BHCKa223
      Basel III (post-2014; including 2014 for advanced-approaches firms) BHCA8274/BHCAA223

N Bank Employees: The number of employees. Employee data from FR-Y9C, item BHCK4150.

HHI Asset Concentration: Measure of business concentration using a Herfindahl-Hirschman
    Index (HHI) for asset concentration. See Kovner, Vickery and Zhou(2014). Data


                                                   55
     from FR-Y9C. Sum of squares of the following asset types (all as proportion of
     total assets, item BHCK2170):

        • Total loans (BHCK2122)
        • Total trading assets (BHCK3545)
        • Fed funds and repo assets (pre-2002: BHCK1350; post 2002: BHDMB987 +
          BHCKB989)
        • Investment securities (BHCK1754 + BHCK1773)
        • The book value (not to exceed fair value), less accumulated depreciation, if
          any, of all real estate other than bank premises actually owned by the bank
          and its consolidated subsidiaries (pre-2000: BHCK2744 + BHCK2745; post-
          2000: BHCK2150)
        • Premises and other fixed assets (BHCK2145)
        • Investments in unconsolidated subsidiaries (BHCK2130)
        • Direct and indirect investments in real estate ventures (BHCK3656)
        • Cash (BHCK0081 + BHCK0395 + BHCK0397)
        • All other assets (pre-2001: BHCK3164 + BHCKb026 + BHCK5507 + BHCK2160;
          post-2001 and pre-2006: BHCK0426 + BHCK2160 + BHCK2155; post-2006:
          BHCK0426 + BHCK2160)

Loan Share: Proportion of total BHC assets that are loans. Data from FR-Y9C, BHCK2122,
     BHCK2170

N Bank Subsidiaries: The count of all legal subsidiaries of a given BHC, computed
    using NIC data. This series was first contructed by Nicola Cetorelli and Samuel
    Stern at the NY Fed. More detailed is available in Cetorelli and Stern (2015) “Same
    Name, New Businesses: Evolution in the Bank Holding Company” published in
    Liberty Street Economics on September 28, 2015.




                                          56
