NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

LABOR SUPPLY IN THE PAST, PRESENT, AND FUTURE:
A BALANCED-GROWTH PERSPECTIVE
Timo Boppart
Per Krusell
Working Paper 22215
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22215

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2016

We would like to thank seminar participants at ASU, Chicago, EIEF, LSE, NYU Stern, NBER
EF&G, Oslo, PSE, Sveriges Riksbank, and UCL for many valuable comments and suggestions.
Kasper Kragh-Sørensen provided valuable research assistance. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Timo Boppart and Per Krusell. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Labor Supply in the Past, Present, and Future: a Balanced-Growth Perspective
Timo Boppart and Per Krusell
NBER Working Paper No. 22215
May 2016
JEL No. E21,J22,O11,O40
ABSTRACT
What explains how much people work? Going back in time, a main fact to address is the steady
reduction in hours worked. The long-run data, for the U.S. as well as for other countries, show a
striking pattern whereby hours worked fall steadily by a little below a half of a percent per year,
accumulating to about a halving of labor supply over 150 years. In this paper, we argue that a
stable utility function defined over consumption and leisure can account for this fact, jointly with
the movements in the other macroeconomic aggregates, thus allowing us to view falling hours as
part of a macroeconomy displaying balanced growth. The key feature of the utility function is an
income effect (of higher wages) that slightly outweighs the substitution effect on hours. We also
show that our proposed preference class is the only one consistent with the stated facts. The class
can be viewed as an enlargement of the well-known “balanced-growth preferences” that dominate
the macroeconomic literature and that demand constant (as opposed to falling) hours in the long
run. The postwar U.S. experience, over which hours have shown no net decrease and which is the
main argument for the use of “balanced-growth preferences”, is thus a striking exception more
than a representative feature of modern economies.

Timo Boppart
Institute for International Economic Studies
Stockholm University
SE-106 91 Stockholm
Sweden
timo.boppart@iies.su.se
Per Krusell
Institute for International Economic Studies
Stockholm University
106 91 STOCKHOLM
SWEDEN
and NBER
per.krusell@iies.su.se

2

1

Introduction

The purpose of this paper is to propose a choice- and technology-based theory for the
long-run behavior of the main macroeconomic aggregates. Such a theory—standard
balanced-growth theory, specifying preferences and production possibilities along
with a market mechanism to be consistent with the data—already exists, but what
we argue here is that it needs to be changed. A change is required because of data
on hours worked that we document at some length: over a longer perspective—going
back a hundred years and more—and looking across many countries, hours worked
are falling at a remarkably steady rate: at a little less than half a percentage point

600

800

1000

1200

1400 1600

per year. Figure 1 illustrates this for a collection of countries.1 This finding turns

1870

1913

1950

1973

19901998

Figure 1: Average yearly hours worked per capita 1870–1998
Source: Maddison (2001). The sample includes the following 25 countries: Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany,
Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom, Ireland, Spain, Australia, Canada, United States, Argentina,
Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Mexico, Peru, Venezuela, Japan. Regressing the log of hours worked on a country fixed effect and year gives
a slope coefficient of -0.00462 in the full sample (and -0.00398 for the period 1950–1998). Huberman and Minns (2007) provide similar
data.

out to contrast the data in the postwar U.S., where hours are overall well described
1

We document these facts in greater detail later in the paper using a number of different data
sets. The particular data set underlying Figure 1 uses extrapolation for the first data points,
except for the U.K., for which there are direct measures.

3
as stationary, but going back further in time and looking across countries leads one
to view the recent U.S. data rather as an exception.
Since the persistent fall in hours worked is not consistent with the preferences
and technology used in the standard macroeconomic framework, we alter this framework. Our alteration is very simple and, on a general level, obvious: to rationalize
decreasing hours worked we point to steadily increased productivity over very long
periods and preferences over consumption and leisure with the feature that income
effects on hours exceed substitution effects. As in the case of the standard setting,
we however also impose additional structure by summarizing the long-run data as
(roughly, at least) having been characterized by balanced growth. So on a balanced
growth path, our main economic aggregates—hours worked, output, consumption,
investment, and the stock of capital—all grow at constant rates. Characterizing the
data as fluctuations around such a path may be viewed as a poor approximation,
but here we nevertheless do maintain the position that such a characterization is
roughly accurate, at least for the last 150 years of data for many developed countries. Hence, we ask: is there a stable utility function such that consumers choose
a balanced growth path, with constant growth for consumption, and constant (negative) growth for hours, given that labor productivity grows at a constant rate?
We restrict ourselves to time additivity and constant discounting, in line with the
assumptions used to derive the standard preference framework. We also restrict
attention to the intensive margin of labor supply in our theoretical analysis. We
find that there indeed are preferences that do deliver the desired properties and our
main result is a complete characterization of the class of such preferences.
The modern macroeconomic literature is based on versions of a framework featuring balanced growth with constant hours worked, to a large extent motivated with
reference to postwar U.S. data; see, e.g., Cooley and Prescott (1995). Our main
point here is not to take fundamental issue with this practice; in fact, our proposed
utility specification in some ways is quantitatively very similar to the preferences

4
normally used. However, for some issues the distinction may be important. As for
discussion of hours historically, there is significant recognition in the macroeconomic
literature that from a longer-run perspective, hours worked have indeed fallen. For
example, several broadly used textbooks actually do point to significant decreases
over the longer horizon, often with concrete examples of how hard our grandparents worked; see, e.g., Barro’s (1984) book and Mankiw’s (2010) latest intermediate
text. In a discussion of some significant length, Mankiw actually reminds us of a very
well-known short text wherein John Maynard Keynes speculated that hours worked
would fall dramatically in the future—from the perspective he had back then (see
Keynes, 1930). Keynes thus imagined a 15-hour work week for his grandchildren,
in particular, supported by steadily rising productivity. As it turned out, Keynes
was wildly off quantitatively, but we would argue that he was right qualitatively (on
this issue. . . ). Finally, in his forthcoming chapter on growth facts, Jones (2015) also
points to the tension between the typical description of hours as stationary and the
actual historical data.2
From Keynes’s U.K. perspective, over the postwar period, and in contrast to
the U.S. experience, hours worked actually fell steadily until as recently as circa
1980, at which point they appear to have stabilized; we review the data in some
detail in Section 2 below. But perhaps more importantly, the picture that arises
from looking at a broader set of countries strengthens the case for falling, rather
than constant, hours, and going further back in time reinforces this conclusion.
With our eye-balling, at least, a reasonable approximation is actually even more
stringent: hours worked are falling at a rate that appears roughly constant over
longer periods (though, of course, with swings over business cycles, etc.). This rate
is slow—somewhere between 0.3% and 0.5% per year—so shorter-run data will not
2

Jones writes “A standard stylized fact in macroeconomics is that the fraction of the time spent
working shows no trend despite the large upward trend in wages. The next two figures show
that this stylized fact is not really true over the longer term, although the evidence is somewhat
nuanced”.

5
suffice for detecting this trend, to the extent we are right; to halve the number of
hours worked at this rate requires around 175 years.
Turning back to the case of the U.S., over the last more than 150 years, thus, as
hours have fallen, output has grown at a remarkably steady rate, mainly interrupted
only by the Great Depression and World War II. Moreover, over this rather long
period, all the other macroeconomic balanced-growth facts also hold up very well;
we review these data briefly in Section 2.3. Thus, as output is growing at a steady
rate, hours are falling slowly at a steady rate. The interpretation of these facts that
we adopt here is that preferences for consumption and hours belong to the class
we define. This preference class is, in fact, very similar to that used ubiquitously
in the macroeconomic literature: that defined in King, Plosser, and Rebelo (1988).
King, Plosser, and Rebelo showed that the preferences they put forth, often referred
to as KPR or, perhaps more descriptively, balanced-growth preferences, were the
only ones consistent with an exact balanced growth path for all the macroeconomic
variables with the restriction to constant hours worked. The class of preferences
that we consider in the present paper is thus strictly larger in that it also allows
hours worked to change over time at a constant rate along a balanced path.
In compact terms, one can describe the period utility function under KPR as
a power function of cv(h), where c is consumption and h hours worked and v is
an arbitrary (decreasing) function. What we show in our main Theorem 1 is that
ν

the broader class has the same form: period utility is a power function of cv(hc 1−ν ),
where ν < 1 is the preference parameter that guides how fast hours shrink relative to
productivity. In terms of gross rates, if productivity grows at rate γ, then hours grow
ν

at rate γ −ν , whereas consumption grows at γ 1−ν . For ν > 0, the factor c 1−ν captures
the stronger income effect: as consumption grows, there is an added “penalty” to
working (since v is decreasing). Our preference class obviously nests KPR: KPR
corresponds to ν = 0.
Interestingly, our class encompasses some utility functions that are often used

6
in the literature (both in macroeconomics and in other fields). One is another
famous functional form of the same vintage as KPR: Greenwood, Hercowitz, and
Huffman’s (1988) proposed utility function, often referred to as GHH preferences.
The GHH class assumes a quasi-linear utility function where utility can be written
as a function of c minus an increasing (and convex) function of h. This formulation
implies that there is no income effect at all on hours worked. With a judicious
choice of v and a ν < 0 we obtain a frequently used case within the GHH class in
which the convex function of hours is restricted to be a power function (and the
Frisch elasticity is constant). Clearly, without an income effect, hours worked grow
under this formulation (so long as productivity grows). GHH preferences are often
used in applied contexts (see, e.g., Chetty et al., 2011) because they allow simple
comparative statics.
Another well-known case is the utility function proposed in MaCurdy (1981)
displaying a constant Frisch elasticity of labor supply and a constant intertemporal
elasticity of substitution, where the period utility function is additive in a power
function of c and a power function of h. However, unless the function of consumption
is logarithmic (a special case of the power function), these preferences are well-known
not to be consistent with constant hours worked. We show, again by a judicious
choice of v, that our preference class actually includes this case. That is, this
class of utility functions is consistent with balanced growth—if one admits that
hours can change over time along a balanced path. For shrinking hours, one needs
the curvature to be high enough (higher than log curvature), since otherwise the
marginal utility value of working an hour will grow: if productivity doubles, the
marginal utility of consumption must more than halve, because otherwise it will not
be optimal to lower hours.
Another example of how our broadening of the class of balanced-growth preferences may be useful in applications involves curvature. In particular, under our
preferences the “consumption curvature”, or formally −ucc (c, h)c/uc (c, h), is an in-

7
ν

creasing (or decreasing) function of the hc 1−ν composite. Under KPR preferences,
this curvature equal a constant: a preference parameter (usually labeled σ). So, in
particular, it is possible that the curvature under our preference specification moves
countercyclically, thus displaying higher consumption risk aversion in recessions than
in booms. In the cross-section, by the same token, richer households would then be
less averse to risk (in the relative sense) and choose riskier portfolios. We briefly discuss this and other possible applications (to growth and business cycles) in Section
8 of our paper.
The paper begins with a data section, Section 2, which looks at hours worked
over different time horizons and in different countries. We look at both the intensive
and the extensive margin and argue that although there have been noticeable movements in the latter recently, over a longer horizon, essentially the entire fall in total
hours is accounted for by the former. Section 2 also briefly reviews the long-run
facts for aggregates, with a focus on the United States, in order to then motivate
our balanced-growth perspective. In Section 3, and to provide some background,
we first briefly discuss the preference class used in the macroeconomic literature to
match constant long-run hours and contrast it with a simple example that is actually
consistent with falling hours; a well-informed reader might want to skip this section.
The theory section of the paper is contained in Section 4 where we lay out the precise balanced-growth restrictions. The main theorem, Theorem 1, is then stated:
it states what kind of utility function is needed in order for households to choose
balanced-growth consumption and labor sequences. The proof of the theorem is in
the Appendix. However, the proof relies heavily on two lemmata—one characterizing
the implications of balanced-growth choices for the consumption-hours indifference
curves and one for consumption curvature—and we discuss those results in some detail in the main text. The theory section also has a Theorem 2, which is straightforward, showing sufficiency of the stated preference class for balanced-growth choices.
Section 5 discusses a number of specific functional forms that are useful in applica-

8
tions and comments on some of their properties. Section 6 comments on consumer
heterogeneity, a relevant issue since our theory relies on representative-consumer
analysis. This section also briefly discusses the cross-sectional wage-hours-wealth
data. Section 7 briefly discusses the U.S. postwar data from the perspective of our
theory: this data, with its stationary hours, is an exception historically and from an

1300
1100
900

Average annual hours

1500

international point of view, so what could explain it? Section 8 concludes.

1950 1955 1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015

Figure 2: U.S. average annual hours per capita aged 15–64, 1950–2013
Notes: Source: GGDC Total Economy Database for total hours worked and OECD for the data on population aged 15–64. The
figure is comparable to the ones in Rogerson (2006). Regressing the logarithm of hours worked on time gives an insignificant slope
coefficient.

2

Hours worked over time and across countries

We now go over the hours data from various perspectives: across time and space.

2.1

Hours over time

Figure 2 is the main justification for the assumption of constant hours worked maintained in the macroeconomic literature. At least in postwar U.S. data this seems to

9
be a good approximation.
What if we look at some other developed countries? Figure 3 shows hours worked
for other selected countries on a logarithmic scale. A horizontal line is no longer
a good approximation of the data. A country-fixed effect regression suggests that
hours fall at roughly 0.45% per year. To be sure, however, there is significant
heterogeneity; Canada, for example, has stationary hours quite like those in the

900

Average annual hours
1100
1300 1500

United States.

1950 1955 1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015
UK
Japan
Canada

France
Italy
Poland

Sweden
Germany
Switzerland

Figure 3: Selected countries average annual hours per capita aged 15–64,
1950–2015
Notes: Source: GGDC Total Economy Database for total hours worked and OECD for the data on population aged 15–64. The
figure is comparable to the ones in Rogerson (2006). Regressing the logarithm of hours worked on time gives a slope coefficient of
-0.00455.

The overall falling hours in Figure 3 are not due to the selection of countries. A
complementary Figure C.1 in the Appendix C.1 shows the graph for all countries
with available data. Average hours are declining clearly in this unrestricted sample,
at roughly 0.34% per year. Hence in the cross-country data of the postwar period the
United States and Canada overall rather look like outliers. Interestingly, as Figure
C.2 in Appendix C.1 shows, a time-use survey shows decreasing hours worked even
for the postwar United States.

10
From a longer-run perspective, hours worked in the U.S. have also clearly been
falling (see Figure 4). We also see that, abstracting from the very large deviations
from trend during Great Depression and World War II, hours have been falling at a

20

Weekly hours worked
22
24
26

28

30

rather steady rate. Only the period 1980–2000 looks exceptional.

1900 1910 1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000

Figure 4: Weekly U.S. hours worked per population aged 14+, 1900–2005
Notes: Source: Ramey and Francis (2009). Regressing the logarithm of hours worked on time gives slope coefficient of -0.00285.

Can the falling trend in hours worked be explained by demographics or the rise
in schooling? In Figure C.4 in Appendix C.1 we hold hours worked of different age
groups constant at their 2005 values and then check whether the observed changes in
the age structure can account for the falling hours. The effect implied by the demographic change is non-monotonic and overall very small.3 Furthermore, Ramey and
Francis (2009) also provide data on schooling (time attending school and studying
at home). As Figure C.5 in Appendix C.1 shows, average weekly hours of schooling
increased by less than two hours in total over the period 1900–2005 and cannot,
therefore, account for the drop in hours worked (hence: leisure has increased).
3

The baby boomers entering prime working age can partially explain the observed increase in
hours since the 1980s.

11
The time trend in total hours worked can be split up into trends in participation
rates and trends in hours per worker; in our theory, we focus on the latter. Figure 5
shows that hours per employed in the U.S. declined at a remarkably constant rate,
including during the postwar period. This is indeed a remarkably robust fact over
time and across countries though the rate of decline differs across countries (see
Figure C.3 in Appendix C.1). Figure C.6 and C.7 in Appendix C.1 show this split
in hours per worker and the participation rate again for the U.S. in the postwar
period as well as over the last century. In other words: hours in the postwar U.S.

40

50

60

70

are only relatively stable because the participation rate increased steeply.

1830

1850

1870

1890

1910

1930

1950

1970

1990

2010

Figure 5: U.S. weekly hours worked per worker in nonfarm establishments
1830–2015
Source: Average weekly hours data for 1830–80: Whaples (1990, Table 2.1). 1890-1970: Historical Statistics of the United States:
Colonial Times to 1970 (Series D765 and D803). 1970–2015: Statistical Abstract of the United States the number for nonfarm
establishments. This graph shows an updates series of the data in Greenwood and Vandenbroucke (2008). Regressing the log of hours
on a constant and year gives a slope coefficient of -0.00315 in the full sample (and -0.00208 for the years 1970–2015).

To sum up: over 100+ years, hours have been falling in all developed countries. In
the postwar data hours are still falling in most countries. In countries where they are
rather stable, like Canada or the U.S., they are stable only because the participation
rate increased quite dramatically. Hours per worker show a clear downward trend in

12
all countries. Participation rates do not show a clear trend over time in developed
countries. Hence we conclude that, purely in terms of trend extrapolation, if the
participation rate does not increase further in the U.S., hours will continue to fall.
In fact, since the Great Recession, the participation rate fell, as did hours worked
per working-age population.

2.2

Hours worked in the cross-section of countries

In the cross-section of countries, our theory predicts that labor productivity (or
GDP per capita) should be negatively correlated with hours worked. Winston (1966)
establishes such a negative relationship in a sample of 18 countries and estimates the
elasticity of hours worked with respect to GDP per capita to be -0.107.4 Bick, FuchsSchuendeln, and Lagakos (2015) document this negative correlation for a larger
sample that includes developing countries. Figure C.8 and Figure C.9 in Appendix
C.1 shows this negative correlation in the postwar data for the pooled sample and
the years 1955 and 2010 separately.
Finally, in Figure C.10 Appendix C.1 we focus on the 21 countries with data for
1955–2010 and look at the correlation in the growth rates in labor productivity and
hours worked over these 55 years. The figure shows again that hours fell for most
of the countries. Moreover, with the exception of South Korea, labor productivity
growth is clearly negatively related with the growth rate in hours worked.

2.3

The balanced-growth facts

Lastly, and for completeness, we now review the basic “stylized facts of growth” for
the United States. These data have been instrumental in guiding the technology
and preference specifications in macroeconomic theory.
4

With a labor productivity growth of 2.5 percent per year this slope coefficient suggests that
hours worked decrease at 0.26 percent per year.

5000

2000

5000

15000

10000

25000

20000 30000

35000

13

1850

1900

1950

2000

1930

1970

1990

2010

0

0

1

.2

2

.4

3

.6

4

.8

5

6

(b) Consumption per capita

1

(a) GDP per capita

1950

1930

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

(c) Consumption-output ratio

2010

1930

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

(d) Capital-output ratio

Figure 6: Balanced growth
Source: BEA and Maddison project.

Figure 6a and 6b show how output and consumption grew over the decades at
a very steady rate. Figure 6c and 6d show that the consumption-output ratio and
the capital-output ratio remained remarkably stable. (Figure C.11 in Appendix C.1
shows the capital-output ratio over an even longer time horizon and an additional
balanced-growth fact often imposed in the macroeconomic literature: constant factor income shares.) Our main take-away message from Figure 6 is that—in the
style of Kaldor (1961)—we would like to impose restrictions on our macroeconomic
framework such that it is consistent with these facts.

14

3

Standard utility and a contrasting example

We now proceed to discuss whether the data we illustrated above can be rationalized
based on a stable utility function over consumption and leisure. To do this, we begin
in Section 3.1 by reminding the reader of the utility functions ordinarily used in
macroeconomic analyses when restricting attention to balanced growth paths with
constant hours. We thus present King, Plosser, and Rebelo’s (1988) formulation and
a parametric example which encompasses all the most commonly used functions.
Furthermore, we give an example in Section 3.2 that is outside this class and that
admits hours falling at a constant rate along a balanced growth path. We then
proceed with the general analysis in the following sections.

3.1

King, Plosser, and Rebelo (1988)

Consider time-additive preferences with a period utility function u(c, h), where c is
consumption and h hours worked. King, Plosser, and Rebelo (1988; KPR for short)
show that balanced growth with constant hours worked obtain if and only if u can
be written as
u(c, h) =


1−σ

 (c·v(h)) −1
1−σ

if σ 6= 1

(1)


log(c) + log v(h), if σ = 1.

The KPR class, sometimes referred to as “balanced-growth preferences”, has dominated the applied macroeconomic literature; in this literature, it is considered
paramount to use a framework that is consistent with a balanced growth path.
Within the KPR class, two special cases stand out. One is the Cobb-Douglas
case: u(c, h) = (c(1 − h)κ )1−σ /(1 − σ) for σ 6= 1 and (replacing the σ = 1 case)
u(c, h) = log(c) + κ log(1 − h). The Cobb-Douglas case, which is obtained by setting
v(h) = (1 − h)κ in (1), restricts the elasticity of substitution between consumption
and leisure to be one. This case, furthermore, is part of the Gorman class, i.e., the
marginal propensities to consume and work are independent of wealth.

15
The second frequently used case of KPR preferences is
1

h1+ θ
u(c, h) = log (c) − ψ
,
1 + 1θ
which is obtained by setting σ = 1 and v(h) = exp

(2)


1

1+
−ψ h1+ 1θ
θ


. The parameter

θ > 0 is then the (constant) Frisch elasticity, i.e., the percentage change in hours
when the wage is changed by 1 percent, keeping the marginal utility of consumption
(or wealth) constant.
One can actually nest the two above cases as
c1−σ 1 − ahb
u(c, h) =
1−σ

d

−1

,

(3)

which, for future reference, typically will be parameterized using ψ, θ, and κ, as
a=

ψ(1 − σ)
,
1 + 1θ

1
b=1+ ,
θ

and

d = (1 − σ)κ.

The functional form in (3) is obtained by setting v(h) = 1 − ahb

d
 1−σ

in (1).5 It is

straightforward to verify that the Cobb-Douglas case obtains when ψ = 1/(1−σ) and
θ → ∞. One can also show that the Frisch elasticity is constant when κ = σ/(1−σ),
which delivers
u(c, h) =


σ
1+ 1
c1−σ 1 − ψ(1 − σ) h1+ 1θ
−1
θ

1−σ

.

(4)

With σ → 1, the the formulation in (4) reduces to (2) as a special case. These
two cases, (2) and (4), are considered in Trabandt and Uhlig (2011), who also show
that these are the only functional forms within KPR admitting a constant Frisch
elasticity.
5

We again assume that for σ = 1, the utility function is given by the limit, or formally
limσ→1 u(c, h).

16
We will return to the “general special case” in (3) below in the context of falling
hours.

3.2

An example with falling hours

The KPR class does not admit hours falling at a constant rate. So suppose we look
at a case outside their class: the rather familiar function
1

c1−σ − 1
h1+ θ
u(c, h) =
,
−ψ
1−σ
1 + 1θ
which was proposed in MaCurdy (1981). Notice that this case is a generalization—
allowing different consumption curvature than the log case—of the most commonly
used constant-Frisch formulation in KPR: (2). A consumer facing a wage rate wt at
time t would thus have an intratemporal first-order condition reading
1

wt c−σ
= ψhtθ .
t
Is this equation consistent with balanced growth, in particular with hours falling
at a constant rate? Suppose that wages grow at rate γ > 1 and that consumption
grows at rate γc , with hours growing at γh , all in gross terms. For the first-order
condition to hold at all points in time we then need that
1

γγc−σ = γhθ .
On the type of balanced growth path considered in typical macroeconomic models,
we would have γ = γc , which is indeed consistent with this equation and then implies
that hours must grow at gross rate γh = γ (1−σ)θ . However, unless σ = 1 (logarithmic
curvature in consumption) this suggestion would not be consistent with the budget
or the aggregate (closed-economy) resource constraint as we would have wt ht growing

17
at a different rate than ct . Rather, for labor income and consumption to grow at the
same rate we need γγh = γc . Inserting this into the previous equation instead we
1

obtain γ 1−σ = γhθ

+σ

, so that γh = γ

θ(1−σ)
1+θσ

. We also see from this example that hours
1+θ

will be falling over time if σ > 1. Consumption will thus grow at rate γc = γ 1+θσ .
Turning to intertemporal considerations, the Euler equation here is a standard
one, since u(c, h) is additive; clearly, under a constant interest rate, it can be met
for a consumption path growing at a constant rate. Thus, we conclude that, at least
based on this utility function, it seems possible to rationalize falling hours worked
along a balanced growth path.

4

Theory

4.1

Balanced growth: technology and preferences

We now begin to set up our formal analysis. We will first state the balancedgrowth restrictions from the perspective of the aggregate resource constraint in a
closed economy. The workhorse macroeconomic framework has a final-good resource
constraint given by
Kt+1 = F (Kt , At ht Lt ) + (1 − δ)Kt − Lt ct ,

(5)

where capital letters refer to aggregates and lower-case letters per-capita values, and
F (Kt , At ht Lt ) is a neoclassical production function. Here, L is population, h is hours
worked per capita and δ the depreciation rate. Growth is of the labor-augmenting
kind, because of the Uzawa theorem.6 We thus assume constant exogenous technol6

Recently, Grossman, Helpman, Oberfield, and Sampson (2015) discusses an interesting exception
to the Uzawa theorem.

18
ogy and population growth, i.e.,
At = A0 γ t , and Lt = L0 η t .

(6)

Turning to preferences, we assume that they are additively separable over time with
a constant discount factor β. Quite importantly, and in line with the KPR setting,
the instantaneous utility, u(ct , ht ), is assumed to be stationary. Then households
(whether infinitely or finitely lived) maximize
· · · + u(ct , ht ) + βu(ct+1 , ht+1 ) + . . .

(7)

subject to a budget constraint
at+1 = (1 + rt )at + ht wt − ct

(8)

and, usually, a time constraint
ht + lt = 1,

(9)

(where l denotes leisure per capita and both h and l are non-negative). In the
following, however, we will focus on interior solutions so this time constraint will
not be used actively.
A balanced-growth path for this economy is a time path along which K and
c grow at constant rates. Feasibility of such a path thus requires
Lt+1 ct+1
Lt
ct

=

Kt+1
Kt

(see (5)). Hence, since

path implies a constant

At+1
At

= γ and

Lt+1
Lt

At+1 ht+1 Lt+1
At
ht
Lt

=

= η a balanced-growth

ht+1
.
ht

On a balanced growth path where labor productivity (alternatively, the real wage
per hour) changes at constant gross rate γ > 0, we need to have consumption grow
at the same rate as labor income. The derivations above led to gc = γgh , where
gc is the gross growth rate of consumption and gh that of hours worked. We thus

19
seek preferences such that gc and gh are determined uniquely as a function of the
growth rate in (real) wages. Thus, we parameterize preferences with a constant ν so
that gc = γ 1−ν and gh = γ −ν .7 A value of ν greater (smaller) than zero would then
correspond to the income effect of increasing productivity on hours being stronger
(weaker) than the substitution effect. The special case ν = 0 is of interest but we
will mainly focus on ν 6= 0; ν = 0 is the standard case, where hours will be constant
on a balanced growth path.
Thus, a balanced growth path is one where, for all t, ct = c0 γ (1−ν)t and ht =
h0 γ −νt , for some values c0 and h0 . One can think of c0 as a free variable here,
determined by the economy’s, or the consumer’s, overall wealth, with h0 pinned
down by a labor-leisure choice given c0 .
In the following we are interested in an interior solution of the consumption and
labor supply decision (i.e., ct > 0, 1 > ht > 0) that is consistent with a balanced
growth path: we confine attention to the intensive margin of labor supply.8 Such
an interior solution requires utility to be strictly increasing in consumption and
strictly decreasing in hours worked as well as some additional regularity conditions
we will comment on further below. Two first-order conditions are relevant for the
consumer’s optimization. The labor-leisure choice is characterized by
−

u2 (ct , ht )
= wt ,
u1 (ct , ht )

where wt , the return from working one unit of time, grows in the long-run at rate γ:
wt = w0 γ t .9 On a balanced growth path we thus need this condition to hold for all t.
In our theorem below, we will also require that preferences admit a balanced growth
7
8
9

With ν ≥ 1 the theory would predict decreasing (or constant) consumption as the wage rate
increases; we rule this case out.
We comment on the extensive margin in Section 6 below.
In a decentralized equilibrium, this return denotes the individual wage rate including potential
taxes and transfers. Similarly, the return on saving we discuss below should be taken to be net
of taxes and transfers.

20
path for all w0 > 0. That is, we are looking for preferences that imply first-order
conditions that admit a balanced path for consumption and hours at growth rates
γ 1−ν and γ −ν , respectively, regardless of the (initial) level of the wage rate relative
to consumption.
The intertemporal (Euler) equation reads
u1 (ct , ht )
= β(1 + rt+1 ),
u1 (ct+1 , ht+1 )
where r is the return on saving and β > 0 the discount factor. If the economy
grows along a balanced path, then we would like this condition to hold for all t,
and we need the right-hand side to be equal to an appropriate constant, a constant
that moreover may depend on the rate of growth of consumption and hours. We
will denote this constant R and discuss its dependence on c, h, and γ below. In
the subsequent analysis, we will switch from sequence to functional notation. Thus
we leave out t subscripts and instead specify the balanced-growth conditions as a
requirement that the paths of all the variables start growing from arbitrary positive
values (save for those nonlinear restrictions relating the variables to each other that
are implied by the equilibrium conditions): they can be scaled arbitrarily.

4.2

Balanced growth using functional language

Proceeding toward our formal analysis, now note that our balanced-growth path
requirements on the utility function can be expressed as follows.
Assumption 1. The utility function u has the following properties: for any w > 0,
c > 0, and γ > 0, there exists an h > 0 and an R > 0 such that, for any λ > 0,
−

u2 (cλ1−ν , hλ−ν )
= wλ,
u1 (cλ1−ν , hλ−ν )

(10)

21
and

u1 (cλ1−ν , hλ−ν )
= R,
u1 (cλ1−ν γ 1−ν , hλ−ν γ −ν )

(11)

where ν < 1.
That is, we must be able to scale variables arbitrarily, but of course consistently
with the balanced rates, and still satisfy the two first-order conditions. The scaling
is accomplished using λ (for wages/productivity), λ1−ν (for consumption), and λ−ν
(for hours) in these conditions. Our main theorem below will thus characterize
the class of utility functions u consistent with these conditions. Our theorem will
not provide conditions on convexity of the associated maximization problem (of the
consumer, or a social planner); obviously, however, conditions must be added such
that the first-order conditions indeed characterize the solution. We briefly discuss
this issue in Section 4.3.5.

4.3

The main theorem

Our main theorem states what restrictions on the utility function are necessary for
generating balanced growth.
Theorem 1. If u(c, h) is twice continuously differentiable and satisfies Assumption
1, then (save for additive and multiplicative constants) it must be of the form

u(c, h) =



 ν 1−σ
−1
c · v hc 1−ν
1−σ

,

for σ 6= 1, or


ν
u(c, h) = log(c) + log v(hc 1−ν ) ,

where v is an arbitrary, twice continuously differentiable function.
The proof relies crucially on two lemmata, one characterizing the marginal rate of
substitution (MRS) function between c and h and one characterizing the curvature

22
with respect to consumption: the relative risk aversion in consumption (RRAc )
function. The proof then uses these lemmata to derive the final characterization.
The proofs of the lemmata and of how to use them to complete the proof of the
theorem are contained in Appendix A.1. However, we will state and comment on
the lemmata, as they are of some independent interest, as well as on the overall
method of proof.
4.3.1

The consumption-hours indifference curves

We thus begin with the following lemma:
Lemma 1. If u(c, h) satisfies (10) for all λ > 0, and for an arbitrary c > 0 and w >
0, then its marginal rate of substitution (MRS) function, defined by u2 (c, h)/u1 (c, h),
must be of the form
1
ν
u2 (c, h)
= c 1−ν q(hc 1−ν ),
u1 (c, h)

(12)

for an arbitrary function q.
This lemma characterizes the shape of the within-period indifference curves.
ν

Notice here that, in the long run, hc 1−ν will be constant so that the argument of q
will not change over time. The proof technique for Lemma 1 is very similar to that
for Euler’s theorem.
The indifference curves are illustrated with the following sequence of graphs. In
Figure 7, we see the KPR indifference curves to the left and a case with ν > 0 to
the right, with consumption and leisure on the axes.10 Clearly, with ν > 0, a higher
labor productivity implies more leisure: the income effect exceeds the substitution
effect.
These same preferences can equivalently be depicted with consumption and hours
on the axes, as in Figure 8. As in the previous figure, the KPR case is to the left
10

For simplicity, we abstract from non-labor income in Figure 7.

23
c

c

1 1−h

l

1 1−h
(b) ν > 0

(a) ν = 0

Figure 7: The consumption-leisure trade-off, I
c

c

1

1

h

(a) ν = 0

h

(b) ν > 0

Figure 8: The consumption-leisure trade-off, II
and has constant hours worked, whereas in the right-hand side panel hours decline
with higher labor productivity.
Finally, Figure 9 takes the right-hand side graph from the previous figure and
puts it on the left. On the right, now, we see that same combination of points but
on log scales for both the axis. Here, the expansion path (dashed line) is linear, and
that is the defining characteristic of the indifference curves in Lemma 1: that is the
precise way in which the income and substitution effect have to be related in the

24
c

log c

1

h

log h
(b) log scale

(a) in levels

Figure 9: The consumption-leisure trade-off, III
class of utility functions that delivers balanced growth.11
4.3.2

Curvature

Next, let us characterize curvature of u with respect to c with Lemma 2.
Lemma 2. Under Assumption 1, the relative risk aversion in consumption (RRAc ),
−cu11 (c,h)
,
u1 (c,h)

must satisfy
−

ν
cu11 (c, h)
= p(hc 1−ν )
u1 (c, h)

for an arbitrary function p.
As for the previous lemma, let us point out that in the long run, i.e., along a
ν

balanced-growth path, hc 1−ν is constant. Thus, the RRAc will be constant. However, in general, its long-run level is endogenous, and over shorter time horizons, it
will not be constant.
The proof of the lemma is straightforward: it involves differentiation of the Euler
equation with respect to λ, the use of Lemma 1, and some manipulations.
11

The slope in Figure 9b is − 1−ν
ν . For ν < 0, the substitution effect would be stronger and
hours/effort would increase as the wage rises; then the right-hand side panel of Figure 9 would
depict a straight line with a positive slope.

25
The term relative risk aversion here is used for convenience; it is appropriate
only to the extent we consider a gamble where hours are not allowed to adjust. As
Swanson (2012) has shown, the appropriate risk aversion concept in typical applied
dynamic models with valued leisure is based on the value function.
4.3.3

The proof structure and some comments

The structure of the overall proof, based on the lemmata, is as follows. Our description is in two steps that are similar in nature. First, we use Lemma 2 to integrate
over c to obtain a candidate for u1 ; this can be accomplished straightforwardly since
the left-hand side of the lemma can be expressed as the derivative of log u1 with
respect to log c. Now note that integration with respect to one variable delivers an
unknown function (a “constant”) of the other variable. This function can then be
restricted by comparison with the characterization in Lemma 1 (a “cross-check”).
Second, after the first integration and cross-checking, with its implied restrictions, we integrate again with respect to c from the obtained u1 to deliver a candidate for u. Then, as in the previous step, another function of h appears and it too
needs to be cross-checked with Lemma 1 and thus further restricted. This, then,
completes the proof.
Notice that, although we were motivated by data displaying increasing productivity growth and falling hours, the proof does not assume γ > 1 or ν ≥ 0. Potentially,
the model could thus generate an increasing h at a constant rate as productivity
increases steadily, and we shall see an example of this below.
Furthermore, to our surprise, we did not see a full proof of the KPR result in
the literature.12 In particular, in the proofs we have looked at, the fact that the
RRAc is constant along a balanced path is taken to mean that this constant is
exogenous (i.e., given by a preference parameter σ and independent of h). This is a
12

We would be very grateful if someone could point us to a proof somewhere, because we may
well have missed it.

26
correct presumption but nontrivial to prove, and it is dealt with in our proof in the
Appendix A.1.
4.3.4

Sufficiency

We now provide the converse of the theorem above: with the utility function in
the specified class, the first-order conditions for optimization will be consistent with
balanced growth.
Theorem 2. Assume that ν < 1. If u(c, h) is given by

u(c, h) =



 ν 1−σ
−1
c · v hc 1−ν
1−σ

,

for σ 6= 1, or


u(c, h) = log(c) + log v(hc

ν
1−ν



) ,

where v is an arbitrary, twice continuously differentiable function, then it satisfies
Assumption 1.
Since this proof is much less cumbersome than that for the main theorem, and
since it involves the manipulations necessary in applied work based on the preference
class we identify here, we include it in the main text.
Proof. Straightforward differentiation delivers
1
u1 (c, h) =
c
and

ν

ν
ν v ′ (hc 1−ν ) 1−ν
1+
hc
ν
1 − ν v(hc 1−ν )

!



 ν 1−σ
c · v hc 1−ν

ν

 ν 1−σ
ν
1 v ′ (hc 1−ν ) 1−ν
c · v hc 1−ν
u2 (c, h) =
.
hc
ν
h v(hc 1−ν )

27
Dividing the latter by the former we obtain
ν

v ′ (hc 1−ν )

c
u2 (c, h)
=
u1 (c, h)
h1+

ν
v(hc 1−ν

)

ν

hc 1−ν
ν

v ′ (hc 1−ν )

ν
ν
1−ν v(hc 1−ν
)

hc

ν
1−ν

.

By multiplying c by λ1−ν and h by λ−ν we obtain that this expression increases
by a factor λ. We have thus reproduced the first part of Assumption 1, i.e., the
intratemporal first-order condition on a balanced-growth path.
By evaluating u1 (c, h)/u1 (cγ 1−ν , hγ −ν ), we obtain γ σ(1−ν) , i.e., an expression that
is independent of c and h and hence c and h can be scaled arbitrarily. By letting
R = γ σ(1−ν) we therefore see that also the second condition of Assumption 1 is
verified.

4.3.5

Utility maximization under explicit constraints

Our two theorems together state necessary and sufficient conditions for our utility
function to be consistent with balanced growth as represented by an interior solution
given by the first-order conditions in Assumption 1. The theorems are thus designed
strictly to characterize preferences. Whether an exact balanced growth path exists,
as a competitive equilibrium or the solution to a planning problem, with preferences
in the defined class is a different, though of course closely related, question. The
answer depends on features of the constraints facing the consumer/planner. For
example, if the marginal product of capital is not high enough for the given productivity growth rate when the capital input is at zero, the balanced-growth version of
the Euler equation could not be satisfied. Moreover, to ensure sufficiency of a maximum based on the first-order conditions requires not only features of the constraints
but also additional assumptions on preferences. We now briefly and informally discuss some of the issues that come up when discussing the more general existence

28
question. As a preview and summary, let us simply say that the main additional
restrictions are those normally assumed on constraints (such as non-emptiness, compactness, and convexity) and preferences (such as monotonicity and concavity).
Let us begin by pointing out that the conditions in Assumption 1 formally arise
from a consumer maximizing utility subject to a budget constraint where prices (w,
including its scaled-up values, and R) are treated as exogenous. As such, it is rather
general and could straightforwardly be applied to models where market allocations
are not necessarily optimal (such as with taxes or an overlapping-generations structure). If one took a planner’s perspective, however, the same first-order conditions
would arise with w represented by a marginal product of labor and R by a marginal
product of capital net of depreciation. Both these would then be functions of endogenous variables (capital and hours) but, on a balanced path, these would be
constant if the production function is homogeneous of degree one, and therefore it
is appropriate to regard them as arbitrary constants and hence our theorems can be
applied directly for a planning problem as well. However, whether appropriate such
constants exist for given technologies, and what they are, precisely requires some
additional discussion.
Since the constraints can differ depending on the specific application, we will not
present an additional theorem here but rather discuss three key issues—existence,
interiority, and sufficiency, each of which leads to potential pitfalls—and mention
some possible further restrictions on v. Starting with existence, as already alluded
to, one needs assumptions on technology to ensure that the first-order conditions
be met on balanced growth paths. Such assumptions are usually ensured with
Inada conditions, on production as well as preferences. To ensure existence of a
solution to a given maximization problem, one would typically make sure that the
utility function is continuous and the constraint set compact for an appropriately
chosen topological space. Here, a variety of standard regularity assumptions could
be invoked on our v and on the constraints.

29
Turning to interiority, this is a presumption we have been working with throughout. Clearly, for the first-order conditions to make sense we need utility to be
monotonic: (strictly) increasing in c and (strictly) decreasing in h. This is accomν
plished with the assumptions v(x) > − 1−ν
v ′ (x)x and v ′ (x) < 0 for all x.13 Moreover,

one needs to ascertain that corner solutions not apply; to rule such cases out, Inada conditions could again be used. E.g., to rule out zero hours for a consumer
maximizing utility, u2 (c, 0) = 0 for all c > 0 would be useful; for a planner, an
additional possibility is to assume F2 (K, 0) = ∞ for all K > 0. However, corner
solutions could be relevant and we do not want to argue generally that strong assumptions on v be made to ensure Inada conditions. It seems reasonable that zero
hours are in fact chosen for some consumers (with high enough wealth/low enough
productivity); moreover, we would like to think of hours in time units and then
there is also a natural upper bound on hours, one that will be reached for a low
enough productivity/wealth level; such bounds may have been relevant historically,
in fact.14
Second, one needs conditions for first-order conditions to be sufficient. In a static
context of labor-leisure choice, first-order conditions together with quasi-concavity
of u(c, h) constitute a typical sufficiency condition. In a dynamic model, matters
are somewhat more complicated. Stokey and Lucas (1989, Theorem 4.15) show how
to prove sufficiency of the first-order conditions in an infinite horizon framework together with a transversality condition, provided that the “return function”, denoted
F (k, k ′ ) there, is jointly concave in k and k ′ . Here, the return function involves h as
well and F (k, k ′ , h) then denotes u(c, h), where c has been replaced, using a resource
or budget constraint, by a concave function of (k, h, k ′ ). The Stokey-Lucas proof
extends straightforwardly to the case where h is included, so long as one can show
that F is now concave in (k, h, k ′ ). The assumption that u(c, h) is (strictly) concave
13
14

However, one would not want to rule out balanced growth paths where these assumptions are
met for some, but not all, values of x.
With an upper bound on working time, we also need to assume (γ − 1)ν ≥ 0.

30
in (c, h) suffices here to obtain (strict) concavity of F . The transversality condition
is derived straightforwardly exactly as in Stokey and Lucas’s treatment. In sum,
given a v(x) that, jointly with constraint set, is such that u(c, h) becomes strictly
concave, standard analysis based on first-order conditions can be used.
Turning to examples, consider a price-taking consumer, i.e., a constraint in the
form of an affine constraint in the choice variables each period. Let us first point out
that the MaCurdy (1981) function then satisfies all the above conditions including,
to the extent σ > 1, an Inada condition for consumption. In Section 5.3.3 below we
look at another concrete special case—that where σ = 1—for which we are also able
to solve for full transitional dynamics in closed form under appropriate assumptions
on technology; there as well, monotonicity and concavity are verified, along with
the existence of a maximum. More generally, one can imagine many other specific
assumptions on v under which the same conditions go through. It is of course also
straightforward to produce assumptions on v such that monotonicity and concavity
are not met. More nontrivially, it is possible to find preferences for Assumption
1, monotonicity, and concavity are all met but that at the same time do not allow
falling, non-zero hours, because such a solution to the first-order conditions is not
consistent with the constraint.15

5

Utility functions for applied use

This section discusses the implementation of our proposed preference class in applied
contexts. This involves discussing the value of ν, special parametric forms, how the
utility functions used in the literature relates to the utility functions here, along
with some of their properties.
15

For a very simple, static example, suppose v(x) is a power function such that we can simply
write u(c, h) = −c−b hd , where b and d are positive constants. In this case, u is strictly increasing
in each of its arguments, and under a further assumption (d > b + 1) it is also strictly concave.
One can show, for this case, that an interior choice for hours is only optimal if the consumer
has negative wealth.

31

5.1

What is ν?

This question refers to the new element we add to standard preferences as represented by KPR’s balanced-growth function (note that by setting ν = 0 in Theorem
1 we obtain the KPR class in (1) above). The added element amounts to an enlargement of the KPR preference class and is captured by the parameter ν, which
regulates the size of the additional income effect, i.e., that above and beyond the
income effect present in the KPR class. With ν > 0, hours fall when productivity
rises as the income effect dominates the substitution effect. Similarly, if ν < 0, hours
rise when productivity rises. In the data, as we have seen in Section 2, hours fall
as productivity rises, so the empirically relevant case is ν > 0. In fact, we can use
the time series data for an estimate of its value. Along a balanced growth path,
productivity grows at (gross) rate γ, hours fall at rate γ −ν , and consumption as well
as output grow at rate γ 1−ν . Thus, with productivity and hours growing at, say,
2% and -0.4%, respectively (these numbers are rough averages), we would obtain
an estimate of ν from 0.996 = 1.02−ν . The result is a ν around 0.2. Thus, when
restricting the analysis to long-run facts, the class of preferences we propose is not
larger: it is different, thus necessitating a ν of 0.2 rather than ν = 0.
The value of ν is key for the long-run behavior of hours, but of course the form
of v can matter greatly for many other aspects of how much people choose to work:
it matters for the level of hours (and therefore output and other macroeconomic
aggregates), for transitional dynamics, for how hours respond to shocks of various
kinds. We now look at a number of special cases.

5.2

Parametric forms

The applied utility function in the KPR class that we suggest was given by (3). The
straightforward extension of this parametric class to ν 6= 0 is obtained by simply
ν

writing, in place of h where it appears, hc 1−ν . Thus we propose, as a rather flexible

32
class for applied use,
c
u(c, h) =

1−σ





1 − a hc

ν
1−ν

1−σ

b d

−1
,

(13)

where we again have
a=

ψ(1 − σ)
,
1 + 1θ

1
b=1+ ,
θ

and

d = (1 − σ)κ.

Formally, this function is obtained by selection of a particular functional form for
 d
ν
v: v(x) = 1 − axb 1−σ with x ≡ hc 1−ν in Theorem 1. This parametrization can

straightforwardly be generalized further, e.g., by changing the functional form of the
squared brackets of x (say, by adding an additional x term to some different power).

However, as we show below, many interesting cases can indeed be viewed as special
cases of (13). We thus view it as a natural starting point.
5.2.1

Generalized log-log

A particularly simple case is the generalization of the standard log-log case to


ν
1−ν
.16 In Section 5.3.3 on transitional dynamu(c, h) = log(c) + κ log 1 − φhc
ics below, we will explore this case in some more detail for the special case κ = 1.

As we will show there, the generalized log-log formulation we use here inherits the
analytical convenience of the standard log-log case when combined with a CobbDouglas production technology and 100% depreciation.
16

This case is obtained by setting ψ = φ/(1 − σ) and θ → ∞ and letting σ → 1.

33
5.2.2

A case of the Greenwood-Hercowitz-Huffman (1988) preferences

With κ = 1 and θ = −ν in (13), where ν < 0 and ψ > 0, we obtain the quasi-linear
preferences
u (c, h) =







1
1− ν
1
1− ν

c−ψ h

!1−σ

−1

1−σ

if σ 6= 1,

(14)





1− 1

log c − ψ h 1ν
if σ = 1.
1−
ν

This is an often used case of the Greenwood-Hercowitz-Huffman (1988; GHH for
short) preferences.17 In this class, the Frisch elasticity is constant and equal to −ν.
These preferences are non-homothetic but they are part of the Gorman class. Preferences (14) also imply a relative risk aversion in consumption, −ucc (c, h)c/uc (c, h),
ν

which depends on hc 1−ν . GHH preferences preclude any income effect on hours
worked. Clearly, with a substitution effect alone, GHH preferences imply increasing
hours as the wage rate increases. Consequently, we have ν < 0 and there is no
overlap with the KPR class. For concavity we need σ > 0. Note also that the pref− 1−ν

erences (14) fulfill Assumption 1 only with 1 > ψ x1− ν1 and consequently additional
ν

restrictions are required.
Quasi-linear preferences are widely used in the applied theory and labor literatures, where the household problem is often assumed to be static and σ can be set to
zero without loss of generality. However, the quasi-linear formulation does preclude
income effects.
5.2.3

MaCurdy (1981)

With κ = 1/(1 − σ) and ν =

σ−1
σ+1/θ

in (13), for σ 6= 1, we obtain the case considered

by MaCurdy (1981) with
1

h1+ θ
c1−σ − 1
−ψ
u(c, h) =
,
1−σ
1 + 1θ
17

− 1−ν

A straighter path to this function is to set v(x) = 1 − ψ x1− ν1 .
ν

(15)

34
with σ > 0, ψ > 0, and θ > 0.18 The attractiveness of this functional form is that
two important elasticities are controlled by two separate parameters: the intertemporal elasticity of substitution (IES) is constant and equal to 1/σ and the Frisch
elasticity is equal to θ; we will discuss these two elasticities more broadly below. As
is well known, with σ 6= 1, preferences of the form (15) are not part of the KPR
class. For this reason, as already discussed in subsection 3.1, a significant part of
the macroeconomic literature restricts itself to the case with a unitary IES by addi1+ 1

tionally setting σ = 1.19 Then the preferences become u(c, h) = log (c) − ψ h1+ 1θ and
θ

are part of the KPR class.
Figure 10 below illustrates how σ and ν have to be restricted on a balanced path
with falling hours: ν > 0 requires σ >

1
1−ν

> 1. Thus, any point on the downward-

sloping curve is admissible (in the figure ν is set at a quantitatively reasonable
value).
5.2.4

Departing from time invariance or time separability

Our preferences rely on there being a stationary utility function u(c, h) characterizing
choice. It is not altogether uncommon in the literature that people use utility functions that are either not stationary or not time-separable. As for non-stationarity,
the typical assumption is that some elements of the period utility function shift with
labor productivity: preferences change over time, in line with technology. Such functions are often motivated by (but not derived from) some form of home-production
structure where the same productivity growth as in final-goods production occurs.20
18
19

20

1
 1−σ

(1−ν)(σ−1)
ψν
ν
for σ 6= 1.
One can also obtain this form directly by setting v(x) = 1 + (1−ν)
x
For instance, Shimer (2010) proposes this preference specification in chapter 1 of his textbook
and then writes “This formulation imposes that preferences are additively separable over time
and across states of the world. It also imposes that preferences are consistent with balanced
growth—doubling a household’s initial assets and its income in every state of the world doubles
its consumption but does not affect its labor supply. [. . . ] I maintain both of these assumptions
throughout this book.”
For a model of structural change between home and market production that generates long-run
changes in hours worked in the market place, see Ngai and Pissarides (2008).

35

θ
ν=0

θ=

ν
(1−ν)(σ−1)−ν

ν = 0.2

1

1 1−ν

σ

Figure 10: Combinations of elasticities
The figure shows combinations of relative risk aversion in consumption σ and Frisch elasticity θ in the functional
form (15) that are consistent with (i) constant hours (ν = 0) and (ii) hours falling at rate γ −0.2 . With two percent
productivity growth, i.e., γ = 1.02, and ν = 0.2 hours worked decline at roughly 0.4 percent per year.

36
As an example, one can make (15) consistent with constant hours in the long run
by adding a time-varying term in front of ψ that is growing at the appropriate rate
(see, e.g., Mertens and Ravn, 2011). Such a formulation has been deemed useful
when one wants to consider free curvature in consumption and hours separately and
yet not violate the balanced-growth conditions. Similarly, by adding a term that
grows at the rate of technical change in front ψ, also the GHH case in (14) can be
made consistent with constant hours worked. A deeper foundation for this kind of
utility function is proposed by Hercowitz and Sampson (1991), who appeal to human
capital accumulation—which, from a home-production perspective, would raise the
disutility of work.
Reconciling constant hours worked in the long run with a small (or non-existent)
income effect has also attracted some attention in the macroeconomic literature,
since small income effects are sometimes appealing when it comes to fluctuations
around a balanced growth path. Hence, the literature has extended the KPR class
by giving up the assumption of time separability. A particularly well-known case is
Jaimovich and Rebelo (2009). Our analysis shows that even the GHH utility function
(14) is part of the general balanced-growth preferences specified in Theorem 1 but
of course, as discussed above, they would imply increasing hours worked as wages
1

1−ρ
grow. However, by adding a “habit” term Xt = cρt Xt−1
in front of h1− ν to these

preferences, we can also obtain the preferences studied in Jaimovich and Rebelo
(2009).
The purpose here is not to take issue with preference formulations that depart
from time invariance or time separability. Relatedly, whether the additional terms
in such formulations ought to be exogenous to the individual (external) or controlled
by the individual (internal) is not a question we address here. It suffices to say that
the “tricks” that have been employed in the literature are still possible to employ
under our preference class. We will return briefly to the possibility of introducing
externalities in Section 6.2.

37

5.3

Often-discussed features of utility

Within the proposed parametric class (13) there are many possible functions that are
all consistent with balanced growth under falling hours but which differ in important
properties. Some of these properties are now discussed. We begin with curvature,
then turn to the Frisch elasticity of labor supply, and finally discuss qualitatively
different transitional dynamics in two special cases of the model where we also make
assumptions on technology for sake of tractability.
5.3.1

Consumption curvature

The IES—the intertemporal elasticity of substitution of consumption—measures
a form of curvature in consumption and is a key object in some macroeconomic
analyses. In a time-additive setting without an hours choice, it is also one divided by
the coefficient of relative risk aversion, −u′′ (c)c/u′ (c). However, in a context where
leisure is valued, it is more difficult to define these concepts. A natural measure
of risk aversion would define a lottery over consumption and hours, or over wealth;
Swanson (2015) discusses this question in detail. Thus, what we defined as our
RRAc function above, −ucc (c, h)c/uc (c, h), is not the most natural measure of risk
aversion: it is defined as lotteries over consumption only, keeping h fixed. Turning
to its characterization, Lemma 2 shows that it is endogenous—it is a function of
ν

hc 1−ν —but it is constant along the balanced growth path.
Similarly, the definition of the IES, i.e., d log(ct+1 /ct )/d log(1 + r), where r is
the net interest rate between t and t + 1, is more complicated when the utility
function includes hours worked. Along the lines of the definition above, one can
define a restricted IES notion keeping ht and ht+1 constant. When evaluated on the
balanced growth path one then obtains the IES 1/(−ucc (c, h)c/uc (c, h)), which again
ν

is constant over time from Lemma 2, but a function of hc 1−ν . Thus, one obtains one
divided by the curvature measure used above for the restricted notion of the RRAc .

38
Here we first wish to re-emphasize the point just made: although the relative
risk aversion in consumption remains constant on a balanced growth path, it can be
endogenously determined. In contrast, in the standard KPR setting, the IES is not
only constant on a balanced growth path but exogenous. We have the following.
Proposition 1. Given the preferences specified in Theorem 1, with ν = 0, the
intertemporal elasticity of substitution is independent of c and h: it equals 1/σ.
With ν 6= 0, however, the intertemporal elasticity of substitution can, but will not
ν

necessarily, depend on hc 1−ν .
Proof. For the KPR class this is verified straightforwardly. For the case ν 6= 0, two
ν

cases are dealt with in the text below: one where the IES is decreasing in hc 1−ν and
one where it is constant and exogenous (and equal to 1/σ).



For the MaCurdy formulation, it is straightforwardly verified that the RRAc
is exogenous and equals σ. However, under GHH, it is equally straightforwardly
verified, that the RRAc /IES is indeed endogenous. For many applications, perhaps
particularly in asset pricing, it may be interesting to consider preferences where
ν

the RRAc is decreasing in the consumption-hours aggregate hc 1−ν : in this case,
booms involve lower consumption curvature. One can imagine different functionalform assumptions here but one is yet another special case of (13). Thus, first set
κ = 1/(1 − σ) and we obtain
1

ν
c1−σ − 1
h1+ θ 1−ν
(1+ θ1 )+1−σ .
u(c, h) =
−ψ
1c
1−σ
1+ θ

(16)

This, clearly, is a slight extension of the MaCurdy case, allowing a variable RRAc .
Further, set 1 +

1
θ

= ǫ and

1−ν
ν

= ǫ. We then obtain the functional form

u(c, h) =

hǫ c2−σ
c1−σ
−ψ
,
1−σ
ǫ

(17)

39
for ψ > 0, σ > 2 and ǫ > σ − 1. In this case, we have
ǫ

(σ − 2)ψ hǫ c
RRAc = σ −
ǫ ,
1 + (σ − 2)ψ hǫ c
ν

(18)

1

which is decreasing in x = hc 1−ν = hc ǫ .
5.3.2

The Frisch elasticity

The Frisch elasticity of labor supply is defined as the percentage change in hours
when the wage rate is changed by 1 percent, keeping the marginal utility of consumption constant. It is a useful concept in the context of intertemporal substitution of
hours worked when there is a frictionless market for borrowing and lending: it relies
on the notion that whatever extra labor income is earned by working harder is in
part substituted toward other periods. This is captured by the requirement that the
marginal utility of consumption remain unchanged; it would change if the income
had to be consumed today.
The functional form we propose in Theorem 1 implies that the Frisch elasticity
is constant along the balanced growth path. To see this, note that we can write
u2 (c, h) =
c−σ
z (x),
h 4

c1−σ
z1 (x),
h

u11 (c, h) = c−σ−1 z2 (x), u22 (c, h) =

c1−σ
z (x),
h2 3

and u12 (c, h) =
ν

where z1 , z2 , z3 , and z4 are some functions of x = hc 1−ν . Inserting

these expressions into the formula for the Frisch elasticity,

u2 (c,h)u11 (c,h)
,
h[u22 (c,h)u11 (c,h)−u12 (c,h)2 ]

one immediately sees that the Frisch elasticity only depends on x, which remains
constant along a balanced growth path. Note, however, that its balanced-growth
value will be endogenous and will in general depend on model parameters; in a
model with heterogeneous agents it would also differ across rich and poor, and so
on.
For the KPR formulation, as pointed out below, Trabandt and Uhlig (2011)
provide a theorem specifying for which subclass of KPR that the Frisch elasticity is
1+ 1

constant, i.e., independent of (c, h): it is constant under u(c, h) = log(c)−ψ h1+ 1θ and
θ

40
it is constant under u(c, h) =

c1−σ
1−σ


1 σ
h1+ θ
1 − κ(1 − σ) 1+ 1
(for σ 6= 1 and κ > 0), but

it is constant for no other function.

θ

21

Our formulation, for ν 6= 0, appears harder to

characterize fully in this regard, but it is clear that there are two additional cases
in which the Frisch elasticity is constant. One is our GHH formulation, for which
the Frisch elasticity is equal to −ν. Interestingly, although the Frisch elasticity
for any given function u(c, h) generally does not feature invariance with respect to
monotone transformations—the elasticity for u is different than that for f (u), where
f is monotone—it is actually invariant in the GHH case. The second case obtains
with the MaCurdy function. So far, we know of no other cases than these two.
5.3.3

Transitional dynamics: two simple examples

Under some additional conditions, as discussed in Section 4.3.5 above, the preferences in Theorem 1 guarantee the existence of a balanced growth path for any neoclassical production function. Along this balanced growth path, the growth rates
of all the variables are completely characterized by the rate of technical change γ,
population growth η, as well as our new preference parameter ν. For transition
dynamics, it is useful to detrend any growing (or shrinking) variables with their respective growth rates. Detrended capital—the only state variable in our one-sector
model—is k̂t ≡
tion as ĥt ≡

Kt
,
η t γ (1−ν)t

ht
γ −νt

whereas we define detrended hours worked and consump-

and ĉt ≡

ct
,
γ (1−ν)t

respectively. Thus, on the balanced path, k̂

is constant and this value, as usual, is determined jointly by the Euler equation,
which delivers k̂/ĥ as a function of preference and technology parameters, and the
first-order condition for hours, which involves k̂ and ĥ, where for each equation the
resource constraint has been used to eliminate the consumption variable. For given
model parameters the transitional dynamics can then be solved for numerically using standard methods, e.g., using linearization around the steady-state value k̂. It
21

Recall that we nest the former as a special case of the latter with our formulation of a parameterized KPR family in (3).

41
is beyond the scope of the present analysis to fully explore how the preferences we
propose alter transition dynamics in well-known models. Rather, we will illustrate
different possibilities with two simple examples where the dynamics can be solved
for in closed form. In the first case, we will focus on preferences with σ = 1 and in
the second, we will examine the MaCurdy class. As we shall see, the transitional
dynamics for hours are qualitatively different in these two cases. Both cases involve
100% depreciation of capital, which does not appear restrictive to us since the focus
here is on growth and the time period can be chosen to be long enough that such
an assumption is not so unrealistic.
Cobb-Douglas production with σ = 1 So let us assume that σ = 1, that the
production function is Cobb-Douglas, i.e., Ktα (γ t ht η t )

1−α

, and that there is 100%

depreciation. Under these assumptions the first-order conditions for the planner’s
solution can be expressed (in terms of detrended variables) as
ηγ 1−ν k̂t+1 = k̂tα ĥt1−α − ĉt ,

−(1 − α)

k̂t
ĥt

!α

=

ĉt

"

ĥt 1 +

#
v ′ (xt )
x
v(xt ) t
,
ν v ′ (xt )
x
t
1−ν v(xt )

′

ν v (xt )
βα
ĉt+1 1 + 1−ν v(xt ) xt
=
′
ĉt 1 + ν v (xt+1 ) xt+1
γ 1−ν
1−ν v(xt+1 )

ĥt+1
k̂t+1

!1−α

.

It is straightforward to guess, and verify, that a constant saving rate of αβη, i.e., ĉt =
 1
 1−ν
−να 1−να
x̄
α 1−α
(1 − αβη)k̂t ĥt , a constant xt ≡ x̄, and hours supply of ĥt = (1−αβη)ν k̂t
,
satisfies these conditions with



ν
1−α
′
v (x̄)x̄ = v ′ (x̄) x̄
v (x̄) +
−
1 − αβη
1−ν

(19)

42
determining the solution for x̄.22 The speed of convergence −
1−α
1−αν

∂ log(k̂t+1 /k̂t )
∂ log k̂t

is given by

and consequently strictly increasing in ν. Obviously, not any function v can be

used here, and the Appendix B.2 provides an example with a simple functional form
for v(x) such that (19) can be solved explicitly for x̄. Since the Frisch elasticity can
be written as a function of xt alone the closed-form solution also implies a constant
Frisch elasticity even along the transition.
The solution for hours just derived implies that if the initial capital stock is below
its balanced-growth level, hours worked will be above their balanced-growth level.
This illustration shows how transitional dynamics might be helpful for understanding
the high and steeply decreasing hours worked in France or Germany after World
War II resulting from a relatively low physical capital stock. Of course, the precise
shape of the transitional dynamics depend on the functional form of preferences and
technology, so the example here is only meant as an illustration and the dynamics
do not generalize; for example, below we construct a case where x adjusts over the
transition but where detrended hours are constant.
MaCurdy preferences with CES production Suppose preferences are
1+ 1

c1−σ −1
−
1−σ

ψ h1+ 1θ , with σ 6= 1, and again let us focus on a planning problem. Here, a Cobbθ

Douglas production function does not admit a closed-form solution. However, one
can show that the result in Koulovatianos and Mirman (2007) can be extended to
the MaCurdy case (and thus with endogenous hours): a closed-form solution with
a constant saving rate along the transition path obtains when σ/ε = 1, where ε
is the degree of substitutability between capital and hours in a CES production
function. Thus, a constant saving rate can be optimal for very high consumption
curvature and hence a low intertemporal consumption substitutability so long as
the production function features a correspondingly high elasticity of transformation
22

The closed-form solution also obtains in the presence of TFP variations, predictable or not.
Hours then respond to TFP but x and the saving rate are constant.

43
across time. The case where σ = ε = 1 is well known here but the other cases
appear less well known.
Given that we can extend the result to to the MaCurdy preference class, how are
hours chosen in this case? It is straightforward to show, as is detailed in Appendix
B.2, that detrended hours, ĥ, are constant during transition. That is, unlike in the
ν

case we looked at first, where the hours-consumption composite hc 1−ν is constant
and hours are higher when the economy starts out with low capital, here detrended
ν

hours remain constant whereas hc 1−ν is moving monotonically. The saving rate out
1

of gross output remains constant along the transition and is equal to 1 − η(αβ) σ .
Interestingly, with the CES production function factor shares change along the transition.23

6

Consumer heterogeneity and cross-sectional facts

We now comment briefly on two important concerns. One is that the analysis so
far has exclusively looked at a representative-agent economy, so a natural question
is whether our results are robust to introducing consumer heterogeneity of various
forms. Another concern has to do with the cross-sectional implications of our preference class: if income effects exceed substitution effects, it seems that high-wage
workers would work less than low-wage workers and perhaps make different portfolio
choices too. We therefore also discuss this aspect below.

6.1

Models of consumer heterogeneity

Our theory of labor supply in the long run, strictly speaking, holds only for a
representative-agent economy. Is it relevant, then, in cases when aggregation does
23

The closed-form solution with a constant saving rate also extends to a case where there are
additional time-varying (random or deterministic) Hicks- or Harrod-neutral technology terms.
Harrod-neutral technology movements then cause ĥ to deviate from its balanced-growth value,
whereas Hicks-neutral technology movements do not.

44
not hold? Whereas it is beyond the scope of the present paper to provide a full
answer to this question, let us still conjecture in the affirmative. More precisely, we
conjecture that in an environment with a stationary distribution of agents heterogeneous in assets, wages, utility-function parameters, etc., preferences in our class are
needed to match the aggregate growth facts (including aggregate hours shrinking at
a constant rate).
The reason for this conjecture is perhaps best explained with an example. So
consider the modern macro-style models of inequality: the Bewley-Huggett-Aiyagari
model. By now, this model has been extended and used in a vast variety of applications, with the common element being that there are incomplete markets for
household-specific idiosyncratic shocks of different kinds and implied differences in
wealth and consumption. Many of these models also consider substantial additional
heterogeneity, such as in preferences (see, e.g., the multiple-discount factor model
in Krusell and Smith, 1998), and yet others consider life-cycle versions with and
without bequest motives (see, e.g., Huggett, 1996).
These modern-macro models of inequality, then, do not display aggregation (at
the very least due to incomplete markets) and they are typically analyzed in steady
state. A key question, thus, is: for standard KPR preferences, and more generally
for the broader class of preferences considered here, do these models admit balanced
growth? The answer is yes. It is straightforward to transform variables and verify
this assertion, just like a representative-agent model would be rendered stationary
by variable transformation. Of course, growth makes a difference—the discount
rate(s), for example, would need to be transformed—so that some aspects of the
aggregate variables (such as the capital-output ratio) will depend on the rate of
growth, as will the moments of the stationary distribution of wealth. In Appendix
B.1, we formally prove this assertion for a typical Aiyagari model with preference
heterogeneity in discounting (and it should be clear from the analysis there that
many other sources of heterogeneity could be handled as well). Why does the trans-

45
formation of variables work? It is straightforward to see that it is precisely because
the preferences are in the pre-specified class, and for this reason we conjecture that
it would not work outside of this class: balanced growth is, by definition, a set
of paths for the economy’s different variables that can be rendered constant by a
standard transformation.
Can life-cycle models with shrinking hours be accommodated? Though the model
in Appendix B.1 has infinitely-lived agents, it should be clear from the analysis there
that the answer is yes. However, in the context of life-cycle models, one is also led to
think about participation, and perhaps how participation changes as life expectancy
and productivity rises. The modeling above focuses entirely on the intensive margin;
what can then be said from a theoretical perspective on the extensive margin and
how it reacts to productivity growth? How does the extensive margin depend on
the form of the utility function? We have begun thinking about these issues, but
a full study must be conducted as a separate project. Let us therefore just make a
few observations. So suppose that hours are restricted to be either 0 or a positive,
exogenous amount h̄ (say, per month or week). Then, first of all, some features of
the utility function will not matter. To illustrate, consider the MaCurdy function.
1+ 1

Clearly, what matters for choice, then, is the difference between 0 and ψ h̄1+ 1θ . Hence,
θ

the curvature (which contains ν, a key parameter in this paper) is unimportant
per se. Of course, if there are two possible choices for positive hours (say, halftime and full-time), then curvature again becomes important. Second, suppose
one wants to derive the prediction that the participation rate decreases over time:
would this be possible for the utility function class we propose? In general, this may
be difficult, but suppose one imagines a planner allocating work to households in
the population, 0 or h̄, and suppose labor productivity is growing. Then if u(c, h)
is not additively separable, the efficient allocation involves different consumption
levels across working statuses. Moreover, in this case, it appears difficult to obtain
a balanced-growth equilibrium where the participation rate shrinks at a constant

46
rate. However, if u(c, h) is additively separable—the MaCurdy case—it is, in fact
possible, so long as σ > 1. It is thus not possible with KPR preferences, which
require σ = 1. Having said all this, a more realistic model would have decentralized
markets with less than full insurance, etc., and the implications of such a model are
less obvious. One would ideally construct such a model with both an intensive and
an extensive margin.

6.2

Cross-sectional data

Another concern one might have from a perspective of heterogeneity is that the
model with an income effect that is larger than the substitution effect might be
inconsistent with what we know from cross-sectional data on households. In particular, there seems to be a view that consumers with higher wages work more, and
not less, as would be implied by our theory. Regarding portfolio choice, there are
potentially also implications for cross-sectional data that differ from those derived
under KPR preferences. We now make a sequence of remarks on this issue. None
of these remarks settles the issue entirely and, as in the case with the participation
margin, a fuller analysis is needed and such an analysis is outside the scope of the
present paper.
First, we are not entirely sure of what the data says. Ideally, one would want
a life-time, all-inclusive hours measure and then ceteris-paribus experiments where
a permanent wage is changed across households. Arguably, convincing such studies
are hard to come by. Interestingly, there is in fact a recently published study that
claims that the wage-hours correlation is negative, not positive. In particular, the
study of the intensive margin in Heathcote, Storesletten, and Violante (2014) reports
such a correlation, after taking out time dummies and age effects. We note in this
context that based on the consumer data they look at, Heathcote, Storesletten and
Violante (2014) actually use a MaCurdy preference formulation—thus, one in our
class—that implies an income effect that exceeds the substitution effect. In fact,

47
with their estimates that implies ν = 0.184 > 0 and annual wage growth of 2
percent, the implied annual growth rate of hours worked over time is -0.365 percent,
so quite in line with the international/historical data. As for what the data says
about the extensive margin, it is well documented that the highly educated work
longer, but they also start working later. Thus, how life-time participation varies
with measures of permanent wage is also not clear.
If, however, the perception that high-skilled people work more, not less, is correct,
then we must point out that such a fact would be difficult to explain also with the
standard model, i.e., with KPR preferences: our generalization would merely make
the challenge slightly more difficult. There are studies in the literature that have
attempted to address this issue, using a combination of assumptions. One is that
the high wages that are observed—and are observed to be associated with higher
working hours—represent a temporary window of opportunity. For such a situation,
our preference class is consistent with a positive correlation. Another possibility is a
non-convexity of the budget set of consumers in the form of a wage rate that depends
on the amount of hours worked (see Erosa, Fuester and Kambourov, 2015). One
can easily imagine other channels. Suppose, for example, that people differ in their
“utility cost of effort”.24 Then those with high costs will work less and presumably,
when effort toward education and learning is factored in, also obtain lower wages.
Thus, a positive correlation between wage and hours would be generated in the
cross-section. Other elements of heterogeneity could, it seems, also deliver the same
qualitative result and it is an open question what amount of heterogeneity would
be necessary to turn a negative into a positive hours-wage correlation in the crosssection.
Another avenue for explaining the cross-section is to short-circuit the income
24

A formulation of such heterogeneity is entertained in Bick et al. (2015), with a utilitarian planner
choosing who works and who does not at any point in time. This formulation would lead, in
reduced form, to a utility function of the kind log c − m(h), where c is per-capita consumption,
equalized across all agents, and h is total employment. Bick et al. combine this setting with a
Stone-Geary element in order to obtain decreasing hours during the transition.

48
effect on the individual level but maintain it on the aggregate level, through an
externality. This approach would be rather ad hoc but it would work as follows:
ν

replace the c in hc 1−ν in our setting with cξ c̄1−ξ , where c̄ is the average consumption
level in the economy. Then, if ξ = 0, on the individual level, the income effect
would equal the substitution effect. One can further weaken the income effect by
considering a ξ < 0, thus producing a positive hours-wage correlation in the crosssection. Thus, taken together, there are many ways to generate a positive wage-hours
correlation, some explored in the literature and some not, and it remains to address
the balanced-growth facts with these theories. We believe that a full evaluation of
the cross-sectional aspects of the model requires much more work and that it is far
too early to dismiss KPR preferences (or those in our proposed class).
Regarding portfolio choice, a stylized fact appears to be that rich households hold
a larger share of their wealth in risky assets. This phenomenon does not allow itself
to be straightforwardly explained by a heterogeneous-agent version—thus extended
to include risk—of theory based on KPR preferences. For example, a theory based
on non-homothetic preferences is proposed by Wachter and Yogo (2010). Can the
preferences entertained in this paper help generate cross-sectional implications that
are in line with the data? To answer this question appears to be a research project
in itself but it is clear that at least consumption curvature will be endogenous in this
model and potentially decreasing in a wealth index, as discussed above. However,
the relevant risk-aversion measure in this model must be derived from the value
function, which is a function in wealth/cash on hand. We hope to explore attitudes
to risk from the perspective of the preferences proposed here in future work.

7

Hours worked in the postwar U.S.

Our data section emphasized the postwar U.S. experience with its rather stationary
hours as an exception rather than a rule, in an international and historical compari-

49
son. Equipped with our theory, what can we say about possible explanations for the
exceptional behavior of the U.S. data? The purpose of the short present section is
not to provide an ambitious and full account of the observations but rather to suggest some possibilities. In addition, there are a number of existing related studies.
For example, there is a clear connection with the debate on the comparison between
hours worked in Europe and in the U.S. initiated by Prescott (2004) and Rogerson
(2006, 2008). These authors argue that the gap in hours worked that opened up
over the postwar period reflects relative changes in tax rates: hours worked fell in
Europe (in relative terms) because of upward movements of tax rates in Europe
relative to those in the U.S.25
To contrast the U.S. experience with some of the more extreme European cases,
consider Figure 11 which displays the U.S. data on hours together with that for
Germany and France. Clearly, hours fell at a fast rate in these European economies,
indeed at a much faster rate than in the broader cross-section of countries we looked
at in the data section of the paper: the cross-country average is a rate of decline in
hours that lies in between that of the U.S. and those in Germany and France.
Turning to possible explanations for the U.S. experience, let us comment on
the Prescott-Rogerson argument first. Here, our model only calls for a slightly
different interpretation of the data. Whether income effects are slightly larger than
substitution effects or not, higher taxes and a larger transfer system would lower
hours worked and so if these policy variables diverged between two regions, one
would expect hours worked to diverge too. Moreover, since we do not argue for
income effects being much higher than the substitution effects, the quantitative
effects on the relative paths of hours in Europe and the U.S. would probably be
similar to those computed by Prescott and Rogerson. The only difference is that
25

Interestingly, Ohanian, Raffo, and Rogerson (2008), look at the developments in a number of
OECD countries, along with tax-rate data, and also point to falling hours. They interpret this
phenomenon as transitional and model it with Stone-Geary preferences as in the approach taken
by Bick et al. (2015).

900

1100

1300

1500

50

1950 1955 1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015
United States

Germany

France

Figure 11: Hours worked in the U.S., Germany, and France, 1950–2013
Notes: Source: GGDC Total Economy Database for total hours worked and OECD for the data on population aged 15–64. The
figure is comparable to the ones in Rogerson (2006).

our perspective would suggest that stable hours, while productivity kept growing,
would in that case have required a fall in taxes and transfers. Indeed, the tax cuts
of the Reagan years represent such a phenomenon. Moreover, prior to the Reagan
tax cuts U.S. hours seemed to be falling, so the timing appears roughly consistent
with this argument.
Second, there has been demographic change, with the baby boom standing out
as a major factor. Figure C.4 in the appendix shows the implied movements of
aggregate U.S. hours due to demographics based on a mechanical view of labor
supply by age (using current hours per adult by age to project backwards). Clearly,
demographics account for a fall in labor supply after the 1950s and then a turnaround
only in the second half of the 1970s, and thus can be an important factor to take
into account.
Third, another potential factor comes from the observation that median wages

51
have not grown much at all in the U.S., and per-capita hours are un-weighted by productivity/wages. That is, if the vast majority of the population does not experience
wage growth, constant hours is of course consistent with our theory. Thus, the welldocumented increase in wage inequality from the late 1970s and onwards—which
coincides with the years within the postwar period with rising hours worked—is a
possible third factor.
A fourth factor is women’s increased labor-force participation. This feature of
the data may be explained by some form of discrimination, where women then
would formerly have been constrained and not able to work (at appropriate wages).
Another perspective is that technical change in household production lies behind the
change in female labor supply. Either way, aside from studying its roots, one would
need to simultaneously address the slight downward trend in male participation.
Overall, however, the participation dynamics at least mechanically account for some
of the changes in the aggregate hours data.
It is beyond the scope of the present paper to evaluate these different potential
explanations quantitatively; in fact, in a separate research project we have indeed
begun to address the exceptional behavior of the postwar U.S. hours data using
a structural model incorporating all these factors. Going forward, what should
one expect about U.S. labor supply (and that in other countries)? Our theory
simply says that, ceteris paribus, hours will fall at a modest rate to the extent the
historical record on growth in labor productivity continues. Assuming that there
will be continued productivity growth, then, could we expect counteracting factors
based on the discussion above? Demographic change will certainly play some role
but changes in the retirement behavior as a function of the projected increases in life
expectancy would need to be taken into account as well. The inequality trend could
continue, thus allowing average productivity growth but no median productivity
growth. Participation could change further, but there is a clear limit to the increased
participation rate of women: this is a clear transitional phenomenon by definition.

52
Finally, for taxes to provide a balance against productivity growth, they would have
to keep falling.

8

Conclusions

We have presented an extension to the standard preference framework used to account for the balanced-growth facts. The new preference class admits that hours
worked fall at a constant rate when labor productivity grows at a constant rate,
as we have also documented the data to show across history and space. The new
preference class intuitively involves an income effect of productivity on hours worked
that exceeds the substitution effect.
We believe that our new preference class has potentially interesting implications
in a range of contexts. As for growth theory and growth empirics, note that on our
balanced path, the main macroeconomic aggregates (output, investment, consumption) grow at the rate γ 1−ν > 1 (ignoring population growth), i.e., at a rate lower
than productivity and in a way that is determined by the preference parameter ν.
Notice also that from a development perspective, falling hours worked is not a sign
of economic malfunctioning but rather the opposite: it is the natural outcome given
preferences and productivity growth, and it rather instead illustrates clearly how
output is an incomplete measure of welfare (see Jones and Klenow, 2015): leisure
grows. Interestingly, our theory says that growth theory probably should not abstract from labor supply (which is typically set to “1” in models); rather, it seems
an important variable to model as it determines the growth of long-run output in
conjunction with the process of technical change.
Does our preference class have something to say about business-cycle analysis?
We cannot identify any immediate substantive implications, but it is clear that our
model can be amended with shocks and transformed to a stationary one that can be
analyzed just like in the RBC and NK literatures. The preference class consistent

53
with hours falling at a constant, but low, rate is a bit different than the standard
one. From the perspective of a particular case—the MaCurdy constant-Frisch elasticity functional form—one can admit an arbitrarily low elasticity of intertemporal
substitution of consumption, though only if the Frisch elasticity is then also very
low.
Other areas where the new preference class may be interesting to entertain include asset pricing and public finance. For asset pricing—as we showed in the
paper—it is possible to have attitudes toward risk behave qualitatively differently,
and possibly more in line with data, than using standard balanced-growth preferences. These same features would potentially also help explain portfolio-choice
patterns across wealth groups. For public finance, the sustainability of government
programs, such as social security, and debt service in the future depend greatly on
how hours worked will develop (along, of course, with the development of productivity).
We build the explanation for the secular drop in hours into preferences. What
about institutional factors? We take the view that over a long horizon, they must
be endogenous and thus must be responding to preferences. Moreover, the facts—
an approximately constant rate of decline in hours worked—are too stark not to
propose a “deep”, and time- and space-independent, explanation. Of course, we are
open to alternatives but our approach seems a reasonable place to start. What are,
then, alternative theories that could explain why hours fall? Could an alternative
theory explain the past without contradicting the constant-hours presumption of the
standard macroeconomic model? Other mechanisms for income effects dominating
substitution effects are possible, such as the Stone-Geary formulation proposed in
Bick et al. (2015), following Atkeson and Ogaki’s estimates (1996). Whether the
transition dynamics in such a model are slow enough to generate the long-term,
constant percent decline in hours observed in the data we look at here is an open
question.

54
In sum, our present analysis should be viewed as one way to look at the long-run
data, and it should carefully be compared to others, especially since their implications for the future differ markedly. For example, the Stone-Geary formulation
implies that the future will see flat hours, independently of how future productivity
evolves, whereas the implications of the preferences we propose here suggest a tight
hours-productivity link. Our theory also has a number of other implications (over
the business cycle, for asset-pricing, growth, and so on) and suggests avenues for
follow-up research. We hope to address some of these applications in future work.

References
Aguiar, M. and E. Hurst (2007), “Measuring Trends in Leisure: The Allocation of
Time over Five Decades”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(3), 969–1006.
Atkeson, A. and M. Ogaki (1996), “Wealth-vary intertemporal elasticities of substitution: Evidence from panel and aggregate data”, Journal of Monetary
Economics, 38, 507–534.
Barro, R. J. (1984), “Macroeconomics”, MIT Press.
Bick A., Fuchs-Schuendeln, N., and D. Lagakos (2015), “How Do Average Hours
Worked Vary with Development? Cross-Country Evidence and Implications”,
mimeo.
Chetty, R., Guren, A., Manoli, A., and A. Weber (2011), “Are Micro and Macro
Labor Supply Elasticities Consistent? A Review of Evidence on the Intensive
and Extensive Margins”, American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings,
101(3), 471–475.
Cooley, T. F. and E. C. Prescott (1995), “Economic growth and business cycles”,
Frontiers of business cycle research 39: 64.

55
Erosa, A., Fuster, L., and G. Kambourov (2014), “Towards a Micro-Founded Theory of Aggregate Labor Supply”, University of Toronto Department of Economics, Working Paper 516.
Greenwood, J., Hercowitz Z., and G. W. Huffman (1988), “Investment, Capacity
Utilization, and the Real Business Cycle”, American Economic Review, 78(3),
402–417.
Greenwood, J. and G. Vandenbroucke (2008), “Hours worked: long-run trends”,
National Bureau of Economic Research, working paper, No. w11629.
Grossman, G. M., Helpman, E., Oberfield, E., and T. Sampson (2015), “Balanced
Growth Despite Uzawa”, mimeo.
Heathcote, J., Storesletten, K., and G. Violante (2014), “Consumption and Labor
Supply with Partial Insurance: An Analytical Framework”, American Economic Review, 104(7), 2075–2126.
Hercowitz, Z. and M. Sampson, (1991), “Output growth, the real wage, and employment fluctuations”, American Economic Review, 81(5), 1215–1237.
Huberman, M. and C. Minns (2007), “The times they are not changin’: Days and
hours of work in Old and New Worlds, 1870-2000”, Explorations in Economic
History, 44(4), 538–567.
Huggett, M. (1996). “Wealth distribution in life-cycle economies”, Journal of Monetary Economics, 38(3), 469–494.
Jaimovich, N. and S. T. Rebelo (2009), “Can News about the Future Drive the
Business Cycle?”, American Economic Review, 99(4), 1097–1118.
Jones, C. I. (2015), “The Facts of Economic Growth”, In preparation for a new
volume of the Handbook of Macroeconomics.

56
Jones, C. I. and P. J. Klenow (2010), “Beyond GDP? Welfare across countries and
time”, National Bureau of Economic Research, working paper No. 16352.
Keynes, J. M. (1930), “Economic Possibilities for our Grandchildren”. In J. M.
Keynes, Essays in Persuasion. London: Macmillan.
Kaldor, N. (1961), “Capital Accumulation and Economic Growth”, In The Theory
of Capital: Proceedings of a Conference of the International Economic Association, edited by Friedrich A. Lutz and Douglas C. Hague. London: Macmillan.
King, R. G., Plosser, C. I., and S. T. Rebelo (1988), “Production, growth and business cycles: I. The basic neoclassical model”, Journal of Monetary Economics,
21(2-3), 195–232.
King, R. G., Plosser, C. I., and S. T. Rebelo (2002), “Production, Growth and
Business Cycles: Technical Appendix”, Computational Economics, 20(1), 87–
116.
Koulovatianos, C. and L. Mirman (2007), “The effects of market structure on industry growth: Rivalrous non-excludable capital”, Journal of Economic Theory,
133(1), 199–218.
Krusell, P., and A. A. Smith, Jr. (1998), “Income and wealth heterogeneity in the
macroeconomy”, Journal of Political Economy, 106(5), 867–896.
Mertens, K. and M. O. Ravn (2011), “Understanding the aggregate effects of anticipated and unanticipated tax policy shocks”, Review of Economic Dynamics,
14(1), 27–54.
Maddison, A. (2001), “The World Economy: A MILLENNIAL PERSPECTIVE”,
Volume 1, OECD, Development Centre Studies.
Mankiw, N. G. (2010), “Macroeconomics”, 7th Edition. Worth Publishers.

57
MaCurdy, T. E. (1981), “An Empirical Model of Labor Supply in a Life-Cycle
Setting”, Journal of Political Economy, 89(6), 1059–1085.
Ngai, L. R. and C. A. Pissarides (2008), “Trends in Hours and Economic Growth”,
Review of Economic Dynamics, 11(2), 239–256.
Ohanian, L., Raffo, A., and R. Rogerson (2008), “Long-term changes in labor
supply and taxes: Evidence from OECD countries, 1956-2004”, Journal of
Monetary Economics, 55, 1353–1362.
Prescott, E. C. (2004), “Why Do Americans Work So Much More Than Europeans?”, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, 28(1), 2–13.
Ramey, V. A. and N. Francis (2009), “A Century of Work and Leisure”, American
Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 1(2), 189–224.
Rogerson, R. (2006), “Understanding differences in hours worked”, Review of Economic Dynamics, 9(3), 365–409.
Rogerson, R. (2008), “Structural Transformation and the Deterioration of European Labor Market Outcomes”, Journal of Political Economy, 116(2), 235–
259.
Shimer, R. (2009), “Convergence in Macroeconomics: The Labor Wedge”, American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 1(1), 280–297.
Shimer, R. (2010), “Labor markets and business cycles”, Princeton University
Press.
Stokey, N. and R. E. Lucas, Jr. (1989), Recursive Methods in Economic Dynamics,
Harvard University Press.
Swanson, E. T. (2012), “Risk Aversion and the Labor Margin in Dynamic Equilibrium Models”, American Economic Review, 102(4), 1663–1691.

58
Trabandt, M. and H. Uhlig (2011), “The Laffer Curve Revisited”, Journal of Monetary Economics, 58, 305–327.
Wachter, J. A. and M. Yogo (2010), “Why Do Household Portfolio Shares Rise in
Wealth?”, Review of Financial Studies, 23(11), 3229–3265.
Winston, C. G. (1966), “An International Comparison of Income and Hours of
Work”, Review of Economics and Statistics, 48(1), 28–39.

59

Appendix A
A.1

Proofs

We now present the proofs of Lemma 1, Lemma 2 and Theorem 1.
We start by proving the two lemmata, characterizing the marginal rate of substitution (MRS) function between c and h and characterizing the curvature with
respect to consumption: the relative risk aversion in consumption (RRAc ) function.
The proof of Theorem 1 then uses these lemmata to derive the final characterization. Because the proofs will involve a large number of auxiliary functions that are
ν

either functions of hc 1−ν or of h, we economize somewhat on notation by sometimes
ν

denoting hc 1−ν by x and by systematically letting fi be a function of x whereas
mj is a function of h (where i and j are indices for the different functions we will
define). A sequence of constants will also appear; they are denoted Ak , accordingly,
from k = 1 and on.

Proof of Lemma 1
Proof. Because λ is arbitrary, we can set it in (10) so that cλ1−ν = 1. This delivers
ν

1
u2 (1, hc 1−ν )
−
= wc− 1−ν .
ν
u1 (1, hc 1−ν )

Evaluating (10) at λ = 1 we obtain − uu21 (c,h)
= w. Inserting this expression, we thus
(c,h)
obtain

ν

1 u2 (1, hc 1−ν )
u2 (c, h)
= c 1−ν
.
ν
u1 (c, h)
u1 (1, hc 1−ν )

Now identifying q(x) as

u2 (1,x)
,
u1 (1,x)

ν

(A.1)

where x = hc 1−ν , gives the result in Lemma 1.



It follows from Lemma 1 and u being twice continuously differentiable that q is
continuously differentiable.

60

Proof of Lemma 2
Proof. The second first-order condition, (11), holds for all λ so it can be differentiated with respect to λ and then evaluated at λ = 1 and divide by (11) again to
yield
(1−ν)cγ 1−ν

1−ν
, hγ −ν )
u11 (c, h)
u12 (c, h)
u11 (cγ 1−ν , hγ −ν )
−ν u12 (cγ
−νhγ
= (1−ν)c
−νh
.
1−ν
−ν
1−ν
−ν
u1 (cγ , hγ )
u1 (cγ , hγ )
u1 (c, h)
u1 (c, h)
(A.2)

This equation has to hold for all γ (and consequently one must adjust R, but R does
not appear in the equation). Moreover, it has to hold for all c and h; it has to hold
for all h because Assumption 1 allows any w and hence any h (given an arbitrary
c). Given this, by setting γ so that cγ 1−ν = 1 we can state (A.2) as
ν

ν

ν u12 (1, hc 1−ν )
u11 (c, h)
u12 (c, h)
u11 (1, hc 1−ν )
− νhc 1−ν
= (1 − ν)c
− νh
,
(1 − ν)
ν
ν
u1 (c, h)
u1 (c, h)
u1 (1, hc 1−ν )
u1 (1, hc 1−ν )

which holds for all c and h. We conclude that the right-hand side of equation (A.2)
ν

only depends on hc 1−ν , i.e., we can write
(1 − ν)c

ν
u11 (c, h)
u12 (c, h)
− νh
= f1 (hc 1−ν ),
u1 (c, h)
u1 (c, h)

(A.3)

where f1 is then defined by the expression on the left-hand side of equation (A.2)
evaluated at cγ 1−ν = 1. Differentiating (12) with respect to c gives
ν

1

ν

ν
c 1−ν q(x) νc 1−ν v1′ (x)hc 1−ν −1
u12 (c, h)u1 (c, h) − u11 (c, h)u2 (c, h)
1−ν f (x),
+
≡
c
=
2
u1 (c, h)2
1−ν
1−ν

ν

where we used the notation x = hc 1−ν and the last equality simply defines a new
function f2 . Then, again using the characterization of the MRS function to replace

61
u2 (c,h)
u1 (c,h)

1

ν

= c 1−ν q(hc 1−ν ), we obtain
1
ν
u12 (c, h) u11 (c, h) 1−ν
−
c q(x) = c 1−ν f2 (x),
u1 (c, h)
u1 (c, h)

and hence
h

ν
1
u11 (c, h)
u12 (c, h)
u11 (c, h) 1−ν
=
hc q(x) + hc 1−ν f2 (x) = c
xq(x) + xf2 (x).
u1 (c, h)
u1 (c, h)
u1 (c, h)

This expression can be combined with equation (A.3) to conclude that
must be a function only of x; we call this function p.26

−cu11 (c,h)
u1 (c,h)



Proof of Theorem 1
Proof. We will now combine the information in Lemmata 1 and 2 to complete our
proof of Theorem 1. We do this in two steps. First we analyze the case with ν 6= 0
and then the case with ν = 0. Note that the case with ν = 0 is already discussed in
King, Plosser and Rebelo (1988).
The strategy of the proof is very similar in the two cases. First, we integrate
the RRAc function in Lemma 2 with respect to c to obtain a functional form for
u1 . As we integrate with respect to c, an unknown function of h appears. Then,
by differentiating the obtained function for u1 with respect to h we arrive at an
expression that can be compared to a restriction on

u12
u1

found in the proof of Lemma

2. This comparison gives us some additional restrictions on the unknown function
of h. Thus, since the proof of Lemma 2 uses Lemma 1, we are in effect making sure
that the functional form we arrive at is consistent with both our lemmata. Having
arrived at a form for u1 , we again integrate to deliver a candidate for u. Due to the
26

The function p(x) is thus defined by
−(1 − ν)p(x) + ν (p(x)xq(x) − xf2 (x)) = f1 (x),
which straightforwardly offers a solution (that will depend on q, f1 , and f2 ).

62
integration a new unknown function of h again appears, but we can again restrict
this function by differentiating our candidate u with respect to h and comparing the
result to Lemma 1. This, then, delivers our final functional form.
Case with ν 6= 0: note that the characterization of the RRAc function in Lemma
2 can be restated as



ν
∂ log u1 (c, h)
= −p exp log(h) +
log(c)
.
∂ log(c)
1−ν
This equation can be integrated straightforwardly with respect to log(c) to arrive at
ν

u1 (c, h) = f3 (hc 1−ν )m1 (h),

(A.4)

where f3 is a new function of x and m1 is an arbitrary function of h.27
(c,h)
Now observe that it follows from the proof of Lemma 2 that also h uu121 (c,h)
can

be written as a function of x alone: it equals −p(x)xq(x) + xf2 (x). We use this
fact to further restrict the function m1 . In particular, by taking derivatives in
equation (A.4) with respect to h, multiplying by h, and dividing by u1 , we obtain
(c,h)
an expression for h uu121 (c,h)
that can be written as

ν

f4 (hc 1−ν ) +

m′1 (h)h
,
m1 (h)

where f4 is defined by f4 (x) ≡ f3′ (x)x/f3 (x). For the consistency of these two
(c,h)
—the one just stated, and the arbitrary function of x given
expressions for h uu121 (c,h)

above (−p(x)xq(x)+xf2 (x))—it must be that
27

28

m′1 (h)h
m1 (h)

is a constant.28 Hence, m1 (h) =

The integration delivers an expression for log u1 (c, h) as a function of log x plus a function of
h. The latter function can only be a function of h since c was integrated over. The function of
log x can be rewritten as a function of x. Equation (A.4) is then obtained after raising e to the
left- and right-hand sides of this equation and f3 and m1 are defined accordingly.
m′ (h)h
If m11 (h) would depend on h, consistency could not be fulfilled for any given combination of c
and h.

63
A1 hκ for some constants A1 and κ, i.e., it is isoelastic. Using this fact in (A.4) gives
ν

u1 (c, h) = f3 (hc 1−ν )A1 hκ .

(A.5)

Since ν 6= 0, the expression on the right-hand side can equivalently be written
f5 (h

1−ν
ν

c)hκ , by defining f5 (x) = A1 f3 (x

1−ν
ν

). Therefore, (A.5) can be easily inte-

grated with respect to c to deliver
ν

u(c, h) = f6 (hc 1−ν )hκ−

1−ν
ν

+ m2 (h),

(A.6)

where f6 is the new function that results from the integration of f5 over c and m2 is
an arbitrary function of h (as the integration was over c). With the aim of further
restricting m2 , we can express u2 as
1

1

ν

1

u2 (c, h) = u1 (c, h)c 1−ν q(x) = f3 (x)A1 hκ c 1−ν q(x) = f7 (hc 1−ν )hκ− ν ,

(A.7)

where we have used the characterization of the MRS function in Lemma 1, (A.5), and
1

finally the definition f7 (x) ≡ f3 (x)A1 x ν q(x). Thus, we can now check consistency
by taking the derivative of u with respect to h in (A.6) and comparing with (A.7).
The derivative becomes


1−ν
κ−
ν



1

ν

f6 (x)hκ− ν + c 1−ν f6′ (x)hκ−

1−ν
ν

1

+ m′2 (h) ≡ f8 (x)hκ− ν + m′2 (h),

where the equality comes from collecting terms and defining a new function f8
1

accordingly. For consistency, thus, this expression has to equal f7 (x)hκ− ν for all
1

x and h. This is possible if and only if m′2 (h) = A2 hκ− ν , where A2 is a constant. Concentrating first on the case where κ − ν1 6= −1, we obtain m2 (h) =
−1
1
1
A2 h1+κ− ν +A3 ≡ A4 h1+κ− ν +A3 . The constant A3 can be set arbitrar1 + κ − ν1
ily as it does not affect choice. The second term in (A.6) can thus be merged together

64
1

with the first term using factorization and we can write u(c, h) as f9 (x)h1+κ− ν +
1
ν
1
1
A3 , with f9 (x) ≡ f6 (x) + A4 . Now note that h1+κ− ν = x1+κ− ν c− 1−ν (1+κ− ν ) , so
ν
1
1
that u(c, h) can be written as f9 (x)x1+κ− ν c− 1−ν (1+κ− ν ) + A3 . Now define v(x) ≡
 1

ν
1+κ− ν1 1−σ
and we conclude that we can write u(c, h) =
(1 − σ)f9 (x)x
and σ ≡ κ 1−ν
(c·v(x))1−σ −1
1−σ

(where A3 has been set to −1/(1 − σ)).

In the special case where 1 + κ = 1/ν, we obtain from equation (A.6) that
ν

u(c, h) = f6 (hc 1−ν ) + m2 (h), but we also see from the arguments above that m2 (h)
has to equal A2 log h + A5 , where A5 is again an arbitrary constant. Since (given
ν 6= 0) we can write log(h) = log(x) −

ν
1−ν

log(c), our candidate u can be rewritten

ν
log(c) + A2 log(x) + A5 . The constant A5 can be set
as u(c, h) = f6 (x) − A2 1−ν
h
i
ν
1−ν
to zero and we can write u(c, h) = −A2 1−ν
log(c) − 1−ν
f
(x)
−
log(x)
. The
A2 ν 6
ν

factorized constant can be normalized to −1 (as it does not affect choice), and we

can then define log v(x) ≡ f6 (x) +

1−ν
ν

log(x), an arbitrary function; this concludes

the case 1 + κ = 1/ν. Hence we obtain the utility function

u(c, h) =


1−σ
ν
c·v(hc 1−ν )
−1


1−σ

if σ 6= 1

ν

log(c) + log v(hc 1−ν
), if σ = 1.

Case with ν = 0: in this case we can rewrite the RRAc function in Lemma 2 as
∂ log u1 (c, h)
= −p(h).
∂ log(c)

(A.8)

We can integrate this equation with respect to log c to obtain
log u1 (c, h) = −p(h) log(c) + m3 (h),

(A.9)

where m3 is an arbitrary function, given that we integrated over c. Differentiating

65
with respect to h then gives
u12 (c, h)
= −p′ (h) log c + m′3 (h).
u1 (c, h)
From the proof of Lemma 2 we know that

u12 (c,h)
u1 (c,h)

(A.10)

must be possible to write as a

function of h alone (recall that ν = 0). From this we conclude that we must have
p′ (h) = 0, i.e., the only version of equation (A.9) that is possible is log u1 (c, h) =
−σ log(c) + m3 (h), where σ is a constant. Using this fact and raising e to both sides
of (A.9) then delivers
u1 (c, h) = c−σ m4 (h),

(A.11)

where m4 (h) = exp (m3 (h)). Integrating (A.11) with respect to c we can write

u(c, h) =


1−σ

 (c·v(h)) −1 + m5 (h)
1−σ

if σ 6= 1

(A.12)


m4 (h) log(c) + log v(h) if σ = 1;

here, in the first equation −1/(1 − σ) + m5 is another function (of h) that appears
because of the integration over c and v(h) is defined from

v(h)1−σ −1
1−σ

= m4 (h), whereas

in the second equation log v(h) is the function that appears due to the integration.
We will now, along the lines of the case where ν 6= 0, show that m4 and m5 will
have to have very specific forms. We look at each in turn. So in the case with σ 6= 1,
combine (A.11) with Lemma 1 to write
u2 (c, h) = c1−σ q(h)m3 (h).

(A.13)

This can be contrasted with the result of differentiating (A.12) with respect to h,
an operation that yields
u2 (c, h) = c1−σ v(h)−σ v ′ (h) + m′5 (h).

66
Since these last two equations both have to hold for all c and h, it must be that
m′5 (h) = 0, i.e., that m5 (h) is a constant (which can be abstracted from).
Turning to the case where σ = 1, along the same lines we again derive two
expressions for u2 and check consistency. Combining (A.11) with Lemma 1 one
obtains that u2 cannot depend on c. Differentiating the second line of (A.12) with
respect to h, however, delivers a function of c unless m4 (h) is a constant; as it does
not affect choice, we set this constant to 1.
This is our final characterization and we have now reproduced the statement in
our main theorem. In summary, in the σ 6= 1 case we obtain u(c, h) =

(c·v(h))1−σ −1
1−σ

and in the σ = 1 case we obtain log(c) + log v(h). This completes the proof for the
case ν = 0.



67

Appendix B
B.1

A model with consumer heterogeneity

B.1.1

The Aiyagari model without growth

The consumer’s problem: for all (ω, ǫ, β),
V (ω, ǫ, β) = max
u(ω + hǫw − k ′ , h) + βE[V (k ′ (1 − δ + r), ǫ′ , β ′ )|ǫ, β]
′
k ,h

s.t. k ′ ≥ k, h ∈ [0, ∞). This leads to decision rules f k (ω, ǫ, β) and f h (ω, ǫ, β).
Labor income is ǫ ∈ {ǫ1 , ǫ2 , . . . , ǫI } and β ∈ {β1 , β2 , . . . , βJ }, with constant and
exogenous first-order Markov transition probabilities π(ǫ′ , β ′ |ǫ, β).
We assume that the economy produces with a neoclassical production function
F (k̄, h̄) and the production factors earn their marginal products. Stationary equilibrium: prices r and w, a value function V , decision rules f k and f h , and a stationary distribution Γ such that
1. f k (ω, ǫ, β) and f h (ω, ǫ, β) attain the maximum in the consumer’s problem for
all (ω, ǫ, β).
2. r = F1 (k̄, h̄) and w = F2 (k̄, h̄), where k̄ ≡ (
P R
and h̄ ≡ ǫ,β ω ǫf h (ω, ǫ, β)Γ(dω, ǫ, β).

3. Γ(B, ǫ, β) =
(ǫ, β).

P

ǫ̂,β̂ πǫ,β|ǫ̂,β̂

R

ω:f k (ω,ǫ̂,β̂)∈B

P

ǫ,β

R

ω

ωΓ(dω, ǫ, β))/(1 − δ + r)

Γ(dω, ǫ̂, β̂) for all Borel sets B and for all

68

B.1.2

The Aiyagari model with growth

The consumer’s problem: for all (ω, ǫ, β),
Vt (ω, ǫ, β) = max
u(ω + hǫwt − k ′ , h) + βE[Vt+1 (k ′ (1 − δ + r), ǫ′ , β ′ )|ǫ, β]
′
k ,h

s.t. k ′ ≥ kg t+1 , h ∈ [0, ∞). Notice, here, that the borrowing constraint changes
over time (unless k = 0) and gets less and less stringent with k < 0. This leads to
decision rules ftk (ω, ǫ, β) and fth (ω, ǫ, β).
Labor income and discount factors are as before. Now, however, note that wt =
γ t w for all t.
A balanced-growth equilibrium: growth rates g and gh , prices r and wt , a
value function Vt , decision rules ftk and fth , and distributions Γt such that, for all t,
1. g = γgh .
2. ftk (ω, ǫ, β) and fth (ω, ǫ, β) attain the maximum in the consumer’s problem for
all (ω, ǫ, β).
3. r = F1 (k̄t , γ t h̄t ) and wt = γ t F2 (k̄t , γ t h̄t ), where k̄t ≡ (
P R
δ + r) and h̄t ≡ ǫ,β ω ǫfth (ω, ǫ, β)Γt (dω, ǫ, β).
4. Γt+1 (B, ǫ, β) =
all (ǫ, β).

P

ǫ̂,β̂ πǫ,β|ǫ̂,β̂

R

ω:ftk (ω,ǫ̂,β̂)∈B

P

ǫ,β

R

ω

ωΓt (dω, ǫ, β))/(1−

Γt (dω, ǫ̂, β̂) for all Borel sets B and for

5. ftk (ωg t , ǫ, β) = g t f0k (ω, ǫ, β), fth (ωg t , ǫ, β) = ght f0h (ω, ǫ, β), and Γt (Bg t , ǫ, β) =
Γ0 (B, ǫ, β) for all ω, B, and (ǫ, β).
Note that due to growth, the distribution over ω will not be stationary. However,
as we will show below, once ω is detrended by the appropriate growth rate we obtain
a stationary distribution.

69

B.1.3

Transforming the Aiyagari model with growth

Using the last condition of the balanced-growth equilibrium, note that in the third
P R
condition we can write k̄t = ( ǫ,β ω ωΓ0 ( dω
, ǫ, β))/(1 − δ + r), which is equivalent
gt
R
P
ω̃Γ (dω̃, ǫ, β))/(1 − δ + r), where we have defined ω̃ = ω/g t .
to k̄˜ ≡ k̄t = (
t

ǫ,β

gt

ω̃

0

Notice also that k̄˜t = k̄˜, i.e., a constant, in a balanced-growth equilibrium.
P R
˜ ≡
Similarly, we obtain h̄t = ǫ,β ω ǫght f0h ( gωt , ǫ, β)Γ0 ( dω
, ǫ, β), implying that h̄
t
gt
R
P
h̄t
h
t =
ǫ,β ω̃ ǫf0 (ω̃, ǫ, β)Γ0 (dω̃, ǫ, β), which also is constant under balanced growth:
gh
˜ = h̄
˜.
h̄
t

Given g = γgh and that F1 and F2 are both homogeneous of degree 0, we now
see that the two firm first-order conditions can be expressed as
˜ ) and w = F (k̄˜, h̄
˜ ).
r = F1 (k̄˜, h̄
0
2

(B.1)

Turning to the fourth equilibrium condition, using the (very) last condition stating that the distribution is (in an appropriate sense) constant on the balanced growth
path, we obtain
Γ0 (B/g

t+1

, ǫ, β) =

X

πǫ,β|ǫ̂,β̂

ǫ̂,β̂

Z

Γ0 (dω̃, ǫ̂, β̂),
ω̃:f0k (ω̃,ǫ̂,β̂)g t ∈B

where we used the definition of ω̃. Defining B̃ = B/g t for any Borel set B, we obtain
Γ0 (B̃/g, ǫ, β) =

X
ǫ̂,β̂

πǫ,β|ǫ̂,β̂

Z

Γ0 (dω̃, ǫ̂, β̂).

(B.2)

ω̃:f0k (ω̃,ǫ̂,β̂)∈B̃

Looking at consumer optimization under balanced growth, finally, we obtain
(after using the same kinds of definitions as above),
Vt (ω̃g t , ǫ, β) = max u(ω̃g t +h̃ght ǫw0 γ t −k̃ ′ g t+1 , h̃ght )+βE[Vt+1 (k̃ ′ g t+1 (1−δ+r), ǫ′ , β ′ )|ǫ, β]
k̃′ ,h̃

70
s.t. k̃ ′ g t+1 ≥ kg t+1 , h̃ght ∈ [0, ∞).
Now consider our instantaneous utility function of Theorem 1 for u and let
gh = γ −ν and g = γ 1−ν . Then g t(1−σ) can be factorized out from u. Dividing both
sides of the equation by this quantity and defining Vt (ω̃g t , ǫ, β) ≡ g t(1−σ) Ṽ (ω̃, ǫ, β),
we can write
Ṽ (ω̃, ǫ, β) = max u(ω̃ + h̃ǫw0 − k̃ ′ g, h̃) + βg 1−σ E[Ṽ (k̃ ′ (1 − δ + r), ǫ′ , β ′ )|ǫ, β] (B.3)
k̃′ ,h̃

s.t. k̃ ′ ≥ k, h̃ ∈ [0, ∞), with associated policy functions f˜tk (ω̃, ǫ, β) and f˜th (ω̃, ǫ, β).
Now r, w0 , Ṽ , f˜k , f˜h , and Γ0 , determined by equations (B.1), (B.2), and (B.3),
define a stationary equilibrium. Three items differ compared to the formulation
above for the stationary equilibrium without growth: the discount factors in the
consumer’s problem are all multiplied by g 1−σ , an additional gross “cost” of saving,
g, appears, and g also appears in the argument on the left-hand side of the equation
determining the stationary distribution.

B.2
B.2.1

Closed-form solutions for specific cases
Unitary elasticity and a constant xt

To illustrate transitional dynamics in hours worked, suppose we have v(x) = 1 −
ν

φhc 1−ν , with φ > 0 and 1/2 > ν ≥ 0, which gives the following utility function.29

29



ν
u(c, h) = log(c) + log 1 − φhc 1−ν .

(B.4)

Note that with ν = 0 and φ = 1 we obtain the symmetric Cobb-Douglas function, which belongs
to the KPR class.

71
Under the assumed parameter restrictions, the function (B.4) is increasing in c,
ν

decreasing in h, and concave if 1 − 2ν > φ(1 − ν)x, where x ≡ hc 1−ν .30 Under CobbDouglas technology and 100% depreciation, (19) can explicitly be solved to obtain
x̄ =

1
(1−α)(1−ν) φ

1−α+(1−αβη)(1−ν)

. With xt = x̄, βη < 1, and ν < 1/2, concavity is ensured since

(1 − 2ν)(1 − α) + (1 − ν)(1 − αβη) > (1 − α)(1 − ν)2 . We then obtain the following
closed-form solution for the detrended variables ĥt ≡ ht γ νt and ĉt ≡ ct γ −(1−ν)t .

ĥt = (1 − αβη)

−ν
1−αν

"

(1 − α)(1 − ν) φ1
(1 − α) + (1 − αβη)(1 − ν)

1−ν
# 1−αν

−να

k̂t1−να

(B.5)

and
α(1−ν)
1−να

ĉt = k̂t

(1 − αβη)

1−ν
1−αν

"

(1 − α)(1 − ν) φ1
1 − α + (1 − αβη)(1 − ν)

# (1−ν)(1−α)
1−αν

.

(B.6)

For the law of motion of the capital stock we obtain
α(1−ν)
1−αν

k̂t+1 = k̂t



αβ
γ 1−ν



(1−α)

(1 − αβη)−ν 1−αν

"

(1 − α)(1 − ν) φ1
1 − α + (1 − αβη)(1 − ν)

# (1−ν)(1−α)
1−αν

.

(B.7)

Along the balanced growth path we have

k̂ ⋆ =
30



αβ
γ 1−ν

 1−να
1−α

(1 − αβη)−ν

To see this, note that we have u1 (c, h) =

"

(1 − α)(1 − ν) φ1
1 − α + (1 − αβη)(1 − ν)

1
c(1−ν)

h

1−ν−xφ
1−xφ

#1−ν

,

(B.8)

i

, which is strictly positive since (1 −
i
xφ
< 0. The second and crossν) ≥
> xφ. Moreover, we have u2 (c, h) =
1−xφ
h
i
h
i2
xφ
1
1
derivatives are u11 (c, h) = − c2 (1−ν)
1 − ν − ν(1−ν−xφ)
,
u
(c,
h)
=
−
< 0, and
2
2
2
22
(1−xφ)
h
1−xφ
1−2ν
1−ν

− h1

h

νxφ
1
2
u12 (c, h) = − ch(1−ν)
(1−xφ)2 ≤ 0, so that the Hessian becomes u11 (c, h)u22 (c, h) − u12 (c, h) =
φ2 [(1−2ν)−(1−ν)xφ]
c

2 1−2ν
1−ν

(1−ν)2 (1−xφ)3

, which is strictly positive for 1 − 2ν > (1 − ν)xφ.

72

ĥ⋆ =



αβ
γ 1−ν

 −να
1−α

(1 − αβη)−ν



"
 α(1−ν)
1−α

and
ĉ⋆ =

B.2.2

αβ
γ 1−ν

"

(1 − α)(1 − ν) φ1
1 − α + (1 − αβη)(1 − ν)

(1 − αβη)(1 − α)(1 − ν) φ1
1 − α + (1 − αβη)(1 − ν)

#1−ν

#1−ν

.

,

(B.9)

(B.10)

CES production and no transitional dynamics in hours

Suppose preferences are as in (15) and the production function is
t



F Kt , γ h t η

t

h



ε−1
ε

= αKt

t

+ (1 − α) γ ht η

t

ε
i ε−1
 ε−1
ε

.

(B.11)

With 100% depreciation, the transformed resource constraint reads
ε
h ε−1
ε−1 i ε−1
− ĉt ,
ηγ 1−ν k̂t+1 = αk̂t ε + (1 − α)ĥt ε

and the first-order conditions read


ĉt+1
ĉt

σ

=

1
h ε−1
ε−1 i ε−1
−1
ε
ε
βαk̂t+1ε αk̂t+1
+ (1 − α)ĥt+1

γ σ(1−ν)

and
− 1ε

(1 − α)ĥt
where ν =

σ−1
.
σ+1/θ

h

ε−1

ε−1

αk̂t ε + (1 − α)ĥt ε

1
i ε−1

1

ĉ−σ
= ψ ĥtθ ,
t

(B.12)

When we further impose the restriction σ/ε = 1, it is easy to

guess and verify that these conditions are all fulfilled if
1

i 1−σ
h
1
ĉt = 1 − η(αβ) σ αk̂t1−σ + (1 − α)ĥt1−σ

(B.13)

73
and

θ
 1+σθ



1−α
σ 
ĥt =  
1
ψ 1 − η(αβ) σ

= ĥ∗ .

(B.14)

For the balanced-growth capital stock we then obtain

k̂ ∗ = h

(1 − α)
γ

(1−σ)(1+θ)
θσ+1

1
1−σ

1
σ



θ
 1+σθ

  1 − α σ 
1
i
1
1−σ 1−σ
ψ 1 − η(αβ) σ
− α(αβ) σ
(αβ)

.

(B.15)

Additional references in the appendices
Piketty, T., and E. Saez (2003), “Income Inequality in the United States, 1913–
1998”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(1), 1–41.
Piketty, T. (2014), Capital in the twenty-first century, Harvard University Press.

74

Appendix C
Additional figures

800

Average annual hours
1200
1600

2000

C.1

1950 1955 1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015

Figure C.1: Average annual hours per capita aged 15–64, 1950–2015
Notes: Source: GGDC Total Economy Database for total hours worked and OECD for the data on population aged 15–64. The
figure is comparable to the ones in Rogerson (2006). The sample includes 37 countries. Regressing the logarithm of hours worked on
time and country fixed effects gives a slope coefficient of -0.00336. The R2 of the regression is 0.64.

30

Average weekly hours worked
32
34

36

75

1965

1975

1985

1993

2003 2007

2013

Figure C.2: U.S. time used survey: Weekly hours worked

1500

2000

2500

3000

3500

Notes: Source: ATUS, following the methodology in Aguiar and Hurst (2007). The sample contains all non-retired, non-student
individuals at age 21–65. For the years 1965–2003 the series is comparable to Aguiar and Hurst (2007) Table II and is updated until
2013 using the same methodology. Regressing the logarithm of hours worked on time gives a slope coefficient of -0.0024.

1870 1880 1890 1900 1910 1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000

Figure C.3: Hours worked per worker
Notes: The figure shows data for the following countries: Belgium, Denmark, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, the U.K., Australia, Canada, and the U.S. The scale is logarithmic which suggests that hours fall at roughly
0.57 percent per year. Source: Huberman and Minns (2007).

22

22.5

23

23.5

24

76

1900

1910

1920

1930

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

Figure C.4: Effect of demographics on hours worked, U.S. 1900–2005

20

1

25

1.5

2

30

2.5

3

35

3.5

Notes: The figure shows the implied average weekly hours worked per person aged 14+ over time by the variable demographical
composition of the society. The scale is logarithmic. Hours worked of each age bracket are held constant at their value in 2005 and
only the demographical composition is changing over time. The considered age brackets are 14–17; 18–24; 25–54; 55–64; and 65+.
The figure looks very similar for other baseline years than 2005. Source: Ramey and Francis (2009) and U.S. Census.

1900

1910

1920

1930

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

(a) Weekly hours of school

2000

1900

1910

1920

1930

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

(b) Hours of work plus school

Figure C.5: Hours of schooling
Notes: The figure on the left shows average weekly hours of schooling (time in class and homework) per population aged 14+. The
figure on the right shows average hours spent for work plus schooling per population aged 14+. The scale is logarithmic in both
figures. Regressing the logarithm of hours worked plus schooling on time gives a slope coefficient of -0.0018. Source: Ramey and
Francis (2009).

.75
.7

1900

.65

1800

.6

1700

hours per worker

2000

77

1950 1955 1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015

1950 1955 1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015

(a) Hours per worker

(b) Participation rate

Figure C.6: Hours per worker and participation rate in the postwar U.S.

35

.45

.5

.55

Weekly hours worked
40
45

.6

50

.65

55

Notes: The scale is logarithmic in the figure on hours worked per worker. Regressing the logarithm of hours worked per worker on
time gives a slope coefficient of -0.002. Source: GGDC Total Economy Database for total hours worked and labor productivity and
OECD for the data on population aged 15–64.

1900 1910 1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000

(a) Hours per worker

1900

1910

1920

1930

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

(b) Participation rate

Figure C.7: Hours per worker and participation rate in the U.S.
Notes: The scale is logarithmic in the figure on hours worked per worker. Regressing the logarithm of hours worked per worker on
time gives a slope coefficient of -0.00418. Source: Ramey and Francis (2009).

800

Average annual hours per capita
1000
1200
1400 1600

1800

78

2.5
5
10
20
40
Labor productivity per hour worked in 1990 US$ (converted at Geary Khamis PPPs)

Figure C.8: Hours worked vs. labor productivity
Source: Source: GGDC Total Economy Database for total hours worked and labor productivity and OECD for the data on population
aged 15–64. Regressing the logarithm of hours worked on the logarithm of labor productivity and a country fixed effect gives a slope
coefficient of -0.13 and an R2 of 0.69.

1500

2010

1000

Average annual hours per capita

2000

1955

2.5

5

10

20

40

2.5

5

10

20

40

Labor productivity per hour worked in 1990 US$ (converted at Geary Khamis PPPs)

Figure C.9: Hours worked vs. labor productivity
Source: GGDC Total Economy Database for total hours worked and labor productivity and OECD for the data on population aged
15–64. The figure shows the scatter plot between labor productivity and hours worked for the years 1955 and 2010.

79

Percentage change in Average annual hours per capita
−60
−40
−20
0
20

1955−2010
Luxembourg

South Korea
Portugal

Canada
Sweden
United States
Switzerland
Chile

Greece
Italy
Spain
Netherlands
Belgium
Austria
Denmark
United Kingdom

Japan

Finland
Ireland
France

Turkey

0

300
600
900
1200
Percentage change in LP, LP converted at Geary Khamis PPPs

Figure C.10: Changes in hours worked vs. labor productivity

1

Source: GGDC Total Economy Database for total hours worked and labor productivity and OECD for the data on population aged
15–64.

Figure 4.10. Capital and slavery in the United States

.9

800%
Net foreign capital

.8

Other domestic capital

700%

.7

Slaves

.6

Agricultural land

.5

500%

.4

400%
300%

.3

Value of capital (% national income)

Housing

600%

.2

200%

0%
1770

1810

1850

1880

1910

1920

1930

1950

1970

1990

2010

The market value of slaves was about 1.5 years of U.S. national income around 1770 (as mush as land). Sources and
series: see piketty.pse.ens.fr/capital21c.

0

.1

100%

1930

1940

1950

1960

1970

Labor

(a) Capital-output ratio

1990

2000

Capital

(b) Factor income shares

Figure C.11: Additional balanced-growth facts
Source: BEA; Piketty (2014) and updated series of Piketty and Saez (2003).

1980

2010

