NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE HISTORY AND ECONOMICS OF SAFE ASSETS
Gary B. Gorton
Working Paper 22210
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22210

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2016

For comments and suggestions I thank Tobias Adrian, Sebastian Infante Bilboa, and Warren
Weber. Also, thanks to Emanuel Farhi, Arun Gupta, Arvind Krishnamurthy, Veronica Aoki
Santarosa, and Jeremy Stein for help with figures. The author has nothing to disclose. The views
expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Gary B. Gorton. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

The History and Economics of Safe Assets
Gary B. Gorton
NBER Working Paper No. 22210
April 2016
JEL No. E3,E41,E42,E44,E5,G2
ABSTRACT
Safe assets play a critical role in an(y) economy. A “safe asset” is an asset that is (almost always)
valued at face value without expensive and prolonged analysis. That is, by design there is no
benefit to producing (private) information about its value. And this is common knowledge.
Consequently, agents need not fear adverse selection when buying or selling safe assets. Safe
assets can easily be used to exchange for goods or services or to exchange for another asset.
These short-term safe assets are money or money-like. A long-term safe asset can store value
over time or be used as collateral. Human history can be written in terms of the search for and
production of safe assets. But, the most prevalent, privately-produced short-term safe assets—
bank debt, are subject to runs and this has important implications for macroeconomics and for
monetary policy.

Gary B. Gorton
Yale School of Management
135 Prospect Street
P.O. Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520-8200
and NBER
Gary.Gorton@yale.edu

1
1. Introduction
A “safe asset” is an asset that can be used to transact without fear of adverse selection; that is, there are
no concerns that the counterparty privately knows more about the value of the asset. And, safe assets
can also be used to store value through time. Historically, the quintessential safe asset was a gold coin.
Such coins were imperfect in performing the role of a safe asset. Starting roughly in the 18th century
certain types of debt came to prevalently serve as safe assets. Some government debt and some privatelyproduced debt came to be used as safe assets.1 Safe assets perform a critical role in the economy and
have implications for transactions and savings efficiency, financial crises, aggregate macroeconomic
activity generally, and monetary policy.
During the time when government insured demand deposits were the dominant form of safe assets, little
attention was paid to the subject of safe assets. The subject, even if visible at all, seemed irrelevant. In a
sense, safe assets did not show themselves to be important. But, starting in the late 1970s the U.S.
financial system underwent a significant transformation in which the role of demand deposits declined
dramatically and short-term wholesale funding became very sizeable and hence important. The financial
crisis of 2007-2008 showed, once again, that privately-produced safe assets (short-term debt like sale and
repurchase agreements (repo)) are not always “safe.” Short-term safe debt is subject to runs, threatening
systemic collapse of the financial system.
And, leading up to the recent crisis there was a shortage of government long-term safe debt, so agents
were increasingly using privately-produced long-term debt, AAA/Aaa asset-backed and mortgage-backed
securities (ABS/MBS). The outcome of this – short-term privately-produced debt backed by long-term
privately-produced debt -- was the financial crisis, a devastating event in terms of human costs. So, now
more attention is paid to safe assets and their role in the economy. This is as it should be because almost
all of human history can be written as the search for and the production of different forms of safe assets.
For much of history, coins made of precious metals were thought of as safe assets (e.g., see Vilar (1969)).
Producing a paper currency that would be accepted at par is only a very recent arrival in history and a
credible fiat currency is even more recent. Finally, there is privately-produced debt, which will be the
main, but not sole, focus here.2
Safe assets, whether coins made of precious metals or some forms of public or privately-produced debt,
are the life blood of an economy. No wonder we say that “money” is in circulation. Intuitively, following
Holmström (2015), a “safe asset” is an asset taken at face value with “no questions asked” (NQA). NQA
means that safe assets are relatively immune to the costly production of private information about their
value. Dang, Gorton and Holmström (2015) call this attribute “Information-insensitivity.” Governmentissued fiat currency is a notable example of a safe asset. The sovereign debt of some countries is “safe” in

1

Throughout the paper I will say “safe asset” even when the asset is privately-produced debt and cannot literally be
“safe”. Privately-produced debt obviously cannot be a perfect substitute for U.S. Treasuries. But, I will say it is “safe”
meaning that the private sector has produced debt that is as close as possible a substitute.
2
Fiat money is a safe asset except for inflation. I do not include fiat money in the discussion here.

2
this sense. Privately-produced debt can also have this property, but not always because it cannot be
riskless like, say, U.S. government debt. In the modern era, say the last 250 years, such private debt plays
a special role in the economy.
The specialness of safe assets implies the existence of nonpecuniary returns (called the “convenience
yield”), in the form of liquidity or moneyness and safety, and so the pecuniary return is lower than it
otherwise would be. Currency, in whatever form, has no pecuniary return and yet it is still held.
Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jørgensen (2012) find that the yield on U.S. Treasuries over 1926-2008 was,
on average, 73 basis points lower than it otherwise would have been, due to the “moneyness” and safety
of U.S. Treasury securities; this is the convenience yield. The existence of a convenience yield implies that
U.S. Treasuries are non-Ricardian (Barro (1979a) and Gorton and Ordoñez (2013)). And, privatelyproduced substitutes, ABS/MBS, also provide a convenience yield. The implication is that these forms of
safe debt have a special role in the economy.
Privately-produced short-term debt has the defect that it is always vulnerable to runs, unless there is
some government support, e.g. deposit insurance. Runs occur when holders of the short-term safe debt
have (rational) doubts about the value of the backing collateral (which is also debt). They want cash
instead. If there is no suspension of convertibility, under which banks do not have to honor the demands
for cash, then banks have to sell enormous amounts of assets, pushing prices down and causing mark-tomarket losses. The resulting dislocations exacerbate the downturn with enormous costs to society, as we
saw in 2007-2008. Financial crises are an integral part of aggregate economic activity, occurring in all
market economies, though countries can go for fairly long periods without a crisis. They are not
aberrations that can be ignored.
Financial crises are often preceded by credit booms, and these booms tend to occur when there is
insufficient safe government debt. This has implications for monetary policy. The role of monetary policy
with regard to financial stability is usually framed as an issue of whether or not the central bank should
prick asset bubbles. But, that is not the right way to think of the issues. Treasuries have a convenience
yield; they have a moneyness attribute. When there are not enough Treasuries, the private sector
produces substitutes, making the economy more fragile. Open market operations exchange one type of
money for another—cash for Treasuries or vice versa-- so the degree of financial stability is affected
because open market operations alter the amount of Treasuries outstanding, which in turn affects the
amount of privately-produced long-term safe debt that is produced. This was not so important when retail
demand deposits were the dominant form of privately-produced money, but in today’s world of wholesale
short-term debt this is a potential problem. The central bank needs to satisfy two clienteles (retail and
wholesale) with demands for different kinds on money, each kind of money with different implications:
one related to inflation, cash, and the other related to financial stability, Treasuries.
The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 very briefly looks at earlier history and the production of coins,
bills of exchange, and early sovereign debt. Examining this early history illuminates the problems with
producing safe assets. It also illustrates the technological innovations that contributed to safe asset
production over time. Section 3 then details the attributes that makes debt safe. Section 5 describes
different types of safe debt. The special qualities of safe debt imply the existence of a convenience yield,

3
which is the subject of Section 6. The regulation of the production of privately-produced safe debt is very
briefly discussed in Section 7. The macroeconomic implications of safe debt are the subject of Section 8
and Section 9 looks at the implications for monetary policy. Section 10 is a conclusion.
2. The Historical Search for Safe Assets
Throughout history there have been attempts to credibly produce safe assets for transacting and for
storing value through time. In this section I very, very briefly survey this history and voluminous literature.3
The main point is that the production of safe assets is difficult. Producing information-insensitive safe
assets depended on technology, legal institutions, and contract design. The early history of money
production reveals the characteristics of an asset needed for efficient transactions to occur. This leads, in
the next section, to a more detailed discussion of these characteristics.
A. Coins Made of Precious Metals
Precious metals in the form of coins played the role of safe assets through most of human history, unless
heavily clipped or debased, two problems that could lead to the collapse of a coinage system.4 Coinage
was desirable in times of stress and could be used to pay off debt.5 Coins were liquid, especially in a period
when there was no credible paper money or credit instruments (see, e.g., Hoppit (1986)). Coins could
store value through time. Many coins, or tokens, were privately issued, for example in eighteenth century
England (see Anderson (1970), because sovereigns under-issued coins. There were also many counterfeit
coins. But, there was also a high degree of uncertainty about the value of coins, especially of small change,
and it was necessary for users to be informed about their worth, producing information by assaying and
weighing the coins.
As safe assets, metallic coins were troublesome. There were numerous problems. One problem was the
shortage of small change and often bewildering numbers of different units of denomination, especially
around ports where foreign coins entered via foreign sailors. See Sargent and Velde (1999) and Carothers
(1930). But, there were other problems such as debasement, the reduction of the metallic content of the
coins below the coin’s face value (see Munro (1988, 2012), Rolnick, Velde and Weber (1996) and Gandal
and Sussman (1997)). The coin producer (government or private) at the mint knew and controlled the
3

I want to alert the reader to the extreme brevity of this historical summary. For reasons of space and language, my
brief summary focuses on Europe and the U.S., omitting the interesting history of other parts of the world, in
particular China. China was the first country to have coins (possibly at the same time as Lydia in Asia Minor). China
was also the first to have paper currency (in the 13th century), competitive issue of bank notes, and a government
monopoly on paper currency. On China see, e.g., Peng (1994), Kaplan (1994), Yang (1952) and Tullock (1957), and
generally a survey by Davies (2002). Classic monetary histories for Europe include Cipolla (1967) and Vilar (1969).
The summary is also confined to the relatively recent past, starting in the 17th century. The history of the prior period
is also interesting and important. Examples include Botticini (2000), de Roover (1942, 1999) and Postan (1928).
4
The field of numismatics is a very specialized area of scholarship and plays little role in (current) economic history.
One introduction is Howgego (1995). Also, see Velde (2013).
5
Coins, of course, were not the only early form of safe assets. Before coins commercial transactions involved jewels,
jewelry, vases, statutes etc. So, it is not clear when a valuable object used in trade becomes “money.” Also, for
example, in early America wampum was very important. See Herman (1956) and Shell (2013). There is a huge
literature on primitive money; see, e.g., Einzig (1948) and Quiggin (1949).

4
coin’s weight and fineness, but users did not know the coin’s subsequent value without producing
information. Coins had to be assayed and weighed to determine their value. Money changers sometimes
kept their scales moving to confuse onlookers whose good money was being exchanged for bad
(Kindleberger (1991)). Sometimes coins were “cried up” or “called up,” that is the denomination of good
coins was fraudulently increased and that of bad coins was “cried down” (see Redish 1990) and
Kindleberger (1991)).6
Another problem was coin clipping, shaving metal from the coin’s circumference; there was also
“sweating,” shaking the coins in a bag to collect the dust that had worn off. Vallavine (1741): “It is
impossible to fix the Time when the fraudulent and pernicious Arts of Diminishing the Coin began to be
first practis’d in this Kingdom; but we find so early as Edward the Confessor, and William the Conqueror,
all great Sums were paid by Weight, because the current Coin had been diminish’d by clipping” (p. 2).
Mate (1972) discusses the epidemic of coin clipping; “As a result of all these activities—coin clipping, the
manufacture of small halfpennies, and the making of imperfect new coins—men, by 1278, had little
confidence in the royal currency. English merchants were worried about receiving poor money for their
goods or in repayment of their loans” (p. 40-41). In some instances, this led to a monetary crisis and
eventually recoinage, for example, the crisis from 1619 to 1623 (see Kindleberger (1991)).7 Indeed,
financial crises occurred fairly frequently in Europe in the 18th century; see, e.g., Ashton (1959) and Hoppit
(1986).
So, coins were not generally information-insensitive. Users of the coins had to assay and weigh coins
because of clipping, debasement and counterfeits (see, e.g., Munro (1988)). Producing information about
coins via assaying was costly because of the expertise and special tools required (see, e.g., Cramer (1741),
Gandal and Sussman (1997), Nightingale (1985) and Oddy (1983)). Weighing coins required that the scales
be fair, another problem. Eventually, the government certified coins: “By stamping them, the State
supplies all buyers and sellers with a piece of knowledge indispensable for all sales, the knowledge,
namely, of the quality and quantity of the metal of the coin for which goods are given away” (Price (1869),
p. 41)
These problems with coinage led to the creation of public banks, not necessarily government banks, but
embryonic central banks. From the fifteenth century on these institutions sought to create money-like
liabilities in a credible way, but this was not always successful. The “money” created by these banks might
have been a demandable bank deposit, bond, time deposit, an equity-like claim, or circulating notes (see
Roberds and Velde (2016) and Ugolini (2011)). But, problems remained. For example, Checkland (1969):
“French banking as late as 1800 was still in a primitive state. Neither note-issue nor deposit banking
existed; the economy relied upon a metallic currency (to the annoyance of many in war-time Britain where
gold had become so scarce); the many elements of proto-banking were yet to be made explicit” (p. 155).

6

Hill (1922) explains the technologies successively used to make coins.
The technology of milling coins was introduced in England. Milling coins means making the coins from a machine,
a process which replaced the process of hammering coins into shape. Coins with milled edges could have uniformly
serrated edges so they were less likely to be clipped. But then the silver content of the milled coins was greater than
that of the clipped coins, driving the milled coins out of circulation.
7

5

Still, even today gold is considered a safe asset; see, e.g., Baur and McDermott (2010), Baele, Bekaert and
Inhelbrecht (2014), and Rickards (2016).
B. Bills of Exchange and Banknotes
The shortage and corruption of credible specie-based coins led to forms of privately-produced circulating
debt: bank notes and bills, goldsmith notes, bills of exchange (all the forms were, however, exchangeable
into coins!). Davenant (1698): “And of late, when Coin grew so Corrupted . . . all great Dealings were
transacted by Tallies, Bank-Bills, and Gold-Smiths Notes. . . . For Tallies and Bank-Bills did to many serve
as well, and to some better than Gold and Silver” (p. 161-162).8 In this subsection we examine the early
forms of debt.
For centuries, starting in the Middle Ages, the bill of exchange was the main form of debt. See Usher
(1914), Richards (1929), and de Roover (1999). And, these bills could also be in small denominations in
areas where there was a shortage of coins (see Ashton (1945)), or larger denominations related to trade.
But, these latter bills could also circulate. Anderson (1970) describes the transferable bill as “a decisive
turning-point in the development of the English credit system” (p. 90). Over time, the legal infrastructure
developed to make these bills credible forms of safe debt (see Rogers (1995) and Santarosa (2015)). Bills
of exchange were the first form of privately-produced debt. And they led to the first financial crises.
A bill of exchange “was a document from a merchant (the issuer) to his agent abroad (the payer),
commanding him to make payment in a different location on his behalf to a third party (the beneficiary)
at a set date in the future” Santarosa (2015, p. 691). The main point here is that the bill could circulate.
Ashton (1945) explains how it worked:
The creditor drew a bill on the debtor; the debtor (or his agent) accepted it and returned
it to the creditor, who either held it till it matured and then presented it for payment, or,
if he needed ready money, discounted it with some other merchant or banker. By the
eighteenth century, however, the bill had become something more than a security for
payment. The drawer very often passed it on to meet obligations of his own, and those
who received it, in their turn, did the same. The bill was now a substitute for money. (p.
25)
Figure 1 (from Santarosa (2015)) shows how a bill circulated. The issuer (creditor) ships some goods to the
payer. The issuer discounts the bill and receives the face value from the first endorser. The bill can then
circulate until it is presented to the payer (debtor) by the final holder for payment.
When a bill circulated, each successive party endorsed it, assuming liability for the ultimate cash payment
if the debtor were to default at maturity. Maturities were usually two, three, six or twelve months (see

8

“Tallies are records kept by cutting notches in sticks of wood, and are a survival of probably the earliest appliance
of commercial nature made by man” (p. 5725); Spink & Son’s Monthly Numismatic Circular (1903). Also see Lawson
(1850, p. 16).

6
Ashton (1945, p. 25)). That there was a high velocity is attested to by the number of endorsements (see
Ashton (1945) and Santarosa (2015)). If there was a default, the holder of the bill could choose an endorser
to collect from. This joint liability allowed medieval bills to become the major form of payment.
Bills of exchange were vulnerable to runs, and this occurred, for example, in Northern Europe in 1763.
After the failure of a large banking house in August 1763, there were runs on merchant banks that had
been financing themselves with short-term debt. Quinn and Roberds (2015) liken the start of this crisis in
Amsterdam in 1763 to the Lehman failure of 2008, as it began with the failure of a large banking house.
Quinn and Roberds (2015) and Schnabel and Shin (2004) point out the similarities between that crisis and
the financial crisis of 2007-2008.
Circulating banknote-like claims emerged in the seventeenth century in London when goldsmiths and
pawn-brokers began issuing notes, orders, and bills (see Richards (1927), Heal (1935), Quinn (1997) and
Temin and Voth (2006, 2013)).9 Goldsmiths had safes, which were expensive.10 Merchants deposited their
surplus of gold coins with the gold merchants, receiving a receipt in exchange. These receipts then
circulated. This was a natural beginning point for “bank notes” as such debt claims depended on
convertibility into precious metals, which the goldsmiths stored in their safes (essentially as reserves).
Goldsmith notes, and bank notes, are distinct from bills of exchange. Thornton (1807): “[A bill circulates]
in consequence chiefly of the confidence placed by each receiver of it in the last endorser, his own
correspondent in trade; whereas, the circulation of a note is owing rather to the circumstance of the name
of the issuer being well known as to give to it universal credit.” (p. 32). These were two different forms
of “backing” the debt.
Goldsmiths also allowed their customers to draw drafts on demand (see Hilton Price (1881)). But, demand
deposits had their origin with merchant bankers in London in the 17th century. See Melton (1986). As with
bills of exchange, checks were debt instruments, but unlike bills of exchange checks were not freely
transferable money substitutes. Early checks were handwritten notes directing the banker to pay a certain
sum to a designated person or to bearer. Such instruments required a legal infrastructure and this
developed in the late 17th and 18th centuries. For example, the practice of endorsing a check over to a
third party took some time to develop legally. So, the innovation allowing these private debt claims to
function was legal. See Rogers (1995).
Convertibility, or short maturity, is important so these debt claims can be used to monitor the issuers, i.e.,
check if the backing collateral is sufficient.11 The debt is backed by collateral that is either precious metals,
in the case of goldsmiths, or real property, in the case of bills of exchange, and eventually loans, in the
case of deposits. But, the credibility of the conversion option required that the borrower have the specie
when the time came to honor the debt claim. How could this be assured? This was, and remains, the

9

Early checks were not widespread, see Horsefield (1952). Also, see Usher (1967).
A history of the evolution of technology in the construction of safes is provided by Price (1856).
11
See Calomiris and Kahn (1996) and Diamond and Rajan (2000) who provide theoretical rationales for this
convertibility option.
10

7
central problem: How can the holder of short-term debt be sure that the claim can be turned into
“money”?
In the case of bills of exchange, we discussed above that the joint liability of the endorsers to the bill
meant that the backing collateral was their assets. A related contract design to assure creditors was
unlimited liability, as with Scottish banknotes, prior to the Bank Charter Act of 1844, which closed entry
into note issuance. Except for the three public banks, which had limited liability, Scottish banks faced
unlimited liability.12 Although not without problems (see, e.g., Goodspeed (2016)), overall the system
appears to have been a success. Although there were bank failures, no losses were suffered; see Douglas
(1975, p. 2). Adam Smith reported in 1776 that “the business of the country is almost entirely carried on
by means of the paper lf those different banking companies . . . silver very seldom appears . . . and gold
still seldomer” Smith (1812, p. 442).
Other institutions designed to maintain the integrity of circulating bank debt include monitoring systems
such as the U.S. pre-Civil War Suffolk bank system in New England (see, e.g., Calomiris and Kahn (1996)
and Mullineaux (1987)). Prior to the U.S. Civil War, banks issued their own private bank notes. In Free
Banking states, these notes had to be backed by state bonds, while in other states the backing was bank
loans. These bank notes traded at par only within a short radius around the issuing bank, and traded at
fluctuating discounts further away. See Gorton (1996, 1999). The Suffolk Bank in Boston monitored the
surrounding country banks by threatening to return with large amounts of their notes for redemption,
ensuring that the country banks had sufficient backing for their notes.
Another mechanism for creating confidence in bank money is insurance. In the U.S. state-run insurance
systems were set up in some states, with different designs. In New York, for example, the Safety Fund
was established in 1829, but losses caused it to be ineffective. See Chaddock (1910) and Calomiris (1990).
Some other states followed the example of New York, but ran into similar problems. After the Panic of
1907 some U.S. states again set up insurance systems, with mixed success (see Calomiris (1989)). Finally,
when checks became important, private bank clearinghouses, facing counterparty risk in the clearing
process, established rules and regulations for mutually monitoring member banks. See, e.g., Canon (1910),
Timberlake (1984) and Gorton and Mullineaux (1987).
C. Government Debt
The production of safe debt by sovereigns took centuries to develop. Embryonic nation states began
borrowing in the 13th century, but repayment was a problem since it depended on confiscation of land,
repayment in worthless currency, or having sufficient loot from wars. Historically, the purpose of
sovereign debt was to raise funds to fight wars, which were quite common. But, the institutions for
ensuring repayment, much less for creating information-insensitivity, took quite a while to develop.
Sovereigns regularly defaulted. Indeed, prior to 1770 financial crises were about sovereign debt, and after
1770 crises often involved both public and private debt.

12

Three banks, the Bank of Scotland, the Royal Bank of Scotland, and the British Linen Company had limited liability,
granted by the Scottish Parliament. See Checkland (1975).

8
The development of credible safe government debt occurred in England, as described by Dicksinson
(1967) (also see Hamilton (1947)). In a famous article, North and Weingast (1989) argue that the key
change making promises to repay English public debt credible was the rise of Parliament’s power relative
to the king’s power. Power-sharing institutions essentially forced the King to commit to not renege on the
government debt. However, Sussman and Yafeh (2006) argue that the cost of government finance did not
go down right away, but took time to reflect the institutional changes. Stasavage (2002) argues that it was
important that the holders of British government debt were important because they constituted an
important partisan force. Also see Stasavage (2016). On France see Velde and Weir (1992) and Conklin
(1998) on Spain.
Still, further development occurred in the 19th century before sovereign debt could be viewed as safe.
Flandreau and Flores Zendjas (2009) study the period of 1820-1830 and argue that governments relied on
the reputations of financial intermediaries to issues debt. Also see Flandreau and Zumer (2004).13
D. Summary
Early forms of money, whether coins or short-term debt, evolved over time toward forms that could be
used efficiently for transactions and for storing value. Information about the value of a coin had to be
produced, as it was never obvious that it was worth its face value. Bank debt took a number of forms that
were designed to convince users that there was sufficient backing for the debt that no information
production was necessary. Unlimited liability, joint liability, monitoring and mutual monitoring, backing
by state bonds, were all ways to do this. The commonality is that all short-term bank debt was based on
the option to convert the debt into currency, or was so short-term as to amount to the same thing. But,
none of the institutional and contractual features that evolved overcame the vulnerability to bank runs.
Bank runs were a common and persistent feature of the economic landscape by the late 18th century.
3. Privately-Produced Safe Debt and Government-Issued Safe Debt
The above brief history suggests attributes that an asset must have to be “safe.” Historically, it has been
hard to produce safe assets. There are two ways to produce safe debt: back the debt with the
government’s taxing power or use collateral. Many governments have evolved to the point where there
debt and their guarantees are credible so they can produce some safe debt. Privately-produced safe debt
must be backed by credible collateral. Since roughly 1750 privately-produced safe assets have been
different types of debt, usually mortgages as land usually preserves value. This section focuses on more
details, identifying and discussing the attributes of public and privately-produced debt that make debt
“safe.” Since government debt is easier to understand, the main focus of the section is on privatelyproduced debt. We first introduce some terminology. Although some of these terms have already
appeared above, I try to be clear here by saying a bit more.

13

Ratchford (1947) discusses the case of the United States.

9
A. Terminology
The terminology developed in the literature on safe assets includes the terms “safety,” “moneyness” (or
“money premium”), “liquidity premium” and “convenience yield.”
“Safety” is used to describe long-term debt that will pay off at par with a very high probability. Examples
include Treasury bonds (and some other government’s bonds) and AAA asset-backed securities. These
forms of debt hold their value over time. “Moneyness” and “liquidity premium” are usually used
synonymously and refer to the NQA attribute relevant in transactions.14 This is an attribute of short-term
safe debt. Examples include Treasury bills, commercial paper, and repo. Finally, the “convenience yield”
refers to the nonpecuniary return that investors receive from holding safe debt, whether short-term or
long-term. The convenience yield is the difference between the return that bond would paid if these
nonpecuniary returns did not exist but everything else was constant. We return to the convenience yield
below.
The convenience yield is not directly observed. Measures of the convenience yield take the form of a yield
spread and the research discussed below uses different spreads, usually for slightly different purposes.
For example, the spread between a AAA U.S. corporate bond and a U.S. Treasury of (roughly) the same
maturity will be positive because corporations are riskier than the U.S. government. If both are also valued
for their safety but Treasuries more so, then there would be a higher demand for Treasuries become
Treasuries are scarce (ceteris paribus), so agents would bid up the price of Treasuries, lowering its yield
relative to the AAA corporate, suggesting that there is a component of the spread which is due to
convenience. Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jørgensen (2012) look at this, as discussed below.
B. Attributes of Safe Debt
Debt is a contractual promise to pay a fixed amount at maturity (or when the conversion option is
exercised) and may promise interim interest payments. Some collateral backs this promise, perhaps land,
a portfolio of loans, a bond, etc. By contractual construction, debt is senior to equity, and so its value has
some immunity to the arrival of information. If the debt is short-term or has the convertibility option, it
is not as exposed to the arrival of information over the long-term. While this is all true, it does not
necessarily add up to debt being “safe.”
There are different notions of “safe.” In Diamond and Dybvig (1983) bank debt is a form of insurance
allowing agents to smooth consumption. The payoff on real investments in the economy is longer than
the potential consumption desires of agents. In other words, agents might want to consume before the
payoffs from the real economy have been realized. Diamond and Dybvig posit this maturity mismatch as
an inherent feature of an economy and this is what creates a problem for the agents. Banks issue debt
with the feature that agents can withdraw early if they have an unanticipated desire to consumer (a need
14

However, Carlson et al (2014) suggest that the money premium is different from a liquidity premium. They note
that short-term Treasury bills have lower yields than Treasury notes and bonds with the same remaining maturity.
Also, see Amihud and Mendelson (1991).

10
for “liquidity”). Agents with no such need wait for the real investment to payoff. Agents face the risk of
wanting to consume early. If they invested on their own, rather than depositing in a bank, they might have
to liquidate the real investment early at a loss. If the possibility of needing to consume early is high
enough, no real investment would take place and agents would simply store their endowments. Bank debt
insures against the risk of early consumption needs; the risk is shared between those agents who turn out
to have early consumption needs and those without such needs. The debt is safe in the sense that it can
perform this function. But, Diamond and Dybvig (1983) show that such debt is vulnerable to runs,
requiring deposit insurance to make it safe in order to reliably smooth consumption.
Holmström and Tirole (1998, 2013) think of liquidity as being “pledgeable” cash flows, assets with cash
flows that are readily verifiable. “Pledgeability” is at the root of all debt instruments because they are
claims on cash and cash streams. Pledgeability is essentially a legal concept and the legal infrastructure
supporting it must be developed. This is the basis of securitization, for example, where contractual cash
flows of underlying loans are the basis for ABS/MBS. Assets with the property that the cash flows are
“pledgeable” provide insurance against possible bad events in which agents need “liquid” instruments. In
Holmström and Tirole (1998) “safety” refers to “instruments (market and nonmarket) that can be used to
transfer wealth across periods” (p. 2). In their setting firms cannot pledge the entire value of the firm
because of a moral hazard problem. Consequently, if the firm faces a “liquidity shock” in the future,
requiring more funds, then without new funds it would be forced to terminate the project even though
this is suboptimal. Firms want to hedge against such a shock. In this setting liquidity means insuring against
the forced liquidation of the project in the face of a shock, by holding reserves, marketable securities, or
arranging a credit line. If each firm hedges, then when some firms face a shock and others do not, the
fortunate firms hold liquidity that cannot be used, an inefficiency. A bank can resolve this problem; it can
hold the liquidity and distribute it to firms in need if the face a shock, via credit lines for example. But, in
the presence of an aggregate shock, this solution breaks down. This creates a role for the government to
create liquidity with government bonds (discussed further below).
In both Diamond and Dybvig (1983) and Holmström and Tirole (1998), the problem is that a demand for
“liquidity” may be realized which could force inefficient liquidation of real investments unless there is a
way to insure against this. In Diamond and Dybvig (1983) and Holmström and Tirole (1998), a financial
instrument is “safe” if it holds its value intertemporally. In both cases, the instrument allows an agent
(household or firm) to insure against an adverse shock. The debt in Diamond and Dybvig most resembles
demand deposits and the debt in Holmström and Tirole looks most like a security a marketable asset or a
line of credit with a bank, but in any case it needs to hold its value. In these two cases, the main friction is
not transactions per se; that is, agents are not confronting each other in a market and exchanging safe
debt for goods and services.
Another concept of safe debt is that it can be used without fear of being taken advantage of by privatelyinformed agents in transactions. Such debt is produced by banks. This is the argument of Gorton and
Pennacchi (1990). By tranching cash flows, information is also tranched, (potentially) leaving one part, the
debt, information-insensitive and the remainder, the equity, information-sensitive. Consequently, the
debt is designed to be immune to adverse selection. Gorton and Pennacchi (1990) argue that this is the
importance, and specificity, of bank debt.

11
In Gorton and Pennacchi (1990) the debt produced by banks is riskless. The form of the contract, debt, is
assumed and the focus is on designing an institution, namely, the bank. The bank attracts privately
informed agents from the stock market to be bank equity holders such that the bank’s debt is immune to
adverse selection when uninformed agents use it to trade. Gorton and Pennacchi (1990) equated
“liquidity” with the idea of being able to transact without fear of adverse selection, that is, without
worrying about the presence of privately-informed traders. Bank debt is created for this purpose. This
debt must be such that there is no question about its value (Holmström’s “no questions asked” property)
so that it can be used efficiently for trade.
In Gorton and Pennacchi (1990) bank debt is riskless and the asset side of the bank balance sheet does
not play much of a role. More generally, there is the question of how banks produce safe debt. What are
the inputs? How are they chosen? These issues are addressed by Dang, Gorton, Holmström, and Ordoňez
(2016) who argue that in order for bank debt to have the NQA property, the bank must be opaque. That
is, information about the bank’s assets must be kept secret. And the assets must be selected so that expert
outsiders do not have an incentive to produce private information, but just accept the money NQA. This
can be accomplished if the bank makes loans that are costly for outsiders to learn about, loans like
consumer loans and loans to small businesses. Large firms go to capital markets.
C. Information-Insensitive Debt
One characteristic needed for short-term safe debt is the NQA property. Such debt is accepted in trade
without extensive and costly verification of its value. As discussed above, producing this NQA property
requires sufficiently credible backing. Another characteristic is the ability of the asset to store value
through time. The first characteristic is associated with short-term debt (as shorter maturities reduce risk)
while the second characteristic is associated with long-term debt. However, as discussed below, longterm debt is used as collateral for short-term debt.
Why is the contractual form debt? This question is addressed by Dang, Gorton and Holmström (2013) and
Holmström (2009, 2015). Dang, Gorton and Holmström (2013) (DGH) study a contract design problem in
which there are three agents and three dates. Omitting the details, there are two transactions. First, agent
B finances agent A’s project; this security must be designed. Then in the next period, agent B wants to
trade with agent C, using the security he got from agent A as collateral. Agent C can produce private
information at a cost. Agent B wants to obtain a known and fixed amount after trading with C (his demand
for liquidity); obtaining this amount drives the outcomes, i.e., agent B’s utility is to be maximized. In
trading with agent C, agent B wants to avoid adverse selection, which occurs if agent C produces
information. How can this possible adverse selection be avoided?
DGH show that the optimal contract that agent B offers agent C is debt. Some intuition for why debt is
optimal comes from Figure 2 (from Holmström (2015)). The figure shows the contractual payoffs to the
debt holder as a function of the backing collateral. At maturity, the value of the backing collateral
determines whether the payoff is the face value (the flat line amount) or whether it is to the left of the
kink, where the borrower defaults and the debt holder receives exactly the value of the collateral. At dates
prior to maturity, agents have beliefs about the value of the backing collateral. If the collateral value is

12
believed to be sufficiently far to the right, the debt is information-insensitive. There is no point in
producing costly information about the exact value of the collateral. If the value is believed to be close to
the kink perhaps to the left of the kink (but prior to maturity), then its value depends exactly on what the
collateral is worth, and it may pay to produce private information to find out this exact value.
The implication of this is that debt is designed to keep the collateral value (the “state of the world”) secret.
As we saw above, this can be done by increasing the collateral value with joint liability, monitoring, etc.
As we will see below, another way to keep the debt information-insensitive is to increase the cost of
producing the information. The collateral value will never be known if the debt pays off its face value.15
Privately-produced safe debt is risky, unlike credible government debt. “Credit risk” refers to the
possibility that debt may not be safe. Privately-produced information-insensitive debt is risky in this sense.
Long-term privately-produced safe debt, ABS/MBS, refers to the AAA tranches. The transition from
information-insensitive to information-sensitive corresponds to a rating downgrade to a rating below
AAA. Indeed, ratings are best viewed as indicating “distance-to-the-kink” in Figure 2; that is ratings
indicate the distance to information-sensitivity.
D. Collateral
The main result in DGH, however, is that the optimal contract that agent B offers agent A is also debt.
Agent B knows that the contract he designs for the transaction with agent A will next period be the
collateral for the contract he offers agent C. DGH show that “debt-on-debt” is the optimal contract. The
intuition is roughly that if a particular bond is almost always information-insensitive, then using that bond
as collateral for another debt contract makes the second debt contract even more information-insensitive.
A repo contract is a clear example of this because the lender obtains a short-term debt contract and also
receives s high-grade (U.S. Treasury of AAA) as collateral.
Debt-on-debt means that the collateral for the short-term debt used to transact (be it bank notes, demand
deposits, sale and repurchase agreements, commercial paper and so on) will also be debt.16 So, shortterm safe debt means that long-term safe debt is needed for collateral. For example, in Free Banking
states in the U.S. before the Civil War, privately-issued bank notes were required (by state law) to back
those notes with state bonds, which were not riskless (see Rolnick and Weber (1983, 1984)). Demand
deposits are backed by portfolios of loans, and are over-collateralized to the extent that the bank has
equity. National Bank notes, issued by banks in the U.S. during the period 1863-1914, were required to
be backed by U.S. Treasury bonds. Sale and repurchase agreements (repo) are backed by a specific bond
that the lender takes as collateral. Asset-backed commercial paper was backed by ABS/MBS, which
themselves were backed by bank loans.
E. Financial Crises

15
16

This is the same as Townsend (1979) although that setting does not involve trade.
In the case of insured demand deposits, the “collateral” is the taxing power of the government.

13
Short-term bank debt is vulnerable to runs. Diamond and Dybvig (1983) were the first to point this out.
In Diamond and Dybvig (1983) the run is disconnected from fundamentals, but Goldstein and Pauzner
(2005) show that in a Diamond and Dybvig-type model depositors run when sufficiently bad news arrives
about. These models (like Gorton and Pennacchi (1990)) assume the existence of debt.
The DGH explanation for the existence of debt implies a concept of a financial crisis that is inherent in
debt, although debt is the optimal contract. A financial crisis is an event in which safe debt with NQA
attribute becomes suspicious; there are questions asked. Holders of short-term bank debt suspect the
backing loans and run on the bank. Holders of repo suspect the collateral offered and refuse to roll their
debt. Gorton (1988) studies financial panics during the U.S. National Banking Era and shows that a panic
occurs when a leading economic indicator unexpectedly exceeds a threshold. There is no panic without
the threshold being exceeded and the threshold is never exceeded without there being a panic. A financial
crisis corresponds to short-term debt switching from information-insensitive to information-sensitive.
Also see Gorton and Metrick (2012).
Figure 3 portrays a suggestive example of the switch from information-insensitive to sensitive debt at the
start of the crisis in the Euro zone. Sovereign bonds which were perceived to be safe, i.e., informationinsensitive, became sensitive, meaning that information is produced such that the degree of “safeness” is
differentiated across different sovereign debt.
When this switch from information-insensitive to information-sensitive debt occurs, what is the response?
How can confidence be restored? In other words, how does the economy get back to insensitive debt?
Notably, the answer is not to make debt more information-sensitive by revealing the state of individual
bank’s backing collateral. Quite the opposite. In the pre-Federal Reserve National Banking Era, private
bank clearinghouses first cut off information, instructing member banks to stop publishing weekly balance
sheet information in newspapers, which members were otherwise required to do. The clearinghouse then
issued a new security—the clearinghouse loan certificate—which could be used in clearing and later
handed out to the public as a cash substitute. The loan certificates were the legal obligations of the joint
clearinghouse membership, thus binding all the members into a single large bank. Basically, the
clearinghouse combined all the collateral (the bank loan portfolios) into a single portfolio to attempt to
convince depositors that the banking system was solvent.17 See Gorton and Tallman (2015).
Central banks have the ability to alter the backing collateral quality via the discount window or emergency
lending facilities. With these mechanisms banks can borrow cash or Treasuries in exchange for bonds and
loans. Notably, this is kept secret, as in the recent financial crisis. That is, the identities of the borrowing
banks are not revealed. The problem in a crisis is that all the bank debt has lost the NQA attribute. It is
counterproductive to attempt to recover this on a bank-by-bank basis, revealing the weak banks in the
process. The banking system will unravel serially. With anonymous emergency lending facilities, the
quality of the collateral in the economy shifts towards government collateral and away from privately-

17

In this period the New York City Clearinghouse Association solvency was essentially equivalent to the solvency of
the entire system.

14
produced collateral. It is similar to the clearinghouse response to a crisis in the sense that the response is
to improve the quality of the backing collateral in the entire economy. See Gorton and Ordonez (2016b).
Understanding the logic of the response to financial crises, which has developed over the past 250 years,
is instructive for understanding what the crisis is about to begin with.
4. Types of Safe Debt
Safe debt can be sovereign debt (although obviously not all sovereigns can produce safe debt) or privatelyproduced safe debt.18 Safe debt can be short-term or long-term. Gorton and Metrick (2010) outline two
ways to create safe debt. First, debt that is credibly backed by the government, either government bonds
or guaranteed debt like demand deposits, can be safe. Second, privately-produced safe debt can never be
as safe as the first category, but short-term privately-produced safe debt can be produced by choice of
the backing collateral. Over time safe debt has taken different contractual forms depending on the
demand from different clienteles and also on contracting (i.e., legal) technology.19 Privately-produced
safe debt has taken the form of goldsmith notes, bills of exchange, bank notes, demand deposits,
certificates of deposit, commercial paper, sale and repurchase agreements, to name a few. But, aside
from financial histories there is little work (and little data) on the relative size of the components of safe
debt and how they change through time.
A. Overview
At the aggregate level, Schularick and Taylor (2012) constructed a data set on money and the banking
sector of fourteen major economies since 1870. They show that the ratio of broad money, M2 or M3, to
GDP was relatively stable until World War II, after which it rose sharply. They label the post-war period
the “second financial era” because of this growth.20 It is not clear though whether the composition of the
bank liabilities changed over the period they study.
For the U.S. more can be said about the components of safe debt. Figure 4, from Gorton, Lewellen, and
Metrick (2012) (GLM), shows privately-produced safe debt and U.S. Treasury debt outstanding (in the
hands of the public) as a percentage of total assets in the U.S. over the period 1952-2010. This figure,
based on Federal Reserve Flow of Funds data includes both long-term and short-term debt. The major
components of “safe” debt include bank deposits, money market mutual fund shares, commercial paper,
federal funds, repurchase agreements (“repo”), short-term interbank loans, U.S. Treasuries, agency debt,
municipal bonds, securitized AAA debt, and high-grade financial-sector AAA corporate debt. Long-term
18

Due to space limitations, I omit discussion of a small, but interesting, literature that looks at bubbles as safe assets.
See, e.g., Caballero and Krishnamurthy (2005), Gourinchas, and Jeanne (2012), Farhi and Tirole (2012) and Martina
and Ventura (2015).
19
Garbade (2012), for example, examines the evolution of the U.S. Treasury market, exploring the problems and
solutions as this market evolved.
20
Jordà, Schularick and Taylor (2014) examine disaggregated data for seventeen advanced economies since 1870.
The main finding is that there has been a sharp rise in mortgage lending during the 20th century, when banks’ balance
sheet doubled in size. But, it is not clear what bank liabilities financed this.

15
debt, the last five categories of debt, is often used as collateral in repo transactions and the asset-backed
commercial paper market, or to safely store value through time.
With respect to this figure, GLM (2012) make two points. First, It is notable in the figure that over this
almost 60 year period, the fraction of total “safe” liabilities to total assets in the economy is persistent at
around 32 percent, suggesting a stable demand for safe debt (as a ratio of total assets). Second, the
privately-produced safe debt component has always been substantial.
Figure 5, from GLM (2012), shows the composition of the privately-produced safe debt in the U.S. as a
percentage of total privately-produced safe debt in the United States, since 1952. The figure shows a very
significant transformation of the U.S. financial system starting roughly in the mid-1970s. Demand deposits
were the dominant form of safe debt for roughly the first 25 to 30 years, starting at nearly 80 percent of
the total and remaining high at 70 percent in the late 1970s. But then demand deposits began a steep
decline as the financial architecture changed with the rise of money market mutual funds, money market
instruments (e.g., repo and commercial paper), and with securitization. This transformation reflects the
changing demands for different types of safe debt, as demands from the wholesale market grew
enormously relative to the retail market. The change is the rise of the Shadow Banking System. The figure
suggests that this is a permanent change, which has important implications for macroeconomics and
monetary policy, discussed below.
In the period before the crisis there was a build-up of safe debt in the form of asset-backed securities
(including mortgage-backed); see Bertaut, DeMarco, Kamin and Tyron (2012). Securitization collapsed
during the crisis, so this source of safe debt has all but disappeared. Betaut, Tabova and Wong (2014)
examine the supply and demand of safe debt since the financial crisis of 2007-2008. They have a number
of interesting findings. First, they show that post-crisis, the (high grade) foreign financial sector has
produced and supplied safe debt to meet U.S. demand for safe assets. And, a large portion of this is in
the form of foreign financial wholesale certificates of deposit. In particular, high-grade dollardenominated debt from Austria and Canada is now 40% of U.S. foreign portfolio of high-grade dollardenominated bonds, whereas pre-crisis this share was 8% pre-crisis. They also find “a strong negative
correlation between the foreign share of the U.S. financial bond portfolio and measures of U.S. safe assets
availability; providing evidence on the importance of foreign-issued financial sector debt as a substitute
when U.S. issued “safe” assets are scarce.”
Other countries similarly display a relatively constant demand for safe assets. Gourinchas and Jeane
(2012) calculate safe asset shares for Japan, England, German and France. The share of safe assets to each
country’s GDP is quite stable and comparable to the U.S. After 2002 there is a rise in safe assets with most
of the increase in the demand for safe assets coming from within the financial system (except for Japan).
Most of the increase in demand for safe debt came from foreign financial institutions and foreign official
agencies. Holdings of U.S. safe assets (SDRs, currency, Treasuries, and municipal debt) by the rest of the
world went up significantly. (This is discussed further below.)

16
B. Sovereign Debt
Holmström and Tirole (1998) provide a rationale for the non-neutrality of government debt. In their
setting firms are constrained by the fact that not all their income is pledgeable; only pledgeable income
can serve as collateral. In each state of the world there is a limited amount of aggregate collateral
(pledgeable cash flows). Firms face uncertain liquidity needs that cannot be met when there is aggregate
uncertainty. This provides a role for safe government debt.21 Caballero and Farhi also provide a rationale
for government debt, discussed below.22
Today, the sovereign debt of some countries is safe debt and is used globally as a mechanism for storing
value.23 Modern government debt issuance amounts and the outstanding amount are determined by
fiscal considerations, rather than being based on the demand for safe debt. See Barro (1979b, 1981). As
shown in Figure 4 there is never enough U.S. Treasury debt, which is the motivation for the private sector
to produce substitutes. Below the shortage of safe government debt is discussed, as is the foreign demand
for U.S. government debt.
In the last forty years or so there has been an enormous demand by foreigners for U.S. Treasury Debt.
See Figure 6. Bernanke, Bertaut DeMarco, and Kamin (2011): “. . . a large share of the highly rated
securities issued by U.S. residents from 2003 to 2007 was sold to foreigners—55 percent. This share was
even higher than in the 1998-2002 period—22 percent—even though total net issuance of apparently
safe assets rose from $3.1 trillion in the first period to $4.5 trillion in the second [period]. (The net issuance
of private label AAA-rated asset-backed securities outstanding, including MBS, rose from $0.7 trillion in
the first period to $2 trillion in the second.)” (p. 8). And Maggiori (2013): “U.S. residents’ holdings of
foreign assets were focused on riskier assets, such as equity and foreign direct investment (FDI), which
together accounted for 56% of total U.S. assets. By contrast, foreign residents’ holdings of U.S. assets were
concentrated in safe assets such as debt, which accounted for 69% of total liabilities” (p. 2).
The foreign demand for safe assets is motivated by a desire to store value. Gourinchas, Govillot and Rey
(2014): “ . . . we document that the U.S. provides insurance to the rest of the world, especially in times of
global stress.” This has been referred to as the “global savings glut” and is the subject of a large literature.
See, for example, Caballero (2006), Bernanke (2005, 2007), Caballero and Krishnamurthy (2009);
Gourinchas, Govillot and Rey (2010), Bernanke, Bertaut DeMarco, and Kamin (2011), Bertaut, DeMarco,
Kamin, and Tyron (2011), Gourinchas, and Jeanne (2012), among others.
Foreign demand for U.S. safe government debt and U.S. agency debt has contributed to a domestic U.S.
shortage of safe assets. For example, prior to the crisis the Bank for International Settlements (2001)
noted: “The increase in collateralized transactions has occurred while the supply of collateral with
21

An earlier literature is also relevant, Issues to do with government debt—set of issues not discussed here, e.g.,
Diamond (1965), Woodford (1990). Woodford (1990) shows the value of government debt in a neoclassical economy
where agents are liquidity constrained.
22
These rationales are for safe government debt. See, e.g., Woodford (1990), which implicitly assumes that
government debt is safe.
23
He, Krishnamurthy and Milbradt (2015) provides a model of the sovereign debt as a “reserve asset” (as opposed
to a “reserve currency,” in which one country’s bond plays the role of safe debt.

17
inherently low credit and liquidity risk has not kept pace. Securities markets continue to grow, but many
major government bond markets are expanding only slowly or even contracting” (p. 2). Gorton and Muir
(2015) provide some direct evidence of this shortage. The implications of this are discussed below.
C. The Supply of Privately-Produced Safe Debt via Securitization
When there is a shortage of public safe debt, the private sector responds by producing substitutes. With
shortages developing when the economy transformed from a retail-based banking system to wholesalebased system, two things happened. Commercial banks became much less profitable and there was a
need for privately-produced (mobile) safe debt. The conjunction of these two forces led to securitization.
Gorton and Metrick (2012b), Gennaioli, Shleifer, and Vishny (2011), Stein (2010), and others, argue that
one of the main purposes of securitization is to produce safe assets.
Securitization is the private production of safe debt. Securitization takes bank loans as inputs, and
produces bonds (asset-backed securities) as outputs. Bank loans are mostly immobile; they cannot be
traded or used for collateral. They sit on the banks’ balance sheets. But, when used to produce ABS/MBS
the resulting bonds, backed by these same loans, become mobile: that is, they can be traded, used as
collateral, rehypothecated, and held to store value. Gorton and Metrick (2013) provide a survey of the
literature on securitization. Also, see Gorton and Souleles (2006). This section is only a brief summary.
As we saw in Figure 5, with demand deposits declining and other forms of privately-produced safe debt
growing, it became necessary to produce safe debt to back money market instruments. This was
particularly true because of the foreign demand for U.S. Treasuries and agency bonds (see Figure 6).
Securitization was driven by a shortage of long-term safe debt. The AAA/Aaa tranches of ABS/MBS were
viewed as safe debt and, as discussed below, have a convenience yield. Xie (2012) finds that, on average,
86.3% of an ABS/MBS deal was rated AAA.
Securitization has several characteristics that make the AAA/Aaa tranches ideal as privately-produced
long-term safe debt. First, it is complicated. Very few financial intermediaries or institutional investors can
conduct a loan-by-loan simulation of the performance of an ABS/MBS. This was certainly the case prior
to the crisis, and less so now. In other words, if we wanted to conduct a Monte Carlo analysis of an
ABS/MBS we would have to know the riskiness of different characteristics of the borrowers, and recovery
rates, etc. And, the details of the internal workings of the ABS/MBS would have to be specified. Safe debt
can be produced when the cost of private information production is prohibitive. This is the case with
ABS/MBS. Another important characteristic of ABS/MBS is that the equity tranche is not traded, but is
held by the sponsor of the securitization, so there is no information leakage. Note that when an ABS/MBS
bond is used as collateral to back repo or ABCP the structure is debt-on-debt-on-debt, which by the above
logic makes the privately-produced short-term debt is very information-insensitive. An ABS/MBS is a bond
backed by a portfolio of loans.
Below we will see some evidence of the convenience yield on AAA ABS/MBS, which means that these
bonds are issued at a lower coupon than they otherwise would be, if they could not be used as a safe
store of value. If banks’ cost of funding is lowered because of the convenience yield, then banks would

18
not want to lose access to this market. There should be implicit recourse to the banks (see Gorton and
Souleles (2006)) if the special purpose vehicles that issued their ABS/MBS deals got into trouble. In fact, that
is what we observed during the financial crisis. Large banks essentially bailed out their large credit card
receivable master trusts by having these trusts issue junior debt to them, adding to the buffer that ABS
holders would have. For example, Bank of America purchased $8.5 billion of junior debt from one of its
trusts in the first quarter of 2009 (see Financial Times, June 24, 2009). In the same spirit, Albertazzi,
Eramo, Gambacorta and Salleo (2011) study a million prime mortgages, some securitized and some not
securitized. “The main finding is that, for given observable characteristics, securitized mortgages have a
lower default probability than non-securitized ones. We show that this finding is consistent with banks
caring about their reputation for not selling lemons” (p. 33).24 On the other hand, Elul (2015) finds that
privately securitized mortgages performed worse than nonsecuritized mortgages.
5. The Convenience Yield
The characteristics of moneyness and safety mean that investors receive some return on safe debt that is
nonpecuniary. Safe debt should display a convenience yield and economists have recently focused on
measuring it. Examining whether there is a convenience yield empirically is important for verifying that
the attributes of safe debt are valued in nonpecuniary ways, that safe debt is special in this sense.
A. Measuring the Convenience Yield and its Components
Figure 6, from Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jørgensen (2012), shows the yield spread between Aaa-rated
U.S. corporate bonds and Treasury securities (on the y-axis) and the ratio of U.S. government bonds
outstanding to U.S. GDP (on the x-axis). The figure shows that when Treasuries are relatively scarce, the
convenience yield rises, i.e., there is a higher relative demand for Treasuries, pushing the price up and the
yield down. In other words, Treasuries offer more liquidity and greater safety than do Aaa-rated corporate
bonds. The basic intuition that comes from Figure 6 is econometrically confirmed for a variety of spreads
by Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jørgensen (2012). They also examine the Baa corporate bond to Treasury
spread. Based on these regressions they calculate that the convenience yield, on average, was 73 basis
points. They also look at short-term spreads, such as the spread between the highest rated three month
commercial paper and three month Treasury bills and find similar effects.
The Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jørgensen (2012) regressions take the following form. They confirm that
increases in the supply of Treasuries (to GDP) reduce both short-term and long-term spreads by looking
at both long-term spreads and short-term spreads in regressions where the main right-hand side variable
is the log of (the market value of) outstanding U.S. Treasuries to GDP. The magnitudes of the response of
the long-term spreads (AAA to Treasuries and BBB to Treasuries) and the short-term spreads (the highest
rated commercial paper to T-Bills and a lower rated commercial paper yield to T-Bills) are basically the
same.

24

On the other hand, securitizations of subprime mortgages seems to have been accompanied by a decline in lending
standards.

19
The Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jørgensen (2012) regression results are consistent with there being two
kinds of convenience: T-bills provide short-term safety (moneyness) and T-bonds provide long-term safety
(certainty of final repayment). Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jørgensen (2012) distinguish between
“liquidity” and “safety” and ask whether these different characteristics are priced. This is done by looking
at the spreads on different assets with different liquidity but similar safety characteristics. For example,
the spread between Baa and Aaa corporate bonds; Baa bonds have more default risk than Aaa bonds but
are similarly illiquid. So, this spread for example, would capture the long-term safety attribute and not
the liquidity attribute.
Greenwood, Hanson and Stein (2015) also argue that short-term government debt is more like money
than long-term government debt because it provides greater short-term safety (due to the short
maturity). Greenwood, Hanson and Stein (2015) show this by calculating the difference between actual
Treasury bill yields and fitted Treasury yields. Figure 8 is from Greenwood, Hanson and Stein (2015). It
shows the average spread, over the period 1983 to 2009, between actual Treasury bill yields (on-the-run
Treasury bills with maturities from one to 26 weeks) and fitted yields (based on a flexible extrapolation of
the Treasury yield curve from Gurkaynak, Sack and Wright (2007)). The figure shows large differences,
e.g., for the one-week bill, the difference is about 60 basis points. The authors interpret this is a premium
for moneyness and show how the premium varies with the mix of T-bills and longer-term government
debt. Relatedly, Greenwood and Vayanos (2014) find that yields on short-term Treasuries decrease
relative to long-term Treasuries when the supply of short-term bills decreases. Amihud and Mendelson
(1991) and Duffee (1996) have also noted that the yields on T-bills are low relative to those on longerterm U.S. Treasuries.
Carlson, Duygan-Bump, Natalucci, Nelson, Ochoa, Stein and Van den Huevel (2014) look at an interesting
experiment to distinguish the convenience components on short-term and long-term Treasuries. They
examine the one-month holding period return relative to the overnight rate and examine Treasury bills
with n weeks to maturity in excess of the one-week rate. The pattern shows that this spread increases
sharply but a decreasing rate. In other words, the longer the maturity the lower is the convenience yield.
Krishnamurthy (2002) examines the yield spread difference between on-the-run and off-the-run
Treasuries. This can be used to derive another estimate of the convenience yield. In Krishnamurthy and
Vissing-Jorgensen (2015) calculate this to be 144 basis points (on an annual basis).
What about securitization? Do AAA ABS/MBS have a convenience yield? This is a harder problem. Nadauld
and Weisbach (2012) study collateralized loan obligations (CLOs). A CLO securitizes corporate loans. Their
main finding is based on comparing two very similar loans, one securitized and one not securitized. They
compare loans that were more likely to be securitized (because of their attributes) with similar but not
likely to be securitized loans. Loans that could be securitized cost 17 basis points less to the borrower.
One way to interpret this result is that there was a strong demand for AAA debt and one way to produce
is was by securitizing BB-rated loans (because this can create a large amount of AAA debt). The 17 basis
points is the convenience yield.

20
B. The Convenience Yield and the Private Sector Response to Changes in Outstanding Treasuries
As shown in Figure 4, since the 1950s there has never been enough U.S. government Treasuries to use as
safe debt, so the private sector has consistently produced the bulk of it (at least in the U.S.). One important
issue concerns how the composition of safe debt changes between public debt and privately-produced
debt over time. The result in the literature is that the private sector produces more safe debt when there
is a lack of government debt, as indicated by a rise in the convenience yield.
In the Krishnamurthy-Vissing-Jørgensen (2015) model a decrease in government securities causes an
increase in the convenience yield, which induces financial intermediaries to borrow with short-term or
demandable debt and then use the proceeds to invest in illiquid loans. Financial intermediaries respond
to changes in the convenience yield: If the convenience yield increases because there is a shortage of
Treasuries, the private financial intermediaries create more safe debt and vice versa. Also, Holmström and
Tirole (1998, 2011) show a connection between the supply of liquid securities supplied by the government
and the amount privately-produced. Holmström and Tirole (2011) argue that when there is a shortage of
government bonds, a liquidity premium arises, causing the private sector to produce substitutes.
Empirically, Gorton, Lewellen, and Metrick (2012) show that government debt and privately-produced
safe assets in the U.S. are strongly negatively correlated. Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jørgensen (2012)
also document this negative relationship between the supply of privately produced safe assets (by the
U.S. financial sector) and the supply of U.S. government debt. Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jørgensen (2012)
show that the outstanding amount of U.S. Treasuries to GDP have large impacts on a variety of yield
spreads corresponding to measures of liquidity and safety. Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jørgensen (2015)
then show that a shortage of Treasuries, causing an increase in measures of the convenience yield, leads
to an increase in short-term debt issued by the private sector. Consistent with the crowdingout/crowding-in view of government debt, Greenwood, Hanson and Stein (2015) show that changes in
government debt maturity choices affects private-sector debt maturity choices. Also, see Carlson, DuyganBump, Natalucci, Nelson, Ochoa Stein and Van den Huevel (2014).
Studies of the private sector issuance of safe debt confirm that issuance responds to widening of the
convenience yield spread. Xie (2012) analyzes all private label ABS/MBS issued from 1978 to 2010,
amounting to 20,000 deals, 300,000 tranches and $11 trillion in issuance. Using daily data Xie finds that
more ABS/MBS are issued when the expected convenience yield is high. This phenomenon does not
happen in other markets for privately-produced debt, like corporate bond markets. Sunderam (2015)
looks at the issuance of asset-backed commercial paper (ABCP) at the weekly frequency. He finds, among
other things, that issuance of ABCP also responds to a shortage of T-bills as evidenced by the convenience
yield.
C. Implications for Asset Pricing
In standard asset pricing theory asset prices are based on the expectation of the product of the asset’s
payoff with the consumer’s intertemporal marginal rate of substitution. The existence of a “convenience

21
yield” is not consistent with standard asset pricing models. Intuitively, safe debt has a lower beta than
would otherwise be the case.
Holmström and Tirole (2001) in a paper entitled “LAPM: A Liquidity-Based Asset Pricing Model,” present
an asset pricing model with a demand for liquidity and articulate the implications of taking this demand
for liquidity into account in pricing assets. In their setting risk neutral firms “are willing to pay a premium
on assets that help them in states of liquidity shortage. This is a form of risk aversion, but unlike in models
based on consumer risk aversion, return variation within states that experience no liquidity shortage is
inconsequential for prices . . .” (p. 1862). The agency friction in the model is the inability of firms to pledge
all of their future cash flows to outsiders limiting their long-term financing, and raising the possibility of
the realization of a future state in which the firm needs more financing. The pledgeability constraint
implies that collaterizable assets are in short supply and the assets that are available command a
premium. This shortage affects real investment. The extent to which this matters depends on future
states of the world in which firms may need to invest more. As long as no liquidity demand state of the
world is realized, the model satisfies the usual Euler equations and asset prices follow a martingale. While
asset prices in the model are driven solely by the agency problem, it is quite rich and suggestive.
Another direction concerns the role of financial intermediaries in producing safe debt. Because it is
financial intermediaries that respond to a changing convenience yield, their ability to respond would also
seem relevant for asset prices. The amount of collaterizable assets that are privately-produced depends
on their ability to perform this function. Rather than firms being unable to pledge future cash flows, it
may be that banks experience frictions. For example, if there is a binding capital constraint, leverage
constraint, or a liquidity constraint, then they might not be able to respond to a change in the convenience
yield. Asset pricing models that for these reasons view financial intermediaries at the center of asset
pricing include He and Krishnamurthy (2012), Adrian, Etula and Muir (2014), Brunnermeier and Sannikov
(2014), and Moreira and Savov (2016).
6. The Regulation of the Private Production of Safe Debt
Banks are universally regulated because they are opaque in order to produce short-term debt, which is
vulnerable to runs. The negative externalities from bank runs are the rationale for bank regulation. Bank
regulation is aimed at making banks’ short-term debt into safe assets. Deposit insurance is a
straightforward example of this. Another potential problem is “destructive competition” meaning that
there could be too much short-term debt creation with free entry into banking. This would create systemic
fragility. See Alhadeff (1962), Stein (2012a), Shleifer and Vishny (2010).
One important form of bank regulation has been formal or informal entry restrictions. Entry into banking
is restricted by the requirement that banks be chartered, and then banks must satisfy a multitude of
requirements, capital and reserve requirements, and also restrictions on activities.25 Because of the huge

25

There are many issues to do with bank regulation and there is a large literature on the topic. I only scratch the
surface here to note that the private production of safe debt has historically been regulated. See Macey, Miller and
Carnell (2001), Grossman (2010, Chapter 6), Calomiris and Haber (2014) and Gorton (2010, chapter 5).

22
scope of this topic, I restrict attention to a very brief discussion of entry restrictions via charter
requirements mostly in the U.S.
Originally, entry into banking was limited to a single bank because this bank would essentially be the
government’s bank. The Bank of England was incorporated, i.e., given a charter, in 1694. Its charter was
renewed in 1697 and then again in 1708, when it was granted a monopoly until 1826 when an Act was
passed to permit the formation of joint stock banks with unlimited liability beyond 65 miles of London and
with no branches in the city of London. See Broz and Grossman (2004). A similar approach was taken in
America. In early America banks needed to obtain a state charter to operate. This required an act of state
legislation. The first bank in north America, called the Bank of North America was incorporated by the
Continental Congress in 1871, and the obtained a charter from Pennsylvania in 1782. The Bank of
Massachusetts and the Bank of New York were established in 1784. By 1840 there were 772 banks, all
formed by obtaining charters via separate acts of legislation. See Hammond (1934). Later, the First Bank
of the United States organized was in 1791 and the Second Bank of the United States was organized in
1817. These were two large monopolistic banks.
In pre-Civil War America, state legislatures eventually granted more charters. Weber (2006) found that
2,291 banks were in business in the U.S. sometime between March 24, 1782 and December 31, 1860. But
the process was widely seen as corrupt. See Bodenhorn (2006). This led to free banking in some states,
where subject to some restrictions on note issuance, no legislation granting a charter was needed to enter
banking. According to Ng (1988), there was not much entry. And Gorton (1996) argues that there was no
excessive competition in the sense that bank notes were mispriced. Later, in the National Banking Era
both state and national banks were required to obtain charters and submit to various regulations.
Limiting entry only makes sense if other firms are not allowed to act like banks. Other firms were
“restrained” from entering the “business of banking.” A restraining act is legislation that prohibits
nonbanks from issuing short-term debt. For example, in New York the first restraining act, passed in 1804
(“an Act to Restrain Unincorporated Banking Associations”) was passed with the objective of guaranteeing
“to banks a monopoly of the rights and privileges granted them, which had been encroached upon or
infringed by private associations.” See N.Y. Fireman’s Insurance Co. v. Ely (2 Cowen, 711). Prior to this
act, the right of banking was a common-law right, which could be exercised by individuals and nonchartered institutions. Once the law was passed, entering banking depended on having a charter. See
Cleaveland (1857) and Symons (1983).
Regulated banks may also receive subsidies to the extent that entry is limited, deposit insurance is
underpriced and there may be ceilings on interest rates paid on bank liabilities. The entry restrictions
create monopoly rents for banks, the value of which is referred to as a bank’s “charter value.” 26
Importantly, because charter value is an intangible asset that is lost if the bank fails, it creates an incentive
for bank owners to avoid risk which would jeopardize their charter. See Marcus (1990). In this way, charter
value helps align the banks' private propensities for risk-taking with the social goal of producing safe short-

26

Informally, large banks are members of a “club” with the central bank and the club restricts entry, e.g., the
Canadian banking system. The club is the source of the entry restrictions.

23
term debt. Saunders and Wilson (2001) argue that charter value is very sensitive to aggregate economic
activity. During contractions, charter value can rapidly decline.
During the transformation shown in Figure 5 banks faced competition from non-banks (e.g., money
market mutual funds, junk bonds), and they faced deregulation (e.g., of interest rate ceilings and
branching restrictions). U.S. commercial banks became less profitable when money market mutual funds
were able to successfully compete with banks because banks faced interest rate ceilings (Regulation Q).
Junk bonds also competed successfully with bank loans. This caused bank charter values to decline, which
in turn caused banks to increase risk and reduce capital (see Gorton and Rosen 1995). This has been
documented by Keeley (1990). Keeley noted an increase in risk-taking and a decline in capital levels. Banks
became less profitable; see Berger, Kashyap, and Scalise (1995). The shadow banking system developed
coincidentally with the disappearance of charter value not by accident. As shown in Figure 5, this
development was fairly long in the making, but it was not hidden. But, it was there for all to see.27
7. The Macroeconomic Implications of Privately-Produced Safe Debt
Financial crises are not rare.28 They have occurred in all market economies throughout history, in
economies with a central bank and in economies with no central bank, in economies with various forms
of short-term debt, in developed economies and in less developed economies, in the past and currently.
If the recent financial crisis of 2007-2008 made one thing clear, it is that financial crises are not events of
only historic interest. In the 17th century and before, financial crises were typically related to sovereign
debt. Since then, a financial crisis is a run on privately-produced short-term debt such that the financial
system is effectively insolvent. Such a crisis is a first order macroeconomic event. Financial crises occur
when debt that was viewed as “safe” unexpectedly comes to be viewed as suspect upon the arrival of
new information. So, there is an intimate connection between “safe” debt and aggregate economic
activity.
A. Credit Booms and Aggregate Economic Activity
Credit booms typically precede financial crises, although not always. This is an important stylized fact to
be taken into account in a model of aggregate economic activity that includes financial crises.
Jorda, Schularick, and Taylor (2011) study fourteen developed countries over almost 140 years, 18702008, and conclude that “. . . credit growth emerges as the single best predictor of financial stability.”
Laevan and Valencia (2012) study 42 systemic crises in 37 countries over the period 1970-2007 and reach
the same conclusion. Gorton and Ordoñez (2016) study 34 countries over 50 years. They find that credit
booms are not rare. Over 50 years the average country spends 27 years in a boom and, on average 12 of
those years were spent in a boom that ended in a crisis. Also, see Mendoza and Terrones (2008),

27

For example, Pozdena (1986) discusses “the causes of rapid growth in securitization” almost 25 years ago. He
writes: “Securitization is . . . one manifestation of how financial innovation – driven by technological and other
changes – is moving some parts of financing activity away from financial intermediaries.”
28
See, e.g., Laevan and Valencia (2012), Cassis (2011) and Kindleberger (2006).

24
Desmirguc-Kant and Detragiache (1998). And there are many more papers with essentially the same
finding.
Gorton and Ordoňez (2014, 2016) link credit booms to crises. In their setting short-term debt consists of
collateralized loans from households to firms, abstracting from intermediation. In Gorton and Ordoňez
(2014) the driving issue is whether lenders should produce information about the quality of the collateral
offered. Collateral is needed because the output of firms is not verifiable. Lenders can produce costly
information about the collateral value prior to lending—information-sensitive debt. Or, lenders can forego
the cost of information production and lend based on their prior information about the collateral quality—
information-insensitive debt. Agents do not find it optimal to produce information all the time. Think for
example of the repo market where trillions of dollars of repo are rolled each morning. The lenders do not
stop and do due diligence on the collateral that is offered.
What happens over time to agents’ beliefs about the collateral quality if no information is produced?
Gorton and Ordoňez (2014) assume that collateral is subject to idiosyncratic shocks changing its quality,
but such that the overall amount of good and bad collateral in the economy does not change. Agents
know there are idiosyncratic shocks but do not know the outcome of the shock. This has the effect that
over time all the collateral comes to appear as collateral of average quality. And if the average quality is
high enough, more and more firms will get loans, a credit boom. Eventually, a small negative shock turning
some good collateral into bad collateral will cause agents to produce information and there will be a
collapse of lending, output and consumption. The effect of a shock, however, depends on how long the
credit boom has been going on because that determines how many firms will be cut off from loans. The
key points are first that credit booms and financial crises are interrelated and second that the explanation
of a crisis need not rely on a “large shock” hitting the economy.
Gorton and Ordoňez (2016) go further to link credit booms to technological change. They first empirically
define a “credit boom” eschewing the standard methodology of Hodrick-Prescott filtering, which
hardwires how much of a change in a series is allocated to the trend and the remainder. With an agnostic
definition of a boom, that three consecutive years of at least five percent average credit growth is the
start of a boom which then continues until there are two consecutive years of non-positive credit growth,
they find, as mentioned above that booms are not rare and that the average boom is ten years in length.
However, they show that not all booms end in a financial crisis. Some do (bad booms) and some do not
(good booms). Empirically (looking at 34 countries over 50 years), they show that both types of booms
start with a positive shock to total factor productivity (TFP) and labor productivity (LP), but that TFP and
LP growth die off rather fast for bad booms, but not for good booms. They then present a model in which
there is a technological innovation. Over time, as the credit boom develops via the Gorton and Ordoňez
(2014) mechanism (although now both borrowers and lenders can produce information, which is critical
for the results), the average quality of firms’ projects is declining over time until such date as lenders want
to produce information, a crash.
In Gorton and Ordoňez (2016) a new technology arrives on average a decade prior to the financial crisis.
No contemporaneous negative shock is needed, as in much of current macroeconomics. Further, trend

25
growth and macroeconomic activity, in particular financial crises, cannot be separated as they are in the
standard paradigm of business cycles of “deviations from trend.”
Moreira and Savov (2016) build a dynamic macro model of shadow banking in which banks transform risky
assets into securities that are “safe” in normal times but which become illiquid when there is an
uncertainty spike. Investors require liquid securities in order to be able to trade quickly in large amounts.
Intermediaries can tranche loans to create a safe security to meet investors’ demands for liquidity. The
senior tranche is always safe; the middle tranche is not always “safe,” in particular it becomes illiquid if
there is a large shock. The residual equity tranche is never safe. The middle tranche is labelled “shadow
money.”
There are two types of capital in the model. One type has high but risky cash flows, while the other type
is low, but safe cash flows. The mix of capital in the economy is endogenous and depends on prices of the
two types of capital. In a boom the price of the risky capital rises and results in more investment in that
type of capital. This reverses in a crash. Uncertainty changes over time. There is a time-varying probability
of a crash. But, more importantly, and what drives the model is that agents learn about the probability
over time based on the occurrence or non-occurrence of crashes. Agents’ beliefs about the likelihood of
a crash determines their decisions. If there has not been a crash in a while, then perceived uncertainty is
low, and there is a boom in the creation of liquidity by banks. This liquidity creation by banks leads to a
lower cost of capital for firms, more investment, and more economic growth. But, over time riskier
investments are made, more shadow money is produced, and fragility builds up. When there is a crash,
uncertainty is high thereafter. Then it drifts down, making crashes less likely.
When fragility builds up, because the last crisis was some time ago, even a small shock can bring the
economy down. Agents do not want shadow money and there is flight to safe assets. But, this forces banks
to de-lever to try to meet this demand. This has knock-on effects for discount rates (which go up) and
asset prices (which go down). In the end there is a deep recession.
As in Gorton and Ordoñez (2016), the credit boom results in an increase in investment and output, but
when the crisis comes it is worse to the extent that credit boom has been going on. In both Gorton and
Ordoñez (2016) and Moreira and Savov (2016) there is an externality from the “money” produced during
the boom, namely, the quality of the collateral is declining. This provides a rationale for government
intervention.
B. Safe Asset Shortages and the Global Savings Glut
Consistent with the trends noted in Figures 5 and 6, Gourinchas and Rey (2007) show that the U.S. went
from a larger creditor position in the early 1950s to a large to a large debtor position in the early 2000s.
The turning point is around 1980 (see Gourinchas and Rey (2007) Figure 1).29 Bernanke (2005), among
others, noted the existence of the global savings glut, that is the net foreign asset position of the U.S. is

29

Gourinchas, Rey and Govillot (2014) updates Gourinchas and Rey (2007).

26
negative and large: U.S. gross liabilities exceed gross assets—a persistent current account deficit.
Caballero and Farhi (2014b) noted: “The unmistakable signature of the growing shortage of safe assets at
any given (safe) real interest rate is the secular downward trend in equilibrium real interest rates for more
than two decades (see Figure 1).” And Caballero (2006) noted that the “world has a shortage of financial
assets” and argued that this point could explain the global savings glut, low real interest rates, and low
inflation.
Bernanke asked, “Why is the United States, with the world’s largest economy, borrowing heavily on
international capital markets—rather than lending, as would seem more natural?” One answer is that the
U.S. was essentially selling insurance to the rest of the world via the rest of the world buying U.S. Treasury
and Agency debt. Caballero, Farhi and Gourinchas (2008) point out that countries differ in their ability to
produce safe financial assets for storing value. In particular, pledgeable income in the rest of the world is
limited due to development related frictions. The rest of the world has few reliable safe local assets to
store value and so there is a demand for foreign assets, leading to a current account deficit for the
developed country, and a decline in the world interest rate.
The development of the global savings glut also involved changes in the composition of the U.S. portfolio.
Gourinchas and Rey (2007) describe the changes: “. . . U.S. assets have shifted more and more out of long
term bank loans towards FDI [foreign direct investment] and, since the 1990s, towards FDI and equity. At
the same time, its liabilities have remained dominated by bank loans, trade credit and debt, i.e., low yield
safe assets. Hence the U.S. balance sheet resembles increasingly one of a venture capitalist with high
return risky investments on the asset side” (p. 21). This change has been interpreted as being consistent
with the U.S. essentially selling insurance to the rest of the world in the form of safe debt (U.S. Treasuries
and agency bonds). Gourinchas and Rey (2007)) and Caballero, Farhi and Gourinchas (2008), Caballero
and Krishnamurthy (2009) and Maggiori (2013) provide models of this. In general these models provide a
rationale for why the U.S. has a greater ability to handle financial risks.
The picture of the global savings glut is further complicated by another aspect. While the main focus has
been on the net position, the gross flows have increased enormously. Johnson (2009) and Obstfeld (2012),
among others, have drawn attention to the gross flows. The net flows hide the enormity of the gross
flows. And further, Obstfeld (2012): “For the rich industrial countries, much of the expansion of gross
external asset and liability stocks has necessarily taken the form of debt instruments” (p. 9). In fact, there
are sizeable two-way debt flows, particularly between the U.S. and the U.K. and between the U.S. and the
Euro area. In particular, European banks bought sizeable amounts of AAA/Aaa ABS/MBS and financed it
with dollar-denominated commercial paper, sold in the U.S. These would net out, but then hide what was
going on. These flows are discussed in detail by Bernanke, Bertaut, DeMarco, and Kamin (2011) and
Bertaut, DeMarco, Kamin, and Tyron (2011).
The shortage of safe assets has continued. For example, the IMF Global Financial Stability Report (2012,
p. 81) notes that “. . . the shrinking set of assets perceived as safe, now limited to mostly high-quality
sovereign debt, coupled with growing demand, can have negative implications for global financial
stability.” Gorton and Muir (2015) also provide evidence on the shortage. Bertaut, Tabova, and Wong
(2014) show that post-crisis U.S. investors are buying a larger share of foreign-issued financial debt, mostly

27
issued by Australian and Canadian financial intermediaries. We know that a shortage of safe debt is
associated with an increase in financial fragility.
8. Safe Debt: Implications for Monetary Policy
The current dominant post-crisis view of monetary policy continues to be that monetary policy should not
be concerned with financial stability, credit booms or macroprudential issues, but should focus exclusively
on inflation.30 The proponents of this view have in mind that proposition that the central bank should not
use interest rates to “prick” asset bubbles. Sometimes this viewpoint is presented as a practical problem:
booms cannot realistically be identified, particularly for individual asset classes. Macroprudential issues,
in this view, are best left to bank regulators and specially-tasked groups like the Financial Stability Board
and individual countries’ macroprudential bodies, such as the Financial Stability Oversight Council in the
U.S. This conventional view seems not to have recognized the fundamental transformation of the
economy portrayed in Figure 5 or the inherent features of the recent financial crisis. Some recent
literature on monetary policy incorporates the important features of the current financial system and
financial crisis to argue that monetary policy should not be solely focused on inflation.
There are three key differences in the starting points between the new view and the conventional view.
First, the new view recognizes that the financial system has changed fundamentally and permanently. The
banking system has metamorphosed from a system based on insured demand deposits to one which is
based on the demands of a different clientele, wholesale investors; again see Figure 5. Secondly, there is
a convenience yield on Treasuries which cannot be perfectly replicated by private substitutes. And this is
important in a system which is much less reliant on insured demand deposits and more reliant on
uninsured wholesale deposits. Finally, financial crises occur when holders of short-term debt have doubts
about the privately-produced collateral backing their debt. To the extent that this collateral is privatelyproduced, the risks of financial crisis are higher, as discussed above. In this context, what implications are
there for monetary policy, if any?
A. Monetary Policy and Wholesale Banking
Stein (2012) examines a world in which unregulated production of private money—short-term uninsured
debt—has an externality.31 Such bank money is special and this is modelled by including it in the utility
function (as a reduced form). Too much short-term debt increases the fragility of the financial system, but
this is not taken into account by the private money issuers. If there is a financial crisis, the money-issuing
banks have to sell assets at fire sale prices. Fire sale prices affect other agents via a collateral constraint.
Stein (2012) then asks how this problem could be addressed. Suppose the regulator is imperfectly
informed about the banks’ investment opportunities. Then Stein (2012) shows examines a cap-and-trade
system under which the regulator which issues permits that allow banks to produce a specific amount of
money. Of course, the regulator does not know how many permits to issue, but assuming the regulator

30

Recent articulations of this view include Bernanke (2015) and Svensson (2015). See Williams (2015) for further
references.
31
Stein (2014) takes the view that the risks of a financial crisis cannot be completely mitigated with conventional
non-monetary tools.

28
knows the other parameters of the model (i.e., how the world works in general), by adjusting the quantity
can the regulator can hit the market-clearing price consistent with the model.
Stein (2012) argues that the cap-and-trade approach is almost isomorphic to a monetary policy where the
central bank adjusts required reserves. When there are more reserves, banks are able to create more
money. Reserves act like the permits in the cap-and-trade system. “An open market operation that
increase the supply of reserves relative to T-bills is isomorphic to an increase in the regulatory limit on M
[money] in the . . . cap-and-trade version of the model” (p. 80). This assumes that all banks in the system
are subject to reserve requirements, which assumes the regulator know which firms are banks. Also see
Stein (2014).
There was a shortage of safe assets prior to the financial crisis, but at the onset of the crisis this shortage
took on even larger dimensions with implications for monetary policy. Caballero and Farhi (2014b) argue
that the shortage of safe assets constitutes a “structural drag on the economy, undermining financial
stability and straining monetary policy contractions” (p. 111). Caballero and Farhi (2014a, b) study the
implications of a safe asset shortage following the crisis onset.32
They study an economy with two types of agents: risk neutral agents (“Neutrals”) and agents who are
infinitely risk averse (“Knightians”). Assets come from Lucas trees, which have risky dividends. However,
trees can be tranched into risky assets and safe assets. In equilibrium, Knightians hold the safe assets and
Neutrals hold the risky assets. In the crisis, there was a sudden demand for safe assets, but simultaneously
there was a sudden reduction in safe assets. During the financial crisis GSE debt and AAA subprime
mortgage-backed securities were no longer considered safe. The usual equilibrating mechanism for the
market in safe assets would be a reduction in the real interest rate and accommodation by central banks
by lowering nominal rates. Caballero and Farhi (2014a, b) show that when a shortage of safe assets pushes
the economy up against the zero lower bound, the usual mechanisms for equilibration and policy
effectiveness weaken or do not work at all. They describe this situation as a “safety trap.”
Figure 9, from Caballero and Farhi (2014b), shows the situation. Initially, the economy is at point E with
a positive interest rate. In the figure there is a leftward shift in the supply of safe assets. This shift is the
financial crisis. But, if there is some friction, of the type normally included in New Keynesian models, then
this adjustment requires a decrease in nominal interest rates. And this cannot happen if the economy
hits the zero lower bound, as shown in the figure. The only Equilibrium requires a reduction in the real
interest rate—to zero in the figure. Agents have to reduce their consumption or investment, depressing
aggregate demand. The only way out of the safety trap to increase output is by reducing the demand for
safe assets or increasing the supply of safe assets. In a post-crisis economy, the private sector cannot
produce safe assets. so that the economy eventually gets to point E’. “It is our conjecture that the

32

Also see Landau (2014): http://www.voxeu.org/article/why-euro-inflation-so-low .

29
shortage of safe assets will remain a structural drag, pushing down real interest rates, putting pressure on
the financial system, and straining monetary policy during contractions” (p. 120).
Gorton and He (2016) study optimal monetary policy when collateral plays a real role in the economy.
Their starting point is the above Figure 5 that is the financial sector has permanently changed to a system
designed to meet the demands of the wholesale market for safe debt. Wholesale safe short-term debt
requires collateral as backing. This collateral can be Treasuries or privately-produced safe debt. In this
new world the quality mix of collateral in the economy is very important. Too low an amount of
outstanding Treasuries results in an increase in privately-produced collateral, a credit boom, and this
situation increase financial fragility. In the previous retailed-based market this was not a concern because
the dominant form of safe debt, demand deposits, was insured. In the retail-based system, it was still the
case that there was a convenience yield on Treasuries, but this is much more important in the wholesale
system. This leads to the fundamental observation that in the wholesale system the central bank’s open
market operations exchange one form of money for another: Treasuries for cash. The fundamental real
world friction at the root of their model is that cash cannot be securitized which makes cash and Treasuries
distinct, not substitutes.33
Their setting is an infinite-horizon game between the central bank and many small households/firms.
Households face a cash-in-advance constraint and firms need collateral for production; collateral enters
the production function, a reduced form for a consolidated financial and real sector. The model displays
the trade-off that open market operations trade one kind of money for another: cash for Treasuries. The
amount of cash in the economy affects inflation. And, the amount of Treasuries in the economy affects
the quality of collateral. In the model MBS are endogenously produced (there is a demand for housing by
households) depending on the amount of Treasuries outstanding. IF there are not enough Treasuries, the
private sector produces MBS—a credit boom.
But, if the ratio of MBS to Treasuries rises, the likelihood of a financial crisis increases. The central bank
in the model understands this and maximizes the utility of the representative agent plus a term that
depends negatively on the ratio of MBS to Treasuries. While the central bank’s objective function could
be modeled as a Ramsey problem, adding the extra term shows clearly the linkages in the economy. In
this world, the central bank sometimes acts to tighten and reduce economic activity in order to avoid a
higher likelihood of a financial crisis. A recession is triggered to reduce the likelihood of a crisis. And
sometimes the opposite can occur.
B. Current Fed Policies
It is too early to evaluate recent Federal Reserve policies from the point of view of the subject of safe
debt. The Fed’s large scale asset purchases (LSAP) are “ . . .likely not net zero in terms of its impact on the
overall amount of safe debt and liquid assets available for private investors” (Krishnamurthy and Vissing-

33

That is, cash cannot be securitized under the current institutional arrangements. If bonds could be issued against
cash segregated into a single account at the Fed and earned interest on this cash as reserves, then cash could be
securitized. This is not currently the case. Garratt, Martin, McAndrews and Nosal (2015) discuss segregated balance
accounts but not securitization.

30
Jørgensen (2015), p. 579). LSAPs contribute to a shortage of safe assets, but may still have the beneficial
effects claimed for them. However, the LSAP replaced the assets purchased with cash, held by banks as
reserves which bear interest from the Fed. On the other hand, the overnight reverse repo operations (ON
RRP) allow for some of the safe assets on the Fed’s balance sheet to re-enter the economy. Frost, Logan,
Martin, McCabe, Natalucci and Remache (2015): “. . . an ON RRP facility could have repercussions for
financial stability. These might include beneficial effects arising from the increased availability of safe,
short-term assets to investors . . . “ (p. 1).
What are the effects of this? Replacing assets purchased with interest-bearing reserves has the problem
that Gorton and He (2016) raised, namely that interest-bearing reserves cannot be securitized, so they do
not replace the assets purchased under the LSAP. The On RRP provides a mechanism to receive safe debt
(collateral) in exchange for cash, but mostly only for money market mutual funds. The operational
structure of the RRP restricts rehypothecation of bonds received for cash under the On RRP system such
that the collateral cannot circulate in the financial system, for example it cannot be used to post as
collateral to central clearing parties or as collateral in the bilateral derivatives market. These are topics for
future research.
9. Conclusion
I have briefly touched on many topics. The main point is that safe assets play a critical role, a fundamental
role, in any economy. In the modern era post 17th century system, safe assets take the form of debt. There
are two ways to produce safe debt: a government may have credible taxing power to back its debt and its
guarantees; and privately-produced safe debt may have credible backing privately-produced collateral.
But, neither method is ironclad and when they fail, when the NQA attribute is gone, it is a financial crisis
or a sovereign debt crisis, or both. Financial crises occur in all market economies because the production
of safe debt is inherently difficult, as history has shown (over and over again).
The technology, legal infrastructure, and institutions for producing safe assets had to develop and they
change over time, and consequently so have the forms of safe assets changed through human history.
But the essential role of safe assets is a constant. There has always been a demand for safe assets and a
lack of safe assets constrains transactions and consumption smoothing. Sovereign debt is not always safe
and it can lead to sovereign debt crises. When there is a shortage of publicly-produced safe assets, the
private sector produces substitutes. This the source of systemic fragility when the safe assets are debt.
The financial crisis of 2007-2008 dramatically revealed the importance of safe debt. The crisis revealed
that the economy has evolved, changing from a system based on insured demand deposits to one which
is based on the demands of a different clientele, wholesale investors. New forms of privately-produced
safe debt have emerged to meet the demands of wholesale investors, a continuation of the evolution of
safe assets through human history.
Because the banking system appears to have permanently changed from a system based on insured
demand deposits to one which is based on the demands of a different clientele, wholesale investors,
attention has shifted to issues concerning safe debt. New legislation and regulation have not solved the

31
problem of the vulnerability of this wholesale system to runs. Given this, there appear to be important
implications:






For macroeconomics which has not been concerned with the financial sector or financial crises,
i.e. with the implications of the systemic vulnerability of safe debt and the mix between public
debt and privately-produced safe debt. In the U.S. the period from 1934 (when deposit insurance
was implemented) to 2007, was a unique period in American history. The financial crisis of 20072008 suggests that the U.S. may have reverted to the earlier history. A macroeconomics that does
not address, explain, and incorporate credit booms and financial crisis will not be of much use.
For monetary policy because open market operations exchange one type of money for another:
cash for Treasuries. When the financial system is very significantly dominated by institutions
desiring wholesale safe debt, the mix of the different kinds of money (cash and Treasuries) has
implications for financial stability. There can be no returning to “normal” because the financial
system has permanently changed.
For bank regulators: if Treasuries are a product sold around the world, then the U.S. investors will
have to rely on privately-produced safe assets, creating fragility. This is not just a matter of trying
to make banks “safe,” because depending on those regulations, a new shadow banking system
can develop.

32
References
Adrian, Tobias, Erkko Etula and Tyler Muir (2014), “Financial Intermediaries and the Cross-Section of Asset
Returns,” Journal of Finance 69, 2557-2596.
Albertazzi, Ugo, Ginette Eramo, Leonardo Gambacorta, and Carmelo Salleo (2015), “Asymmetric
Information in Securitization: An Empirical Assessment,” Journal of Monetary Economics 71, 3349.
Alhadeff, David (1962), “A Reconsideration of Restrictions on Bank Entry,” Quarterly Journal of Economics
76(2), 246-263.
Amihud, Yakov and Haim Mendelson (1991), “Liquidity, Maturity, and the Yields on U.S. Treasury
Securities,” Journal of Finance 46, 1411-1425.
Anderson, B.L. (1970), “Money and the Structure of Credit in the Eighteenth Century,” Business History
12, 85-101.
Ashton, T.S. (1945), “The Bill of Exchange and Private Banks in Lancashire, 1790–1830,” Economic History
Review 15, no. 1-2, 25–35.
Ashton, T.S. (1959), Economic Fluctuations in England, 1700-1800 (Oxford).
Baele, Lieven, Geert Bekaert, and Koen Inghelbrecht (2014, “Flights to Safety,” Federal Reserve Board,
Finance and Economics Discussion Series No. 2014-46.
Bank for International Settlements (2001), “Collateral in Wholesale Financial Markets: Recent Trends, Risk
Management and Market Dynamic,” Committee on the Global Financial System.
Barro, Robert (1979a), “Are Government Bonds Net Wealth?,” Journal of Political Economy 82, 1095-1117.
Barro, Robert (1979b), “On the Determination of the Public Debt,” Journal of Political Economy 87(5), 940971.
Barro, Robert (1981), “Output Effects of Government Purchases,” Journal of Political Economy 89(6), 10861121.
Baur, Dirk and Thomas McDermott (2010), “Is Gold a Safe Haven? International Evidence,” Journal of
Banking and Finance 34, 1886-1898.
Berger, Allen, Anil Kashyap, and Joseph Scalise (1995), “The Transformation of the U.S. Banking Industry:
What a Long, Strange Trip It’s Been,” Brookings Paper on Economic Activity, vol. 2, 55-218.
Bernanke, Ben (2005), “The Global Savings Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deficit,” speech delivered
at the Sandridge Lecture, Virginia Association of Economists, Richmond, Va., March 10.

33
Bernanke, Ben (2007), “Global Imbalances: Recent Developments and Prospects,” speech delivered at the
Bundesbank Lecture, Berlin, Germany, September 2.
Bernanke, Ben (2015), “Should Monetary Policy Take into Account Risks to Financial Stability?,” speech in
London, May 20, 2014; see
http://www.brookings.edu/blogs/ben-bernanke/posts/2015/04/07-monetary-policy-risks-tofinancial-stability
Bernanke, Ben, Carol Bertaut, Laurie Pounder DeMarco, and Steve Kamin (2011), “International Capital
Flows and the Return to Safe Assets in the United States, 2003-2007,” Banque de France Financial
Stability Review (February), 13–26.
Bertaut, Carol, Laurie Pounder DeMarco, Steve Kamin, and Ralph Tyron (2011), “ABS Inflows to the United
States and the Global Financial Crisis,” Journal of International Economics 88, 219-234.
Bertaut, Carol, Alexandra Tabova, and Vivian Wong (2014), “The Replacement of Safe Assets: Evidence
from the U.S. Bond Portfolio,” Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, International
Finance Discussion papers, No. 1123.
Bodenhorn, Howard (2006), “Bank Chartering and Political Corruption in Antebellum New York Free
Banking Reform,” chapter 7 of Corruption and Reform: Lessons from America’s Economic History,
edited by Edward Glaeser and Claudia Goldin (University of Chicago Press).
Botticini, Maristella (2000), “A Tale of ‘Benevolent’ Governments: Private Credit Markets, Public Finance,
and the Role of Jewish Lenders in Medieval and Renaissance Italy,” Journal of Economic History
60, 164-189.
Broz, Lawrence, and Richard Grossman (2004), "Paying for Privilege: The Political Economy of Bank of
England Charters: 1694-1844," Explorations in Economics History 41, 48-72.
Brunnermeier, Markus and Yuliy Sannikov (2014), “A Macroeconomic Model with a Financial Sector,”
American Economic Review 104(2), 379-421.
Caballero, Ricardo (2006), “On the Macroeconomics of Asset Shortages,” in Andreas Beyer and Lucrezia
Reichlin, eds., The Role of Money: Money and Monetary Policy in the Twenty-First Century, vol. 4
of European Central Banking Conference 2006, 272-283.
Caballero, Ricardo, and Emmanuel Farhi (2014a), “The Safety Trap,” NBER Working Paper No. 20652.
Caballero, Ricardo and Emmanuel Farhi (2014b), “On the Role of Safe Asset Shortages in Secular
Stagnation,” Chapter 9 in Secular Stagnation: Facts, Causes and Cures, edited by Coen Teulings
and Richard Baldwin, (CEPR Press).
Caballero, Ricardo and Arvind Krishnamurthy (2006), “Bubbles and Capital Flow Volatility: Causes and Risk
Management,” Journal of Monetary Economics 53(1), 35-53.

34
Caballero, Ricardo and Arvind Krishnamurthy (2009), “Global Imbalances and Financial Fragility,”
American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings 99, 584-588.
Caballero, Ricardo, Emmanuel Farhi, and Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas (2008), “An Equilibrium Model of
Global Imbalances’ and Low Interest Rates,” American Economic Review, 98(1):358–393.
Calomiris, Charles (1989), “Deposit Insurance: Lessons from the Record,” Economic Perspectives 13
(Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago), 10-30.
Calomiris, Charles (1990), “Is Deposit Insurance Necessary? A Historical Perspective,” Journal of Economic
History 50(2), 283-295.
Calomiris, Charles and Haber, Stephen (2014), Fragile by Design (Princeton University Press).
Calomiris, Charles and Charles Kahn (1991), “The Role of Demandable Debt in Restructuring Optimal
Banking Arrangements,” American Economic Review 81, 497-513.
Calomiris, Charles and Charles Kahn (1996), ‘‘The Efficiency of Self-Regulated Payments Systems: Learning
from the Suffolk System,’’ Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 28(2), 766–803.
Cannon, James Graham (1910), Clearing Houses (National Monetary Commission; Government Printing
Office; Washington D.C.).
Carlson, Mark, Buru Duygan-Bump, Fabio Natalucci, William Nelson, Marcelo Ochoa, Jeremy Stein and
Skander Van den Huevel (2014), “The Demand for Short-Term, Safe Assets, and Financial Stability:
Some Evidence and Implications for Central Bank Policies,” International Journal of Central
Banking, forthcoming (Finance and Economics Discussion Series, Division of Research & Statistics
and Monetary Affairs, Federal Reserve Board, No. 2014-102.)
Carothers, Neil (1930), Fractional Currency (New York: John Wiley & Sons).
Cassis, Youssef (2011), Crises and Opportunities: The Shaping of Modern Finance (Oxford University
Press).
Chaddock, Robert E. (1910), The Safety Fund Banking System in New York State, 1829-1866, Sen. Docu.
No. 581, 61st Cong., 2nd Sess., (Government Printing Office: Washington D.C.).
Checkland, S. G. (1975), Scottish Banking: A History, 1675-1973 (Collins; Glasgow).
Cleaveland, John (1857), The Banking System of New York (John S. Voorhees; New York).
Cipolla, Carlo M. (1967), Money, Prices and Civilization in the Mediterranean World, Fifth to Seventeenth
Century (New York: Gordian Press).
Conklin, James (1998), “The Theory of Sovereign Debt and Spain under Philip II,” Journal of Political
Economy 106, pp. 483–513.

35
Cooper, Denis R. (1988), The Art and Craft of Coinmaking: A History of Mint Technology (London: Spink).
Cramer, John Andrew (1741), Elements of the Art of Assaying Metals (translated from the Latin; Tho.
Woodward; London).
Dang, Tri Vi, Gary Gorton, and Bengt Holmström (2013), “Ignorance, Debt and Financial Crises,” Working
Paper, Yale University.
Dang, Tri Vi, Gary Gorton, Bengt Holmström and Guillermo Ordoñez (2016), “Banks as Secret Keepers,”
Working Paper, University of Pennsylvania.
Davenant, Charles (1698), Discourses on the Publick Revenues, and on Trade of England, Part II (London).
Davies, Glyn (2002), History of Money (University of Wales Press; 3rd edition).
de Roover, Raymond (1942), “Money, Banking, and Credit in Medieval Bruges,” Journal of Economic
History 2, Supplement, 52-65.
de Roover, Raymond (1953), The Rise and Decline of the Medici Bank: 1397-1494 (Beard Books).
Desmirguc-Kant, Asli and Enrica Detragiache (1998), “The Determinants of Banking Crises in Developing
and Developed Countries,” IMF Staff papers 45 (March), 81-109.
Diamond, Peter (1965), “National Debt in a Neoclassical Growth Model,” American Economic Review 55,
1126-1150.
Diamond, Douglas and Phillip Dybvig (1983), “Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance, and Liquidity,” Journal of
Political Economy 91, 401-419.
Diamond, Douglas and Raghuram Rajan (2000), “A Theory of Bank Capital,” Journal of Finance 55, 24312465.
Dickinson, Peter (1967), The Financial Revolution in England: A Study in the Development of Public Credit,
1688-1756 (Macmillan; London).
Douglas, James (1975), Scottish Banknotes (Stanley Gibson Publications).
Duffee, Gregory (1998), “Idiosyncratic Variation of Treasury Bill Yields,” Journal of Finance 51, 527-551.
Edkins, D.D. (1890), Chinese Currency (Kegan Paul, Trench, Trübner & Co.; London).
Einzig, Paul (1948), Primitive Money: In its Ethnological, Historical and Economic Aspects)Eyre and
Spottiswoode; London).
Elul, Ronel (2015), “Securitization and Mortgage Default,” Journal of Financial Services Research, 1-29.
Farhi, Emmanuel and Jean Tirole (2012), “Bubbly Liquidity,” Review of Economic Studies 79, 678-706.

36
Flandreau, Marc and Juan Flores Zendejas (2009), “Bonds and Brands: Foundations of Sovereign Debt
Markets, 1820-1830,” Journal of Economic History 69(3), 646-684.
Flandreau, Marc and Frédéric Zumer (2004), The Making of Global Finance (Paris: OECD).
Frost, Josh, Lorie Logan, Antoine Martin, Patrick McCabe, Fabio Natalucci, and Julie Remache (2015),
“Overnight RRP Operations as a Monetary Policy Tool: Some Design Considerations,” Finance and
Economics Discussion Series 2015-010, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
Gandal, Neil and Nathan Sussman (1997), “Asymmetric Information and Commodity Money: Tickling the
Tolerance in Medieval France,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 29, 440-457.
Garbade, Kenneth (2012), Birth of a Market: The U.S. Treasury Securities Market from the Great War to
the Great Depression (MIT Press).
Garrat, Rodney, Antoine Martin, James McAndrews and Ed Nosal (2015), “Segregated Balance Accounts,”
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Staff Report No, 730.
Goldstein, Itay and Ady Pauzner (2005), “Demand-Deposit Contracts and the Probability of Bank Runs,”
Journal of Finance 60(3), 1293-1327.
Goodspeed, Tyler Beck (2016), Legislating Instability: Adam Smith, Free Banking, and the Financial Crisis
of 1772 (Harvard University Press).
Gorton, Gary (1988), “Banking Panics and Business Cycles,” Oxford Economic Papers 40(4), 751–81.
Gorton, Gary (1996), ‘‘Reputation Formation in Early Bank Note Markets,’’ Journal of Political Economy
104, 346–397.
Gorton, Gary (1999), “Pricing Free Bank Notes,” Journal of Monetary Economics 44, 33-64.
Gorton, Gary (2010), "Bank Regulation When `Banks' and `Banking' Are Not the Same," Chapter 5 of Slapped
by the Invisible Hand (Oxford University Press).
Gorton, Gary, Stefan Lewellen, and Andrew Metrick (2010), “The Safe Asset Share,” American Economic
Review, Papers and Proceedings 102, 101–106.
Gorton, Gary and Ping He (2016), “Optimal Monetary Policy in a Collateralized Economy,” Yale working
paper.
Gorton, Gary and Andrew Metrick (2012a), “Securitized Banking and the Run on Repo,” Journal of Financial
Economics 104, 425-451.
Gorton, Gary and Andrew Metrick (2012b), “Securitization,” Chapter 1 in the Handbook of the Economics
of Finance, volume 2, Part A, edited by George Constantinides, Milton Harris, and René Stulz,
Elsevier, 2013, p. 1-70.

37
Gorton, Gary and Tyler Muir (2015), “Mobile Collateral versus Immobile Collateral,” Yale, working paper.
Gorton, Gary and Don Mullineaux (1987), ‘‘The Joint Production of Confidence: Endogenous Regulation
and Nineteenth Century Commercial-Bank Clearinghouses,’’ Journal of Money, Credit, and
Banking 19, 457–468.
Gorton, Gary, and George Pennacchi (1990), ‘‘Financial Intermediaries and Liquidity Creation,’’ Journal of
Finance XLV, 49–71.
Gorton, Gary and Ping He (2016), “Optimal Monetary Policy in a Collateralized Economy,” Yale, working
paper.
Gorton, Gary, and Andrew Metrick (2013), “Securitization,” in Handbook of the Economics of Finance, G.
Constantinides, M. Harris, and R. Stulz eds., Vol. 2A, 1-70, Elsevier.
Gorton, Gary and Andrew Metrick (2010), “Regulating the Shadow Banking System,” Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity, Fall, 261-312.
Gorton, Gary and Tyler Muir (2015), “Mobile Collateral versus Immobile Collateral,” Yale working paper.
Gorton, Gary and Guillermo Ordoñez (2016a), “Good Booms, Bad Booms,” Working Paper, Yale University.
Gorton, Gary and Guillermo Ordoñez (2016b), “How Do Central Banks End Crises,” Penn and Yale working
paper.
Gorton, Gary and Guillermo Ordoñez (2014), “Collateral Crises,” American Economic Review 104 (February
2014), 343-378.
Gorton, Gary and Guillermo Ordoñez (2013), “The Supply and Demand for Safe Assets,” NBER Working
Paper No. 18732.
Gorton, Gary and Richard Rosen (1995), “Corporate Control, Portfolio Choice, and the Decline of Banking,”
Journal of Finance 50, 1377-1420.
Gorton, Gary and Nicholas S. Souleles (2006), “Special Purpose Vehicles and Securitization,” chapter in The
Risks of Financial Institutions, edited by Rene Stulz and Mark Carey (University of Chicago Press).
Gorton, Gary and Ellis Tallman (2015), “How Did Pre-Fed Banking Panics End?,” NBER Working Paper 22036.
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, Nicolas Govillot and Hélène Rey (2014), “Exorbitant Privilege and Exorbitant
Duty,” Berkeley, working paper.
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, and Olivier Jeanne (2012), “Global Safe Assets,” Working Paper, Berkeley.
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, and Maurice Obstfeld (2012), “Stories of the Twentieth Century for the
Twenty-First,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 4 (1): 226–65.

38
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier and Hélène Rey (2007), “From World Banker to World Venture Capitalist: U.S>
External Adjustment and The Exorbitant Privilege,” in G7 Current Account Imbalances:
Sustainability and Adjustment", Richard Clarida, editor, p. 11-55 (University of Chicago

Press).

Greenwood, Robin, Samuel Hanson, and Jeremy Stein (2010), “A Gap-Filling Theory of Corporate Debt
Maturity Choice,” Journal of Finance 65, 993-1028.
Greenwood, Robin, Samuel Hanson, and Jeremy Stein (2015), “A Comparative-Advantage Approach to
Government Debt Maturity,” Journal of Finance 70, 1683-1722.
Grossman, Richard S. (2010), Unsettled Account: The Evolution of Banking in the Industrialized World
since 1800 (Princeton University Press).
Gurkaynak, Refet, Brian Sack, and Jonathan Wright (2007), “The U.S. Treasury Yield Curve: 1961 to the
Present,” Journal of Monetary Economics 54, 2291-2304.
Hamilton, Earl (1947), “Origin and Growth of the National Debt in Western Europe,” American Economic
Review 37(2), 118-130.
Hammond, Bray (1934), “Long and Short Term Credit in Early American Banking,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 49(1), 79-103.
He, Zhiguo, Arvind Krishnamurthy (2012), “Intermediary Asset Pricing,” American Economic Review
103(2), 732-770.
He, Zhiguo, Arvind Krishnamurthy and Konstantin Milbradt (2015), “A Model of the Reserve Asset,”
Stanford working paper.
He, Zhiguo, Arvind Krishnamurthy and Konstantin Milbradt (2016), “What Makes U.S. Government Bonds
Safe Assets?,” American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, forthcoming.
Heal, Ambrose (1935), London Goldsmiths (Cambridge University Press).
Herman, Mary (1956), “Wampum as Money in Northeastern North America,” Ethnohistory 3, 21-33.
Hill, George (1922), “Ancient Methods of Coining,” The Numismatic Chronicle and Journal of the Royal
Numismatic Society, Fifth Series, vol. 2, 1-42.
Hilton Price, F.G. (1881), “Some Notes on the Early Goldsmiths and Bankers to the close of the
Seventeenth Century,” Transactions of the London and Middlesex Archaeological Society, Vol. V,
255-281.
Holmström, Bengt (2009), “Discussion of G. Gorton, ‘The Panic of 2007’” in Maintaining Stability in a
Changing Financial System, Proceedings of the 2008 Jackson Hole Conference, Federal Reserve
Bank of Kansas City.

39
Holmström, Bengt (2015), “Understanding the Role of Debt in the Financial System,” Bank for
International Settlements, Working Paper No. 479.
Holmström, Bengt and Jean Tirole (1997), “Financial Intermediation, Loanable Funds and the Real Sector,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 112, 663-691.
Holmström, Bengt and Jean Tirole (1998), “Private and Public Supply of Liquidity,” Journal of Political
Economy 106, 1-40.
Holmström, Bengt and Jean Tirole (2001), “A Liquidity-Based Asset Pricing Model,” Journal of Finance 56,
1837-1867.
Holmström, Bengt and Jean Tirole (2011), Inside and Outside Liquidity (MIT Press).
Hoppit, Julian (1986), “Financial Crises in Eighteenth-Century England,” Economic History Review 39, 3958.
Horsefield, J.K. (1952), “British Banking Practices, 1750-1850,” Economica, New Series, Vol. 19, 308-321.
Howgego, Christopher (1995), Ancient History from Coins (Routledge).

Hrung, Warren, and Jason Seligman (2011), “Responses to the Financial Crisis, Treasury Debt, and the
Impact on Short-Term Money Markets,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Staff Report No. 481.
International Monetary Fund (2012), Global Financial Stability Report: The Quest for Lasting Stability
(International Monetary Fund: Washington D.C.).
Johnson, Karen (2009),” Gross or Net International Financial Flows: Understanding the Financial Crisis,”
Council on Foreign Relations, working paper.
Jordà, Òscar, Moritz Schularick and Alan Taylor (2016), “The Great Mortgaging: Housing Finance, Crises,
and Business Cycles,” Economic Policy 31 (85) 107-152.
Jordà, Òscar, Moritz Schularick, and Alan M. Taylor (2011), “Financial Crises, Credit Booms, and External
Imbalances: 140 Years of Lessons,” International Monetary Fund (IMF) Economic Review 59 (2):
340–78.
Kaplan, Edward (editor) (1994), A Monetary History of China (Bellingham, WA: Center for East Asian
Studies, University of Western Washington).
Keeley, Michael (1990), “Deposit Insurance, Risk and Market Power in Banking,” American Economic
Review 80(5), 1183-1200.
Kindleberger, Charles (1991), “The Economic Crisis of 1619 to 1623,” Journal of Economic History 51, 149175.
Kindleberger, Charles (2006), A Financial History of Western Europe (Rutledge; new edition).

40
Krishnamurthy, Arvind (2002), “The Bond/Old Bond Spread,” Journal of Financial Economics 66, 463-506.
Krishnamurthy, Arvind, and Annette Vissing-Jørgensen (2012), “The Aggregate Demand for Treasury
Debt,” Journal of Political Economy 120, 233-267.
Krishnamurthy, Arvind, and Annette Vissing-Jørgensen (2015), “The Impact of Treasury Supply on
Financial Sector Lending and Stability,” Journal of Financial Economics 118, 571-600.
Kwan, Simon (1996), “Firm-Specific Information and the Correlation between Individual Stocks and
Bonds,” Journal of Financial Economics 40, 63-80.
Laevan, Luc and Fabian Valencia (2012), “Systemic Banking Crises Database: An Update,” IMF Working
Paper no. WP/12/163.
Lawson, William John (1850), The History of Banking (Richard Bentley; London).
Macey, Jonathan, Geoffrey Miller, and Richard Carnell (2001), Banking Law and Regulation (Aspen Law &
Business).
Maggiori, Matteo (2013), “Financial Intermediation, International Risk Sharing and Reserve Currencies,”
Harvard, working paper.
Marcus, Alan (1984), "Deregulation and Bank Financial Policy," Journal of Banking and Finance 8 (1984),
p. 557-565.
Martin, Alberto and Jaume Ventura (2015), “Managing Credit Bubbles,” Universitat Pompeu Fabra,
working paper.
Mate, Mavis (1972), “Monetary Policies in England, 1272-1307,” British Numismatic Journal 41, 34-79.
Melton, Frank (1986), Sir Robert Clayton and the Origins of English Deposit Banking, 1658-1685
(Cambridge University Press).
Mendoza, Enrique and Marco Terrones (2008), “An Anatomy of Credit Booms: Evidence from Macro
Aggregates and Micro Data,” NBER Working Paper 14049.
Moreira, Alan and Alexi Savov (2016), “The Macroeconomics of Shadow Banking,” Yale working paper.
Mullineaux, Don (1987), ‘‘Competitive Moneys and the Suffolk Bank System: A Contractual Perspective,”
Southern Economic Journal 53, 884–897.
Munro, John (1988), “Deflation and the Petty Coinage Problem in the Late-Medieval Economy: The Case
of Flanders, 1334-1484,” Explorations in Economic History 25, 387–423.
Munro, John (2000), "A Maze of Medieval Monetary Metrology: Determining Mint Weights in Flanders,
France and England from the Economics of Counterfeiting, 1388 - 1469", Journal of European
Economic History 29, 173–99.

41
Munro, John (2012), Money in the Pre-Industrial World: Bullion, Debasements and Coin Substitutes
(Pickering & Chatto).
Nadauld, Taylor and Michael Weisbach (2012), “Did Securitization Affect the Cost of Corporate Debt?,”
Journal of Financial Economics 105, 332-352.
Ng, Kenneth (1988), “Free Banking Laws and Barriers to Entry in Banking, 1838-1860,” Journal of Economic
History 48(4), 877-889.
Nightingale, Pamela (1985), “The Evolution of Weight-Standards and the Creation of New Monetary and
Commercial Links in Northern Europe from the Tenth Century to the Twelfth Century,” Economic
History Review 38, 192-209.
North, Douglas and Barry Weingast (1989), “Constitutions and Commitment: The Evolution of Institutional
Governing Public Choice in Seventeenth-Century England,” Journal of Economic History 49(4),
803-832.
Obstfeld, Maurice (2012), “Does the Current Account Still Matter?,” American Economic Review, Papers
& Proceedings 102(3), 1-23.
Oddy, Andrew (1983), “Assaying in Antiquity,” Gold Bulletin 16, 52-59.
Peng Xinwei (1994), A Monetary History of China (Bellingham, WA: Center for East Asian Studies,
University of Western Washington; translation by Edward H. Kaplan of Zhongguo huobi shi, third
edition, Shanghai, 1965; 2 volumes.
Postan, M. (1928), “Credit in Medieval Trade,” Economic History Review 1, 134-261.
Pozdena, Randall (1986), “Securitization and Banking,” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Weekly
Letter, July 4, 1986.
Price, Bonamy (1869), Principles of Currency (James Parker and Co.; Oxford and London).
Price, George (1856), Treatise on Fire & Thief-Proof Depositories and Locks and Keys (Simpkin, Marshall
and Co.; London).
Quiggin, A. Hingston (1949), A Survey of Primitive Money (Methuen; London).
Quinn, Stephen (1996), “Gold, Silver, and the Glorious Revolution: Arbitrage between Bills of Exchange
and Bullion,” Economic History Review XLIX, 473-490.
Quinn, Stephen (1997), “Goldsmith-Banking: Mutual Acceptance and Interbanker Clearing in Restoration
London,” Explorations in Economic History 34, 411-432.
Quinn, Stephen and William Roberds (2015), “Responding to a Shadow Banking Crisis: The Lessons of
1763,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 47, 1149-1176.

42
Ratchford, Benjamin (1947), “Constitutions and Commitment: History of the Federal Debt in the United
States,” American Economic Review 37(2), 131-141.
Reddish, Angela (1990), “The Evolution of the Gold Standard in England,” Journal of Economic History 50,
789-805.
Richards, R. D. (1927), “The Evolution of Paper Money in England,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 41(3),
361-404.
Richards, R.D. (1929), The Early History of Banking in England (Routledge).
Rickards, James (2016), The New Case for Gold (Portfolio).
Roberds, William and François Velde (2016), “Early Public Banks I: Ledger-Money Banks,” p. 321-358, and
“Early Public Banks II: Banks of Issue,” p. 465-488, chapters in Money in the Western Legal
Transition: Middle Ages to Bretton Woods, edited by David Fox and Wolfgang Ernst (Oxford
University Press).
Rogers, James (1995), The Early History of the Law of Bills and Notes (Cambridge, MA: Cambridge
University Press).
Rolnick, Arthur and Warren Weber (1983), “New Evidence on the Free Banking Era,” American Economic
Review 73, 1080-1091.
Rolnick, Arthur and Warren Weber (1984), “The Causes of Free Bank Failures,” Journal of Monetary
Economics 14, 267-291.
Rolnick, Arthur, François Velde, and Warren Weber (1996), “The Debasement Puzzle: An Essay on
Medieval Monetary History,” Journal of Economic History 56, 789-808.
Santarosa, Veronica Aoki (2015), “Financing Long-Distance Trade: The Joint Liability Rule and Bills of
Exchange in Eighteenth-Century France,” Journal of Economic History 75, 690-719.
Sargent, Thomas and François Velde (1999), “The Big Problem of Small Change,” Journal of Money, Credit
and Banking 31, 137-161.
Saunders, Anthony and Berry Wilson (2001), “An Analysis of Bank Charter Value and Its Risk-Constraining
Incentives,” Journal of Financial Services Research 19, 185-2001.
Schnabel, Isabel and Hyun Shinn (2004), “Liquidity and Contagion: The Crisis of 1763,” Journal of the
European Economic Association 2, 929-968.
Schularick, Moritz and Alan M. Taylor. 2012. “Credit Booms Gone Bust: Monetary Policy, Leverage Cycles
and Financial Crises, 1870-2008.” American Economic Review 102, 1029-1061.
Shell, Marc (2013), Wampum and the Origins of American (University of Illinois Press).

43
Shleifer, Andre and Robert Vishny (2010), “Unstable Banking,” Journal of Financial Economics 97, 306-318.
Smith, Adam (1812), The Works of Adam Smith, in five volumes (London).
Stasavage, David (2002), "Credible Commitment in Early Modern Europe: North and Weingast Revisited,"
Journal of Law, Economics and Organization 18, 155-86.
Stasavage, David (2016), “What can we Learn from the Early History of Sovereign Debt?,” Explorations in
Economic History 59, 1-16.
Stein, Jeremy (2014), “Incorporating Financial Stability Considerations into a Monetary Policy
Framework,” Remarks at the International Forum on Monetary Policy (March 21, 2014).
Stein, Jeremy (2012a), “Monetary Policy as Financial Stability Regulation,” Quarterly Journal of Economics
127, 57-95.
Stein, Jeremy (2012b), “Evaluating Large-Scale Asset Purchases,” Remarks by Jeremy Stein, member of
the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System at the Brookings Institution, Washington
D.C., October 11, 2012.
Stein, Jeremy (2014), “Incorporating Financial Stability Considerations into a Monetary Policy
Framework,” Remarks by Jeremy Stein, member of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System at the International Research Forum on Monetary Policy, Georgetown University, March
21, 2014.
Sunderam, Adi (2015), “Money Creation and the Shadow Banking System,” Review of Financial Studies 28,
939-977.
Sussman, Nathan and Yishay Yafeh (2006), “Institutional Reforms, Financial Development and Sovereign
Debt: Britain 1690-1790,” Journal of Economic History 66, 906-935.
Svensson, Lars E.O. (2015), “Monetary Policy and Macroprudential Policy: Different and Separate,” draft;
http://larseosvensson.se/
Symons, Edward (1983), “The ‘Business of Banking’ in Historical Perspective,” George Washington Law
Review 51(5), 676-726.
Temin, Peter and Hans-Joachim Voth (2006), “Banking as an Emerging Technology: Hoare’s Bank 17021742,” Financial History Review 13, 149-178.
Temin, Peter and Hans-Joachim Voth (2013), Prometheus Shackled: Goldsmith Banks and England’s
Financial Revolution after 1700 (Oxford University Press).
Thornton, Henry (1807), An Inquiry into the Nature and Effects of the paper Credit of Great Britain (James
Humphreys; Philadelphia).

44
Timberlake, Richard (1984), “The Central Banking Role of Clearinghouse Associations,” Journal of Money,
Credit and Banking 16, 1-15.
Townsend, Robert (1979), “Optimal Contracts and Competitive Markets with Costly State Verification,”
Journal of Economic Theory 21, 265-293.
Ugolini, Stefano (2011), “What Do We Really Know about the Long-Term Evolution of Central Banking?
Evidence from the Past, Insights for the Present,” Working Paper No. 2011-15, Norges Bank, Oslo.
Usher, Abott Payson (1943), The Early History of Deposit Banking in Mediterranean Europe, volume 1
(Harvard Economic Studies, Vol. 75; Harvard University Press).
Usher, Abott Payson (1914), “The Origin of the Bill of Exchange,” Journal of Political Economy 22, 566-576.
Vallavine, Peter (1742), Observations on the Present Condition of the Current Coin of this Kingdom (R.
Penny; London).
Velde, François (2013), “On the Evolution of Specie: Circulation and Weight Loss in 18 th and 19th Century
Coinage,” Revue Numismatique 170, 605-650.
Velde, François and David Weir (1992), “The Financial Market and Government Debt Policy in France,
1746-1793,” Journal of Economic History 52, 1-39.
Vilar, Pierre (1969), A History of Gold and Money (Verso; London and New York).
Weber, Warren (2006), “Early State Banks in the United States: How Many Were There and When Did
They Exist?,” Journal of Economic History 66, 433-455.
Williams, John C. (2015), “Macroprudential Policy in a Microprudential World,” speech in Singapore,
May 28; http://www.frbsf.org/our-district/press/presidents-speeches/williamsspeeches/2015/may/macroprudential-policy-microprudential-world/
Woodford, Michael (1990), “Public Debt as Private Liquidity,” American Economic Review Papers and
Proceedings 80, 382–388.
Xie, Lei (2012), “The Seasons of Money: ABS/MBS Issuance and the Convenience Yield,” Working Paper,
Yale University.
Yang, Lien-sheng (1952), Money and Credit in China, A Short History (Harvard University Press).

45

Figure 1: The Circulation of Bills of Exchange

City A

City An
Goods

Issuer

Local Currency,
Merchandise, Settle a
Debt

Payer

Bill of Exchange

Payment

City A1 , A2 , A3 , …
Last
Holder

Beneficiary
(First Holder)

Endorsers

Source: Santarosa (2015).

46

Figure 2

Source: Holmström (2015).

47

Figure 3: Bond Yields of Selected Sovereigns of the Euro Area

Euro Area Sovereign Bond Yields
45

% Yields

40

Greece

35

Portugal

30

Spain

25

Italy

20

Netherlands

15

Belgium

10
Austria
5
0

Source: Investing.com.

Germany

48

Figure 4: The Safe Debt Share

45.0%

40.0%
35.0%
30.0%
25.0%

20.0%
15.0%
10.0%
5.0%

Government Liabilities
Source: Gorton, Lewellen, and Metrick (2012).

Financial Liabilities

2010Q3

2007Q2

2004Q1

2000Q4

1997Q3

1994Q2

1991Q1

1987Q4

1984Q3

1981Q2

1978Q1

1974Q4

1971Q3

1968Q2

1965Q1

1961Q4

1958Q3

1955Q2

1952Q1

0.0%

49

Figure 5: The Components of Privately-Produced Safe Debt

Deposits

Money-like debt

MBS/ABS Debt

Corporate Bonds and Loans

Other Liabilities
Source: Gorton, Lewellen, and Metrick (2012).

2010Q3

2007Q2

2004Q1

2000Q4

1997Q3

1994Q2

1991Q1

1987Q4

1984Q3

1981Q2

1978Q1

1974Q4

1971Q3

1968Q2

1965Q1

1961Q4

1958Q3

1955Q2

1952Q1

100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%

50

US Depository Institutions
Insurance Companies
Source: Flow of Funds.

Rest of the World
Mutual Funds

2011

2008

2005

2002

1999

1996

1993

1990

1987

1984

1981

1978

1975

1972

1969

1966

1963

1960

1957

1954

1951

1948

0.70
0.60
0.50
0.40
0.30
0.20
0.10
0.00
-0.10

1945

Figure 6: Holders of U.S. Treasury Securities (percent of total
oustanding)

51

Figure 7: Corporate Bond Spread and Government Debt

Source: Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jørgensen (2012).

52

Figure 8
Average premium (actual T-bill yield minus fitted yield) by week to maturity, 1983-2009

Source: Greenwood, Hanson and Stein (2015).

53
Figure 9: Supply and Demand for Safe Debt as a Function of the Real Interest Rate

Source: Caballero and Farhi (2014b).

