                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  MULTIFACETED AID FOR LOW-INCOME STUDENTS AND COLLEGE OUTCOMES:
                   EVIDENCE FROM NORTH CAROLINA

                                     Charles T. Clotfelter
                                      Steven W. Hemelt
                                        Helen F. Ladd

                                      Working Paper 22217
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22217


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                            May 2016, Revised June 2017




The research reported here was supported by the National Center for Analysis of Longitudinal
Data in Education Research (CALDER) and the Gates Foundation. We are very grateful to
Shirley Ort, Associate Provost and Director of Scholarships and Student Aid, and Lynn Williford,
Assistant Provost for Institutional Research and Assessment, for sharing generously of their
expertise and deep institutional knowledge with the research team – and for answering many
questions about data and programmatic elements of the Carolina Covenant. We benefited from
the suggestions and comments of seminar participants at Stanford University, University of
Michigan, the fall 2015 meetings of the Association for Public Policy Analysis and Management
(APPAM) in Miami, FL, and the winter 2017 meetings of the Western Economic Association
International (WEAI) in Santiago, Chile. We are grateful to Dan Cohen-Vogel and Eric Zwieg for
many helpful conversations about data. We thank Yang Zhou, Cindy Wu, and Ying Shi for
excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Charles T. Clotfelter, Steven W. Hemelt, and Helen F. Ladd. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Multifaceted Aid for Low-Income Students and College Outcomes: Evidence from North
Carolina
Charles T. Clotfelter, Steven W. Hemelt, and Helen F. Ladd
NBER Working Paper No. 22217
May 2016, Revised June 2017
JEL No. I22,I23

                                         ABSTRACT

We study the evolution of a campus-based aid program for low-income students that began with
grant-heavy financial aid and later added a suite of non-financial supports. We find little to no
evidence that program eligibility during the early years (2004-2006), in which students received
additional institutional grant aid and few non-financial supports, improved postsecondary
progress, performance, or completion. In contrast, program-eligible students in more recent
cohorts (2007-2010), when the program supplemented grant-heavy aid with an array of non-
financial supports, were more likely to meet credit accumulation benchmarks toward timely
graduation and earned higher GPAs than their barely ineligible counterparts.

Charles T. Clotfelter                           Helen F. Ladd
Sanford School of Public Policy                 Box 90245
Duke University                                 Duke University
Rubenstein Hall Room 178                        201 Science Drive
201 Science Drive                               Durham, NC 27708
Box 90312                                       helen.ladd@duke.edu
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
charles.clotfelter@duke.edu

Steven W. Hemelt
Department of Public Policy
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Abernethy Hall, Campus Box 3435
Chapel Hill, NC 27599
hemelt@email.unc.edu
I.      Introduction

        In addition to being less likely than their more affluent peers to enter college, low-income

students are also less likely to graduate after they enroll. Moreover, these income-based gaps in

college completion have grown larger in recent decades (Bailey & Dynarski, 2011). This

widening occurred despite attempts to improve postsecondary access and success for low-income

students. The number of students receiving need-based federal Pell grants and the average, per-

student value of those awards steadily increased from the mid-1990s to 2011 (Dynarski & Scott-

Clayton, 2013). In addition, states have doubled expenditures on grant aid to students since 1980

(Dynarski & Scott-Clayton, 2013), but an increasing share of that aid is not need-based. 1 Recent

policy discussions have centered on the genesis and evolution of income-based gaps in college

enrollment and completion, as well as on ways postsecondary institutions can improve outcomes

for the low-income students they enroll.

        In this paper, we study a multifaceted aid program for low-income college enrollees

implemented by a leading public flagship institution. In the fall of 2003, the University of North

Carolina at Chapel Hill (UNC-CH) announced a new aid program for low-income students who

had gained admission through the standard process. This program was intended to promote their

successful progress through college and ultimate graduation. Beginning with students entering

UNC-CH in the fall of 2004, this aid program, dubbed the “Carolina Covenant,” would cover the

financial costs of college attendance – without loans – and provide the “Covenant scholars” with

additional support services, such as mentoring by faculty and peers, career advice, professional

development opportunities, and social events. We examine the effects of the Carolina Covenant

on various markers of college success: earned credits, grades, and graduation. Our results


1
  Between 2002-2003 and 2012-2013, the share of undergraduate grant aid from states that was not need based
increased by 2 percentage points, from 23 to 25 percent (NASSGAP, 2014).

                                                       2
highlight the capacity of non-financial supports to improve the postsecondary progress and

performance of low-income, underrepresented students at highly competitive institutions when

layered on top of need-based, grant-heavy aid. We find suggestive, though ultimately

inconclusive, evidence of positive effects of Covenant eligibility on college graduation.

         The next section situates our paper and its contributions within the literature that explores

the effects of college costs, information, and other supports on students’ postsecondary

outcomes. We focus particularly on studies that examine outcomes for enrolled students. Section

III discusses the components and implementation of the Carolina Covenant. Section IV describes

the data and section V outlines our empirical approach. Section VI presents our main findings

and section VII concludes with a discussion of policy implications.

II.      Existing Literature

         Previous research has explored the effects of need-based aid on the postsecondary

attendance choices of students (e.g., Dynarski, 2003; Deming & Dynarski, 2010), the influence

of tuition costs on college enrollment (e.g., Hemelt & Marcotte, 2011; Heller, 1996; Kane,

1995), and the effects of merit-based scholarships on postsecondary enrollment and choice (e.g.,

Bruce & Carruthers, 2014; Scott-Clayton, 2011). Much less attention has been paid to the

influence of such factors (and other supports) on outcomes beyond college enrollment such as

short-run persistence, academic performance, and college completion. 2 We summarize here first

the studies that examine such effects of financial support, second those that focus on the effects

of non-financial supports, and third the few that study programs combining both types of

support. The fully developed Carolina Covenant program includes financial and non-financial

assistance.


2
 For an excellent synthesis of recent research that explores ways to improve college access in the United States, see
Page and Scott-Clayton (2015).

                                                          3
         A. Need- and Merit-Based Aid: Effects on Post-Enrollment Outcomes

         Examining the effects of merit aid on college completion, Dynarski (2008) found that

merit-aid programs in Arkansas and Georgia increased the share of young people with a college

degree by 3 percentage points, with the largest effects accruing to women. She notes, however,

that her reduced-form approach cannot “separately identify the effect of aid on entry and

persistence conditional on entry” (p. 579). Further, she highlights the fact that her findings

suggest that “scholarships alone will not keep the bulk of dropouts from leaving college” (p.

579). Even with generous merit aid, a sizeable share of entering college students fail to persist to

completion. 3

         Scott-Clayton (2011) and Bruce and Carruthers (2014) studied the effects of merit-based,

statewide aid programs in West Virginia (PROMISE) and Tennessee (HOPE), respectively, on

measures of college success. In both cases, the authors exploited a set of transparent eligibility

criteria based on ACT scores and GPAs to estimate scholarship effects. The West Virginia

program fully covered tuition and fees for up to four years of college for first-time, full-time

college attendees at public in-state institutions (or an equivalent amount at in-state privates). The

Tennessee scholarship awarded up to three-fourths of the cost of tuition and fees at in-state

public institutions, a quarter of the analogous cost at in-state private institutions.

         Scott-Clayton (2011) focused on college enrollees and explored effects on credit

accumulation and persistence, whereas Bruce and Carruthers (2014) focused on high school

graduates and explored effects along the extensive margin, that is, where students enrolled.

Bruce and Carruthers (2014) found no effect of reduced college costs on overall postsecondary

enrollment rates, but uncovered a substitution effect of eligibility for merit aid: Students who

3
  Sjoquist and Winters (2012) reevaluate different samples of the 2000 Census used by Dynarski (2008) and find
little overall impact of merit aid on college completion. This finding further highlights the need to explore impacts
of multifaceted aid packages on postsecondary persistence and completion.

                                                           4
barely qualified for the Tennessee HOPE scholarship were more likely to enroll in a four-year

rather than two-year college, relative to their barely ineligible counterparts. Scott-Clayton (2011)

found that eligibility for the West Virginia scholarship increased the share of individuals in the

state with a bachelor’s degree by 1.8 to 2.3 percentage points (i.e., between 8 and 10 percent). In

addition, she argued that the requirements for renewing the scholarship – a minimum GPA and

number of credits – drove the main effects. That is, compared to their ineligible counterparts,

students eligible for the scholarship were substantially more likely to take and complete 30 or

more credits during each of their first three years of college. Such effects on key intermediate

outcomes kept the treatment group on track to graduate.

       These studies all pertain to merit-based aid programs. Whether we should expect similar

effects for need-based aid programs is unclear given that merit- and need-based programs often

differ by target population, amount of aid, delivery mechanisms, and incentives. To date, with a

few notable exceptions, there is little evidence on how need-based aid affects outcomes beyond

the college-entry margin. Using student-level data from Ohio, Bettinger (2004) exploited

discontinuities in students’ Pell grant awards (based on family size and number of children

attending college) to estimate effects on persistence beyond the first year of college. He found

that a $1,000 increase in a Pell award led to roughly a 4 percentage point decrease in the

likelihood that a student would drop out of college (p.28). In an experimental context, Goldrick-

Rab et al. (2012) focused on first-year Pell grant recipients at Wisconsin public colleges and

found that additional need-based aid increased the likelihood students completed a full-time

credit load as well as persisted to the second year of college. Castleman and Long (2013) used

data on high school seniors in Florida during the 2000-2001 academic year to examine effects of

additional need-based aid (above the Pell grant) on college enrollment, persistence, credit



                                                 5
accumulation, and graduation. Comparing students who received some aid (i.e., a Pell grant) to

those who were eligible to receive additional aid on top of Pell, they found that an additional

$1,000 of need-based aid (in 2000 dollars) increased continual enrollment through the spring

semester of freshman year and bachelor’s degree completion within four years by 3.3 and 3.5

percentage points, respectively (pp. 27-28).

         In contrast to Scott-Clayton (2011), Castleman and Long (2013) contend that their

findings are driven “much more by the reduction in cost of attendance at public, four-year

institutions than by possible incentive effects” (p. 29). Of course, the populations of students

eligible for the types of aid studied in these two papers differ along important dimensions, such

as academic preparation and severity of financial need. 4 Still, our reading of this set of evidence

is that money and incentives both matter for students’ progress and success in college – as does

how they are combined in specific aid programs.

         B. Non-Pecuniary Interventions to Improve Postsecondary Persistence and Completion

         A second line of recent research has focused on non-pecuniary interventions, such as

college counseling and information provision. At present, much of this work explores the ability

of such interventions to influence students’ choices about college-going – whether by improving

student-institution matches, (Hoxby & Turner, 2014), encouraging students to apply for need-

based financial aid (Bettinger et al., 2012), providing better information about the costs and

payoffs of college (Oreopoulos & Dunn, 2012), or counseling students through the college

transition process (Castleman, Page, & Schooley, 2014; Castleman & Page, 2015).

          Two of these studies examine short-run persistence (Bettinger et al., 2012; Castleman &

Page, 2014). Castleman and Page (2014) found that students who were offered summer

4
 Recent evidence shows how additional financial aid affects non-traditional, older students. Barr (2014) exploits the
expansion of financial aid for college via the Post-9/11 GI Bill and finds that additional aid increases the likelihood a
veteran obtains a bachelor’s degree within six years of enrollment by 6 percentage points (30 percent).

                                                           6
counseling were 5 percentage points more likely to be continuously enrolled through three

semesters of college. Bettinger and colleagues (2012) found that high school seniors whose

parents were offered assistance with filing the Free Application for Federal Student Aid

(FAFSA) were 8 percentage points more likely to have completed two years of college (during

the first three years after the experiment). These findings highlight the capacity of interventions

mainly targeted at improving access to college (or higher-quality postsecondary options) to

encourage persistence.

       Work that considers the causal effects of in-college counseling on measures of

postsecondary persistence and completion is scarce. As a part of MDRC’s multi-site

demonstration project, “Opening Doors,” researchers found some effects of enhanced student

services for low-income students at community colleges on subsequent course registrations but

no effects on measures of academic achievement (Scrivener & Weiss, 2009). Bettinger and

Baker (2014) explored the persistence effects of one-on-one, proactive, in-college coaching

aimed at helping students find ways to address academic and “real-life” obstacles. The authors

found that coached students were more likely to persist in college during the coaching period as

well as after the treatment had ended, relative to comparison students who were not coached.

       C. Mixed Aid Programs and Postsecondary Success

       A few studies provide evidence about the importance of mixed financial and non-

financial supports. Two focus on post-enrollment college outcomes (Scrivener et al., 2015;

Angrist et al., 2009) and one begins with high school seniors to explore effects on postsecondary

access and persistence (Page et al., 2016). MDRC conducted a randomized evaluation of a

program fielded in three community colleges of the City University of New York (CUNY)

system called Accelerated Study in Associate Programs (ASAP), which included financial



                                                 7
supports like tuition waivers, free metro cards, and free textbooks, along with non-financial

supports such as advising, career services, and seminars. The authors found that ASAP increased

persistence, credit accumulation, and graduation – with 40 percent of the treatment group earning

an associate’s degree by the end of the three-year period compared to just 22 percent of the

control group (Scrivener et al., 2015, p. 51).

        Angrist, Lang, and Oreopoulos (2009) tested the relative efficacy of financial incentives,

non-financial supports, and a mix of both financial and non-financial assistance in the context of

an experiment at a large Canadian university. The programs targeted first-time freshman in the

bottom three-quarters of the achievement distribution (defined by high school GPA). One group

was offered an array of non-financial supports, including peer mentoring and supplemental

tutoring. A second group was offered financial awards equivalent to about one year’s tuition that

were tied to academic performance. A third group was offered access to both the non-financial

supports and the financial incentives. All treatments were only available during the first year of

college. Angrist and colleagues (2009) explored the effects of these treatments on academic

performance and credits earned during the first two years of college. They found that the

combined treatment increased students’ GPA and number of earned credits, relative to the

control group, but detected little effect of either the financial or non-financial treatment in

isolation. Notably, the positive effects were driven entirely by women. 5 By the second year of

college, women in the treatment group earned about 0.5 more credits and had GPAs that were

higher than their control-group counterparts by about 0.28 points (pp. 159-160). The authors do

not look at effects on college completion.


5
  The positive effects of the combined treatment on female students’ GPAs and credit accumulation persisted into
the second year of college, when the treatments were no longer in operation. Thus, this suggests that financial
incentives in conjunction with non-financial supports led to lasting improvements in academic and study skills
(Angrist et al., 2009, p. 160).

                                                        8
       Finally, within the U.S. context, Page, Castleman, and Sahadewo (2016) study the effects

of the Dell Scholars Program which provides generous financial support and individualized,

virtual advising to low-income, college-intending high school students. The authors find

suggestive effects of scholarship receipt on postsecondary persistence and marked impacts on

college completion (i.e., a 25 percent increase in four-year and six-year bachelor’s degree

attainment rates). Eligibility for the Dell scholarship is based on financial need, evidence of

overcoming adversity, and modest academic requirements. The large completion effects

uncovered by Page and colleagues (2016) contrast with the modest effects found by Angrist et al.

(2009) – and together these studies underscore the need for additional evidence on how mixed

financial aid programs affect students of different types in different institutional settings.

       D. Contributions

       Our research explores the effects of a need-based aid program that combines financial

and non-financial supports on post-enrollment college outcomes, including completion. The

Carolina Covenant is targeted at high-achieving, low-income students and the manner in which it

is delivered allows us to look at the effects of mixed aid awarded after admission and enrollment

on measures of postsecondary success. Further, we explore these questions at a highly selective

public flagship institution, a particularly important setting given the recent finding that earnings

are higher for students who attend a state flagship university (Hoekstra, 2009).

       Our study contributes to the literature in four ways. First, it adds to the small, developing

subset of studies that explores the effects of various types of aid on outcomes beyond college

enrollment, such as performance and completion. Specifically, we examine the capacity of

institutional aid and programmatic support to influence the likelihood that low-income students

persist and complete college. These supports are available to students throughout the entirety of



                                                   9
their college careers, which differs from past work in which financial incentives or non-financial

supports were available only in the first semester to year of college (e.g., Angrist et al., 2009;

Bettinger & Baker, 2014). Second, because the Carolina Covenant includes both financial and

non-pecuniary elements, our findings add to the nascent literature on the effects of aid programs

that mix financial support with incentives and wrap-around services for low-income students.

Third, we illustrate the importance of characterizing whether and how the “treatment” received

by students eligible for the aid program evolved over time. This type of exploration is valuable

for any study seeking to estimate the effects of a program or policy that has been in existence for

a number of years, as the treatment-control contrast can sometimes shift in meaningful ways that

shape subsequent interpretation of any effects (or lack thereof). Finally, we consider and assess

the relative merits and drawbacks of two plausible research methodologies for estimating causal

effects of the program. This discussion highlights the importance for researchers of paying

careful attention to the choice and associated tradeoffs of study design when multiple quasi-

experimental approaches are possible.

III.    The Carolina Covenant

        The Carolina Covenant aid program at UNC-CH offers low-income students financial aid

packages heavy on grants and work-study funds and light on loans. The program was announced

in the fall of 2003, and the first cohort of awardees entered UNC-CH the following fall, making

the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill the first public institution in the country to award

loan-free financial aid packages to low-income students (Fiske, 2010). Virginia and then a

number of other public universities soon followed suit, with similar programs. 6




6
  For a much more detailed exploration of the origins of the Carolina Covenant, its components, and evolution over
time, see Fiske (2010).

                                                        10
         A. Brief History of the Carolina Covenant

         Drawing on research that highlighted low-income families’ particular wariness of loans

and general unfamiliarly with postsecondary aid systems, the designers of the Covenant specified

that a) the aid packages contain no loans; and b) the eligibility criteria be simple and clear (Fiske,

2010, pp. 24-25). Though the loan-free financial aid award is the most visible part of the

Covenant, the program was also designed to address other barriers to success in college faced by

many high-ability students from low-income families, including “lack of informed guidance

from parents unfamiliar with the ways of higher education” (Fiske, 2010, p. 18). We discuss

these components of the program below.

         The first cohort of Covenant scholars, those who matriculated in the fall of 2004, totaled

224 students. Over the ensuing years, this number grew, rising to 558 students in fall of 2010, the

most recent cohort of scholars for whom we have data. In total, these recipients comprise about

10 percent of all undergraduates at UNC-CH and hail overwhelmingly from North Carolina.

         B. Eligibility and Components of the Covenant

         The Carolina Covenant is open to incoming freshman and transfer students who meet a

basic set of enrollment and financial criteria. There is no separate application process for the aid

program. All admitted students who applied for financial aid are screened for the Covenant.

Thus, a student must first be admitted to UNC-CH and be pursuing her first undergraduate

degree in a full-time capacity. Second, the student must be dependent on parents whose adjusted

gross income (AGI) is no higher than 200% of the federal poverty guidelines, an amount that

varies by family size. 7 Third, the student’s family must have limited assets and other resources


7
 For the first cohort of Covenant scholars (i.e., fall of 2004), the cutoff was 150% of the federal poverty line. In all
subsequent years the cutoff was 200%. Eligibility is determined using family income from the prior tax year: For
example, for incoming freshman in the 2015-2016 academic year, UNC-CH uses 2014 income records. We are not
aware of any other state programs that use the same eligibility threshold as the Covenant and that could plausibly

                                                           11
with which to pay for college. UNC-CH requires students to complete both the Free Application

for Federal Student Aid (FAFSA) and the College Board’s PROFILE application to be

considered for any financial aid. The university uses information collected in the PROFILE

about a family’s assets to ensure Covenant recipients are students from families with historically

low income, as opposed to those from families that have had a bad year or two. We do not have

access to the PROFILE data, but conversations with the Office of Scholarships and Student Aid

revealed that these asset conditions remove from eligibility about 10% of students initially

eligible for the Covenant based solely on family income data from the FAFSA. Thus, income is

the primary lever by which Covenant eligibility is determined. For the 2015-2016 academic year,

a student from a family of four with a 2014 income of $47,700 or less would be eligible to

receive the Carolina Covenant. 8

        The majority of Covenant scholars find out about their award after accepting admission

but prior to enrollment. Once a student is flagged as eligible to receive the Covenant, family

income and asset claims are verified by the UNC Office of Scholarships and Student Aid after

admission and before the Covenant is officially awarded. In practice, this means the total number

of Covenant scholars fluctuates by a few students over the first several weeks of classes each

year. 9 Each spring, Covenant recipients must renew their funding for the next year by submitting

the required paperwork. Criteria for renewal are simple: the student must continue to meet the

income requirement, be enrolled and making good progress toward a degree at UNC-CH, and be


affect the postsecondary outcomes of students entering college. The one state program with a similar cutoff is the
“emergency assistance” part of North Carolina’s Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) program. It
provides help with housing and utility costs to eligible, low-income families. The majority of TANF services focus
on the parents (i.e., short-term training and supports that will lead to employment and self-sufficiency).
8
  Additional information about the Carolina Covenant can be found here: http://carolinacovenant.unc.edu/faqs/.
9
  In ancillary analyses using data on 8th grade students in North Carolina public schools, we explored whether the
Carolina Covenant appeared to affect recruitment and enrollment patterns. We found no consistent evidence that the
existence of the program meaningfully altered the likelihood of enrollment in UNC-CH for disadvantaged students.
Results are available from the authors upon request.

                                                       12
in compliance with federal financial aid standards. Covenant scholars can receive funding for up

to a maximum of nine semesters (i.e., one semester beyond four years, full-time). 10 We cannot

observe renewal at the student level; but, aggregate data from the Office of Scholarships and

Student Aid at UNC demonstrate that nearly 100 percent of eligible students who continue at

UNC renew their Covenant awards. Thus, non-renewal is unlikely to be of concern.

         The first and most salient component of the Carolina Covenant is the financial award.

The program covers 100 percent of unmet need, that is, the difference between the financial-aid

recognized costs of attending UNC-CH for an academic year and the amount the student’s family

is expected to contribute, through a mix of grant and work-study awards. 11 In addition to this

financial support, Covenant scholars are offered a number of non-financial services. In the early

years of the program (2004-2006) such services were limited in scope and mainly took the shape

of faculty mentors, career exploration workshops and advising, as well as some social activities

such as the “etiquette dinner.” More recent cohorts of Covenant scholars (2007-2010) have been

exposed to a much greater depth and breadth of non-financial supports. Peer mentoring of new

scholars by older Covenant scholars was developed during the 2006-2007 academic year.

Targeted summer support for academically struggling students began in the summer of 2008

(Fiske, 2010). 12 Further, a range of supports intended to address the social, emotional, and



10
   For students entering UNC-CH in fall 2007 or later, university policy dictates that students must appeal to enroll
for a 9th semester. If a student is granted that appeal, and remains Covenant eligible, Covenant funding continues for
the 9th semester. UNC-CH’s policy is described here: http://advising.unc.edu/policies-and-procedures/additional-
semester-appeal/.
11
   The Covenant does not replace the amount (if any) that a family is expected to contribute based on the FAFSA.
While the Covenant award makes it possible for students to graduate without borrowing, some scholars elect to
borrow. This can be for a number of reasons: a) some students wish to substitute a loan for the work-study
component of their award; b) some borrow for study abroad or summer programs; or c) some students may cover
any remaining “expected family contribution” with loans. In almost all cases, Covenant scholars who borrow
originate federal (Stafford and Perkins) loans (Shirley Ort, Associate Provost, UNC-CH Office of Scholarships and
Student Aid, Personal Communication, April 13, 2014).
12
   Covenant scholars close to losing academic eligibility and in need of summer courses to remain eligible were
provided with loans to take those courses along with academic support. At the end of the summer, the loans turned

                                                         13
cultural challenges faced by low-income, often first-generation students of adjusting to college

expanded during this later period. Examples include paying for a student’s orientation expenses

(along with one parent), providing for “business clothing needs,” navigating students to campus

wellness and academic/tutoring programs, facilitating regular interaction of students with faculty

and administrators over meals, providing learning disability services, supplying funding for

health insurance, and offering a variety of low- or no-cost cultural and performing arts

opportunities (Shirley Ort, Personal Communication, April 30, 2015). 13 Finally, the fall 2007

cohort was the first exposed to the university-wide policy limiting students to eight full-time

semesters in which to complete degree requirements. For these reasons, and also because, as with

any large program, there were logistical and programmatic kinks during the first few years, we

view scholars entering in the fall of 2007 as the earliest cohort to experience the “full-fledged”

Carolina Covenant.

IV.      Data

         We use student-level administrative data from the UNC system-wide Office of

Institutional Research and Assessment. These de-identified data include demographic descriptors

of students, such as gender and race and ethnicity, basic information about their pre-college

preparation, such as high school GPA, SAT/ACT scores, detailed information on any and all

financial aid awards, and the criteria on which need-based awards primarily rest, namely family



into grants if students successfully completed the course(s). This agreement was specified in a contract (Fiske, 2010,
pp. 40-41).
13
   Examples of supports that were expanded for later cohorts include 1) paying for a student’s orientation expenses
(and that of one parent); 2) providing welcome receptions and introductions to faculty/staff/peer mentors in the fall;
3) holiday and end-of-year social receptions; 4) business networking workshops; 5) providing for “business clothing
needs” through UNC-CH’s “Styled for Success” program; 6) providing multiple opportunities to engage with other
campus organizations; 7) encouraging self-formed Covenant Scholar organizations (like the Covenant Gives Back or
the Covenant pre-Health Society); 8) doing triage for campus wellness and academic tutoring/support programs; 9)
providing regular opportunities to dine with fellow scholars and administrators; 10) providing learning disabilities
services; 11) providing funding for medical insurance; 12) providing a rich array of low- or no-cost cultural and
performing arts opportunities (Carolina Performing Arts, and Playmakers).

                                                         14
income and household size. Finally, these data files contain our outcomes of interest: credit

accumulation, GPA, and graduation.

        We identify entering freshman cohorts of students, labeled by the fall of the academic

year in which they entered UNC-CH, from 2003 through 2010. We attempted to acquire data for

additional years prior to 2003, but unfortunately the UNC system did not begin to regularly

retain information on income and family size from student applications for financial aid until the

entering class of 2003. We then restrict our analytic sample in a number of ways. First, we

remove incoming transfer students from these cohorts, allowing us to focus on initial freshman

enrollees. 14 Second, we drop independent students – since only dependent students are eligible to

receive the Covenant. Third, among dependent students, we further restrict our sample to those

who report parental income information, which is necessary to be considered for any aid award.

Fourth and finally, we limit our sample to students who have non-missing values of key

covariates (i.e., gender, race and ethnicity, measures of high school GPA and SAT/ACT

scores). 15

        A. Identifying Covenant-Eligible Students

        Although we observe detailed information on the sources of financial aid students

receive, the files we received from UNC do not identify which specific students were Covenant

recipients. Our request to merge on indicators flagging anonymized recipients was denied by the

Provost’s committee that handles internal data requests. Lacking that information, we were

forced to predict eligibility for the aid program by combining eligibility rules with detailed,


14
   This restriction implies that we also drop students who enroll for the first time in UNC-CH in the summer or in
the spring of an academic year. We do not observe any spring enrollees (among first-time students) during our
sample’s timeframe. Our results are similar if we re-include the 593 students we observe first entering UNC-CH in a
summer term.
15
   Only 2 percent of the sample (i.e., 386 students) has missing covariate information. Results and conclusions
remain unchanged if we include these students in our sample and control for missing covariate information with
indicator variables.

                                                        15
student-level data that capture the key components that determine eligibility: family size,

parental income, and each year’s federal poverty line. Hence, we flag eligible students solely

based on the family income cutoff, which is a function of the federal poverty line in each year.

        In Table 1 we compare the number of Covenant-eligible students that we predict using

this approach to actual totals reported by the UNC-CH Office of Scholarships and Student Aid.

We generally come close but underestimate (overestimate) the number of true, first-year

Covenant scholars in early (later) years of the program. In-state students make up more than 80

percent of all recipients and over half of Covenant scholars are first-generation college students.

V.     Empirical Approaches

       The structure of the Carolina Covenant and the data available to us make possible two

estimation approaches: regression discontinuity (RD) and difference-in-differences. The

approaches rest on different identifying assumptions that, in turn, rely on different comparison

groups. In this section, we compare the relative merits of each approach given our primary

research aims and the realities of the data we have in hand.

       The RD approach exploits the income-based cutoff used to identify Covenant scholars. In

this approach, the treatment group is students whose family income placed them just below the

cutoff for Covenant eligibility in each year of the program’s existence and the comparison group

is students whose family income placed them just above that threshold. The identifying

assumptions are that students cannot manipulate the assignment variable (i.e., parental income)

and that students just above and below the cutoff are virtually identical in terms of both

measurable characteristics such as academic preparation and financial need as well as

unobservable characteristics, such as motivation.




                                                16
        The difference-in-differences approach measures the effects of the Covenant program as

the change in performance of eligible students over time relative to that of students not eligible

for the program. The baseline for measuring these changes is the performance of students

entering UNC-CH in the fall of 2003, the final year before the program was introduced. Thus,

changes in the performance of ineligible students over time allow us to net out the effects of

confounding factors on our outcomes of interest. The key identifying assumption is that pre-

treatment outcomes for the treatment and control groups follow parallel trends.

        In our case, one reasonable hypothesis is that students well below the income eligibility

cutoff would benefit the most from the program’s array of supports. This hypothesis would point

toward favoring the difference-in-differences approach since the logic of RD rests on

comparisons within a relatively narrow range of family income around the cutoff. Yet, the ability

to interpret estimates from the difference-in-differences setup as causal turns on the assumption

of parallel trends. Unfortunately, only one year (2003) of pre-Covenant data exists. Thus, we

cannot formally assess pre-trends. In addition, since our data are composed of college enrollees

and our main questions center on the capacity of grant aid (in place of loans) along with non-

financial supports to affect post-enrollment outcomes such as performance, progress, and

completion, we want to compare students who are likely to be balanced in terms of their ex ante

propensity to apply to UNC and receive the Covenant aid. 16 Within a narrower range of family

income around the eligibility cutoff, such ex ante information is likely to be similar on either side

of the cutoff, especially since eligibility is largely but not entirely determined by parental



16
   That is, if students and families have some knowledge of the Covenant program and how eligibility works,
students from families with extremely low incomes might apply to UNC-CH with a stronger expectation that they
would receive the Covenant aid, if admitted. In such a case, differential information about the likelihood of grant
receipt would be negatively correlated with parental income and could influence application or enrollment decisions.
Such students would be included in the treatment group of a traditional difference-in-differences approach, but
excluded from the treatment group under an RD approach.

                                                        17
income. These two points suggest that we privilege the RD approach. Thus, we adopt an RD

approach as our primary identification strategy, but supplement this strategy with difference-in-

difference estimates at points where the difference-in-differences approach can help us address

uncertainties or drawbacks of the RD approach.

       The most appealing attribute of the RD setup is that it compares treatment and control

groups in the same cohort. Contrast this with the difference-in-differences approach in which

treatment effects are identified off of changes in the outcome over time for the eligible group

compared to the ineligible group. Comparing changes in outcomes for these two groups adjusts

for pre-treatment differences between the groups. The problem is that some time-sensitive

factors, such as income declines due to the Great Recession, may influence the type of student

eligible for the Covenant as well as postsecondary outcomes, resulting in possible bias of the

difference-in-differences results. Those factors would not, however, affect the RD estimates.

       The largest drawback we face in the conduct of our RD analysis is that we cannot observe

whether students ultimately received the Covenant scholarship. Since Covenant eligibility is

largely but not entirely a function of a student’s family income, this means our indicator for

Covenant eligibility incorrectly labels some ineligible students as eligible. The resulting error is

likely to depress our estimates, but the small portion of misclassified students means that the

downward bias is likely to be small. Thus, our RD approach is best thought of as a reduced-form

fuzzy RD model.

       We employ parametric and nonparametric approaches to RD estimation, but mainly

present results from parametric models of the following basic form:




                                                 18
                           Yit = α + β1CCit + f ( Incit ) + β x X it + δ t + ε it                                  (1)

Here, CCit is an indicator equal to one if student i in year t was eligible to receive the Carolina

Covenant. The function f ( Incit ) represents the relationship between the running variable (i.e.,

the difference between the relevant poverty threshold in a given year and a student’s family

income) 17 and the outcome. We interact polynomial functions of this running variable with the

eligibility indicator to allow the relationship between family income and the outcome to differ on

either side of the cutoff. In some specifications, we insert a vector of student-level controls ( X it )

that includes gender, race and ethnicity, household size, high school GPA, and SAT composite

score 18 along with year fixed effects ( δ t ); finally, ε it is a stochastic error term. Within this

parametric setup, β1 represents the effect of being eligible to receive the Carolina Covenant on

the outcome of interest. 19 The analytic sample for the RD results includes students in the cohorts

of 2004 through 2010.

         Difference-in-difference results come from models of the following basic form:

                      Yit = α + β1CCit + β 2 [CCit * Afterit ] + β x X it + δ t + ε it                             (2)

Here, Yit is the outcome of interest (e.g., graduate from college in four years) for student i in year

t; CCit indicates whether student i in year t was eligible to receive the Carolina Covenant; Afterit

takes on the value of one for all students entering UNC-CH in the fall of 2004 and later, that is,

after the Covenant program had begun. The coefficient, β 2 , on the interaction of Afterit and CCit

is the coefficient of interest and represents our estimate of how eligibility for the Carolina


17
   The poverty line is household-size specific. We express income in 2010 dollars and re-center the eligibility cutoff
on zero.
18
   For students who only have an ACT score, we convert their ACT score to an equivalent SAT score using the
concordance table provided by the College Board (2009).
19
   This effect is a local average treatment effect, most applicable to observations near the cutoff.

                                                           19
Covenant affects the particular outcome of interest. The vector X it refers to student-level

characteristics including gender, race and ethnicity, high school GPA, SAT composite score, real

family income and its square, and household size; δ t represents year effects, which set up the

difference-in-differences framework and capture secular changes over time in the outcomes of

interest, and ε it is a stochastic error term. The estimation sample for the difference-in-

differences results includes students in the cohorts of 2003 through 2010.

VI.     Findings

        In the subsections that follow, we discuss our core results concerning the effects of

Covenant-eligibility on measures of postsecondary progress, performance, and completion.

Throughout our analyses, we pay particular attention to the treatment elements and associated

effects for two groups of cohorts: the early (2004-2006) and late (2007-2010) sets of Covenant

scholars. The Carolina Covenant is an evolving program. As we described earlier, in its

inaugural years, the focus was more squarely on relieving the financial burden of college. In

more recent years the program has expanded to include an appreciable array of non-financial

supports. 20

        A. Descriptive Statistics: Who are Covenant Scholars?

        In Table 2 we present basic descriptive statistics for the full sample and sub-samples of

Covenant-eligible and Covenant-ineligible students. The full sample is 62 percent female, 67

percent white, relatively high achieving (with an average SAT score of about 1290), and consists

of many well-off families (with average real parental income of nearly $107,000). Relative to the

whole sample, Covenant-eligible students are more likely to be minority and are slightly lower-

achieving (with an average SAT score of about 1240), and they come from families with

20
  Conversations with the Associate Provost and Director of the Office of Scholarship and Financial Aid confirm this
distinction (Shirley Ort, Personal Communication, April 30, 2015).

                                                        20
markedly lower parental income. The typical Covenant-eligible student comes from a family

with parental income of a bit more than $26,000 (measured in constant 2010 dollars), which is

far below the average parental income of the typical student not eligible for the Covenant – of

roughly $121,000.

         B. Exploration of RD Assumptions

         The ability to interpret our findings as causal effects of Covenant eligibility turns on a

few key assumptions embedded in our RD setup. We probe these assumptions before discussing

our main results. The first assumption is that students/families are unable to strategically

manipulate the assignment variable. Since Covenant receipt is a function of parental income and

family assets reported via the FAFSA and College Board PROFILE, respectively, and verified

after admission by the UNC-CH Office of Scholarships and Student Aid prior to award

disbursement, there is limited scope to game eligibility. In Figure 1, we present the distribution

of our running variable (i.e., parental income minus cutoff) and test for any jump at the threshold

using the McCrary (2008) test – for all cohorts and separately for the early (2004-2006) and late

(2007-2010) groups of cohorts. In no case do we detect statistically significant evidence of

bunching near the threshold suggestive of running variable manipulation. 21

         The second key assumption is that in the neighborhood of the cutoff, we can consider

students on either side as equivalent in all observed and unobserved respects except one:

eligibility for the Carolina Covenant. Thus, we should see few differences in observable, pre-

college characteristics of eligible and ineligible students as we move across the threshold for

21
   Though statistically insignificant, the density plot for the cohorts of 2007 to 2010 suggests that there may be a
small discontinuity that we are unable to detect. Encouragingly, we find no discontinuities in observable covariates
at the eligibility cutoff for those later cohorts. As an extra step to ensure that any small heaping has no influence on
our main findings, we do two things. First, we adopt a type of “donut RD” approach (Barreca et al., 2011) and re-
estimate our main models dropping observations at heaping points. Second, we drop the cohort of 2010, which
appears to drive a good portion of any small density discontinuity, and re-estimate our main RD models. In both
cases, our central findings and conclusions hold. Results from these supplementary approaches are available from
the authors upon request.

                                                           21
eligibility. Figure 2 shows scatterplots of select baseline characteristics by the running variable,

where the cutoff is re-centered on zero. For each baseline characteristic, we present separate

graphs for the early (2004-2006) and late (2007-2010) sets of cohorts. To highlight changes

around the cutoff, we limit the figures to students from families with income that falls within +/-

200 percent of the federal poverty threshold. This roughly translates to a range of $0 to $83,000

(measured in 2010 dollars). 22 The solid lines to each side of the cutoff are the estimated

regression lines from a simple parametric specification based on a data window of +/- 75, 23

which corresponds to a parental income range of $24,000 to $56,000.

         For the late cohorts of 2007 to 2010, we see no evidence of imbalance in terms of pre-

college achievement or demographics. The early cohorts, in contrast, exhibit some evidence of

imbalance at the eligibility threshold, especially in terms of measures of pre-college academic

performance. In Appendix Table A1, we present a range of parametric and nonparametric

estimates of how a number of student-level covariates move as we pass through the cutoff,

separately for the early (2004-2006) and late (2007-2010) groups of scholars. In addition, we

show analogous estimates for the one pre-policy cohort of 2003. Once again, across a range of

data windows and specifications, results for the late cohorts raise no concerns. For the early

cohorts of 2004 to 2006, it appears that Covenant-eligible students were somewhat lower

performing coming into college compared to their barely ineligible counterparts. 24 Given these



22
   In terms of the full analytic sample of UNC-CH students, a family income of $83,000 would place a student at
roughly the 44th percentile in the distribution of real parental income.
23
   For these simple parametric models, we limit the sample to +/- 75 from the cutoff and include a linear term in the
running variable which is allowed to differ on either side of the cutoff. The nonparametric bandwidth selector
developed by Calonico, Cattaneo, and Titiunik (2014, 2015) suggested optimal bandwidths ranging from +/- 48 to
+/- 100 for the vast majority of outcomes in our paper; thus, we adopt an intermediate value for the data window on
which we estimate our local linear regressions, +/- 75. Estimates are similar and conclusions unchanged if we
instead use a data window of +/- 50 or +/- 100.
24
   Left addressed, this imbalance would negatively bias our results. Such a difference runs contrary to the story that
higher-achieving students who barely miss the Covenant threshold go elsewhere to college in search of better aid

                                                          22
observed differences, we do two things: First, we control for a range of student-level

characteristics in our preferred RD specification. Second, since one might worry that the

covariates we employ fail to capture some remaining unobserved differences between the two

groups of students to either side of the cutoff, we exploit the fact that the 2003 pre-cohort

demonstrates a similar imbalance in pre-college achievement (Appendix Figure A1). Thus, for

the early cohorts, we can use this pre-cohort within a difference-in-differences setup to net out

any remaining, unobserved differences between the groups. If our difference-in-difference and

RD estimates are similar, we have additional assurance that the inclusion of our student-level

covariates in the RD setup is sufficient for arriving at causal estimates of the effects of the

Covenant for the early cohorts. 25

         C. Unpacking the Implicit Financial Treatment

         Before turning to effects of the aid program, we use the rich measures of financial aid at

our disposal to characterize the financial treatment experienced by the typical Covenant-eligible

student at the threshold. We pay particular attention to how the treatment-control contrast

encountered by students in the earlier cohorts differs, if at all, from the contrast experienced by

those in the latter group of scholars.

         For the purposes of this exercise, we group aid into four main categories: loans (which

include federal, state, local, and institutional loans); institutional, need-based grant aid; work

study aid; and Pell grant aid. Total aid is thus the sum of these four categories. 26 Figure 3


packages. Indeed, this would create a discontinuity in the opposite direction of what we observe, leaving relatively
higher-achieving students below the threshold.
25
   We primarily rely on the RD estimates for the later cohorts given our inability to use more than one pre-policy
cohort to establish pre-trends and the concern that time-varying shocks correlated with Covenant eligibility and our
postsecondary outcomes of interest could pollute estimated effects from a difference-in-differences setup.
26
   Students may receive special scholarships or other types of aid that fall outside these categories. In our sample,
such aid is relatively small in magnitude. Further, there is no difference at the eligibility threshold in the likelihood
or amount of such “other aid.” Thus, we abstract from its inclusion to focus on substantive differences in the core
financial components of students’ first-year aid packages at the cutoff for Covenant eligibility.

                                                           23
presents RD figures by cohort group for amounts of total aid, loans, and institutional grants.

Table 3 shows corresponding point estimates from simple, local linear regressions within +/- 75

of the cutoff, represented by the solid lines in Figure 3, for these as well as additional financial

outcomes.

         The graphs in Figure 3 and point estimates from Table 3 tell a similar story about the

evolution of the treatment-control contrast. Covenant-eligible students in the early iterations of

the program (2004-2006) received more total aid than their barely ineligible counterparts. That

additional aid totaled roughly $1,300 and was comprised almost entirely of institutional grant

dollars. For the early cohorts of 2004 to 2006, we find no statistically significant effect of

Covenant eligibility on the likelihood of having loans in one’s first-year financial aid package. 27

But, for the late cohorts of 2007 to 2010, we find that a Covenant-eligible student is about 16

percentage points less likely to have loans in her first-year financial aid package, relative to her

barely ineligible counterpart (Panel A, Table 3). 28 Interestingly, in these latter cohorts, Covenant-

eligible and Covenant-ineligible students near the threshold received roughly comparable

amounts of total aid. Thus, the financial treatment for the cohorts of 2007 to 2010 should be

thought of as a substitution of roughly $1,000 of loans for $1,000 of grants, with a dollop of a

few hundred additional dollars of grant aid on top of that swap and access to a variety of non-

financial supports. The treatment at the threshold for the early cohorts of scholars (2004-2006)

was an increase in the first-year aid package of about $1,300 in grant aid alongside limited non-

financial supports. In both cases, Covenant-eligible students received more institutional, need-

27
   This estimate and interpretation are local to the eligibility cutoff. As one moves outward in both directions from
the cutoff, the difference in the probability of having loans as a part of the first-year financial aid package grows,
with students well below the eligibility cutoff much less likely to have a loan as a part of their aid package than
students a bit farther above the Covenant cutoff.
28
   We explored whether Covenant eligibility influenced the type of loan taken out by a student. Specifically,
anecdotal evidence suggested that Covenant scholars may have been more likely to originate Stafford or Perkins
loans. We find no effect of Covenant eligibility on the likelihood a student has a Stafford or Perkins loan in her first-
year financial aid package.

                                                           24
based grant aid (of a bit over $1,000) in their first-year aid packages than their barely ineligible

counterparts.

         D. Effects on College Completion

         We now turn to the effects of Covenant eligibility on college graduation. We focus on

timely college completion, that is, within four years of initial enrollment in UNC-CH. 29 Figure 4

presents RD graphs by cohort group. Table 4 shows a range of parametric and nonparametric RD

estimates of the effect of Covenant eligibility on four-year graduation rates in the first five

columns. 30 In columns 6 and 7 we present estimates from our difference-in-differences approach.

Recall that our primary interest in doing so is to compare results from our preferred parametric

RD specification for the early cohorts of 2004 to 2006, which includes student-level controls and

is estimated within a narrow window around the cutoff (column 4), with the difference-in-

difference results for that same set of cohorts.

         Note first the stability of the magnitude of the point estimates for the late cohorts of 2007

to 2010 as we move from a wider window of data with controls (column 2) to a narrower

window of data without controls (column 3). Further, within the narrowest window of data on

which we estimate our parametric models, the point estimate barely budges when we add our


29
   We focus on four-year completion rates for two reasons. First, we can observe this time horizon for all of our
cohorts. Second, RD estimates of effects of Covenant eligibility on six-year graduation rates for the early cohorts of
2004 to 2006 and the subset of more recent cohorts for which we can calculate six-year completion rates (2007 and
2008) are extremely similar to estimates of effects on four-year completion rates. For example, the coefficients and
standard errors from our preferred RD specification (column 4 in Table 4) when completing college in six years is
the outcome are 0.012(0.045) for the 2004-2006 cohorts and 0.055(0.050) for the 2007-2008 cohorts. These
estimates are very similar to their counterparts in Table 4. Thus, there is little support for the notion that Covenant
eligibility hastens college completion without increasing overall attainment rates.
30
   Our nonparametric estimates employ rectangular (i.e., uniform) kernels. We also conducted our nonparametric
analyses with triangular kernels, which weight observations close to the cutoff more than those farther from the
cutoff. Results are extremely similar and we prefer the use of rectangular kernel on the grounds articulated by Lee
and Lemieux (2008) – namely that a more transparent way to increase the weight of observations close to the cutoff
is to estimate local linear regressions within increasingly smaller bandwidths. Thus, when using a rectangular kernel,
one can more easily compare estimates from columns 3 and 5 in Table 4, which both amount to estimating local
linear regressions within a window of data; in the case of column 5, that “window” is a data-driven, “optimal”
bandwidth selected by the procedures outlined in Calonico, Cattaneo, and Titiunik (2014, 2015).

                                                          25
vector of student-level controls (moving from column 3 to 4). Contrast this stability with the

pattern of point estimates of effects for the early cohorts of 2004 to 2006. Consistent with the

imbalance of student characteristics at the cutoff shown earlier, we find that the inclusion of

covariates matters for the direction and magnitude of this point estimate. Indeed, the

nonparametric estimate at the cutoff is negative. Encouragingly, for these early cohorts, our

preferred RD estimate in column 4 is very similar to an estimate from the difference-in-

differences approach in column 7. Both are about 0.02 and statistically insignificant. Taken

together, the RD and difference-in-differences estimates (along with the ocular evidence) suggest

that there is no effect of Covenant eligibility in the early cohorts of 2004 to 2006 on the

likelihood of graduating from college in four years. 31

         We find suggestive, though not conclusive, evidence that Covenant eligibility in the later

cohorts of 2007 to 2010 increased the likelihood of graduating from college in four years.

Though our RD estimates steadily hover around 5 percentage points, none rise to conventional

levels of statistical significance. Estimates from the difference-in-differences approach are

slightly larger, between 7 and 8 percentage points, and marginally significant. The main concern

regarding the causal interpretation of the difference-in-differences estimates is that, since we

cannot formally test the parallel trends assumption with one pre-treatment cohort, any

subsequent effects might be the results of divergent trends or a time-varying shock correlated

with Covenant eligibility and measures of college success and completion (e.g., the Great


31
  The similarity of these two estimates is important for two reasons. First, we argue that the difference-in-
differences approach anchored on one pre-cohort year (2003) is likely to be more valid for temporally proximate
Covenant cohorts and useful in netting out any additional, unobservable student characteristics at the eligibility
threshold for the early Covenant cohorts of 2004 to 2006. Second, the analytic sample for the difference-in-
differences approach includes a wider range of students and therefore includes students well below the cutoff, whom
we might expect to benefit the most from additional grant aid. Thus, the fact that we continue to find no appreciable
effect on four-year completion rates with the difference-in-differences approach suggests that grant aid alone, while
influential along the extensive margin of college enrollment, may not be as effective in promoting post-enrollment
success.

                                                         26
Recession). The fact that our estimates are similar across difference-in-differences specifications

that omit and control for student-level covariates is encouraging. Nevertheless, moving forward,

we focus our interpretation on estimates from the RD setup.

         E. Effects on Progress and Performance

         In Tables 5 and 6, we explore effects of Covenant eligibility on measures of credit

accumulation and academic performance. 32 We generally focus interpretation on estimates from

our preferred RD specification in column 4 of each table. Figure 5 presents RD graphs for select

outcomes that illustrate representative contrasts in effects (or lack thereof) between the early

(2004-2006) and late (2007-2010) groups of cohorts.

         The estimate in column 4 of Table 5 shows that Covenant-eligible students in the cohorts

of 2007 to 2010, who received institutional grant aid along with robust non-financial supports,

were about 7 percentage points more likely to have earned 30 credits one year after initially

enrolling in UNC-CH, compared to their barely ineligible counterparts. For the earlier cohorts of

Covenant scholars (2004-2006), who received additional grant aid but were exposed to limited

non-financial supports, we see no such effect. The pattern of coefficients across the subsequent

two credit-based outcomes that track progress toward on-time completion (i.e., within four years

of initial enrollment) suggests that the effect of Covenant eligibility on timely credit




32
  Early college persistence rates are quite high for all cohorts and we fail to detect effects of Covenant eligibility on
persistence for either group of cohorts (see Appendix Table A2). For both sets of outcomes (cumulative earned
credits and cumulative GPA), we assign students who drop out or otherwise disappear from the dataset the last
cumulative value on record. The outcome that measures cumulative earned credits includes Advanced Placement
(AP) and International Baccalaureate (IB) credits earned upon college entry as well as any summer credits earned
prior to entering the next year of college. AP and IB credits are a function of pre-treatment high school coursework
but also contribute to timely credit accrual during college. Therefore, we include them in our measure of total
cumulative earned credits but check to see whether there are any differences at the Covenant eligibility threshold in
AP credits: We use AP credits as the outcome in our preferred RD specification (i.e., column 4 of Table 4) and
detect no association between Covenant eligibility and the number of AP credits with which a student enters UNC-
CH. Estimates and standard errors of the discontinuity for the 2004-2006 and 2007-2010 groups of cohorts are -
0.686(0.961) and 1.009(0.731), respectively.

                                                           27
accumulation for the cohorts of 2007 to 2010 persists at least through earning 60 credits by two

years after initial enrollment.

        Table 6 provides some evidence that Covenant eligibility in the cohorts of 2007 to 2010

bolsters academic performance as students move through college: by three years after initial

enrollment, the cumulative GPA of Covenant-eligible students is about 0.09 points higher than

their barley ineligible counterparts (which is equivalent to about 15 percent of a standard

deviation of the cumulative GPA measure). We see less evidence of such an effect for the early

cohorts of 2004 to 2006, but our RD estimates are much more sensitive to the inclusion of

controls. 33

        Taken together, the results from Tables 5 and 6 suggest that Covenant eligibility boosts

timely credit accrual and academic performance for the cohorts in which Covenant scholars

received more institutional grant aid and had access to a suite of non-financial supports. 34 We see

less evidence of such effects in the early cohorts (2004-2006) that received additional grant aid

but had access to few non-financial supports. Thus, one plausible interpretation of this set of

findings alongside extant literature is that grant-heavy, need-based financial aid affects measures

of postsecondary success along the intensive margin differently than it does college enrollment

(i.e., the extensive margin). One explanation for such differences in effects is that concerns

related to credit constraints and finances dominate students’ and families’ decisions about

college-going. But, once enrolled, non-financial barriers such as cultural and academic

33
   The corresponding estimate and standard error from a difference-in-differences setup of the effect of Covenant
eligibility during the early cohorts of 2004 to 2006 on cumulative GPA three years after initial enrollment is
0.007(0.057). Thus, this is additional evidence of little effect of Covenant eligibility on academic performance for
the early cohorts of scholars.
34
   Covenant-eligible students could perform better in the later years of college if they differentially switched to
majors with relatively high GPAs. Appendix Table A3 tests this explanation. In this table, we estimate the effect of
Covenant eligibility on the likelihood a student’s final recorded major is in a STEM field. For the cohorts where we
see a GPA effect (2007-2010) we fail to find evidence that students shied away from majors with traditionally low
average GPAs. In fact, it appears that Covenant-eligible students in the cohorts of 2007 to 2010 may have been a bit
more likely to major in a STEM field than their barely ineligible counterparts.

                                                        28
adjustment frictions, dominate. This is likely to be especially true for first-generation,

underrepresented students at elite institutions of higher education.

         F. Heterogeneous Effects by Gender

         Given evidence that male and female students respond differently to postsecondary

interventions and costs (e.g., Angrist et al., 2009; Garibaldi et al., 2012), we explore

heterogeneity in the effects of Covenant eligibility in Table 7. We focus on male-female

comparisons within the more recent set of cohorts (2007-2010) for which we find effects on

measures of postsecondary progress and performance. Figure 6 presents RD graphs that examine

effects of Covenant eligibility on college completion separately for males and females.

         The estimates in Table 7 along with visual inspection of Figure 6 suggest that the

Covenant program may have boosted college completion much more for males than for females

in the cohorts of 2007 to 2010. 35 In Panel A of Table 7, estimates of the effect of Covenant

eligibility on graduating from college in four years are always close to zero in magnitude and

statistically insignificant for females. For males, this effect rises to a marginally significant 12

percentage points. Potential underlying mechanisms responsible for these differential completion

effects by gender are a bit unclear. Results in Panel B of Table 7 show that the effects on timely

credit accumulation are driven by impacts on females whereas estimates in Panel C of Table 7

suggest that Covenant eligibility improved academic performance for both men and women, with

potentially larger effects on men. Thus, like Angrist et al. (2009), we see that effects on timely

credit accumulation of a program that mixes financial and non-financial supports are driven by

women. Yet, we do not see the same pattern with impacts on academic performance throughout

college and we find suggestive evidence of a completion effect for men but not women. Angrist

35
  Appendix Table A4 presents complementary RD estimates by gender for the early cohorts of 2004 to 2006. We
see little evidence of differential completion effects for males versus females. Indeed, the coefficient for males in
column 4 is negative and statistically insignificant.

                                                          29
and colleagues (2009) note that women used the non-financial services and supports at much

higher rates than men. Unfortunately, the Carolina Covenant program does not track students’

usage of the non-financial components. Going forward, a path for future research is to better

understand the mechanisms that lead to differential responses of men and women to in-college

aid programs that mix financial and non-financial supports in different ways.

VII.     Discussion and Conclusion

         We use rich administrative data on college enrollees at a highly selective public

institution to study the effects of a need-based, multifaceted, institutional aid program on

postsecondary progress, achievement, and completion. Across specifications and approaches, we

see little to no evidence that the early version of the Covenant program (2004-2006), in which

students were supplied with additional institutional grant aid without much in the way of non-

financial support, improved progress, performance, or completion. In contrast, the more recent

incarnation of the program (2007-2010) layers a range of non-financial supports on top of a

grant-heavy aid package. For these cohorts, we find that Covenant eligibility increases the

likelihood students stay on track to graduate in four years by accumulating the necessary number

of credits by key time points. In addition, we see some evidence that Covenant eligibility

improves students’ academic performance in college.

         In the end, we fail to detect statistically significant effects of Covenant eligibility on rates

of four-year college completion for either set of cohorts. Yet, a few associated findings point to

suggestive evidence of a positive effect for the recent cohorts of 2007 to 2010. 36 First, we find

statistically significant effects on intermediate outcomes such as timely credit accumulation and


36
  In addition, since the character of the financial treatment in the later cohorts is largely a substitution of grants for
loans, the expected reduction in debt for Covenant-eligible students may also affect post-college employment
decisions. Rothstein and Rouse (2011) find that debt increases the likelihood college graduates choose higher-paying
jobs and reduces their propensity to enter “public interest” jobs.

                                                           30
cumulative GPA that could lead to improved completion. Second, if we include even needier

students farther below the eligibility threshold in the context of the alternative difference-in-

differences approach, our estimate of the effect of Covenant eligibility on four-year graduation

rates rises from an insignificant 5 percentage points to a marginally significant 7 percentage

points for the cohorts that received both grant aid and robust non-financial supports (2007-2010),

but remains close to zero and statistically insignificant for the early cohorts that received grant

aid and limited non-financial supports (2004-2006).

       Taken together, our core findings highlight the importance of non-financial supports for

students after they enroll in college. In this sense, our findings are consonant with those of

Angrist et al. (2009) and Scott-Clayton (2011) who, in different ways for different populations of

students, find that financial support alone is unlikely to boost college success. Our evidence

strengthens the general external validity of the conclusion that money is a necessary but

insufficient condition to improve postsecondary outcomes, especially for underrepresented

students, as it comes from a setting (elite public institution) and sample (low-income, largely

first-generation students) that differ from both of these prior studies. Further, our results expand

the conversation concerning the nature of such “non-financial supports.” For example, Scott-

Clayton (2011) argues that her findings point to the use of “incentives tied to minimum course

loads (not just GPAs)” (p. 644) as one promising strategy for boosting educational attainment.

Our results suggest that, at least for some populations of students in some settings, a looser array

of non-financial supports focused on academic, cultural, and social adaptation to college may

also improve post-enrollment college outcomes. The stronger and more comprehensive suite of

non-financial supports to which the more recent set of Covenant cohorts (2007-2010) were

exposed included peer mentoring, learning disability services, opportunities to dine with fellow



                                                 31
scholars and administrators, and the provision of a rich array of low- or no-cost on-campus

cultural experiences. The costs associated with supplying these non-financial components were

about $276,000 per year (in 2010 dollars). This figure includes stipends for faculty mentors and

office administrative support as well as the costs of all special programming activities and

subsidies. Thus, this translates to a cost of roughly $580 per Covenant-eligible student. 37

        This interpretation of our findings is consistent with recent portrayals of barriers

encountered by low-income, first-generation students at strong postsecondary institutions (e.g.,

Pappano, 2015). These anecdotes make the case that financial aid can get such students in the

door, but once enrolled these students confront barriers beyond the financial. Such barriers are

depicted as social, cultural, and complicated: “The bright children of janitors and nail salon

workers, bus drivers and fast-food cooks may not have grown up with the edifying vacations,

museum excursions, daily doses of NPR and prep schools that groom Ivy applicants…”

(Pappano, 2015). It is exactly these types of barriers the non-financial aspects of the Carolina

Covenant were designed to address. Our work suggests such supports have the capacity to

improve the postsecondary progress and performance of low-income, underrepresented students

at highly competitive institutions when layered on top of need-based, grant-heavy aid.




37
  We base this figure on an average of the sizes of the incoming Covenant-eligible cohorts from 2007 through 2010,
available in Table 1.

                                                       32
                                           References

Angrist, J., Lang, D., & Oreopoulos, P. (2009). Incentives and services for college achievement:
       Evidence from a Randomized Trial. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
       1(1), 136-163.

Bailey, M., & Dynarski, S. (2011). Inequality in postsecondary attainment. In Greg Duncan
        and Richard Murnane (Eds.), Whither Opportunity: Rising Inequality, Schools, and
        Children's Life Chances, pp. 117-132. New York, NY: Russell Sage Foundation.

Barreca, A. I., Lindo, J. M., & Waddell, G. R. (2011). Heaping-induced bias in regression-
       discontinuity designs. NBER Working Paper, No. 17408. Access:
       http://www.nber.org/papers/w17408.pdf

Baum, S., Ma, J., & Payea, K. (2013). Education pays: The benefits of higher education for
      individuals and society. The College Board. Access:
      https://trends.collegeboard.org/sites/default/files/education-pays-2013-full-report.pdf

Bettinger, E. P., & Baker, R. B. (2014). The effects of student coaching: An evaluation of a
       randomized experiment in student advising. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis,
       36(1), 3-19.

Bettinger, E. P., Long, B. T., Oreopoulos, P., & Sanbonmatsu, L. (2012). The role of application
       assistance and information in college decisions: Results from the H&R Block FAFSA
       experiment. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(3), 1205-1242.

Bettinger, E. P. (2004). How financial aid affects persistence. In C. M. Hoxby (Ed.), College
       choices: The economics of where to go, when to go, and how to pay for it (pp. 207-238).
       Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.

Bowen, W. G., Chingos, M. M., & McPherson, M. S. (2009). Crossing the finish line:
      Completing college at America’s public universities. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
      Press.

Bruce, D. J., & Carruthers, C. K. (2014). Jackpot? The impact of lottery scholarships on
       enrollment in Tennessee. Journal of Urban Economics, 81, 30-44.

Calonico, S., Cattaneo, M. D., & Titiunik, R. (2015). Optimal data-driven regression
       discontinuity plots. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 110(512), 1753-
       1769.

Calonico, S., Cattaneo, M. D., & Titiunik, R. (2014). Robust data-drive inference in the
       regression-discontinuity design. The Stata Journal, 14(4), 909-946.




                                               33
Castleman, B. L., & Page, L. C. (2015). Freshman year financial aid nudges: An experiment to
       increase FAFSA renewal and college persistence. Journal of Human Resources, 51(2),
       forthcoming.

Castleman, B. L., & Long, B. T. (2013). Looking beyond enrollment: The causal effect of need-
       based grants on college access, persistence, and graduation. NBER Working Paper, No.
       19306. Access: http://www.nber.org/papers/w19306

Castleman, B. L., & Page, L. C., & Schooley, K. (2014). The forgotten summer: Does the offer
       of college counseling after high school mitigate summer melt among college-intending,
       low-income high school graduates? Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 33(2),
       320-344.

College Board. (2009). Research Notes: ACT and SAT Concordance Tables. Access:
       https://research.collegeboard.org/sites/default/files/publications/2012/7/researchnote-
       2009-40-act-sat-concordance-tables.pdf

Deming, D. & Dynarski, S. (2010). Into college, out of poverty? Policies to increase
      postsecondary attainment of the poor. In Phillip B. Levine & David J. Zimmerman (Eds.),
      Targeting Investments in Children: Fighting Poverty When Resources are Limited, pp.
      382-402.

Dynarski, S., & Scott-Clayton, J. (2013). Financial aid policy: Lesson from research. Future of
      Children, 23(1), 67-91.

Dynarski, S. (2008). Building the stock of college-educated labor. Journal of Human Resources,
      43(3), 576-610.

Dynarski, S. M. (2003). Does aid matter? Measuring the effect of student aid on college
      attendance and completion. American Economic Review, 93(1), 279-288.

Fiske, E. B. (2010). “The Carolina Covenant.” In R. D. Kahlenberg, ed., Rewarding Strivers:
        Helping Low-Income Students Succeed in College. The Century Foundation Press.

Fitzpatrick, M., & Jones, D. (2012). Higher education, merit-based scholarships and post-
        baccalaureate migration. NBER Working Paper Series, No. 18530. Access:
        http://www.nber.org/papers/w18530

Garibaldi, P., Giavazzi, F., Ichino, A., & Rettore, E. (2012). College cost and time to complete a
       degree: Evidence from tuition discontinuities. Review of Economics and Statistics, 94(3),
       699-711.

Heller, D. E. (1997). Student price response in higher education: An update to Leslie
        and Brinkman. The Journal of Higher Education, 68(6), 624-659.




                                                34
Hemelt, S. W., & Marcotte, D. E. (2011). The impact of tuition increases on enrollment at public
      colleges and universities. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 33(4), 435-457.

Hoekstra, M. (2009). The effect of attending the flagship state university on earnings: a
       discontinuity-based approach. Review of Economics and Statistics, 91(4), 717-724.

Hoxby, C. & Turner, S. (2014). Expanding opportunities for high-achieving, low-income
      students. Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research (SIEPR) Working Paper, No.
      12-014. Access: http://siepr.stanford.edu/publicationsprofile/2555

Hoxby, C., & Avery, C. (2013). The missing “one-offs”: The hidden supply of high-achieving,
      low-income students. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring 2013. Access:
      http://www.brookings.edu/~/media/projects/bpea/spring-2013/2013a_hoxby.pdf

Kane, T. J. (1995). Rising public college tuition and college entry: How well do public subsidies
       promote access to college? NBER Working Paper Series, No. 5164.

Lee, D. S., & Lemieux, T. (2009). Regression discontinuity designs in economics. NBER
       Working Paper Series, No. 14723, access: http://www.nber.org/papers/w14723

McCrary, J. (2008). Manipulation of the running variable in the regression discontinuity design:
      A density test. Journal of Econometrics, 142(2), 398-714.

NASSGAP. (2014). 44th Annual Survey Report on State-Sponsored Financial Aid. National
     Association of State Student Grant Aid Programs. Access:
     https://www.nassgap.org/viewrepository.aspx?categoryID=3#

Page, L. C., Castleman, B. L., & Sahadewo, G. A. (2016). More than dollars for scholars: The
       impact of the Dell Scholars Program on college access, persistence and degree
       attainment. Working paper, access:
       http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2726320

Page, L., C., & Scott-Clayton, J. (2015). Improving college access in the United States: Barriers
       and policy responses. NBER Working Paper Series, No. 21781. Access:
       http://www.nber.org/papers/w21781

Pappano, L. (2015, April 8). First-generation college students unite. The New York Times,
      Education Life, p. ED18.

Rothstein, J., & Rouse, C. E (2011). Constrained after college: Student loans and early-career
       occupational choices. Journal of Public Economics, 149-163.

Scott-Clayton, J. (2010). On money and motivation: A quasi-experimental analysis of financial
       incentives for college achievement. Journal of Human Resources, 46(3), 614-646.




                                                35
Scrivener, S., et. al. (2015). Doubling graduation rates: Three-year effects of CUNY’s
       Accelerated Study in Associate Programs (ASAP) for developmental education students.
       MDRC Research Report, Access: http://www.mdrc.org/publication/doubling-graduation-
       rates

Scrivener, S., & Weiss, M. J. (2009). More guidance, better results? Three-year effects of an
       enhanced students services program at two community colleges. MDRC Research
       Report, Access: http://www.mdrc.org/sites/default/files/full_450.pdf

Sjoquist, D. L., & Winters, J. V. (2012). Building the stock of college-educated labor revisited.
       Journal of Human Resources, 49, 572-610.




                                                36
Figure 1. Distribution of Running Variable

                                                                                 A. All Cohorts, 2004-2010

                                .0015




                                 .001
                      Density




                                .0005




                                       0
                                           -500                                             0                                     500                                                 1000
                                                  Parental Income as Percentage of Federal Poverty Line Minus Cutoff
                                             Discontinuity (log difference in height) = 0.036 (0.078)




                                                                                 B. Early vs. Late Cohorts

                                                         2004 to 2006                                                                               2007 to 2010
                      .002                                                                                         .002




                     .0015                                                                                        .0015
           Density




                                                                                                        Density




                      .001                                                                                         .001




                     .0005                                                                                        .0005




                           0                                                                                          0
                                -500                    0                     500               1000                      -500                     0                     500                 1000
                                Discontinuity (log difference in height) = -0.035 (0.127)                                  Discontinuity (log difference in height) = 0.080 (0.099)



                                             Family Income as Percentage of Poverty Line Minus Cutoff

Notes: Graphs depicts McCrary (2008) test for discontinuity in the density of the running variable at the cutoff for
Covenant eligibility; bandwidth = 75.
Figure 2. Covariate Balance: Early vs. Late Cohorts

                                                                 A. Pre-College Achievement: SAT Score

                                                                   2004 to 2006                                         2007 to 2010




                                                                                                 1400
                                             1400




                                                                                                 1350
                                             1350




                                                                                                 1300
                                             1300
            SAT Composite Score




                                                                                                 1250
                                             1250




                                                                                                 1200
                                             1200




                                                                                                 1150
                                             1150




                                                                                                 1100
                                             1100




                                                    -200 -150 -100 -50   0   50    100 150 200          -200 -150 -100 -50   0   50    100 150 200

                                                                Family Income as Percentage of Poverty Line Minus Cutoff

                                                            B. Demographics: Share White, Non-Hispanic

                                                                    2004 to 2006                                       2007 to 2010
                                                                                                 .8
                                              .8




                                                                                                 .7
                                              .7
                 Share White, Non-Hispanic




                                                                                                 .6
                                              .6




                                                                                                 .5
                                              .5




                                                                                                 .4
                                              .4




                                                                                                 .3
                                              .3




                                                                                                 .2
                                              .2




                                                    -200 -150 -100 -50   0   50    100 150 200          -200 -150 -100 -50   0   50    100 150 200

                                                                Family Income as Percentage of Poverty Line Minus Cutoff

Notes: Solid lines represent local linear regressions within a data window of +/- 75 of the cutoff using a rectangular
kernel. Appendix Table A1 presents a range of parametric and nonparametric estimates of the discontinuities at the
cutoff.
Figure 3. Treatment-Control Contrast: Financial Aid Elements, Early vs. Late Cohorts

                                                                              A. Total Aid

                                   16000                  2004 to 2006                                        2007 to 2010




                                                                                       16000
                                   14000




                                                                                       14000
       Total Aid (2010$)
                                   12000




                                                                                       12000
                                   10000




                                                                                       10000
                                   8000




                                                                                       8000
                                   6000




                                                                                       6000




                                           -200 -150 -100 -50   0   50   100 150 200           -200 -150 -100 -50   0   50   100 150 200

                                                       Family Income as Percentage of Poverty Line Minus Cutoff

                                                                           B. Loans Amount

                                                          2004 to 2006                                        2007 to 2010
                                   4000




                                                                                       4000
                                   3000




                                                                                       3000
         Amount of Loans (2010$)
                                   2000




                                                                                       2000
                                   1000




                                                                                       1000
                                   0




                                                                                       0




                                           -200 -150 -100 -50   0   50   100 150 200           -200 -150 -100 -50   0   50   100 150 200

                                                       Family Income as Percentage of Poverty Line Minus Cutoff
                                                                    C. Institutional, Need-Based Grant Aid Amount (2010$)

                                                                             2004 to 2006                                        2007 to 2010


                                                      10000




                                                                                                          10000
          Amount of Institutional Grant Aid (2010$)
                                                      8000




                                                                                                          8000
                                                      6000




                                                                                                          6000
                                                      4000




                                                                                                          4000
                                                      2000




                                                                                                          2000

                                                              -200 -150 -100 -50   0   50   100 150 200           -200 -150 -100 -50   0   50   100 150 200

                                                                          Family Income as Percentage of Poverty Line Minus Cutoff


Notes: Solid lines represent local linear regressions within a data window of +/- 75 of the cutoff using a rectangular
kernel. See Table 3 for the corresponding point estimates of the discontinuities.
Figure 4. Effects of Covenant Eligibility on College Completion

                                                   A. 4-Year College Completion Rate, Early Cohorts, 2004-2006

                            1
                            .95
             .6 .65 .7 .75 .8 .85 .9
              College Completion Rate, 4 Years
                            .55
                            .5




                                                  -200   -150     -100       -50       0        50        100        150   200
                                                            Family Income as Percentage of Poverty Line Minus Cutoff

                                                   B. 4-Year College Completion Rate, Late Cohorts, 2007-2010
                             1
                             .95
              .6 .65 .7 .75 .8 .85 .9
               College Completion Rate, 4 Years
                             .55
                             .5




                                                  -200   -150     -100       -50       0        50        100        150   200
                                                            Family Income as Percentage of Poverty Line Minus Cutoff

Notes: Solid lines represent local linear regressions within a data window of +/- 75 of the cutoff using a rectangular
kernel. See Table 4 for a range of parametric and nonparametric estimates of the discontinuities.
Figure 5. Effects of Covenant Eligibility on Postsecondary Progress and Performance

                                                                                  A. Earned 30 Credits 1 Year After Enrollment

                                                                                      2004 to 2006                                      2007 to 2010




                                                                                                                   1
                                                                 1
              Share Earning 30 Credits 1 Year After Enrollment




                                                                                                                   .95
                                                                 .95




                                                                                                                   .9
                                                                 .9




                                                                                                                   .85
                                                                 .85




                                                                                                                   .8
                                                                 .8




                                                                                                                   .75
                                                                 .75




                                                                                                                   .7
                                                                 .7




                                                                                                                   .65
                                                                 .65




                                                                                                                   .6
                                                                 .6




                                                                                                                   .55
                                                                 .55




                                                                                                                   .5
                                                                 .5




                                                                       -200 -150 -100 -50   0   50   100 150 200         -200 -150 -100 -50   0   50   100 150 200

                                                                                   Family Income as Percentage of Poverty Line Minus Cutoff

                                                                                  B. Cumulative GPA 3 Years After Enrollment

                                                                                      2004 to 2006                                      2007 to 2010
                                                                 3.4




                                                                                                                   3.4
                                                                 3.3




                                                                                                                   3.3
            Cumulative GPA 3 Years After Enrollment
                                                                 3.2




                                                                                                                   3.2
                                                                 3.1




                                                                                                                   3.1
                                                                 3




                                                                                                                   3
                                                                 2.9




                                                                                                                   2.9
                                                                 2.8




                                                                                                                   2.8
                                                                 2.7




                                                                                                                   2.7
                                                                 2.6




                                                                                                                   2.6
                                                                 2.5




                                                                                                                   2.5
                                                                 2.4




                                                                                                                   2.4




                                                                       -200 -150 -100 -50   0   50   100 150 200         -200 -150 -100 -50   0   50   100 150 200

                                                                                   Family Income as Percentage of Poverty Line Minus Cutoff

Notes: Solid lines represent local linear regressions within a data window of +/- 75 of the cutoff using a rectangular
kernel. See Tables 5 and 6 for a range of parametric and nonparametric estimates of the discontinuities.
Figure 6. Heterogeneous Effects of Covenant Eligibility on College Completion by Gender:
Cohorts 2007-2010
                                        A. Male

                            1
                            .95
             .6 .65 .7 .75 .8 .85 .9
              College Completion Rate, 4 Years
                            .55
                            .5




                                                 -200   -150     -100       -50       0        50        100        150   200
                                                           Family Income as Percentage of Poverty Line Minus Cutoff

                                                                             B. Female
                            1
                            .95
             .6 .65 .7 .75 .8 .85 .9
              College Completion Rate, 4 Years
                            .55
                            .5




                                                 -200   -150     -100       -50       0        50        100        150   200
                                                           Family Income as Percentage of Poverty Line Minus Cutoff

Notes: Solid lines represent local linear regressions within a data window of +/- 75 of the cutoff using a rectangular
kernel. See Table 7 for a range of parametric and nonparametric estimates of the discontinuities.
Table 1. Number of UNC-CH Students Eligible for Carolina Covenant: Estimated and Actual

                        Estimated First-Year Students                                                               Actual
                                                                                              First-Year                             Share First          Share NC
                         Income Cutoff for Eligibility                        All                                 Transfers
                                                                                               Students                              Generation           Residents
                      <150% Federal          < 200% Federal
   Year (Fall)
                      Poverty Level           Poverty Level
       2003               153                                                N/A                 N/A                  N/A                 N/A                 N/A
       2004               183                                                224                 224                    0                 0.54                0.88
       2005                                          291                     351                 325                   26                 0.52                0.88
       2006                                          307                     413                 340                   73                 0.57                0.84
       2007                                          328                     397                 337                   60                 0.59                0.87
       2008                                          356                     409                 349                   60                 0.60                0.85
       2009                                          453                     530                 440                   90                 0.56                0.86
       2010                                          493                     558                 450                  108                 0.55                0.80
Notes: Analytic sample captures first-time, dependent, fall enrollees in UNC-CH. The first cohort of Covenant scholars entered UNC-CH in the fall of 2004.
Federal poverty level cutoffs take into account family size and are based on parents' adjusted gross earnings for the prior year. See text for details about eligibility.
Table 2. Descriptive Statistics: Cohorts 2003 to 2010

                                                                    Covenant-           Covenant-
                                              All Students           Eligible           Ineligible
                                                                     Students            Students
Demographics
Female                                             0.62                0.64                0.62
Black, non-Hispanic                                0.14                0.28                0.12
Hispanic                                           0.06                0.09                0.05
Asian, non-Hispanic                                0.08                0.14                0.07
White, non-Hispanic                                0.67                0.44                0.71
Other race/ethnicity, non-Hispanic                 0.04                0.05                0.04

Pre-College Achievement
                                                   4.30                4.25                4.31
High School GPA
                                                  (0.75)              (0.75)              (0.75)
                                                   1291                1238                1300
SAT Composite Score
                                                  (127)               (136)               (124)

Family Background
                                                107,251               26,134             121,365
Income (in 2010 dollars)
                                                (81,369)             (12,402)            (80,014)
                                                 500.52               122.26              566.34
Income (as % of poverty line)
                                                (364.35)              (50.28)            (355.23)
                                                  4.05                  4.02               4.05
Household size
                                                 (0.47)                (1.40)             (1.05)

N(students)                                       17300                2564               14736
Notes: Sample is limited to observations with non-missing demographic and achievement measures. Means
are presented for each variable and sample with standard deviations for continuous variables shown below
the means in parentheses. Parental income is expressed in real (2010) dollars using the Consumer Price
Index for All Urban Consumers (CPI-U).
Table 3. Effects of Covenant Eligibility on Components of First-Year Financial Aid Package: RD Estimates

                                                                                                                                   Institutional, Need-
                                                                                    Total Aid                    Loans                                           Work Study                  Pell Grant
                                                                                                                                      Based Grants
Outcome Type and Cohort Group                                                            (1)                       (2)                      (3)                        (4)                       (5)
A. Presence of Aid Component in First-Year Package
 Covenant eligible, 2004-2006                                                            --                     -0.054                     -0.023                    -0.019                     -0.032
                                                                                         --                    (0.053)                    (0.034)                   (0.059)                    (0.045)
  Covenant eligible, 2007-2010                                                           --                   -0.158***                     0.002                    -0.015                     0.013
                                                                                         --                    (0.043)                    (0.023)                   (0.043)                    (0.036)

B. Amount of Aid Component in First-Year Package
 Covenant eligible, 2004-2006                                                          1341*                     -258                     1404**                        -99                     294*
                                                                                       (767)                    (238)                      (664)                      (120)                     (172)
  Covenant eligible, 2007-2010                                                          790                    -852***                    1215**                        -29                    456***
                                                                                       (709)                    (233)                      (600)                       (80)                     (141)

N(students, 2004-2006)                                                                1133                       1133                       1133                      1133                      1133
 Outcome mean for control group, 2004-2006, Any                                         --                       0.42                       0.88                      0.34                      0.58
 Outcome mean for control group, 2004-2006, Amount                                   $9,591                     $1,730                     $6,062                     $603                     $1,301
N(students, 2007-2010)                                                                1838                       1838                       1838                      1838                      1838
 Outcome mean for control group, 2007-2010, Any                                         --                       0.43                       0.93                      0.28                      0.56
 Outcome mean for control group, 2007-2010, Amount                                   $10,846                    $1,932                     $7,150                     $462                     $1,303
Notes: The analytic sample for the RD analyses includes the cohorts of 2004 to 2010. The data window for all outcomes is +/- 75 of the running variable. We interact the function of the running
variable with the indicator for Covenant eligibility. Total aid is defined as the sum of aid from the Pell Grant, institutional grants, loans (including federal, state, institutional, and other), and work
study. All aid amounts are expressed in real, 2010 dollars. Results in the table come from estimating a linear, parametric RD model within a data window of +/- 75 of the cutoff. Robust standard
errors appear in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.
Table 4. Effects of Covenant Eligibility on College Completion

                                                                                                               Outcome = Complete college in 4 years
                                                                                                          RD Estimates                                                                  D-in-D Estimates
                                                                                                    Parametric                          Nonparametric
Cohort Group                                                               (1)                  (2)            (3)          (4)                (5)                                     (6)                  (7)
Early Cohorts (2004-2006)
 Covenant eligible                                                        0.017              -0.004               -0.030                0.022               -0.062                   0.025                0.019
                                                                         (0.039)             (0.055)              (0.051)              (0.052)          [-0.168,0.044]              (0.043)              (0.042)
Late Cohorts (2007-2010)
 Covenant eligible                                                        0.007               0.047                0.045                0.047                0.058                  0.077*               0.068*
                                                                         (0.026)             (0.040)              (0.037)              (0.037)          [-0.019,0.136]              (0.041)              (0.040)

Data window                                                             All data             +/- 150               +/- 75               +/- 75              All data                All data            All data
Polynomial of running variable                                         quadratic            quadratic              linear               linear                 --                      --                  --
Student-level covariates and year effects                                 yes                  yes                   no                   yes                  no                     no                  yes
N(students, 2004-2006)                                                   6860                 2118                 1133                 1133                  716                      --                  --
  Nonparametric bandwidth, 2004-2006                                       --                   --                   --                    --                46.73                     --                  --
  Outcome mean for control group, 2004-2006                              0.83                 0.78                  0.76                 0.76                  --                      --                  --
N(students, 2007-2010)                                                   8275                 3330                 1838                 1838                 1690                      --                  --
  Nonparametric bandwidth, 2007-2010                                       --                   --                   --                    --                68.52                     --                  --
  Outcome mean for control group, 2007-2010                              0.85                 0.82                  0.82                 0.82                  --                      --                  --
N(students, 2003-2010)                                                     --                   --                   --                    --                  --                              17300
  Outcome mean for control group, 2003-2010                                --                   --                   --                    --                  --                               0.84

Notes: The analytic sample for the RD analyses includes the cohorts of 2004 to 2010. The analytic sample for the difference-in-differences specification includes the cohorts of 2003 to 2010. The vector of student-
level covariates includes measures of gender, race and ethnicity, high school GPA, SAT composite score, household size, and in the case of the difference-in-difference specification, real parental income (in 2010$)
and its square. For additional information on the difference-in-differences and RD approaches, please consult the text. In the RD models, we interact the function of the running variable with the indicator for
Covenant eligibility. Nonparametric RD estimates are calculated using a uniform (i.e., rectangular) kernel and data-driven bandwidth selection procedure described in Calonico, Cattaneo, and Titiunik (2014, 2015).
Robust 95-percent confidence intervals are shown in brackets. Robust standard errors appear in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.
Table 5. Effects of Covenant Eligibility on Credit Accumulation

                                                                                                               RD Estimates                                              Outcome Mean
                                                                                                         Parametric                                        Nonparametric Control Group
Outcome and Cohort Group                                                         (1)                 (2)            (3)                       (4)              (5)            (6)
A. Outcome = Earned 30 credits 1 year after enrollment
 Covenant eligible, early cohorts (2004-2006)                                  0.019               0.040                -0.012              0.020               -0.022                0.74
                                                                              (0.038)             (0.055)              (0.054)             (0.051)          [-0.148,0.105]
  Covenant eligible, late cohorts (2007-2010)                                0.058***             0.086**              0.058*              0.065**             0.075**                0.82
                                                                              (0.022)             (0.035)              (0.030)             (0.029)          [0.001,0.149]

B. Outcome = Earned 60 credits 2 years after enrollment
 Covenant eligible, early cohorts (2004-2006)                                  0.044               0.017                -0.048               -0.010             -0.136*               0.72
                                                                              (0.041)             (0.056)              (0.054)              (0.053)         [-0.272,0.001]
  Covenant eligible, late cohorts (2007-2010)                                  0.036              0.082**              0.067*               0.065*             0.116**                0.77
                                                                              (0.026)             (0.040)              (0.039)              (0.038)         [0.019,0.214]

C. Outcome = Earned 90 credits 3 years after enrollment
 Covenant eligible, early cohorts (2004-2006)                                  -0.018               -0.094            -0.128**             -0.107*            -0.208***               0.71
                                                                              (0.043)              (0.060)             (0.056)             (0.056)          [-0.346,0.070]
  Covenant eligible, late cohorts (2007-2010)                                 0.054*                0.056               0.048               0.048              0.126**                0.75
                                                                              (0.028)              (0.043)             (0.040)             (0.039)          [0.009,0.243]

Data window                                                                   All data             +/- 150              +/- 75              +/- 75             All data              +/- 75
Polynomial of running variable                                               quadratic            quadratic             linear              linear                --                   --
Student-level covariates and year effects                                       yes                  yes                  no                  yes                 no                   --
N(students, 2004-2006)                                                         6860                 2118                1133                1133              664 to 713               --
  Nonparametric bandwidth range, 2004-2006                                       --                   --                   --                  --              43 to 47                --
N(students, 2007-2010)                                                         8275                 3330                1838                1838             896 to 1494               --
  Nonparametric bandwidth range, 2007-2010                                       --                   --                   --                  --              37 to 62                --
Notes: The analytic sample includes the cohorts of 2004 to 2010. The vector of student-level covariates includes measures of gender, race and ethnicity, high school GPA, SAT composite score, and
household size. In the RD models, we interact the function of the running variable with the indicator for Covenant eligibility. Nonparametric RD estimates are calculated using a uniform (i.e.,
rectangular) kernel and data-driven bandwidth selection procedure described in Calonico, Cattaneo, and Titiunik (2014, 2015). Robust 95-percent confidence intervals are shown in brackets. Robust
standard errors appear in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.
Table 6. Effects of Covenant Eligibility on Academic Performance

                                                                                                               RD Estimates                                              Outcome Mean
                                                                                                         Parametric                                        Nonparametric Control Group
Outcome and Cohort Group                                                         (1)                 (2)            (3)                       (4)              (5)            (6)
A. Outcome = Cumulative GPA 1 year after enrollment
 Covenant eligible, early cohorts (2004-2006)                                  0.043                0.050               -0.053               0.044              -0.029                2.94
                                                                              (0.053)              (0.079)             (0.078)              (0.073)         [-0.221,0.163]
  Covenant eligible, late cohorts (2007-2010)                                  0.064                0.063                0.067               0.068               0.080                3.04
                                                                              (0.039)              (0.058)             (0.058)              (0.053)         [-0.072,0.232]

B. Outcome = Cumulative GPA 2 years after enrollment
 Covenant eligible, early cohorts (2004-2006)                                  0.056                0.065               -0.053               0.049              -0.086*               2.94
                                                                              (0.052)              (0.077)             (0.077)              (0.071)         [-0.259,0.086]
  Covenant eligible, late cohorts (2007-2010)                                 0.084**               0.088               0.079                0.081             0.127**                3.03
                                                                              (0.036)              (0.054)             (0.054)              (0.050)         [0.001,0.253]

C. Outcome = Cumulative GPA 3 years after enrollment
 Covenant eligible, early cohorts (2004-2006)                                  0.086                0.106               -0.007               0.086              -0.013                2.96
                                                                              (0.064)              (0.077)             (0.075)              (0.071)         [-0.168,0.140]
  Covenant eligible, late cohorts (2007-2010)                                 0.102**              0.098*               0.088               0.091*              0.141*                3.05
                                                                              (0.047)              (0.055)             (0.055)              (0.051)         [-0.006,0.288]

Data window                                                                   All data             +/- 150              +/- 75              +/- 75             All data              +/- 75
Polynomial of running variable                                               quadratic            quadratic             linear              linear                --                   --
Student-level covariates and year effects                                       yes                  yes                  no                  yes                 no                   --
N(students, 2004-2006)                                                         6860                 2118                1133                1133              698 to 988               --
  Nonparametric bandwidth range, 2004-2006                                       --                   --                   --                  --              47 to 65                --
N(students, 2007-2010)                                                         8275                 3330                1838                1838             980 to 1257               --
  Nonparametric bandwidth range, 2007-2010                                       --                   --                   --                  --              41 to 52                --
Notes: The analytic sample includes the cohorts of 2004 to 2010. The vector of student-level covariates includes measures of gender, race and ethnicity, high school GPA, SAT composite score, and
household size. In the RD models, we interact the function of the running variable with the indicator for Covenant eligibility. Nonparametric RD estimates are calculated using a uniform (i.e.,
rectangular) kernel and data-driven bandwidth selection procedure described in Calonico, Cattaneo, and Titiunik (2014, 2015). Robust 95-percent confidence intervals are shown in brackets. Robust
standard errors appear in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.
Table 7. Heterogeneous Effects of Covenant Eligibility on Postsecondary Outcomes by Gender: Cohorts of 2007 to 2010

                                                                                                                 RD Estimates                                              Outcome Mean
                                                                                                           Parametric                                        Nonparametric Control Group
Subgroup and Outcome                                                              (1)                  (2)            (3)                       (4)              (5)            (6)
A. Outcome = Complete College in 4 Years
 Covenant eligible, male                                                         0.053              0.112*               0.108*              0.121*              0.145**                0.78
                                                                                (0.042)             (0.067)              (0.061)             (0.062)          [0.007,0.284]
  Covenant eligible, female                                                      -0.020              0.010                0.001               0.009               -0.013                0.85
                                                                                (0.033)             (0.050)              (0.046)             (0.046)          [-0.113,0.087]

B. Outcome = Earned 30 Credits 1 Year After Enrollment
 Covenant eligible, male                                                        0.044                0.030                0.007               0.008                0.011                0.83
                                                                               (0.038)              (0.056)              (0.054)             (0.053)          [-0.096,0.119]
  Covenant eligible, female                                                    0.069**             0.123***              0.083*              0.080*              0.116**                0.82
                                                                               (0.028)              (0.045)              (0.044)             (0.042)          [0.019,0.213]

C. Outcome = Cumulative GPA 3 Years After Enrollment
 Covenant eligible, male                                                       0.135**               0.120                0.116               0.118               0.160*                2.98
                                                                               (0.065)              (0.094)              (0.089)             (0.085)          [-0.028,0.347]
  Covenant eligible, female                                                     0.066                0.074                0.065               0.063               0.145*                3.10
                                                                               (0.042)              (0.068)              (0.069)             (0.063)          [-0.023,0.312]

Data window                                                                    All data             +/- 150              +/- 75               +/- 75             All data              +/- 75
Polynomial of running variable                                                quadratic            quadratic             linear               linear                --                   --
Student-level covariates and year effects                                        yes                  yes                  no                   yes                no                    --
N(students, 2007-2010, male)                                                    3157                 1284                 720                  720                507                    --
N(students, 2007-2010, female)                                                  5118                 2046                1118                 1118                918                    --

Notes: The vector of student-level covariates includes measures of race and ethnicity, high school GPA, SAT composite score, and household size. In the RD models, we interact the function of the
running variable with the indicator for Covenant eligibility. Nonparametric RD estimates are calculated using a uniform (i.e., rectangular) kernel and data-driven bandwidth selection procedure
described in Calonico, Cattaneo, and Titiunik (2014, 2015). The sample sizes reported for the nonparametric estimates are the effective number of observations used by the estimator when the
outcome is 4-year college graduation. Robust 95-percent confidence intervals are shown in brackets. Robust standard errors appear in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.
Appendix Figure A1. SAT Composite Score, Pre-Cohort of 2003



           1100 1150 1200 1250 1300 1350 1400 1450 1500
                         SAT Composite Score




                                                          -200   -150     -100       -50       0        50        100        150   200
                                                                    Family Income as Percentage of Poverty Line Minus Cutoff

Notes: Solid lines represent local linear regressions within a data window of +/- 75 of the cutoff using a rectangular
kernel.
Table A1. Test of Balance of Covariates at RD Cutoff

                                                                                               Parametric                                         Nonparametric
Outcome                                                              (1)                 (2)                  (3)                  (4)                (5)
Early Cohorts, 2004-2006
 SAT Composite Score                                            -40.244***           -43.218**           -44.178***           -44.499***             -43.57**
                                                                  (12.241)            (17.269)             (16.160)             (16.070)         [-78.246,-8.892]
  High School GPA                                                -0.309***           -0.344***            -0.317***            -0.313***             -0.264**
                                                                   (0.079)             (0.098)              (0.091)              (0.090)          [-0.481,-0.047]
  Female                                                            0.014               0.054                0.037                0.036                 0.046
                                                                   (0.044)             (0.063)              (0.058)              (0.058)          [-0.115,0.207]
  White                                                          -0.170***              -0.016               -0.062               -0.061               -0.063
                                                                   (0.045)             (0.064)              (0.059)              (0.059)          [-0.191,0.064]
N(students)                                                         6860                 2118                 1133                 1133             623 to 988

Pre-Cohort of 2003
  SAT Composite Score                                            -63.491*              -58.166            -78.541**           -78.541**               -43.06
                                                                 (33.023)             (38.422)             (36.311)            (36.311)         [-122.435,36.320]
  High School GPA                                                  -0.192               -0.126               -0.237              -0.237               -0.222
                                                                  (0.141)              (0.155)              (0.144)             (0.144)           [-0.589,0.145]
  Female                                                          0.180**               0.087                0.054               0.054                 0.046
                                                                  (0.090)              (0.111)              (0.104)             (0.104)           [-0.232,0.323]
  White                                                         -0.332***               -0.136               -0.128              -0.128              -0.339**
                                                                  (0.091)              (0.116)              (0.110)             (0.110)           [-0.609,0.068]
N(students)                                                         2165                 600                  319                 319               148 to 235

Late Cohorts, 2007-2010
  SAT Composite Score                                             -11.474               -1.956               -1.608              -3.182               15.995
                                                                  (8.557)             (12.829)             (11.962)            (11.846)           [-15.59,47.58]
  High School GPA                                                -0.121**               -0.045               -0.005              -0.022                0.054
                                                                  (0.049)              (0.069)              (0.067)             (0.066)           [-0.107,0.215]
  Female                                                           -0.014               0.006                0.012               0.012                -0.035
                                                                  (0.032)              (0.048)              (0.045)             (0.045)           [-0.140,0.070]
  White                                                           -0.079*               -0.048               -0.026              -0.029               -0.000
                                                                  (0.042)              (0.049)              (0.046)             (0.046)           [-0.122,0.121]
N(students)                                                         8275                 3330                 1838                1838             947 to 1174

Data window                                                       All data            +/- 150               +/- 75               +/- 75               All data
Polynomial of running variable                                   quadratic           quadratic              linear               linear                  --
Year effects                                                        yes                 yes                   no                   yes                  no

Notes: In the RD models, we interact the function of the running variable with the indicator for Covenant eligibility. Nonparametric RD estimates are calculated using
a uniform (i.e., rectangular) kernel and data-driven bandwidth selection procedure described in Calonico, Cattaneo, and Titiunik (2014, 2015). Robust 95-percent
confidence intervals are shown in brackets. Robust standard errors appear in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.
Appendix Table A2. Effects of Covenant Eligibility on Postsecondary Persistence

                                                                                                                RD Estimates                                              Outcome Mean
                                                                                                          Parametric                                        Nonparametric Control Group
Outcome and Cohort Group                                                         (1)                  (2)            (3)                       (4)              (5)            (6)
A. Outcome = Persist to 2nd Year of College
 Covenant eligible, early cohorts (2004-2006)                                   0.016               0.005                0.005               0.005               0.019                 0.97
                                                                               (0.013)             (0.022)              (0.019)             (0.019)         [-0.021,0.058]
  Covenant eligible, late cohorts (2007-2010)                                   -0.017              -0.011               -0.013              -0.015              -0.011                0.97
                                                                               (0.012)             (0.018)              (0.017)             (0.017)         [-0.057, 0.034]

B. Outcome = Persist to 3rd Year of College
 Covenant eligible, early cohorts (2004-2006)                                   0.030               0.020                0.003               0.003               0.005                 0.94
                                                                               (0.020)             (0.030)              (0.027)             (0.027)         [-0.059,0.070]
  Covenant eligible, late cohorts (2007-2010)                                   -0.024              -0.026               -0.029              -0.022             -0.016                 0.95
                                                                               (0.016)             (0.024)              (0.022)             (0.027)         [-0.074,0.043]

C. Outcome = Persist to 4th Year of College
 Covenant eligible, early cohorts (2004-2006)                                   0.033               0.027                0.019               0.015               0.035                 0.90
                                                                               (0.024)             (0.034)              (0.032)             (0.032)         [-0.034,0.099]
  Covenant eligible, late cohorts (2007-2010)                                   -0.003              -0.014               -0.021              -0.023             -0.024                 0.92
                                                                               (0.018)             (0.027)              (0.025)             (0.025)         [-0.083,0.034]

Data window                                                                   All data             +/- 150              +/- 75               +/- 75             All data              +/- 75
Polynomial of running variable                                               quadratic            quadratic             linear               linear                --                   --
Student-level covariates and year effects                                       yes                  yes                  no                   yes                 no                   --
N(students, 2004-2006)                                                         6860                 2118                1133                 1133              704 to 993               --
  Nonparametric bandwidth range, 2004-2006                                       --                   --                   --                   --              52 to 65                --
N(students, 2007-2010)                                                         8275                 3330                1838                 1838             964 to 1283               --
  Nonparametric bandwidth range, 2007-2010                                       --                   --                   --                   --              41 to 53                --
Notes: The analytic sample includes the cohorts of 2004 to 2010. Persistence is measured according to whether a student is observed attempting any credits X years after initial enrollment. The
vector of student-level covariates includes measures of gender, race and ethnicity, high school GPA, SAT composite score, and household size. In the RD models, we interact the function of the
running variable with the indicator for Covenant eligibility. Nonparametric RD estimates are calculated using a uniform (i.e., rectangular) kernel and data-driven bandwidth selection procedure
described in Calonico, Cattaneo, and Titiunik (2014, 2015). Robust 95-percent confidence intervals are shown in brackets. Robust standard errors appear in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
p<0.10.
Appendix Table A3. Effects of Covenant Eligibility on Major Choice

                                                                                                  Outcome = STEM Major, Final
                                                                                                         RD Estimates
                                                                                                   Parametric                                       Nonparametric
Cohort Group                                                              (1)                 (2)             (3)             (4)                       (5)
Early Cohorts (2004-2006)
Covenant eligible                                                      -0.076*            -0.135**              -0.105*              -0.084            -0.168**
                                                                       (0.042)             (0.063)              (0.058)             (0.058)         [-0.311,-0.024]
Late Cohorts (2007-2010)
Covenant eligible                                                       0.034               0.067              0.093**              0.083*               0.069
                                                                       (0.033)             (0.049)             (0.046)              (0.045)         [-0.023,0.161]

Data window                                                            All data            +/- 150               +/- 75              +/- 75             All data
Polynomial of running variable                                        quadratic           quadratic              linear              linear                --
Student-level covariates and year effects                                yes                 yes                   no                  yes                 no
N(students, 2004-2006)                                                  6443                1970                  1054                1054                644
 Nonparametric bandwidth, 2004-2006                                       --                  --                    --                  --               45.67
 Outcome mean for control group, 2004-2006                              0.34                0.35                  0.35                0.35                 --
N(students, 2007-2010)                                                  7793                3115                  1722                1722               1531
 Nonparametric bandwidth, 2007-2010                                       --                  --                    --                  --               66.51
 Outcome mean for control group, 2007-2010                              0.37                0.37                  0.37                0.37                 --

Notes: The vector of student-level covariates includes measures of gender, race and ethnicity, high school GPA, SAT composite score, and household size. STEM majors
include the following majors (CIP codes): Agriculture, Agriculture Operations, and Related Sciences (01); Natural Resources and Conservation (03); Architecture and
Related Services (04); Computer and Information Sciences and Support Services (11); Engineering (14); Biological and Biomedical Sciences (26); Mathematics and
Statistics (27); Physical Sciences (40); Psychology (42); and Health Professions and Related Clinical Sciences (51). In the RD models, we interact the function of the
running variable with the indicator for Covenant eligibility. Nonparametric RD estimates are calculated using a uniform (i.e., rectangular) kernel and data-driven
bandwidth selection procedure described in Calonico, Cattaneo, and Titiunik (2014, 2015). Robust 95-percent confidence intervals are shown in brackets. Robust standard
errors appear in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.
Appendix Table A4. Heterogeneous Effects of Covenant Eligibility on College Completion by Gender: Cohorts of 2004 to 2006

                                                                                              Outcome = Complete college in 4 years
                                                                                                         RD Estimates
                                                                                                   Parametric                                         Nonparametric
Subgroup                                                                   (1)                 (2)            (3)              (4)                        (5)
Early Cohorts (2004-2006)
 Covenant eligible, male                                                 -0.041               -0.105              -0.068               -0.038             -0.137
                                                                        (0.070)              (0.095)             (0.088)              (0.090)         [-0.367,0.093]
 Covenant eligible, female                                               0.049                0.056               -0.011               -0.010             -0.040
                                                                        (0.046)              (0.067)             (0.062)              (0.063)         [-0.181,0.102]

Data window                                                             All data             +/- 150              +/- 75               +/- 75             All data
Polynomial of running variable                                         quadratic            quadratic             linear               linear                --
Student-level covariates and year effects                                 yes                  yes                  no                   yes                no
N(students, 2004-2006, male)                                             2570                  765                 421                  421                254
 Outcome mean for control group, males                                   0.80                 0.74                 0.74                 0.74                 --
N(students, 2004-2006, female)                                           4290                 1353                 712                  712                511
 Outcome mean for control group, females                                 0.85                 0.80                 0.78                 0.78                 --

Notes: The vector of student-level covariates includes measures of race and ethnicity, high school GPA, SAT composite score, and household size. In the RD models, we
interact the function of the running variable with the indicator for Covenant eligibility. Nonparametric RD estimates are calculated using a uniform (i.e., rectangular)
kernel and data-driven bandwidth selection procedure described in Calonico, Cattaneo, and Titiunik (2014, 2015). Robust 95-percent confidence intervals are shown in
brackets. Robust standard errors appear in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.
