                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        PREMIUM SUBSIDIES, THE MANDATE, AND MEDICAID EXPANSION:
             COVERAGE EFFECTS OF THE AFFORDABLE CARE ACT

                                       Molly Frean
                                     Jonathan Gruber
                                   Benjamin D. Sommers

                                     Working Paper 22213
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w22213


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    April 2016




This project was supported by grant number K02HS021291 from the Agency for Healthcare
Research and Quality (AHRQ). We are grateful to Kosali Simon, Jenny Kenney, participants in
the economics research seminar series at the University of Virginia, and the 6th Biennial
Conference of the American Society of Health Economists for helpful comments. Dr. Sommers
has received research grants from AHRQ, the Commonwealth Fund, and the National Institute for
Health Care Management. He served as a paid part-time advisor for the U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services from Sept. 2012 through June 2016, and he is an unpaid member of
the National Advisory Board for the non-profit Institute for Medicaid Innovation. The authors
have no other disclosures to report. This paper does not represent the views of HHS, AHRQ, or
the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Molly Frean, Jonathan Gruber, and Benjamin D. Sommers. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Premium Subsidies, the Mandate, and Medicaid Expansion: Coverage Effects of the Affordable
Care Act
Molly Frean, Jonathan Gruber, and Benjamin D. Sommers
NBER Working Paper No. 22213
April 2016, Revised December 2016
JEL No. H2,I13

                                          ABSTRACT

Using premium subsidies for private coverage, an individual mandate, and Medicaid expansion,
the Affordable Care Act (ACA) has increased insurance coverage. We provide the first
comprehensive assessment of these provisions’ effects, using the 2012-2015 American
Community Survey and a triple-difference estimation strategy that exploits variation by income,
geography, and time. Overall, our model explains 60% of the coverage gains in 2014-2015. We
find that coverage was moderately responsive to price subsidies, with larger gains in state-based
insurance exchanges than the federal exchange. The individual mandate’s exemptions and
penalties had little impact on coverage rates. The law increased Medicaid among individuals
gaining eligibility under the ACA and among previously-eligible populations (“woodwork
effect”) even in non-expansion states, with essentially no crowd-out of private insurance. Overall,
exchange premium subsidies produced 40% of the coverage gains explained by our ACA policy
measures, and Medicaid the other 60%, of which 1/2 occurred among previously-eligible
individuals.

Molly Frean                                  Benjamin D. Sommers
3641 Locust Walk                             Harvard TH Chan School of Public Health
Philadelphia, PA 19104                       Department of Health Policy and Management
United States                                677 Huntington Avenue
mfrean@wharton.upenn.edu                     Kresge 406
                                             Boston MA 02115
Jonathan Gruber                              bsommers@hsph.harvard.edu
Department of Economics, E52-434
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
gruberj@mit.edu
           One of the most significant policy issues facing the United States over the past forty

years has been the high number of those without health insurance. The percentage of uninsured

Americans rose steadily from the 1980s through 2010, through both recessions and economic

growth (DeNavas-Walt, Proctor, & Smith, 2013). A major policy focus during this era was

intervening in insurance markets to expand coverage and offset this trend. This mostly happened

using public insurance via Medicaid and the Children’s Health Insurance Program, with little

private sector intervention (Gruber & Levitt, 2000). This pattern of incremental public coverage

expansion changed dramatically with the passage of the Affordable Care Act (ACA) in 2010.

           The ACA enacted enormous expansions of both public and private insurance. The former

was to take place through a nationwide expansion of Medicaid to all those with incomes below

138% of the Federal Poverty Level (FPL); however, the Supreme Court ruled in 2012 that states

could refuse this expansion. The private insurance expansion takes place through sizeable

income-based tax credits for those with incomes from 100-400% of FPL who are not eligible for

Medicaid, to subsidize premiums for private insurance purchased on newly established insurance

exchanges. Underlying the expansion are new insurance regulations that end discrimination on

the basis of pre-existing conditions, coupled with an individual mandate that requires most

Americans to obtain insurance (with several exemptions, most notably related to affordability).

These principal pieces of the ACA took effect in January 2014.1

           National data from multiple sources strongly support the notion that the ACA has

reduced the uninsurance rate substantially beginning in 2014, reaching an historic low by 2015

(Cohen & Martinez, 2014; Smith & Medalia, 2015; Sommers, Gunja, Finegold, & Musco, 2015).

This drop has generally been attributed to the ACA, but most analyses of the ACA to date have

   1
     The earliest coverage expansion enacted under the ACA was the dependent coverage provision, which mandated that private insurers allow
parents to cover their children on their insurance until age 26. This provision took effect September 2010. We do not examine this policy here,
since it had essentially reached steady-state by 2012 and has already been examined thoroughly elsewhere (Antwi, Moriya, & Simon, 2013).



                                                                        3
been largely descriptive (Cohen & Martinez, 2014; Long et al., 2014) or limited to a particular

aspect of the ACA such as the Medicaid expansion (Black & Cohen, 2015; Kaestner, Garrett,

Gangopadhyaya, & Fleming, 2015; Wherry & Miller, 2016). No studies have disentangled the

different coverage effects of the ACA’s various provisions. Even as the 2016 election results cast

uncertainty over the ACA’s future, these issues remain critically important to understanding the

potential impact of a partial or complete rollback of the law, as well as the potential

consequences of future state or federal efforts to expand coverage.

       In this paper, we provide the first comprehensive model that identifies the causal impact

of the ACA’s numerous provisions on insurance coverage. In doing so, we also offer an

empirical template for future research on this wide-ranging law. We use data from the American

Community Survey (ACS) for the two years before and two years after full ACA

implementation. We estimate rich models that examine both the public coverage expansions and

private coverage subsidies that are put in place by the ACA, as well as the individual mandate.

Public insurance expansions are identified by state decisions about whether to take up the

Medicaid expansions and by differential impacts of Medicaid expansions across income groups

and family types. Private insurance subsidies are identified by the variation in effective subsidy

rates by income group and area of the country. Mandate effects are identified by variation in the

incidence of the penalty (related to the law’s several mandate exemptions) and the magnitude of

the penalty (tied to income and family structure). Our models allow us to control for fixed

differences and trends by income group and geographic area.

       Overall, we find that our policy parameterization can explain roughly 60% of the increase

in insurance coverage from 2012-2013 to 2014-2015. The remainder is likely due to features of

the law that we cannot effectively measure, such as the ACA’s insurance market reforms and a




                                                   4
general social effect of the individual mandate not mediated by its codification in the law, as well

as any effect of the economic recovery not captured by our adjustment for area unemployment.

       Within these ACA coverage changes, we have several key findings. The impact of tax

credits to private insurance was fairly modest but grew over time, with each 10% increase in

subsidy reducing the uninsured rate by roughly 0.5 percentage points in 2014 and 0.9 percentage

points in 2015. Premium tax credits produced much larger effects in states operating state-based

insurance exchanges, as opposed to using the federal exchange (healthcare.gov), suggesting

potential benefits to local implementation of the law. All told, exchange insurance subsidies

accounted for approximately 40% of the reduction in the uninsured rate attributable to our ACA

policy parameters. In contrast, the mandate penalty had a negligible impact on coverage.

       Meanwhile, Medicaid accounted for the other 60% coverage change attributable to our

ACA policy measures, via three distinct pathways. Medicaid expansion increased coverage

among newly-eligible individuals by roughly 14 percentage points in 2015, which accounted for

nearly 20% of the observed ACA effect on the uninsured rate. Another 10% came from the

ACA’s early expansions of Medicaid that occurred in 6 states between 2011-2013. Nearly 30%

of the ACA policy impact on coverage in 2014-2015 came via the less discussed “woodwork

effect” of increased insurance enrollment among those who were previously eligible for

Medicaid before the ACA but not enrolled. This phenomenon was evident in all states, whether

or not they had expanded Medicaid, and occurred for both adults and children. Finally, we find

no evidence of private insurance crowd-out from the expansion of Medicaid.

       Our paper proceeds as follows. Section I describes the ACA’s main coverage provisions.

Section II reviews the existing literature on how these policies may impact health insurance

coverage. Section III describes our data and policy variables. Section IV presents our empirical




                                                  5
strategy. Section V presents our results. Section VI discusses policy implications and concludes.


I. Background on the Affordable Care Act

           The ACA represents the largest transformation of the U.S. health care system since the

introduction of Medicare and Medicaid in the mid-1960s. While the legislation also addressed

issues such as health care costs and quality of care, we focus on the coverage provisions of the

ACA. There are three key provisions that form the law’s “three legged stool”:

           The first is a federal overhaul of private insurance market regulation. Among other

changes, the ACA guarantees the issue of insurance regardless of pre-existing conditions, bans

medical underwriting, and eliminates annual or lifetime benefit limits. These provisions apply to

the entire non-group insurance market, as well as to non-self-insured employers.

           The second is the individual mandate. Under the ACA, legal residents of the U.S. are

mandated to obtain insurance, subject to a number of exemptions, and those who do not are

subject to a tax penalty. This penalty was modest in 2014, equal to the larger of $95 or 1% of

income; it has grown more sizeable since, rising to the larger of $695 or 2.5% of income in 2016.

Exemptions exist for those with incomes below the threshold for filing federal income taxes,

low-income residents in states that have not expanded Medicaid under the ACA, and those who

cannot find insurance on the exchange for less than 8% of income.

           The third is comprised of policies to make health insurance more affordable. This

includes a massive expansion of public insurance through a universal extension of Medicaid

eligibility to all those below 138% of the federal poverty level.2 Medicaid was previously

categorically restricted: some groups (such as children and pregnant women) were typically


    2
      The statutory cutoff for Medicaid eligibility under the ACA is 133% of FPL, but requires that states disregard a portion of applicants’ income
equal to an additional 5% of FPL, producing an effective eligibility threshold of 138% of FPL. Also, note that Medicaid coverage is not available
to individuals without either U.S. citizenship or legal permanent residency status for at least 5 years.



                                                                          6
eligible above this income level, others (such as disabled adults and low-income parents) were

only eligible at much lower income levels, and the remaining low-income adults (so-called

“childless adults”) were not eligible at all in most states. This expansion had differential impacts

by state, income, and family type. An additional element of variation in Medicaid eligibility was

the result of a Supreme Court decision in 2012, which made the ACA’s Medicaid expansions

voluntary. As a result, only 24 states plus Washington D.C. expanded by January 2014; since

then, another 7 states have expanded (Kaiser, 2015).

       The other source of financial support for insurance was through the introduction of new

tax credits for private insurance purchased through the exchanges. Individuals are eligible for tax

credits if they are ineligible for Medicaid and have incomes between 100% and 400% of FPL.

These credits cap the share of income that individuals must pay for coverage (at the “silver” level

described below) at between 2% and 9.5% of income on a sliding scale basis. In addition, the

ACA provides cost-sharing subsidies to enrollees with incomes below 250% of FPL.

       The ACA included other provisions that are harder to quantify, but which might have

significant effects. The first is the introduction of private insurance exchanges, which brought

organized shopping to a fractured non-group insurance market. On these exchanges, individuals

can compare options at four different “metal” levels based on the plans’ actuarial value (the

share of expected medical costs covered): 60% for bronze, 70% for silver, 80% for gold, and

90% for platinum. States had the option of establishing their own exchanges or using the federal

exchange; 13 states plus Washington D.C. operated state-based exchanges in 2014-2015, though

two states (Kentucky and Hawaii) have since reverted to the federal exchange.

       The ACA includes an “employer mandate” as well. This is a charge levied on firms based

on the share of their employees that are not offered affordable coverage who end up receiving




                                                  7
exchange tax credits. However, this provision was delayed until 2015, and given the lack of

information on employer offers of coverage in the ACS, we did not model that policy directly.


II. Literature Review

       Our paper focuses on three main policy levers: public expansions, private insurance

subsidies, and an individual mandate. In this section we review the literature on the effects of

these policies on health insurance coverage and what is known to date about the ACA’s effects.

       Previous research on public insurance expansions focuses on the sizeable expansions of

Medicaid and the Children’s Health Insurance program (CHIP) over the late 1980s-early 1990s,

and again in the late 1990s-early 2000s (Gruber & Simon, 2008; Sommers, Kronick, et al.,

2012). The literature finds that take-up of these Medicaid and CHIP expansions was moderate,

with roughly 25-35% of those who became newly-eligible for public insurance coverage

choosing to enroll. One reason is that many of those made eligible for public insurance already

had private insurance coverage. Complex application processes and informational barriers also

contribute to low participation (Sommers, Tomasi, Swartz, & Epstein, 2012).

       Some individuals, however, may have dropped their private coverage for free or heavily

subsidized public insurance, a phenomenon known as “crowd out” (Cutler & Gruber, 1996).

Estimates of the share enrolling in public insurance who would otherwise have private insurance

vary. Some studies have found rates ranging from 20-60% (Gruber & Simon, 2008; Lo Sasso &

Buchmueller, 2004), while others have found little to no crowd-out (Hamersma & Kim, 2013;

Thorpe & Florence, 1998). In general, crowd-out has been found to be greater among expansions

to higher-income groups (Kronick & Gilmer, 2002).

       There has been much less work on the impact of private insurance subsidies. One well-

cited study (Marquis & Long, 1995) used geographic variation in the price of individual



                                                  8
insurance to assess the correlation with insurance coverage, estimating an elasticity of demand of

-0.4. This is problematic, however, since other factors correlated with insurance demand may

drive this price variation. There has been more work on tax policy and the demand for employer-

sponsored insurance; see Gruber (2005) for a review. Massachusetts’ 2006 health reform law,

which featured premium subsidies and a state exchange, led to large reductions in the uninsured

rate (Long, Stockley, & Yemane, 2009). However, the state law’s other features (including

individual and employer mandates) complicate the interpretation of these findings, and previous

research has not disentangled the effects of subsidies versus these other provisions.

       There is also less understanding of how the individual mandate impacts coverage and

interacts with the ACA’s other provisions. Again, the best evidence comes from Massachusetts,

which introduced an individual mandate as part of its 2006 health reform. In addition to a general

decline in the uninsured rate, prior research shows several spillover effects of the mandate. First,

individuals who were already eligible for the state’s Medicaid program but not yet enrolled

significantly increased their take-up (Sonier, Boudreaux, & Blewett, 2013). Second, despite

generous non-employer insurance subsidies and a weak employer mandate, there was no erosion

of employer-sponsored coverage – and some evidence that such coverage increased (Kolstad &

Kowalski, 2012). This may reflect a response to the individual mandate, in which workers accept

lower wages in return for employer coverage (Hackmann, Kolstad, & Kowalski, 2015).

       In terms of the ACA itself, a growing body of research has begun to document changes in

coverage under the law. Several states opted to expand Medicaid under the ACA prior to 2014,

and studies indicate small marginal changes in coverage with variable crowd-out – little among

those with health problems, but significant among younger adults (Sommers, Kenney, & Epstein,

2014). For the 2014 expansion, federal survey data (Cohen & Martinez, 2014; Smith & Medalia,




                                                  9
2015) and private data sources (Shartzer, Long, Karpman, Kenney, & Zuckerman, 2015;

Sommers, Gunja, et al., 2015) all confirm a large drop in the uninsured rate, particularly among

lower-income adults. A time-series analysis estimated nearly equal coverage gains in 2014 due to

exchange insurance and Medicaid (Carman, Eibner, & Paddock, 2015), though this study simply

presented descriptive trends. Finally, several analyses describe moderate coverage gains in 2014

due to the Medicaid expansion (Courtemanche, Marton, Ukert, Yelowitz, & Zapata, 2016;

Kaestner et al., 2015). To our knowledge, no research has yet developed an identification

strategy to assess the ACA’s coverage provisions simultaneously and disentangle their effects.3


III. Data and Policy Measurement

A. Data

          Our primary source of data for this analysis is the 2012-2015 American Community

Survey (ACS),. The ACS, conducted by the United States Census Bureau, is the largest

household survey in the country, with approximately 3 million individuals surveyed in the

public-use file each year. Within-state geographical information is available in the ACS based on

approximately 2350 “public use microdata areas” (PUMAs). PUMAs are mutually exclusive

areas within states that are populated with at least 100,000 individuals; PUMA boundaries were

redrawn after 2011 using the Decennial Census, which precludes us from using data prior to

2012. The ACS is one of the primary sources used by the federal government to evaluate health

insurance coverage (Finegold & Gunja, 2014; Smith & Medalia, 2015).

          Our study sample includes all non-elderly (age under 65) individuals residing in the U.S.,

other than in Massachusetts. We exclude the elderly from our analysis because the ACA’s


  3
    Another strand of research examines effects of public insurance on labor supply, with conflicting findings (Baicker, Finkelstein, Song, &
Taubman, 2014; Garthwaite, Gross, & Notowidigdo, 2014). Early evidence on the ACA suggests that labor market effects have been minimal
(Garrett & Kaestner, 2015; Gooptu, Moriya, Simon, & Sommers, 2016; Moriya, Selden, & Simon, 2016), and we do not focus on this issue here.



                                                                      10
coverage expansions did not apply to individuals 65 and over. We excluded Massachusetts

because the state’s 2006 health reform law already included many ACA-like features; our results

are essentially unchanged by this exclusion.

           Our dependent variables of interest in the ACS are four measures of insurance coverage:

no health insurance (uninsured), Medicaid, employer-sponsored insurance (ESI, including

military and union coverage), and non-group private insurance. Together, these four categories

are inclusive of 98% of non-elderly individuals in the survey, with the remainder insured by the

VA or Medicare. Regarding Medicaid, the ACS’s question asks about “Medicaid, Medical

Assistance, or any kind of government-assistance plan for those with low incomes or a

disability.” Thus, some respondents may answer “yes” to this question based on their receipt of

government subsidized exchange coverage, while others may report this as non-group coverage

(i.e. “Insurance purchased directly from an insurance company”).4 Indeed, evidence from the

Census Bureau shows that more respondents in the ACS miscode their private coverage in this

way compared to other surveys (Pascale, Call, Fertig, & Oellerich, 2016).

B. Policy Measures

           The ACA marks an enormous policy change towards insurance coverage. Fortunately for

research purposes, many of the changes embodied in the law vary substantially across

individuals in a way that can be parameterized. Other factors are more uniform and difficult to

separate from non-ACA conditions that may more generally impact insurance coverage.

           Medicaid Eligibility. Our first policy measure is eligibility for Medicaid, which we

combine with eligibility for the related Children’s Health Insurance Program (CHIP). We

decompose eligibility into three parts: eligibility prior to the ACA’s Medicaid expansion (i.e.,

   4
     The ACS, while generally quite reliable at assessing health insurance coverage and used by the Census in its annual reports on insurance of
the U.S. population, does produce overestimates of non-group coverage compared to other data sources (Mach & O'Hara, 2011). However, our
study design effectively subtracts out any time-invariant over-reporting bias for this form of coverage in the survey.



                                                                       11
using 2010 income thresholds and criteria), eligibility under the so-called “early expansions” that

occurred under the ACA between 2011-2013 in 6 states;5 and new eligibility as a result of the

2014 Medicaid expansion. The first group is known as the “woodwork” (or “welcome mat”)

population that may newly take up Medicaid coverage due to increased awareness of coverage

options under the ACA, the law’s attempt to reduce administrative-related barriers to applying

that have previously reduced enrollment (Aizer, 2007), and the individual mandate (Sommers &

Epstein, 2011). In addition, the existence of Medicaid expansion may increase participation in

this group as individuals know they are less likely to lose eligibility for small changes in income.

           Our approach distinguishes between these categories of Medicaid eligibility because all

three may have plausibly experienced coverage changes as a result of the ACA, but likely with

heterogeneous take-up rates. Most analyses of Medicaid expansions prior to the ACA have

ignored any potential woodwork effect, which in many cases was likely negligible given the lack

of other systemic policy changes (such as the ACA’s mandate and application streamlining).

However, some analyses have identified similar spillover effects in previous expansions (Aizer

& Grogger, 2003; Sonier et al., 2013). All measures of Medicaid eligibility are constructed using

state rules based on age, income, disability, and parental status obtained from the Centers for

Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) and the Kaiser Family Foundation.6

           Figure 1 depicts the percent of the sample eligible for Medicaid/CHIP, based on state

expansion status for children (Panel A) and adults (Panel B). All children under the poverty line

are eligible, regardless of state expansion decision. In the 200-300% FPL range, coverage is


   5
     The early expansion states are CA, CT, DC, MN, NJ, and WA. See Sommers, Arntson, et al. (2013) for expansion details and timing.
   6
     Medicaid and CHIP eligibility for children, parents, and childless adults was obtained for each state, as of 2013, from a pre-ACA survey of
all 50 states conducted by the Kaiser Family Foundation (Heberlein, Brooks, Aiker, Artiga, & Stephens, 2013), supplemented by information on
the six states adopting the ACA’s early-expansion option to expand prior to 2014 (Meng, Cabezas, Roby, Pourat, & Kominski, 2012; Sommers,
Arntson, Kenney, & Epstein, 2013). Information on disability-related eligibility is also from Kaiser (Kaiser, 2010); adult disability was identified
in the ACS using their disability recode variable. 2014 eligibility was updated with information from CMS (2014). The ACS does not report
pregnancy, so we do not attempt to model that pathway of eligibility here. We apply the ACA’s statutory 5% income disregard to all MAGI-
eligible groups (groups who income is totaled using the notion of Modified Gross Adjusted Income).



                                                                         12
typically via CHIP and eligibility trails off – more steeply in non-expansion states (which have

traditionally been less generous with coverage). For adults, expansion states offer eligibility to

everyone with incomes up to 138% of FPL, while a minority of adults in non-expansion states

meet both income and categorical criteria for eligibility. Even prior to the ACA expansion,

eligibility standards for adults were more generous in expansion states than non-expansion states.

       Exchange Premium Subsidies. Our second policy measure is the subsidy rate for

insurance purchased through the ACA’s exchanges. Since exchange premiums are defined based

on the family unit, our analysis models the premiums and subsidies using the notion of the health

insurance unit (HIU) – defined as an adult, his/her spouse, and their dependent children in the

household, excluding unrelated roommates or other adult relatives (such as grandparents). This

corresponds to the family unit upon which premium subsidies and Medicaid eligibility is based,

and we use the term “family” and HIU interchangeably below.

       To construct the subsidy measure, we first calculate an unsubsidized premium for each

HIU based on the ACA rating area they resided in. We directly matched premiums to individuals

in cases where a single rating area mapped directly to a PUMA and used population-weighted

premium averages in cases where multiple rating areas spanned a single PUMA. The HIU

unsubsidized premium is the sum of the individual premiums for each of its members, with no

more than three covered children included in the sum based on federal regulations. Individual

premiums are based on the second-lowest-cost silver plan in the rating area, obtained from the

Robert Wood Johnson Foundation. We use this plan for two reasons: 1) the silver tier is the most

commonly purchased tier, selected by 65% of consumers in the first open enrollment period

(ASPE, 2014); and 2) the second-lowest cost silver plan is the one to which the ACA’s premium

tax credits are pegged. All unsubsidized premiums are age-adjusted using state-specific age-rated




                                                  13
premium curves obtained from CMS.

           Then, we calculate the net subsidized premium for each family. Families with incomes

outside of 100-400% of FPL and those eligible for Medicaid or CHIP are ineligible for subsidies.

For the remainder of the sample, net premiums are calculated based on the ACA’s subsidy

schedule, which determines premium payments on a sliding scale percentage of income.7 In

addition to net premiums, we also calculate each HIU’s Percent Subsidy, equal to 1 – (Net

Premium / Unsubsidized Premium). While both are measures of premium subsidy generosity,

they have important differences. The net premium only captures cost, while the percent subsidy

incorporates both the cost of coverage and its effective value to the consumer; holding net

premiums constant, the percent subsidy is higher for older adults and those living in areas with

more expensive health insurance. A priori, we hypothesize consumers respond to both the cost

and value of coverage. Thus, percent subsidy is our preferred parameter, but we test both and

allow the data to indicate which is a better predictor of behavior.8

           Figure 2 shows the percent subsidy as a function of FPL and Medicaid expansion status.

In non-expansion states, premium subsidies are available starting at 100% of FPL; in expansion

states, where such families are eligible for Medicaid, subsidies begin at 138% of FPL.9 Subsidy

rates peak at about two-thirds for non-expansion states for those between 100-138% of FPL, and

slightly over half for those just above 138% of FPL in expansion states. The subsidy rate then


   7
     Premium tax credits are pegged to the following thresholds: 2% of income for individuals with incomes up to 133% of FPL; 3-4% of income
for individuals with incomes between 133-150% of FPL; 4.0-6.3% of income for individuals with incomes between 150-200% of FPL; 6.3-8.05%
of income for individuals with incomes between 200-250% of FPL; 8.05-9.5% of income for individuals with incomes between 250-300% of
FPL; and 9.5% of income for individuals with incomes between 350-400% of FPL.
   8
     Yet a third measure of premium subsidy is also possible, taking into account the ACA’s cost-sharing reductions (CSR) for individuals with
incomes from 100-250% FPL who are eligible for exchange subsidies. In an alternative analysis, we created a premium subsidy measure that
takes this into account by inflating the value of coverage (the unsubsidized premium) based on the CSR’s legislative increase in actuarial value.
Silver plans have an actuarial value of 70%, but the CSR increases this to 94% for those with incomes 100-150% FPL, 87% for incomes 150-
200% FPL, and 73% for incomes 200-250% FPL. The resulting measure therefore reflects a higher percent subsidy for those who would receive
CSRs, and is equal to our original premium-based measure for those ineligible to receive CSRs. Overall, the CSR’s increase the mean subsidy
rate from 16% to 17%, and the results of the model using this variable are quite similar to our primary specification.
   9
     Legal permanent residents are not eligible for Medicaid until after a five-year waiting period, but premium tax credits are available under the
ACA for those with incomes under 138%. The ACS does not enable us to distinguish between legal and undocumented immigrants, though it
does self-reported citizenship. We test the robustness of our results by excluding non-citizens from our sample, and the results are quite similar.



                                                                         14
declines steadily but not quite linearly until going to zero above 400% of FPL. Overall, the

variation in premium subsidies is a result of two factors – unsubsidized premiums and the ACA’s

income-based subsidy rules. While the former may vary across markets based on potentially

endogenous factors including health care costs, PUMA fixed effects should address this concern,

and it is only in combination with the ACA’s tax credit schedule – which is plausibly exogenous

– that we obtain variation used to identify the policy impact of the subsidies.10

           Mandate. Our third policy measure is the tax penalty associated with the individual

mandate. Fundamentally, the existence of the mandate is a time series change that cannot be

separately identified in our model. To the extent that the mandate creates a generalized “taste for

compliance” (Saltzman, Eibner, & Enthoven, 2015), our model is unable to capture that effect.

However, in principle, the mandate does not impact those who are exempted, and due to non-

linearities in the mandate penalty, families may be exposed to different levels of tax penalties for

forgoing health insurance. We therefore construct a measure representing each family’s tax

penalty in dollars due to the mandate. The penalty is equal to $0 for families exempt due to any

of the following (with the percentage of the sample affected by each exemption in 2014 listed in

parentheses): 1) family income below the federal tax-filing threshold11 (20.7%); 2) family

income below 138% of FPL in a state that elected not to expand Medicaid (5.5%); 3) Native

Americans (0.6%); or 4) no affordable coverage available, defined as the lowest-cost option

having a premium greater than 8% of family income (10.2%).12 For the roughly 64% of our


    10
       Another important component of the ACA is community rating of premiums. The main effect of community rating is difficult to capture as
it is essentially a time series effect. One could compute the “effective” subsidy to include the implicit subsidy of community rating, but since we
do not observe health status, we can’t include implicit subsidization of the sick in such a calculation. But we do include the implicit subsidies
from compressed age rating, since our existing subsidy variable is largest within a given income band for the most expensive (i.e. oldest) group.
    11
       In 2014, the tax-filing thresholds were $10,150 for single non-elderly individuals; $20,300 for married couples filing jointly; and $13,050
for ‘heads of household’ (i.e., multi-individual HIUs without a married couple).
    12
       The last exemption was based on the lowest-cost bronze-level plan in each rating area. Healthcare.gov provides county-level bronze
premium data for states on the federal exchange, which are not available in the data source we use for our silver-level premiums. Thus, for the 16
states using state-based exchanges, we imputed the lowest-cost bronze premiums for each rating area using a regression model to predict the ratio
of second-lowest-cost silver plan to lowest-cost bronze plan as a function of the following variables: number of silver plans, ratio of maximum to
minimum silver premium, ratio of maximum to second-lowest silver premium, ratio of median to second-lowest silver premium, ratio of second-



                                                                         15
sample subject to the mandate, the family-level mandate penalty is calculated per ACA criteria:

the greater of $95 per uninsured adult (half that per child) or 1% of taxable income in 2014, and

$325 per adult or 2% of taxable income in 2015.13

          Figure 3 shows the average mandate penalty per family in 2015, by income and Medicaid

expansion status. No one below 138% of FPL in non-expansion states is subject to the mandate,

while in expansion states, the mandate takes effect at the tax-filing threshold. Between 138% and

400% of FPL, most families are subject to the mandate, with the penalty increasing with income.

Near and above the 400% FPL subsidy cutoff, a substantial portion of families are exempt based

on the affordability criterion. At higher incomes, most families are subject to the mandate and

the average penalty approaches $1500 per family.


IV. Empirical Strategy

          Our overall empirical strategy consists of a longitudinal design that uses geographical and

income-based variation in the ACA policy levers to identify changes in coverage over time,

adjusting for time, geography, and income. We use the 2012-2013 period to control for

geographic and income group differences that might be correlated with our outcomes of interest.

Essentially, this allows us to do a difference-in-difference-in-difference (DDD) model across

PUMAs, income groups, and time. Our model also separately identifies the policy effects in

2014 vs. 2015 since the policies themselves evolved over time.

          We have 8 policy parameters – two versions each (2014 and 2015) of the mandate

penalty, new Medicaid eligibility based on state expansion decisions, and premium subsidy rate;

and then single measures of pre-ACA Medicaid eligibility and early expansion eligibility (since


lowest to minimum silver premium, and PUMA-level demographic measures from the ACS for age, sex, race, citizenship, education, disability,
parental status, marital status, and household size.
13
   The mandate penalty is additionally capped at the national average premium for bronze-level health plans offered by the health insurance
exchanges, and those with only short periods without insurance (less than 3 months per year) are also exempt from the fine.



                                                                     16
neither policy changed between 2014 and 2015). We model the direct effects of these policies in

all four years of the study (which includes 2 years of the pre-ACA baseline) and the DDD

estimates by interacting each term with post-ACA year fixed effects:

   (1)     %Uninsuredijt = β0 +β1 PercentSubsidy2014ij +β2 PercentSubsidy2015ij
           + β3 MandatePenalty2014ij +β4 MandatePenalty2015ij+β5 McaidEligiblePreACAij
           + β6 McaidEarlyExpansionEligibleij +β7 McaidNewlyEligible2014ij
           + β8 McaidNewlyEligible2015ij
           + β9 PercentSubsidy2014ij * Yr2014t
           + β10 MandatePenalty2014ij* Yr2014t
           + β11 McaidEligiblePreACAij* Yr2014t
           + β12 McaidEarlyExpansionEligibleij * Yr2014t
           + β13 McaidNewlyEligible2014ij * Yr2014t
           + β14 PercentSubsidy2015ij * Yr2015t
           + β15 MandatePenalty2015ij* Yr2015t
           + β16 McaidEligiblePreACAij* Yr2015t
           + β17 McaidEarlyExpansionEligibleij * Yr2015t
           + β18 McaidNewlyEligible2015ij * Yr2015t
           + Ω Area j*HIU_Typei + ∂ Yeart*HIU_Typei + µ Incomei*HIU_Typei
           + π AreaUnemploymentRate jt + βx Xijt + εijt

           Subscript i indexes the family (HIU), which is the unit of observation; j indexes the

geographical area; and t indexes time (year). The dependent variable is the percent of each HIU

without insurance at the time of the survey; for single adults, this is a binary variable, for

families with multiple members this is a continuous fraction ranging from 0 to 1. β1 through β8

capture the baseline (pre-ACA) direct effects of the PUMA-income policy variables. The

coefficients of interest are β9 through β13, which measure the impact of the ACA policy variables

in 2014, and β14 through β18, which measure the policy impacts in 2015.14

            Ω is a vector of area fixed effects (either PUMA or state, depending on the model), ∂ is a

vector of year fixed effects, and µ is a vector of fixed effects for different income groups; all

three fixed effects were interacted with HIU type (single adults, adult couples, and families with

14
   A simpler alternative is to run two separate models: one for 2012-2014, and the other for 2012-2015 that omits 2014 as a washout period. The
overall results of these separate models are essentially identical to the single model specified here.




                                                                        17
children), since each group has its own coverage trends and policy responses. Xijt is a vector of

the demographics based on the adult(s) in the family: race/ethnicity, marital status, citizenship,

age, educational attainment, and number of children. Finally, the model adjusts for annual

county-level unemployment rates from the Bureau of Labor Statistics.

          Even with the DDD model, Equation 1 raises several identification concerns. Primary

among these is state- or PUMA-level differences in the income distribution that may be related

to both premiums and Medicaid expansion, as well as omitted factors correlated with both family

income and tastes for insurance. Another flaw is that the mapping of survey-reported income

onto ACA-related eligibility is imprecise, creating measurement error biased towards the null.

          We address many of these concerns through the use of a “simulated” measure of

eligibility (Currie & Gruber, 1996a, 1996b; Cutler & Gruber, 1996). For this measure, we first

group all families into 12 income bands.15 For each income band, we randomly select from the

national sample up to 200 families of each of three types – single adults, adult couples,16 and

families with children – such that the total number of individuals sampled per group is

approximately 200. We then assign this same sample to each PUMA in our dataset and estimate

the value of our policy variables for that family type-PUMA-income group cell.

          The resulting measure computes, for example, the average subsidy for a representative set

of single adults from 150-200% of FPL, in each PUMA in the nation. Critically, this approach

allows us to capture the variation in subsidies by income group and PUMA, but to also

rigorously control for any direct influences of income and PUMA by putting in a full set of 12

income category dummies and PUMA dummies. That is, the only variation that identifies this

   15
      The income bands were: 0-50% FPL, 50-100% FPL, 100-138% FPL, 138-200% FPL, 200-250% FPL, 250-300% FPL, 300-350% FPL, 350-
400% FPL, 400-500% FPL, 500-600% FPL, 600-800% FPL, and greater than 800% FPL. Tweaking these to stagger them across the ACA’s key
income thresholds (e.g., using 100-150% FPL and 350-450% FPL instead) produces similar results in our regression models. In all models, we
recoded negative incomes as $0, and incomes above the 99th percentile were top-coded as the 99th percentile.
   16
      This group contains families with 2 adults and no children 18 or younger. Approximately 99% of the HIUs in this group are married
couples. The others are typically single parents with adult dependents (e.g. a 20 year-old student).



                                                                    18
model is interactions of PUMA, income, and year, and not direct effects of any of these factors.17

          This approach mitigates several potential sources of bias. First, it eliminates any

endogeneity based on state-level differences in income distributions. Some states have poorer

populations or worsening economic conditions over time, which may affect premiums as well as

the share of the population eligible for Medicaid; using a standardized population in all states

removes any bias from this source. Second, this approach reduces concerns about the

measurement of survey income, since we are longer reliant on precise family-level estimates of

premium subsidies and other measures; instead, we use an aggregate measure of the ACA’s

policy features for families within a given income band. Third, it reduces the potential for

individual-level endogeneity of income in response to ACA policies. We assign families to fairly

broad income bands using their actual income, but then use the simulated measure for the whole

income band to assess policy impact. In other words, the model assumes that income group is not

endogenous, even if a family’s specific income within that group may be. Fortunately, other

work on the ACA suggests that employment responses to the law have been minimal on both the

intensive and extensive margins (Gooptu et al., 2016; Kaestner et al., 2015; Moriya et al., 2016).

          These simulated policy measures can serve as instruments for each family’s actual

premium subsidy, mandate penalty, and Medicaid eligibility as described in Equation 1. The

first-stage regression for such a 2SLS estimate is close to one for each policy measure (see

Appendix Table 2), so that IV and reduced form estimation yield almost identical answers. Thus,

for most analyses we focus on a reduced form model identical to Equation 1, except that for each

of the policy variables and interaction terms (β1 through β18) we use simulated policy measures

as the independent variables of interest. For brevity, we do not re-state this equation, but this and


   17
      Unlike the original Currie-Gruber approach, our model simulates eligibility at the PUMA rather than state-level. However, collapsing our
simulated eligibility measure to a state-level estimate for each income band produces similar findings as our main model.



                                                                      19
the full 2SLS equation are described in the Appendix.

       Our primary model focuses on the percentage of each HIU that is uninsured. In all

models, we use ACS survey weights aggregated at the HIU-level and robust standard errors

clustered at the level of the PUMA.


V. Results

A. Summary Statistics and Coverage Trends

       Table 1 presents summary statistics for our sample in 2014 and 2015. Nearly one-quarter

of the population was Medicaid eligible before the ACA, 2% gained eligibility under the ACA’s

early expansions, while approximately 5% became eligible in 2014. Overall, nearly two-thirds of

the sample was subject to the mandate, and the size of the average mandate penalty more than

doubled from 2014 to 2015 ($458 to $956). The mean unsubsidized premium was slightly more

than $8000 in both years. The subsidy rate was approximately 16% in both 2014 and 2015.

       Table 2 shows the time series for insurance outcomes. There was a net decrease in the

uninsured rate of roughly 3.4 percentage points in 2014 and 6.0 percentage points in 2015, both

compared to the 2012-2013 period. By 2015, there had been a 3.3 percentage point increase in

Medicaid, 0.9 percentage point increase in ESI, and 1.9 percentage point increase in non-group

private coverage. Overall coverage gains were largest for single adults (10.8 percentage points

by 2015), with smaller changes for couples (4.6) and families with children (4.2).

B. IV and Reduced Form Model Results

       Table 3 shows the ACA-related coefficients for the 2SLS and reduced form approaches;

coefficients for demographic covariates are in Appendix Table 1. Due to computational

constraints when attempting to run the 2SLS model with the full set of PUMA fixed effects, we

control for state rather than PUMA in the IV model. The estimates are virtually identical between



                                                20
the IV and reduced form models for each policy measure. For simplicity, we focus on the

reduced form estimates for the remainder of the paper, which also enables us to consider a more

robust set of PUMA-level fixed effects and various interaction terms as discussed below.

       We estimate a significant negative effect of the subsidy rate on the risk of being

uninsured. The subsidy rate estimate shows that for each 1.0 percentage-point of subsidy, the

uninsured rate fell by 0.051 percentage points in 2014. This effect was nearly twice as large in

2015, with a coefficient of 0.089. Put another way, each 10% increase in average subsidy

produced a decrease in the uninsured rate of 0.89 percentage points in 2015, equal to roughly 2.4

million Americans (given 273 million non-elderly Americans).

       The coefficient on the mandate penalty is quite small in magnitude and presumably

wrong-signed (i.e. higher mandate leads to more uninsured). The magnitude of the coefficient

implies that each $100 in mandate in 2014 (when the average penalty was roughly $460)

increases the uninsured rate by 0.04 percentage-points, which is negligible. The coefficient in

2015 was similarly small – 0.03. This could be because individuals are not aware of the precise

exemption parameters, or because they do not respond to the affordability exemption. It does not

necessarily imply that the mandate had no effect, though it does suggest that individuals did not

respond to their income-specific mandate. This still leaves open the possibility of a more general

impact of a “taste for compliance” that some have hypothesized (Saltzman et al., 2015).

       The coefficients on all three Medicaid eligibility variables are highly significant. The

results indicate a marginal reduction in the uninsured rate of 8.9 percentage points in 2014 and

13.7 percentage points in 2015 among individuals made newly for Medicaid. Take-up rates were

even higher (10.7 and 19.7 points in 2014 and 2015, respectively) for those who became eligible

under the ACA’s early Medicaid expansions. Meanwhile, we also detect smaller but significant




                                                 21
insurance changes among those who were previously eligible for Medicaid. Our coefficient

suggests that the ACA expansion led to 2.6 and 4.6 percentage-point increases in coverage in

2014 and 2015, respectively, for those who were already eligible for Medicaid prior to the ACA

– the so-called “woodwork effect.” This builds on prior analyses of the Medicaid expansion,

which used standard difference-in-differences methods and several data sources to estimate 2014

coverage gains ranging from 3 to 6 percentage points. Importantly, those analyses did not

attempt to model other aspects of the law simultaneously and did not disentangle the various

types of Medicaid eligibility. One paper that did separately identify childless adults, who were

the main group to become newly eligible, found larger gains on the order of 15 percentage

points, closer to our newly-eligible coefficient (Simon, Soni, & Cawley, 2016).

       The next set of coefficients show the direct impact of our policy measures when not

interacted with 2014 or 2015 – i.e., the impact in 2012-2013. Pre-existing and early expansion

Medicaid eligibility are negatively associated with uninsurance as one would expect. It is

somewhat surprising that there are significant coefficients on several other policy measures –

though these point estimates are generally small. This suggests the possibility of omitted factors

across PUMA-income cells that are correlated with both our policy measures and coverage. We

can address this concern by further enriching the model to incorporate interactions of PUMA and

income category, so that the identification purely comes from differences in effects within each

PUMA-income category. We do so in Table 5, with minimal impact on the results.

       Figure 4 plots the ACA policy coefficients from the reduced form model for each year of

our study as a visual test of our DDD approach. For clarity, we have separated the 2014 and 2015

results. We find generally flat trend lines for 2012-2013 before large changes in 2014 and 2015

for premium subsidies, new Medicaid eligibility, and previous Medicaid eligibility. For the early




                                                 22
expansions, we see a slight downward trend in the uninsured coefficient from 2012-2013,

consistent with the implementation of those expansions during that period, before a much larger

drop occurred in 2014 and 2015. Meanwhile, the trend for the mandate penalty is essentially flat

throughout the study period. This offers strong evidence that our model is capturing a

discontinuous change in outcomes related to these policy measures in 2014 and 2015, rather than

spurious variation in outcomes that predated the ACA’s implementation.

C. Decomposing Coverage Changes by ACA Policy Provision

       In Table 4, we apply our estimates to model the population-level changes in insurance

coverage in 2014 that are accounted for by these aspects of the ACA. Over the period from 2012-

2013 to 2014, the rate of uninsurance as measured by the ACS fell by 3.4 percentage points. We

find that the average 16% subsidy to exchange coverage in the full sample implies a reduction in

uninsurance of 0.83 percentage points. The estimates for the mandate are small (as well as

inconsistent and non-significant in robustness checks we present below), so we ignore this in our

calculations. We estimate that the 2014 Medicaid expansion to 4.5% of our sample reduced

uninsurance by 0.40 percentage points; the early expansions affected 2% of the sample and

reduced uninsurance by 0.21 percentage points; and the “woodwork effect” – impacting 23% of

our sample – led to a decline in uninsurance of 0.60 percentage points. Taken together, the policy

variables in our model sum to nearly a 2.1 percentage-point reduction in the uninsured rate. Of

this total, 41% is attributable to premium subsidies, 20% to the expansion of Medicaid eligibility

in 2014, 10% the early expansion, and 29% to the woodwork effect. The relative magnitudes of

the changes for each policy were quite similar in 2015. The prominence of the woodwork effect

is due to the fact that nearly 5 times as many people (disproportionately children) were already

eligible for Medicaid before the ACA than those made newly eligible in 2014. Our estimates are




                                                 23
slightly more oriented towards Medicaid gains than previous estimates by Carman et al. (2015),

but broadly consistent with their results, despite different analytical approaches and data sources.

       Overall, our parameterization of the ACA explains approximately 60% of the 3.4

percentage-point decrease observed in 2014 and a nearly equal fraction of the 6.0 percentage-

point change in 2015. Several other analyses have attributed nearly all of the national change in

coverage in 2014 to the ACA, even after adjustment for the improving economy (Blumberg,

Garrett, & Holahan, 2016; Sommers, Gunja, et al., 2015). In our model, the area unemployment

rate is a significant predictor of coverage (with each percentage point drop in unemployment

reducing the uninsured rate by 0.2 percentage points), but our ACA policy coefficients are nearly

identical with or without this adjustment. Thus, the remaining decline in uninsurance in 2014-

2015 may be due to other unmeasured aspects of the ACA, such as the social effect of the

individual mandate, guaranteed issue requirements, simplification of purchasing coverage due to

the creation of the exchanges, and any measurement error in our policy variables.

D. Robustness Checks

       Table 5 considers the robustness of our estimates; for simplicity, we list only the 2015

policy effects (the 2014 coefficients follow a similar pattern, but with smaller magnitudes).

Column 1 shows the same reduced form model used in Table 3, but replaces state fixed effects

with PUMA fixed effects. The results are nearly identical to the baseline model. Columns 2-4

include various second-level interactions to test whether omitted variables may be driving the

results. Column 2 allows for an interaction between PUMA and income categories. This allows

us to drop the direct effects of our simulated policy variables (set at the PUMA-income level),

and leaves only the policy interactions with Year2014 and Year2015. The results again are nearly

identical. Column 3 allows for PUMA-income interactions and income-year fixed effects, to




                                                  24
address possible time-varying differences in insurance trends across income groups unrelated to

the ACA. This model reduced the point estimates somewhat though with the same basic pattern,

except the mandate penalty becomes negative and non-significant. Column 4 tests PUMA-year

interactions and income-year interactions, with generally similar estimates. We also consider

replacing the Mandate Penalty variable with Any Mandate (i.e. percent of families that are not

exempt from the mandate) or the mandate penalty as a percentage of income. These results

(Columns 5 and 6) again demonstrate small and inconsistent impacts of the mandate.

       Finally, we consider an alternative premium subsidy measure. Column (7) replaces

Percent Subsidy with Net Premium (in $1000s), which shows a significant positive effect of the

premium on uninsurance – but the implied effect is much smaller than that captured by the

percent subsidy in our main model. Applying this coefficient to the type of analysis shown in

Table 4, we estimate a change in uninsured in 2015 due to subsidies of just 0.73 percentage

points, as opposed to the 1.53 percentage points from the percent subsidy. Column (8) shows that

when both measures are included together, the coefficient for Percent Subsidy is unchanged from

our primary model, while the coefficient for Net Premium is essentially zero. These results

indicate that the percent subsidy – by capturing information on both price and the potential

benefits of coverage – better reflects exchange consumer decision-making than the out-of-pocket

premium alone. This suggests, for example, that older individuals or those in areas with more

costly insurance are more likely to take up exchange coverage than younger individuals or those

in cheaper rating areas, conditional on facing a similar net premium after subsidies.

E. Results by Type of Insurance

       Next, we decompose our findings on uninsurance into changes among three types of

coverage: Medicaid, employer-sponsored insurance, and non-group private insurance (Table 6).




                                                 25
As discussed earlier, the ACS survey wording makes it reasonable for respondents receiving

subsidized exchange coverage to report either “Medicaid/government assistance plan” or

“insurance purchased directly from an insurance company.” The positive coefficient on percent

subsidy in the Medicaid regressions indeed suggests that some individuals report their publicly-

subsidized exchange coverage as Medicaid. Still, as expected, we find the largest effect of the

premium subsidies on non-group insurance. We estimate that each 10% rise in subsidy increased

the share of the population with non-group insurance by 0.48 percentage points by 2015. At the

mean subsidy (16.2%) and baseline non-group coverage rate (8.8%), this implies an elasticity of

demand for non-group coverage of -0.09. If we treat the subsidy coefficients on Medicaid as part

of the exchange effect, the elasticity is -0.17. While lower than the elasticity used in typical

microsimulation modeling of the ACA (Gruber, 2011), the 2015 estimate is nearly twice as large

as the 2014 estimate, suggesting that increased awareness of the law and resolving technical

challenges in the exchanges likely improved consumer responsiveness over time.

       The coefficient on the mandate penalty remains small, wrong-signed, and only

statistically significant for non-group coverage.

       We estimate highly significant impacts of all three Medicaid variables on Medicaid

coverage. These coefficients reflect marginal take-up rates among those eligible for the program.

Strikingly, these Medicaid effects are very close to the effects for overall insurance coverage;

that is, we estimate virtually no crowd-out of private coverage by the Medicaid expansion or

woodwork effect. This is illustrated further in the next two columns of Table 6. We observe no

negative impact of the Medicaid eligibility variables on either ESI or non-group insurance (and

in fact detect a significant but small positive effect of pre-ACA eligibility on both, on the order

of 0.5 to 0.8 percentage points). This is a notable finding, as most previous literature suggested at




                                                    26
least some crowd-out was likely under the ACA.18

           At least one analysis of the ACA has detected moderate crowd-out – roughly 25% for

parents, less for childless adults (Kaestner et al., 2015). However, this appears to be an artifact of

modeling Medicaid eligibility alone. In the 100-138% income range, individuals in non-

expansion states are able to receive premium subsidies as a fallback to Medicaid. This increases

private coverage in those states. In a simple differences-in-differences model with a simple

binary Medicaid expansion vs. non-expansion independent variable, this larger increase in

private coverage in non-expansion states appears as a form of “crowd-out” (i.e. a negative DD

coefficient on private insurance – see Appendix Table 3). However, this is not crowd-out in the

traditional sense: Medicaid is not leading some to drop private insurance coverage. Rather, in the

absence of Medicaid expansion, some adults obtain premium subsidies. In our model, which

explicitly accounts for both Medicaid and premium subsidies, we find no crowd-out at all.19

F. Heterogeneity in Coverage Changes

           We examine patterns of ACA effects across different demographic groups and states

(Table 7). To do so, we repeat our reduced form analysis for several stratified samples, based on

family type (single adults, adult couples without children, and families with children) and state

policies. We compared states that had established their own exchanges in 2014 (n=14) to those

using the federal exchange.20 We also compared states based on their ACA Medicaid policies,

classified into three groups – non-expansion states (n=21); early (2011-2013) expansion states

(n=6, including Washington DC); and states that expanded eligibility in 2014 or 2015 (n=24).



   18
       One previous coverage expansion without much crowd-out occurred in Massachusetts, suggesting that the individual mandate may play an
important role here (Hackmann, Kolstad and Kowalski 2014). In addition, Clemens (2015) showed that community rating in private insurance –
as required by the ACA – may also reduce crowd-out from Medicaid.
    19
       The simple D-in-D model also shows a reduction in ESI associated with Medicaid expansion. This effect also disappears in our full model,
in which we do not simply analyze Medicaid expansion as a binary variable but take into account how many people actually gained eligibility.
    20
       The 14 states with state-based exchanges were CA, CO, CT, DC, HI, ID, KY, MA, MD, MN, NY, RI, VT, and WA. For 2016, Hawaii has
reverted to the federal exchange, and Kentucky will do so for 2017.



                                                                       27
           Coverage gains associated with premium subsidies were significantly larger for adult

couples (ß=-0.108) than single adults (ß=-0.085) or for families with children (ß=-0.070). The

2015 effects of Medicaid eligibility were largest in for adult couples, with take-up rates of over

18% for both previously-eligible and newly-eligible adults, compared to 5.1% and 11.7% for

single adults. Among families with children, the woodwork effect was smaller – 4.1% – which

likely reflects the fact that Medicaid/CHIP take-up rates for children were already quite high

(Kenney et al., 2011). However, since children make up such a large portion of Medicaid

eligibility, this is a non-trivial population effect. In children-only models, we estimate that they

account for 28-45% of the overall population woodwork effect in 2015.21

           In our analysis by state policy, exchange subsidies were significantly more effective at

reducing the uninsured rate in states with state-based exchanges than in states using the federal

exchange. Conditional on the subsidy amount, gains in coverage were essentially twice as high in

the state exchanges (ß=-0.129) as in the federal exchange (ß=-0.076). While technical difficulties

plagued the launch of the federal website, several state exchanges were similarly affected, and

these difficulties would not explain the differences we observe well into 2015. More likely is that

states that implemented their own exchanges were more consistent supporters of coverage

expansion, with greater outreach efforts and stronger application assistance programs (Shin,

Sharac, Zur, Alvarez, & Rosenbaum, 2014; Sommers, Maylone, Nguyen, Blendon, & Epstein,

2015). However, our analysis here is merely suggestive and without a clear causal interpretation.

           The pattern by Medicaid expansion decision also showed significantly larger effects of



   21
      This requires adapting our HIU-level model to run an individual-level analysis for children only. If we use the same simulated instruments
as our main model for premium subsidies and the mandate, but substitute child-level Medicaid/CHIP eligibility for the three-part Medicaid
eligibility modeled in Equation 1, we estimate that the uninsured rate among children eligible for Medicaid or CHIP fell by 1.0 percentage point
in 2014 and 1.8 percentage points in 2015, with no significant private insurance crowd-out. At the population level, this accounts for 28% of the
overall woodwork effect in Table 4 (given that 57% of children were already eligible), or equivalently, 800,000 additionally insured children in
2015. An alternative model that includes only Medicaid/CHIP eligibility provides an upper bound of 1.4 million additionally insured children,
which would represent roughly 45% of the woodwork effect.



                                                                        28
exchange subsidies in states more supportive of the ACA (expansion states, particularly the early

expansion states). This finding suggests that the early eligibility expansions from 2011-2013 laid

the groundwork for increased Medicaid participation later on. Notably, we find large and

similarly-sized woodwork effects in all groups of states, regardless of Medicaid expansion status.


VI. Policy Implications and Conclusions

           In what we believe is the most comprehensive analysis to date of coverage changes under

the ACA related to the law’s primary policy measures, we identify several notable findings.

First, of the ACA’s reduction in the uninsured rate in 2014 and 2015 that is attributable to our

policy measures, roughly 40% was due to the creation of premium subsidies for exchange

coverage. The other 60% was due to increased Medicaid coverage – much of it the result of

enrolling individuals eligible for Medicaid before 2014, including many children. While some

policymakers and researchers had anticipated this potential “woodwork effect,” the fact that it is

such a large policy lever is somewhat surprising, and simple differences-in-differences models of

the Medicaid expansion obscure this important policy heterogeneity across eligibility groups.

           In part, our large woodwork estimate may reflect some measurement error in Medicaid

eligibility, and if some share of our sample appeared eligible based on 2013 data but in fact was

not eligible until 2014 or 2015, this could bias our findings towards a larger woodwork effect.22

However, federal administrative data on Medicaid enrollment confirm that a substantial

woodwork effect is evident, and this effect exists whether or not a state expanded Medicaid

under the ACA. Even in non-expansion states, Medicaid enrollment by January 2015 had

increased by 8% over pre-ACA levels. In expansion states, of course, it had increased even more


   22
      Of course, the converse is also possible – our approach may define some individuals as ineligible in 2013 even though they were eligible.
But these two mismeasurement effects are likely to be asymmetric, since the marginal take-up rate in 2014 among newly-eligible individuals
should (and does) exceed the marginal take-up rate among previously eligible individuals. Essentially, mismeasurement of pre-ACA Medicaid
eligibility should bias the woodwork coefficient upwards and the newly-eligible coefficient downwards.



                                                                       29
– by 26% – but our results suggest that a sizable portion of the gains in these states was in fact

from the woodwork effect (CMS, 2014). Moreover, even among the childless adult group that

comprises the bulk of the newly-eligible population, as of late 2014 roughly 1/3 of this

enrollment group was eligible under pre-ACA criteria (CMS, 2016).23 These findings are also

consistent with enrollment spillovers detected in pre-ACA Medicaid expansions (Aizer &

Grogger, 2003; Dubay & Kenney, 2003; Sonier et al., 2013), as well as one recent analysis of

children’s coverage under the ACA (Kenney, Haley, Pan, Lynch, & Buettgens, 2016).

          Another key finding is the lack of private insurance crowd-out. We find no evidence of

significant crowd-out of employer-sponsored coverage by the new premium subsidies, and no

evidence of crowd-out of either employer coverage or non-group private coverage by the

Medicaid expansion. These results have implications for the ACA’s efficiency and effects on

social welfare, as expanding coverage without crowding out alternative sources of health

insurance reduces the law’s total cost and potential deadweight loss (Gruber, 2008).

          In terms of premium subsidies, our findings offer some useful insights for policy and

future research. We find that modeling the net premiums is a fairly weak approach to predicting

enrollment behavior, with coverage gains much more responsive to the percent subsidy received.

It also suggests that much of the recent attention to absolute premium rate increases may be less

relevant than the subsidy rate received by most exchange customers. By necessity, our model

only examined a single representative premium in each market – the second lowest cost silver

plan. Further research is needed into how consumers enrolling in exchange plans choose among

their various options, in terms of the relative tradeoffs between overall subsidy rates, net

premiums, and other plan features such as cost-sharing requirements and provider networks.


   23
      Massachusetts, due to its 2006 health reform law, and New York and Arizona, due to their large 2002-2003 expansions of Medicaid under
Section 1115 waivers, were the largest contributors to this group in the CMS statistics.



                                                                     30
        We find small and inconsistent effects of the individual mandate in 2014 and 2015. In

some models, the coefficient is wrong-signed, while in others it is in the expected direction, with

varying levels of statistical significance. Overall, it is the least robust of our estimates, and in all

models, the coefficients indicate minimal policy impact. In part, this may indicate a lack of

consumer awareness about the intricacies of the tax penalty rules and exemptions. It may also

reflect the low levels of the mandate penalty in the law’s early years, though we saw no increase

in the mandate’s effect in 2015 even with steeper penalties. Finally, the mandate likely exerts a

generalized effect that encourages people to obtain coverage in a way that is independent of its

precise details and whether one is even subject to it. In Massachusetts, for instance, researchers

have shown an increase in Medicaid participation among adults after the implementation of the

mandate, even though most had incomes too low to make them subject to it (Sonier et al., 2013).

        One of our paper’s main contributions is its comprehensive framework for rigorous

causal evaluation of the ACA’s effects. Given the intense interest in many outcomes from this

wide-ranging law, including health care utilization, labor market outcomes, and health effects,

our approach will likely be useful for many subsequent analyses of the law.

        However, the 2016 election results have cast significant doubt over the law’s future.

There has been discussion of a full repeal, as well as more targeted changes such as repealing the

individual mandate, shifting Medicaid to block grants, and scaling back or eliminating premium

tax credits. Our findings offer insight into how each of these pieces of the law are interacting to

produce coverage gains and how their repeal would likely do the opposite. Overall, we find that

the bulk of the coverage gains in 2014-2015 are directly attributable to expanded eligibility for

subsidized insurance via exchanges and Medicaid. While we also detect large gains in coverage

for previously-Medicaid eligible populations (including many children), the underlying




                                                    31
mechanism for these gains in 2014-2015 is presumably a combination of the ACA’s other

features, such as a streamlined application process, the elimination of Medicaid asset tests, the

mandate, and expanded eligibility for parents that likely improved Medicaid take-up rates for

children as well. It is therefore possible that much of these latter coverage gains would also

unravel after a repeal of the ACA. Undoubtedly, how patterns of coverage evolve over time in

this policy environment – and how they affect other domains of health care and the economy –

will remain worthy of continued study.




                                                  32
                                         REFERENCES

Aizer, A. (2007). Public Health Insurance, Program Take-Up, and Child Health. Review of
        Economics and Statistics, 89(3), 400-415.
Aizer, A., & Grogger, J. (2003). Parental Medicaid Expansions and Child Medicaid Coverage
        NBER Working Paper 21836. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Antwi, Y. A., Moriya, A. S., & Simon, K. (2013). Effects of federal policy to insure young
        adults: evidence from the 2010 Affordable Care Act's dependent coverage mandate.
        American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 5(4), 1-28.
ASPE. (2014). Health Insurance Marketplace: Summary Enrollment Report for the Initial
        Annual Open Enrollment Period. from
        http://aspe.hhs.gov/health/reports/2014/MarketPlaceEnrollment/Apr2014/ib_2014Apr_en
        rollment.pdf
Baicker, K., Finkelstein, A., Song, J., & Taubman, S. (2014). The impact of Medicaid on labor
        market activity and program participation: evidence from the Oregon Health Insurance
        Experiment. Am Econ Rev, 104(5), 322-328.
Black, L. I., & Cohen, R. A. (2015). Insurance Status by State Medicaid Expansion Status: Early
        Release of Estimates From the National Health Interview Survey, 2013-September 2014:
        National Center for Health Statistics.
Blumberg, L. J., Garrett, B., & Holahan, J. (2016). Estimating the Counterfactual: How Many
        Uninsured Adults Would There Be Today Without the ACA? Inquiry : a journal of
        medical care organization, provision and financing, ePub ahead of print.
Carman, K. G., Eibner, C., & Paddock, S. M. (2015). Trends In Health Insurance Enrollment,
        2013-15. Health affairs, 34(6), online before print.
Clemens, J. (2015). Regulatory Redistribution in the Market for Health Insurance. American
        Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 7(2), 109-134.
CMS. (2014). State Medicaid and CHIP Income Eligibility Standards. Baltimore, MD: Centers
        for Medicaid & CHIP Services.
CMS. (2016). October-December 2014 Medicaid MBES Enrollment Report: Department of
        Health & Human Services.
Cohen, R. A., & Martinez, M. E. (2014). Health Insurance Coverage: Early Release of Estimates
        from the National Health Interview Survey, January-March 2014: National Center for
        Health Statistics.
Courtemanche, C., Marton, J., Ukert, B., Yelowitz, A., & Zapata, D. (2016). Impacts of the
        Affordable Care Act on Health Insurance Coverage in Medicaid Expansion and Non-
        Expansion States NBER Working Paper 22182. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of
        Economic Research.
Currie, J., & Gruber, J. (1996a). Health insurance eligibility, utilization of medical care and child
        health. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111(2), 431-466.
Currie, J., & Gruber, J. (1996b). Saving Babies: The Efficacy and Cost of Recent Expansions of
        Medicaid Eligibility for Pregnant Women. Journal of Political Economy, 104(6), 1263-
        1296.
Cutler, D., & Gruber, J. (1996). Does Public Insurance Crowd Out Private Insurance? The
        Quarterly Journal of Economics, 11(1), 391-460.
DeNavas-Walt, C., Proctor, B., & Smith, J. (2013). Income, poverty, and health insurance
        coverage in the United States: 2012. Washington, DC: U.S. Census Bureau.



                                                  33
Dubay, L., & Kenney, G. (2003). Expanding public health insurance to parents: effects on
        children's coverage under Medicaid. Health services research, 38(5), 1283-1301.
Finegold, K., & Gunja, M. Z. (2014). Survey Data on Health Insurance Coverage for 2013 and
        2014. Washington, DC: ASPE.
Garrett, B., & Kaestner, R. (2015). Recent Evidence on the ACA and Employment: Has the
        ACA Been a Job Killer? Washington, DC: Urban Institute.
Garthwaite, C., Gross, T., & Notowidigdo, M. J. (2014). Public health insurance, labor supply,
        and employment lock. Q J Econ, 129(2), 653-696.
Gooptu, A., Moriya, A. S., Simon, K. I., & Sommers, B. D. (2016). Medicaid Expansion Did Not
        Result In Significant Employment Changes Or Job Reductions In 2014. Health affairs,
        35(1), 111-118. doi: 10.1377/hlthaff.2015.0747
Gruber, J. (2005). Tax Policy for Health Insurance. In J. Poterba (Ed.), Tax Policy and the
        Economy (pp. 39-63). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gruber, J. (2008). Covering the Uninsured in the United States. Journal of Economic Literature,
        46(3), 571-606.
Gruber, J. (2011). The Impacts of the Affordable Care Act: How Reasonable are the Projections.
        National Tax Journal, 64(3), 893-908.
Gruber, J., & Levitt, L. (2000). Tax subsidies for health insurance: costs and benefits. Health
        affairs, 19(1), 72-85.
Gruber, J., & Simon, K. (2008). Crowd-out 10 years later: have recent public insurance
        expansions crowded out private health insurance? Journal of health economics, 27(2),
        201-217. doi: 10.1016/j.jhealeco.2007.11.004
Hackmann, M. B., Kolstad, J. T., & Kowalski, A. E. (2015). Adverse Selection and an Individual
        Mandate: When Theory Meets Practice. American Economic Review, 105(3), 1030-1066.
Hamersma, S., & Kim, M. (2013). Participation and crowd out: Assessing the effects of parental
        Medicaid expansions. Journal of health economics, 32, 160-171.
Heberlein, M., Brooks, T., Aiker, J., Artiga, S., & Stephens, J. (2013). Getting into Gear for
        2014: Findings from a 50-State Survey of Eligibility, Enrollment, Renewal, and Cost-
        Sharing Policies in Medicaid and CHIP, 2012-2013. Washington, D.C.: Kaiser Family
        Foundation.
Kaestner, R., Garrett, B., Gangopadhyaya, A., & Fleming, C. (2015). Effects of ACA Medicaid
        Expansions on Health Insurance Coverage and Labor Supply NBER Working Paper
        21836. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Kaiser. (2010). Medicaid financial eligibility: primary pathways for the elderly and people with
        disabilities. Washington, D.C.: Kaiser Family Foundation.
Kaiser. (2015). Status of State Action on the Medicaid Expansion Decision. from
        http://kff.org/health-reform/state-indicator/state-activity-around-expanding-medicaid-
        under-the-affordable-care-act/
Kenney, G. M., Haley, J., Pan, C., Lynch, V., & Buettgens, M. (2016). Children’s Coverage
        Climb Continues: Uninsurance and Medicaid/CHIP Eligibility and Participation Under
        the ACA: Urban Institute / Robert Wood Johnson Foundation.
Kenney, G. M., Lynch, V., Haley, J., Huntress, M., Resnick, D., & Coyer, C. (2011). Gains for
        Children: Increased Participation in Medicaid and CHIP in 2009: Urban Institute / Robert
        Wood Johnson Foundation.




                                               34
Kolstad, J. T., & Kowalski, A. E. (2012). The Impact of Health Care Reform on Hospital and
       Preventive Care: Evidence from Massachusetts. Journal of Public Economics, 96(11-12),
       909-929. doi: 10.1016/j.jpubeco.2012.07.003
Kronick, R., & Gilmer, T. (2002). Insuring low-income adults: does public coverage crowd out
       private? Health affairs, 21(1), 225-239.
Lo Sasso, A. T., & Buchmueller, T. C. (2004). The effect of the State Children's Health
       Insurance Program on health insurance coverage. Journal of health economics, 23(5),
       1059-1082. doi: 10.1016/j.jhealeco.2004.03.006
Long, S. K., Kenney, G. M., Zuckerman, S., Wissoker, D., Goin, D., Karpman, M., & Anderson,
       N. (2014). QuickTake: Number of Uninsured Adults Falls by 5.4 Million since 2013.
       Washington, DC: Urban Institute.
Long, S. K., Stockley, K., & Yemane, A. (2009). Another Look at the Impacts of Health Reform
       in Massachusetts: Evidence Using New Data and a Stronger Model. American Economic
       Review: Papers & Proceedings, 99(2), 508-511.
Mach, A., & O'Hara, B. (2011). Do people really have multiple health insurance plans?
       Estimates of Nongroup Health Insurance in the American Community Survey SEHSD
       Working Paper Number 2011-28. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Census Bureau.
Marquis, M. S., & Long, S. H. (1995). Worker demand for health insurance in the non-group
       market. Journal of health economics, 14(1), 47-63.
Meng, Y. Y., Cabezas, L., Roby, D. H., Pourat, N., & Kominski, G. F. (2012). Successful
       Strategies for Increasing Enrollment in California’s Low Income Health Program (LIHP).
       Los Angeles, CA: UCLA Center for Health Policy Research.
Moriya, A. S., Selden, T. M., & Simon, K. I. (2016). Little Change Seen In Part-Time
       Employment As A Result Of The Affordable Care Act. Health affairs, 35(1), 119-123.
       doi: 10.1377/hlthaff.2015.0949
Pascale, J., Call, K. T., Fertig, A., & Oellerich, D. (2016). Validating Self-Reported Health
       Insurance Coverage: Preliminary Results on CPS and ACS. Washington, D.C.: United
       States Census Bureau.
Saltzman, E. A., Eibner, C., & Enthoven, A. C. (2015). Improving The Affordable Care Act: An
       Assessment Of Policy Options For Providing Subsidies. Health affairs, 34(12), 2095-
       2103. doi: 10.1377/hlthaff.2015.0209
Shartzer, A., Long, S. K., Karpman, M., Kenney, G. M., & Zuckerman, S. (2015). QuickTake:
       Insurance Coverage Gains Cross Economic, Social, and Geographic Boundaries.
       Washington, DC: Urban Institute.
Shin, P., Sharac, J., Zur, J., Alvarez, C., & Rosenbaum, S. (2014). Assessing the Potential Impact
       of State Policies on Community Health Centers’ Outreach and Enrollment Activities.
       Washington, DC: George Washington University
Simon, K., Soni, A., & Cawley, J. (2016). The Impact of Health Insurance on Preventive Care
       and Health Behaviors: Evidence from the 2014 ACA Medicaid Expansions NBER
       Working Paper 22265. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Smith, J. C., & Medalia, C. (2015). Health Insurance Coverage in the United States: 2014.
       Washington, DC: U.S. Census Bureau.
Sommers, B. D., Arntson, E., Kenney, G. M., & Epstein, A. M. (2013). Lessons from Early
       Medicaid Expansions under Health Reform: Interviews with Medicaid Official. Medicare
       & medicaid research review, 3(4), E1-E23.




                                                35
Sommers, B. D., & Epstein, A. M. (2011). Why states are so miffed about Medicaid--economics,
        politics, and the "woodwork effect". The New England journal of medicine, 365(2), 100-
        102. doi: 10.1056/NEJMp1104948
Sommers, B. D., Gunja, M. Z., Finegold, K., & Musco, T. (2015). Changes in Self-reported
        Insurance Coverage, Access to Care, and Health Under the Affordable Care Act. JAMA :
        the journal of the American Medical Association, 314(4), 366-374. doi:
        10.1001/jama.2015.8421
Sommers, B. D., Kenney, G. M., & Epstein, A. M. (2014). New evidence on the affordable care
        act: coverage impacts of early medicaid expansions. Health affairs, 33(1), 78-87. doi:
        10.1377/hlthaff.2013.1087
Sommers, B. D., Kronick, R., Finegold, K., Po, R., Schwartz, K., & Glied, S. (2012).
        Understanding Participation Rates in Medicaid: Implications for the Affordable Care Act.
        Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (ASPE). .
Sommers, B. D., Maylone, B., Nguyen, K. H., Blendon, R. J., & Epstein, A. M. (2015). The
        Impact Of State Policies On ACA Applications And Enrollment Among Low-Income
        Adults In Arkansas, Kentucky, And Texas. Health affairs, 34(6), 1010-1018. doi:
        10.1377/hlthaff.2015.0215
Sommers, B. D., Tomasi, M. R., Swartz, K., & Epstein, A. M. (2012). Reasons for the wide
        variation in medicaid participation rates among States hold lessons for coverage
        expansion in 2014. Health affairs, 31(5), 909-919. doi: 10.1377/hlthaff.2011.0977
Sonier, J., Boudreaux, M. H., & Blewett, L. A. (2013). Medicaid 'welcome-mat' effect of
        affordable care act implementation could be substantial. Health affairs, 32(7), 1319-1325.
        doi: 10.1377/hlthaff.2013.0360
Thorpe, K. E., & Florence, C. S. (1998). Health insurance among children: the role of expanded
        Medicaid coverage. Inquiry : a journal of medical care organization, provision and
        financing, 35(4), 369-379.
Wherry, L. R., & Miller, S. (2016). Early Coverage, Access, Utilization, and Health Effects
        Associated With the Affordable Care Act Medicaid Expansions: A Quasi-experimental
        Study. Annals of internal medicine. doi: 10.7326/M15-2234




                                                36
                                  FIGURE 1. ELIGIBILITY FOR MEDICAID/CHIP BY INCOME AND
                                             STATE MEDICAID EXPANSION STATUS
   Panel A: Children




   Panel B: Adults




Notes: Top panel represents child eligibility and bottom panel represents adult eligibility. Dashed vertical line indicates 138% of the Federal
Poverty Level (FPL).




                                                                          37
 FIGURE 2. EXCHANGE PERCENT SUBSIDY IN 2015 BY INCOME AND
             STATE MEDICAID EXPANSION STATUS




   Notes: Dashed vertical lines indicate 138% and 400% of the Federal Poverty Level (FPL).


FIGURE 3. INDIVIDUAL MANDATE PENALTY IN 2015 BY INCOME AND
              STATE MEDICAID EXPANSION STATUS




   Notes: Dashed vertical lines indicate 138% and 400% of the Federal Poverty Level (FPL).




                                              38
                                        FIGURE 4. POLICY COEFFICIENTS BY YEAR
Panel A: 2014 Policy Measures




Panel B: 2015 Policy Measures




Note: Estimates are the reduced-form coefficients for each policy measure’s direct effect in Equation (2), with the regression separately estimated
for each year of the sample. Panel A shows results for the 2014 policy measures, and Panel B shows results for the 2015 policy measures.



                                                                         39
TABLE 1 —SUMMARY STATISTICS OF SIMULATED POLICY VARIABLES IN 2014 & 2015
                                                                     2014                   2015
Medicaid Eligibility
  Percent Previously Eligiblea                                       23.0%                 22.7%
                                                                    (31.9%)               (31.7%)
   Percent Eligible Under ACA Early Expansion                         2.0%                  1.9%
                                                                    (11.1%)               (10.9%)
   Percent Newly Eligible in 2014                                     4.5%                  5.5%
                                                                    (18.2%)               (19.7%)
Individual Mandate
   Family Mandate Penalty                                             $458                  $956
                                                                     ($632)               ($1,210)
   Subject to Mandate Penalty                                        63.7%                 64.5%
                                                                    (41.0%)               (40.5%)
Exchange Premiums
  Unsubsidized Family Premium                                        $8,023                $8,114
                                                                    ($3,282)              ($3,298)
   Net Subsidized Family Premium                                     $6,631                $6,715
                                                                    ($3,488)              ($3,519)
   Percent Subsidy                                                   16.2%                 16.1%
                                                                    (24.4%)               (24.3%)



Notes: Table presents weighted means, with standard deviations in parentheses, for the population 0 to 64 years old. All measures are
assessed at the level of the Health Insurance Unit and use ACS survey weights, excluding the state of Massachusetts.
a
  Based on state eligibility criteria as of 2013.




   TABLE 2—TIME SERIES CHANGE IN INSURANCE OUTCOMES BY FAMILY TYPE (2012-2015)
                                                         2012                  2013                2014               2015
Overall
  Uninsured                                              17.5%                 17.3%               14.0%              11.4%
  Medicaid                                               18.3%                 18.5%               20.0%              21.6%
  Employer Sponsored Insurance                           58.4%                 58.1%               58.7%              59.1%
  Non-group Private                                      8.9%                  8.6%                9.7%               10.7%
Single Adults
  Uninsured                                              31.2%                 30.3%               24.6%              20.0%
  Medicaid                                               13.4%                 13.7%               16.3%              18.7%
  Employer Sponsored Insurance                           47.5%                 47.8%               49.1%              50.3%
  Non-group Private                                      8.7%                  8.6%                10.4%              11.8%
Adult Couples
  Uninsured                                              11.7%                 11.8%               9.0%               7.1%
  Medicaid                                               3.7%                  3.9%                5.0%               5.8%
  Employer Sponsored Insurance                           75.1%                 74.6%               74.6%              74.8%
  Non-group Private                                      11.5%                 11.4%               12.9%              13.8%
Families with Children
  Uninsured                                              12.6%                 12.5%               10.2%              8.3%
  Medicaid                                               24.3%                 24.6%               25.8%              27.1%
  Employer Sponsored Insurance                           59.1%                 58.7%               59.1%              59.3%
  Non-group Private                                      8.3%                  7.8%                8.6%               9.3%



Notes: Table presents weighted means for the population 0 to 64 years old. All measures are assessed at the level of the Health
Insurance Unit and use ACS survey weights, excluding the state of Massachusetts.




                                                                         40
                    TABLE 3—REDUCED FORM AND IV ESTIMATES FOR ACA EFFECTS ON
                                   PERCENT UNINSURED
                                                       (1) 2-Stage Least
                                                            Squares                  (2) Reduced Form
2014 Policy Interactions
Family Percent Subsidy * 2014                             -0.056***                      -0.051***
                                                            (0.002)                        (0.002)
Family Mandate Penalty * 2014 (in $100s)                  0.0004***                      0.0004***
                                                           (0.0001)                       (0.0001)
Previously Medicaid-Eligible * 2014                       -0.027***                      -0.026***
                                                            (0.002)                        (0.002)
Early Expansion Medicaid-Eligible *2014                   -0.107***                      -0.107***
                                                            (0.006)                        (0.006)
Newly Medicaid-Eligible * 2014                            -0.090***                      -0.089***
                                                            (0.004)                        (0.002)
2015 Policy Interactions
Family Percent Subsidy * 2015                             -0.098***                      -0.089***
                                                            (0.002)                        (0.002)
Family Mandate Penalty * 2015 (in $100s)                  0.0004***                      0.0003***
                                                           (0.0000)                       (0.0001)
Previously Medicaid-Eligible * 2015                       -0.046***                      -0.046***
                                                            (0.002)                        (0.002)
Early Expansion Medicaid-Eligible *2015                   -0.196***                      -0.197***
                                                            (0.007)                        (0.007)
Newly Medicaid-Eligible * 2015                            -0.142***                      -0.137***
                                                            (0.004)                        (0.003)
Direct Effects
Family Percent Subsidy2014                                   -0.009                          -0.006
                                                            (0.008)                         (0.007)
Family Percent Subsidy2015                                   -0.004                          -0.002
                                                            (0.008)                         (0.007)
Family Mandate Penalty2014 (in $100s)                       -0.0000                        -0.0001*
                                                            (0.000)                         (0.000)
Family Mandate Penalty2015 (in $100s)                    -0.00002***                     -0.0000***
                                                           (0.0000)                         (0.000)
Previously Medicaid-Eligible                              -0.120***                       -0.110***
                                                            (0.005)                         (0.004)
Early Expansion Medicaid-Eligible                         -0.045***                       -0.034***
                                                            (0.007)                         (0.007)
Newly Medicaid-Eligible2014                                -0.019**                         -0.015*
                                                            (0.008)                         (0.008)
Newly Medicaid-Eligible2015                                  -0.012                          -0.011
                                                            (0.008)                         (0.008)
Notes: Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the PUMA level. Dependent variable was the percentage of each Health
Insurance Unit without any health insurance. All variables are expressed at the level of the Health Insurance Unit (HIU) and use ACS
survey weights, excluding the state of Massachusetts, for the population aged 0 to 64 years old. Models control for HIU type (single
adult, couple, family with children); number of men and women in the family; number of children; educational attainment, age, and
race/ethnicity of adults in the family; area-specific annual unemployment rates; and year, income group, and state fixed effects each
interacted with HIU type. N=5,458,170.
*** Significant at the 1 percent level. ** Significant at the 5 percent level. * Significant at the 10 percent level.




                                                                       41
                TABLE 4—PROJECTED TIME SERIES IMPACT OF ACA POLICY VARIABLES ON PERCENT UNINSURED
                                                    Reduced Form          Population Mean           Implied Percentage
                                                                                                                             Share of Total ACA-Related Change
                                                     Coefficient        (Simulated Measure)           Point Change
                                                        (1)                     (2)                         (3)                               (4)
2014 Effects
Family Percent Subsidy * 2014                          -0.051                   0.162                     -0.83%                             41%
Family Mandate Penalty * 2014 (in $100s)               0.0004                   4.58                       0.18%                             N/A
Previously Medicaid-Eligible * 2014                    -0.026                   0.230                     -0.60%                             29%
Early Expansion Medicaid-Eligible *2014                -0.107                   0.020                     -0.21%                             10%
Newly Medicaid-Eligible * 2014                         -0.089                   0.045                     -0.40%                             20%

2015 Effects
Family Percent Subsidy * 2015                          -0.089                   0.161                     -1.43%                             40%
Family Mandate Penalty * 2015 (in $100s)               0.0003                   9.56                       0.29%                             N/A
Previously Medicaid-Eligible * 2015                    -0.046                   0.227                     -1.04%                             29%
Early Expansion Medicaid-Eligible *2015                -0.197                   0.019                     -0.37%                             10%
Newly Medicaid-Eligible * 2015                         -0.137                   0.055                     -0.75%                             21%


Notes: Dependent variable was the percentage of each Health Insurance Unit without any health insurance. All variables are expressed at the level of the Health
Insurance Unit (HIU) and use ACS survey weights, excluding the state of Massachusetts, for the population aged 0 to 64 years old. Models control for HIU type (single
adult, couple, family with children); number of men and women in the family; number of children; educational attainment, age, and race/ethnicity of adults in the
family; area-specific annual unemployment rates; and year and state fixed effects both interacted with HIU type.




                                                                                        42
          TABLE 5—ROBUSTNESS TO ALTERNATIVE SPECIFICATIONS FOR ACA EFFECTS ON PERCENT UNINSURED
PREMIUM SUBSIDIES                                  (1)              (2)              (3)             (4)              (5)             (6)             (7)              (8)
                                               -0.091***        -0.093***        -0.050***       -0.045***        -0.099***       -0.095***                        -0.091***
Family Percent Subsidy * 2015
                                                 (0.002)          (0.002)          (0.005)         (0.006)          (0.002)         (0.002)                          (0.003)
Family Net Subsidized Premium                                                                                                                      0.0052***        -0.00002
($1000s) * 2015                                                                                                                                     (0.0002)        (0.0002)

INDIVIDUAL MANDATE
                                               0.0003***        0.0003***         -0.0001         0.0004*                                          0.0005***       0.0003***
Family Mandate Penalty ($100s) * 2015
                                                (0.0001)         (0.0001)         (0.0001)        (0.0002)                                          (0.0002)        (0.0000)
Subject to Mandate * 2015                                                                                         0.011***
                                                                                                                   (0.002)
Family Mandate Penalty (Percent of                                                                                                  -0.042
Income) * 2015                                                                                                                      (0.053)

MEDICAID ELIGIBILITY
                                         -0.045***              -0.046***        -0.020***       -0.027***        -0.043***       -0.053***        -0.028***       -0.045***
Previously Medicaid-Eligible * 2015
                                           (0.002)                (0.002)          (0.005)         (0.005)          (0.002)         (0.002)          (0.002)         (0.002)
Early Expansion Medicaid-Eligible *      -0.196***              -0.197***        -0.159***       -0.104***        -0.194***       -0.193***        -0.179***       -0.196***
2015                                       (0.007)                (0.007)          (0.008)         (0.007)          (0.007)         (0.007)          (0.007)         (0.007)
Newly Medicaid-Eligible * 2015           -0.137***              -0.138***        -0.108***       -0.092***        -0.138***       -0.129***        -0.114***       -0.137***
                                           (0.003)                (0.003)          (0.005)         (0.005)          (0.003)         (0.003)          (0.003)         (0.003)
FIXED EFFECTS (all interacted with HIU-Type)
Year fixed effects                            √                      √                                                √                √               √               √
Income fixed effects                          √                                                                       √                √               √               √
PUMA fixed effects                            √                                                                       √                √               √               √
PUMA-income fixed effects                                            √                √
Income-year fixed effects                                                             √               √
PUMA-year fixed effects                                                                               √

Notes: PUMA=public use microdata area. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the PUMA level. Dependent variable was the percentage of each Health
Insurance Unit without any health insurance. All variables are expressed at the level of the Health Insurance Unit (HIU) and use ACS survey weights, excluding the
state of Massachusetts, for the population aged 0 to 64 years old. Models control for HIU type (single adult, couple, family with children); number of men and women
in the family; number of children; educational attainment, age, and race/ethnicity of adults in the family; and area-specific annual unemployment rates. All fixed effects
are interacted with HIU type. All coefficients refer to 2015 policy estimates.
*** Significant at the 1 percent level. ** Significant at the 5 percent level. * Significant at the 10 percent level.




                                                                                          43
                                        TABLE 6—ACA POLICY EFFECTS IN 2015 BY TYPE OF COVERAGE
                                                         (1) Uninsured                (2) Medicaid            (3) Employer Sponsored        (4) Non-group Private
Family Percent Subsidy * 2015                              -0.091***                    0.040***                    0.011***                      0.048***
                                                             (0.002)                     (0.002)                      (0.003)                       (0.002)
Family Mandate Penalty * 2015 ($100s)                      0.0003***                     -0.0001                     -0.00004                    -0.0003***
                                                            (0.0001)                    (0.00003)                    (0.0001)                      (0.0001)
Previously Medicaid-Eligible * 2015                        -0.045***                    0.038***                    0.008***                       0.005**
                                                             (0.002)                     (0.002)                      (0.003)                       (0.002)
Early Expansion Medicaid-Eligible * 2015                   -0.196***                    0.210***                      -0.000                        -0.001
                                                             (0.007)                     (0.007)                      (0.005)                       (0.004)
Newly Medicaid-Eligible * 2015                             -0.137***                    0.148***                       0.002                         0.002
                                                             (0.003)                     (0.004)                      (0.003)                       (0.002)

Notes: Regressions in table include fixed effects from Model 1 described in Table 5. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the PUMA level. Dependent variable
was the percentage of each Health Insurance Unit without any health insurance. All variables are expressed at the level of the Health Insurance Unit (HIU) and use ACS
survey weights, excluding the state of Massachusetts, for the population aged 0 to 64 years old. Models control for HIU type (single adult, couple, family with
children); number of men and women in the family; number of children; educational attainment, age, and race/ethnicity of adults in the family; area-specific annual
unemployment rates; and year, income group, and PUMA fixed effects each interacted with HIU type. All coefficients refer to 2015 policy estimates.
*** Significant at the 1 percent level. ** Significant at the 5 percent level. * Significant at the 10 percent level.




                                                                                        44
TABLE 7—UNINSURED RESULTS BY FAMILY TYPE, EXCHANGE TYPE, AND MEDICAID EXPANSION STATUS
                                                                           Family Mandate         Previously         Early Expansion
                                     Number of        Family Percent                                                                          Newly Medicaid-
                                                                            Penalty * 2015        Medicaid-         Medicaid-Eligible *
                                    Observations      Subsidy * 2015                                                                           Eligible * 2015
                                                                               ($100s)          Eligible * 2015            2015
Family Type
  Single Adults                       2,594,364          -0.085***           0.0028***             -0.051***             -0.155***               -0.117***
                                                           (0.004)            (0.0002)               (0.006)               (0.007)                 (0.004)
  Adult Couples                        990,805           -0.108***           0.0006***             -0.187***             -0.258***               -0.187***
                                                           (0.004)            (0.0001)               (0.016)               (0.020)                 (0.009)
  Families with Children              1,873,001          -0.070***           0.0001***             -0.041***             -0.268***               -0.126***
                                                           (0.004)           (0.00004)               (0.002)               (0.016)                 (0.009)
Exchange Type
 State-Based                          1,706,327          -0.129***           0.0002***             -0.046***             -0.203***               -0.162***
                                                           (0.004)           (0.00005)               (0.003)               (0.007)                 (0.006)
 Federal                              3,751,843          -0.076***           0.0004***             -0.044***             -0.137***               -0.129***
                                                           (0.003)           (0.00004)               (0.003)               (0.002)                 (0.004)
Medicaid Expansion Status
 No Expansion                         2,197,199          -0.064***           0.0005***             -0.042***                N/A                     N/A
                                                           (0.003)            (0.0001)               (0.004)
 Early Expansion in 2011-2013         1,130,446          -0.166***           0.0003***             -0.057***             -0.200***               -0.164***
                                                           (0.005)            (0.0001)               (0.004)               (0.007)                 (0.007)
Expansion in 2014 or 2015             2,130,525          -0.099***           0.0001**              -0.045***                 N/A                 -0.146***
                                                           (0.003)           (0.00005)               (0.003)                                       (0.004)
Notes: Regressions in table include fixed effects from Model 1 described in Table 5. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the PUMA level. Dependent
variable was the percentage of each Health Insurance Unit without any health insurance. All variables are expressed at the level of the Health Insurance Unit and use
ACS survey weights, excluding the state of Massachusetts, for the population aged 0 to 64 years old. Models control for family type (single adult, couple, family with
children); number of men and women in the family; number of children; educational attainment, age, and race/ethnicity of adults in the family; and area-specific annual
unemployment rates. All coefficients refer to 2015 policy estimates.
*** Significant at the 1 percent level. ** Significant at the 5 percent level. * Significant at the 10 percent level.




                                                                                         45
                        For Online Publication: Appendix

2-Stage Least Squares Regression Equation:

1st Stage:
  Endogenous Variables (HIU-level observed policy measures)
  PercentSubsidy2014ij
  PercentSubsidy2015ij
  MandatePenalty2014ij
  MandatePenalty2015ij
  McaidEligiblePreACAij
  McaidEarlyExpansionEligibleij
  McaidNewlyEligible2014ij
  McaidNewlyEligible2015ij
 PercentSubsidy2014ij * Yr2014t
 MandatePenalty2014ij* Yr2014t
 McaidEligiblePreACAij* Yr2014t
 McaidEarlyExpansionEligibleij * Yr2014t
 McaidNewlyEligible2014ij * Yr2014t
 PercentSubsidy2015ij * Yr2015t
 MandatePenalty2015ij* Yr2015t
 McaidEligiblePreACAij* Yr2015t
 McaidEarlyExpansionEligibleij * Yr2015t
 McaidNewlyEligible2015ij * Yr2015t

 Instrumental Variables (simulated measures designated with the prefix “SIM” for ea
 PUMA-income band combination):
 SIMPercentSubsidy2014ij
 SIMPercentSubsidy2015ij
 SIMMandatePenalty2014ij
 SIMMandatePenalty2015ij
 SIMMcaidEligiblePreACAij
 SIMMcaidEarlyExpansionEligibleij
 SIMMcaidNewlyEligible2014ij
 SIMMcaidNewlyEligible2015ij
 SIMPercentSubsidy2014ij*Yr2014t
 SIMMandatePenalty2014ij* Yr2014t
 SIMMcaidEligiblePreACAij* Yr2014t
 SIMMcaidEarlyExpansionEligibleij * Yr2014t




                                           46
  SIMMcaidNewlyEligible2014ij * Yr2014t
  SIMPercentSubsidy2015ij * Yr2015t
  SIMMandatePenalty2015ij* Yr2015t
  SIMMcaidEligiblePreACAij* Yr2015t
  SIMMcaidEarlyExpansionEligibleij * Yr2015t
  SIMMcaidNewlyEligible2015ij * Yr2015t
  Additional Independent Variables
  Ω Area j*HIU_Typei
  ∂ Yeart*HIU_Typei
  µ Incomei*HIU_Typei
  π AreaUnemploymentRate jt
  βx Xijt


  2nd Stage: %Uninsuredijt = β0 +β1 PercentSubsidy2014ij +β2 PercentSubsidy2015ij
        +β3 MandatePenalty2014ij +β4 MandatePenalty2015ij+β5 McaidEligiblePreACAij
        +β6 McaidEarlyExpansionEligibleij +β7 McaidNewlyEligible2014ij
        +β8 McaidNewlyEligible2015ij
       +β9 PercentSubsidy2014ij * Yr2014t
       +β10 MandatePenalty2014ij* Yr2014t
       +β11 McaidEligiblePreACAij* Yr2014t
       +β12 McaidEarlyExpansionEligibleij * Yr2014t
       +β13 McaidNewlyEligible2014ij * Yr2014t

       +β14 PercentSubsidy2015ij * Yr2015t
       +β15 MandatePenalty2015ij* Yr2015t
       +β16 McaidEligiblePreACAij* Yr2015t
       +β17 McaidEarlyExpansionEligibleij * Yr2015t
       +β18 McaidNewlyEligible2015ij * Yr2015t
       + Ω Area j*HIU_Typei + ∂ Yeart*HIU_Typei + µ Incomei*HIU_Typei
       + π AreaUnemploymentRate jt + βx Xijt + εijt

where i indexes the family (HIU), j indexes the geographical area, and t indexes time
(year). The dependent variable is the percent of each HIU without insurance at the time of
the survey; for single adults, this is a binary variable, for families with multiple members
this is a continuous fraction ranging from 0 to 1. β1 through β8 capture the baseline (pre-
ACA) direct effects of the puma-income policy variables. The coefficients of interest are




                                             47
β9 through β13, which measure the impact of the ACA policy variables in 2014, and β14
through β18, which measure the policy impacts in 2015.

Ω is a vector of area fixed effects (either PUMA level or state level, depending on the
model), ∂ is a vector of year fixed effects, and µ is a vector of fixed effects for different
income groups; all three fixed effects were interacted with HIU type (single adults, adult
couples, and families with children), since each group likely has its own coverage trends
and policy responses. Xijt is a vector of the demographics based on the adult(s) in the
family: race/ethnicity, marital status, citizenship, age, educational attainment, and number
of children. Finally, the model adjusts for annual county-level unemployment rates from
the Bureau of Labor Statistics.


Reduced Form Regression Equation (Modified from Equation 1 in Text):
 %Uninsuredijt = β0 +β1 SIMPercentSubsidy2014ij +β2 SIMPercentSubsidy2015ij
          +β3 SIMMandatePenalty2014ij +β4 SIMMandatePenalty2015ij
          +β5 SIMMcaidEligiblePreACAij +β6 SIMMcaidEarlyExpansionEligibleij
          +β7 SIMMcaidNewlyEligible2014ij +β8 SIMMcaidNewlyEligible2015ij

             +β9 SIMPercentSubsidy2014ij*Yr2014t
             +β10 SIMMandatePenalty2014ij* Yr2014t
             +β11 SIMMcaidEligiblePreACAij* Yr2014t
             +β12 SIMMcaidEarlyExpansionEligibleij * Yr2014t
             +β13 SIMMcaidNewlyEligible2014ij * Yr2014t
             +β14 SIMPercentSubsidy2015ij * Yr2015t
             +β15 SIMMandatePenalty2015ij* Yr2015t
             +β16 SIMMcaidEligiblePreACAij* Yr2015t
             +β17 SIMMcaidEarlyExpansionEligibleij * Yr2015t
             +β18 SIMMcaidNewlyEligible2015ij * Yr2015t
             + Ω Area j*HIU_Typei + ∂ Yeart*HIU_Typei + µ Incomei*HIU_Typei
             + π AreaUnemploymentRate jt + βx Xijt + εijt

All variables are defined as in Equation 1, except that the policy variables associated with
coefficients β1 through β18 are all simulated measures (designated with the prefix “SIM”)
for each PUMA-income band combination.




                                              48
   APPENDIX TABLE 1—REDUCED FORM ESTIMATES FOR PERCENT UNINSURED WITH
                       DEMOGRAPHIC COVARIATES
                                           Reduced Form – Table 3 Results
2014 Policy Interactions
Family Percent Subsidy * 2014                        -0.051***
                                                       (0.002)
Family Mandate Penalty * 2014 (in $100s)             0.0004***
                                                      (0.0001)
Previously Medicaid-Eligible * 2014                  -0.026***
                                                       (0.002)
Early Expansion-Eligible *2014                       -0.107***
                                                       (0.006)
Newly Medicaid-Eligible * 2014                       -0.089***
                                                       (0.002)
2015 Policy Interactions
Family Percent Subsidy * 2015                        -0.089***
                                                       (0.002)
Family Mandate Penalty * 2015 (in $100s)             0.0003***
                                                      (0.0001)
Previously Medicaid-Eligible * 2015                  -0.046***
                                                       (0.002)
Early Expansion-Eligible *2015                       -0.197***
                                                       (0.007)
Newly Medicaid-Eligible * 2015                       -0.137***
                                                       (0.003)
Direct Effects
Family Percent Subsidy2014                             -0.006
                                                       (0.007)
Family Percent Subsidy2015                             -0.002
                                                       (0.007)
Family Mandate Penalty2014 (in $100s)                 -0.000*
                                                       (0.000)
Family Mandate Penalty2015 (in $100s)               -0.0000***
                                                       (0.000)
Previously Medicaid-Eligible                         -0.110***
                                                       (0.004)
Early Expansion Eligible                             -0.034***
                                                       (0.007)
Newly Medicaid-Eligible2014                           -0.015*
                                                       (0.008)
Newly Medicaid-Eligible2015                            -0.011
                                                       (0.008)
Other Covariates
Area Unemployment Rate                               0.002***
                                                      (0.000)
Number of Adult Females                              0.011***
                                                      (0.002)
Number of Adult Males                                0.047***
                                                      (0.003)
Number of Children = 0

Number of Children = 1                               -0.306***
                                                       (0.014)
Number of Children = 2                               -0.334***
                                                       (0.014)
Number of Children = 3                               -0.354***
                                                       (0.014)
Number of Children = 4                               -0.372***
                                                       (0.014)
Number of Children = 5 plus                          -0.368***




                                                        49
                                             (0.014)
Family has Head of Household 1             -0.054***
                                             (0.003)
HoH1 Non-citizen                            0.085***
                                             (0.002)
HoH1 Age = Under 25                        -0.018***
                                             (0.003)
HoH1 Age = 25-34                            -0.005**
                                             (0.002)
HoH1 Age = 35-44                            0.010***
                                             (0.002)
HoH1 Age = 45-54                            0.015***
                                             (0.002)
HoH1 Age = 55-64                           -0.012***
                                             (0.002)
HoH1 Age = 65 and above

HoH1 Race/Ethnicity = White                -0.020***
                                             (0.001)
HoH1 Race/Ethnicity = Black                -0.029***
                                             (0.001)
HoH1 Race/Ethnicity = Asian                -0.020***
                                             (0.002)
HoH1 Race/Ethnicity = Native American       0.024***
                                             (0.004)
HoH1 Race/Ethnicity = Other Non-Hispanic   -0.019***
                                             (0.002)
HoH1 Race/Ethnicity = Hispanic

HoH1 Education = Less than High School     0.052***
                                            (0.002)
HoH1 Education = High School Diploma       0.021***
                                            (0.001)
HoH1 Education = College Graduate

Family has Head of Household 2             -0.024***
                                             (0.004)
HoH2 Non-citizen                            0.103***
                                             (0.002)
HoH2 Age = Under 25                        -0.020***
                                             (0.002)
HoH2 Age = 25-34                            0.034***
                                             (0.001)
HoH2 Age = 35-44                            0.027***
                                             (0.001)
HoH2 Age = 45-54                            0.013***
                                             (0.001)
HoH2 Age = 55-64                           -0.012***
                                             (0.001)
HoH2 Age = 65 and above

HoH2 Race/Ethnicity = White                -0.040***
                                             (0.001)
HoH2 Race/Ethnicity = Black                -0.034***
                                             (0.002)
HoH2 Race/Ethnicity = Asian                -0.060***
                                             (0.002)
HoH2 Race/Ethnicity = Native American         0.006
                                             (0.004)
HoH2 Race/Ethnicity = Other Non-Hispanic   -0.045***
                                             (0.002)




                                              50
HoH2 Race/Ethnicity = Hispanic

HoH2 Education = Less than High School                        0.087***
                                                               (0.002)
HoH2 Education = High School Diploma                          0.030***
                                                               (0.001)
HoH2 Education = College Graduate



Notes: HoH=head of household, defined as the one or two adults in each household. Standard errors in parentheses.
*** Significant at the 1 percent level.
** Significant at the 5 percent level.
* Significant at the 10 percent level.




                                                                 51
                        APPENDIX TABLE 2—POLICY COEFFICIENTS FROM FIRST STAGE OF 2SLS REGRESSIONS
Dep Var                                                                             1st Stage Coefficients on Policy Variables†
in 1st Stage†   β1        β2       β3        β4         β5       β6        β7         β8       β9        β10      β11       β12      β13      β14      β15      β16      β17      β18

β1              .974#     .003^    7.4*      24.2#      -.016#   .001      -.056#     .006     .001      .032#    -.007#    -.001*   -.006#   .000     -.014    -.005*   -.001    .002
β2              .013#     .984#    6.1       -6.1       .017#    -.001*    -.026#     -.088#   .001      -.019    .006#     .000     -.008#   .003#    .115#    .004*    .000     -.017#
β3              .000*     .000     .945#     0.1#       .000*    .000*     .000#      .000#    .000*     .000*    .000      .000^    .000#    .000     .000#    .000^    .000#    .000*
β4              .000^     .000#    0.0       .869#      .000     .000      .000       .000     .000^     .000     .000      .000     .000     .000#    .000#    .000     .000     .000#
β5              -.003#    -.003#   -6.2      -8.5       .963#    .004#     -.050#     -.052#   .003#     -.008    -.006#    .000     -.015#   .003#    .115#    -.006#   .000     -.015#
β6              -.001     .000     -1.8      0.3        -.064#   1.03#     -.057#     -.056#   .000      -.006    -.005#    .000     -.010#   .000     .032*    -.006#   .001#    -.010#
β7              -.006#    -.006#   4.5       -10.4      -.025#   .001      .934#      .024#    -.002*    .037#    -.010#    .000     -.005#   -.001    -.055*   -.008#   .000     .008#
β8              .005#     .006#    1.6       16.8#      .023#    -.002#    -.012^     .899#    .002#     -.011    .006#     -.001#   -.004^   .001     .160#    .003^    .000     -.017#
β9              -.008#    -.008#   -21.0#    -50.4#     .000     .000      .000       .001     .970#     -.120#   .004#     -.001*   -.024#   .000     -.023#   .001#    .000     -.001#
β10             .000#     .000#    2.2#      3.2#       .000*    .000      .000       .000     .000#     .993#    .000#     .000#    -.001#   .000#    -.003#   .000#    .000     .000
β11             .007#     .007#    -15.4#    -37.2#     .001     .000      -.001      -.001    -.012#    -.127#   .986#     .004#    .008#    .000     -.035#   .000*    .000     .000*
β12             .003#     .003#    -8.6#     -13.9#     .004     .005      -.011#     -.011#   .000      -.043#   -.040#    1.04#    -.026#   .000*    -.008^   .001#    .000^    -.001#
β13             .002#     .002#    -10.0#    -17.4#     .003     .001*     -.004*     -.005*   -.001#    -.106#   .015#     .000     .958#    .000     -.013#   .002#    .000     -.002#
β14             -.016#    -.015#   -44.2#    -103.5#    .001     .000      .001*      .001*    .000*     .004     -.001#    .000#    .000#    .963#    -.798#   .008#    -.001^   -.022#
β15             .000#     .000#    1.9#      2.7#       .000     .000      .000#      .000#    .000^     .000#    .000^     .000     .000#    .000#    1.00#    .000     .000#    .000#
β16             .012#     .012#    -34.6#    -81.3#     .003#    .000      -.001*     -.002*   .000^     .009#    .000^     .000     .000     -.007#   -.867#   .989#    .004#    .007#
β17             .004#     .004#    -15.6#    -25.5#     .013#    -.008*    -.004*     -.004*   .000#     .000     .000#     .000#    -.001#   .003#    -.184#   -.029#   1.02#    -.016#
β18               .003#      .003#     -21.1# -35.1#        .003     .000     -.001    -.003  .000      .001      -.002#    .000     -.002#   .001#    -.462#   .022#    -.002#   .959#
Notes: HoH=head of household, defined as the one or two adults in each household. Standard errors in parentheses.
# Significant at the 1 percent level.
* Significant at the 5 percent level.
^ Significant at the 10 percent level.
† All ß coefficients refer to the policy variables in the 2SLS Equation in Appendix Methods.
                   APPENDIX TABLE 3—SIMPLE DIFFERENCE-IN-DIFFERENCES MODEL OF MEDICAID EXPANSION

                                                        (1) Uninsured                (2) Medicaid           (3) Employer Sponsored        (4) Non-group Private

All Individuals 0-64 –
Models Include Mandate and Premium Subsidy

Medicaid Expansion in 2014                                -0.013***                    0.024***                    -0.006***                    -0.005***
                                                            (0.001)                     (0.001)                      (0.001)                      (0.001)
Medicaid Expansion in 2015                                -0.019***                    0.045***                    -0.013***                    -0.009***
                                                            (0.001)                     (0.001)                      (0.002)                      (0.001)

All Individuals 0-64 –
No Mandate and Premium Subsidy Variables

Medicaid Expansion in 2014                                -0.010***                    0.024***                    -0.006***                    -0.007***
                                                            (0.001)                     (0.001)                      (0.001)                      (0.001)
Medicaid Expansion in 2015                                -0.013***                    0.043***                    -0.013***                    -0.009***
                                                            (0.001)                     (0.001)                      (0.001)                      (0.001)

Low-Income Individuals 0-64 (0-138% FPL) –
No Mandate and Premium Subsidy Variables

Medicaid Expansion in 2014                                -0.027***                    0.048***                    -0.009***                    -0.011***
                                                            (0.002)                     (0.003)                      (0.002)                      (0.001)
Medicaid Expansion in 2015                                -0.043***                    0.088***                    -0.021***                    -0.021***
                                                            (0.003)                     (0.003)                      (0.003)                      (0.002)

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the PUMA level. Dependent variable was the percentage of each Health Insurance Unit without any health
insurance. All variables are expressed at the level of the Health Insurance Unit (HIU) and use ACS survey weights, excluding the state of Massachusetts, for the
population aged 0 to 64 years old. Models control for number of men and women in the family; number of children; educational attainment, age, and race/ethnicity of
adults in the family; area-specific annual unemployment rates; and year, income group, and state fixed effects each interacted with HIU type. Medicaid Expansion is a
binary indicator for whether the state had expanded Medicaid under the ACA by that year; no other Medicaid eligibility variables are included in this model.
*** Significant at the 1 percent level. ** Significant at the 5 percent level. * Significant at the 10 percent level.




                                                                                       53
