NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

COMMUNICATION IN VERTICAL MARKETS:
EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE
Claudia Möllers
Hans-Theo Normann
Christopher M. Snyder
Working Paper 22219
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22219

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2016

The authors are grateful to Maura Doyle, Ali Hortacsu, Francisco Martinez, Patrick Rey and
conference participants at CISS Turunc, DFG-ANR Rennes, EARIE Milan, IIOC Boston, LEW
London, VfS Berlin (IO Committee) and VfS Muenster for helpful comments. We are are
grateful to Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (grant DFG NO 429/5-1) for financial support. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Claudia Möllers, Hans-Theo Normann, and Christopher M. Snyder. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Communication in Vertical Markets: Experimental Evidence
Claudia Möllers, Hans-Theo Normann, and Christopher M. Snyder
NBER Working Paper No. 22219
May 2016
JEL No. C70,C90,K21,L42
ABSTRACT
When an upstream monopolist supplies several competing downstream firms, it may fail to
monopolize the market because it is unable to commit not to behave opportunistically. We build
on previous experimental studies of this well-known commitment problem by introducing
communication. Allowing the upstream firm to chat privately with each downstream firm
reduces total offered quantity from near the Cournot level (observed in the absence of
communication) halfway toward the monopoly level. Allowing all three firms to chat together
openly results in complete monopolization. Downstream firms obtain such a bargaining
advantage from open communication that all of the gains from monopolizing the market accrue to
them. A simple structural model of Nash bargaining fits the pattern of shifting surpluses well. We
conclude with a discussion of the antitrust implications of open communication in vertical
markets.
Claudia Möllers
University of Duesseldorf
Universitätsstr. 1
40225 Düsseldorf Germany
moellers@dice.hhu.de
Hans-Theo Normann
University of Duesseldorf
Universitätsstr. 1
40225 Düsseldorf Germany
normann@dice.hhu.de

Christopher M. Snyder
Department of Economics
Dartmouth College
301 Rockefeller Hall
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
chris.snyder@dartmouth.edu

A online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w22219

1. Introduction
Whether vertical mergers can have anticompetitive effects remains a central question in the largest
antitrust cases. For example, in January 2011, the U.S. Department of Justice applied the “most
intense scrutiny ever for a planned media merger” before approving the takeover of NBC Universal
(an upstream content provider) by Comcast (a downstream cable distributor) subject to a list of
conditions (Arango and Stelter 2011). In April 2015, the European Competition Commission
charged Google with the violation of favoring its affiliates over competitors in search displays
(Kanter and Scott 2015).
An influential strand of the theoretical literature (summarized in Rey and Tirole 2007) connects
the anticompetitive effects of vertical restraints to their ability to solve a commitment problem. An
upstream monopolist serving downstream competitors might wish to offer contracts restricting
output to the joint-profit maximum. It may fail to do so, however, because it has an incentive to
behave opportunistically, offering one of the downstream firms a contract increasing their bilateral
profits at the expense of all other downstream firms (the same logic extending to the bilateral
contract with each downstream firm). In Hart and Tirole (1990), a vertical merger helps to solve
this commitment problem by removing its incentive to behave opportunistically in a way that
would harm the downstream unit with which it shares profits. While the upstream firm benefits
from solving the commitment problem, overall the vertical merger has an anticompetitive effect
on the market because prices rise and output falls. Similar anticompetitive effects can arise with
vertical restraints aside from mergers including resale price maintenance (O’Brien and Shaffer
1992, Rey and Vergé 2004) and non-discrimination clauses (McAfee and Schwartz 1994).
The commitment problem is a somewhat delicate theoretical proposition. Depending on downstream firms’ beliefs after receiving a deviating secret contract offer—not pinned down in a perfect
Bayesian equilibrium—there can be multiple equilibria, with the commitment effect arising in
some and not in others (McAfee and Schwartz 1994, and Rey and Vergé 2004). With symmetric
beliefs, downstream firms reject deviating contracts generating negative profits for rivals because
they infer that rivals received the same deviating contract. In this way, symmetric beliefs afford the
upstream firm the ability to commit to monopolizing the market. With passive beliefs, on the other
hand, deviation does not change downstream firms beliefs, increasing their willingness to accept
deviating contracts, impairing the upstream firm’s commitment power.
1

In the absence of a widely accepted refinement of perfect Bayesian equilibrium providing a firm
theoretical foundation for selecting one or another equilibrium in this context, Martin, Normann,
and Snyder (2001) turned to experiments to gauge the significance of the commitment problem. In
their baseline treatment in which an upstream monopolist makes secret offers of nonlinear tariffs
to two downstream firms, labeled SECRAN, they found that markets were rarely monopolized; industry profits averaged only two thirds of the joint maximum. By contrast, markets were regularly
monopolized when either the upstream monopoly was vertically integrated with a downstream
firm or when contracts were public. The experiments thus support the view that the commitment
problem is genuine.
In this paper, we return to an experimental study of vertical markets with a new focus—on
whether allowing firms to communicate can help them solve the commitment problem without resorting to vertical restraints. For the sake of comparison, we start with the same SECRAN treatment
as Martin, Normann, and Snyder (2001). In addition to this baseline treatment without communication, we run a series of three treatments in which players can communicate whatever messages
they want via a messenger-like tool. The communication treatments involve different levels of
openness. One allows the upstream firm to engage in private two-way chat with each downstream
firm. Another allows all three firms to engage in completely open (three-way) chat. A third is a
hybrid of the other two, allowing players the option of using either or both of two- or three-way
communication.
Communication is cheap talk in our experiments, so standard results (Crawford and Sobel
1982) leave open the possibility that adding this form of communication may have no effect on
equilibrium. Yet we have a number of good reasons to believe communication might have real
effects in our experiments. First, the vertical contracting game involves considerable strategic
uncertainty. A downstream firm has to form out-of-equilibrium beliefs and other firms have to
conjecture what this belief is (or what its distribution is if beliefs are heterogeneous). Communication could resolve some of this strategic uncertainty, perhaps by allowing downstream firms to
communicate their beliefs to the upstream firm so that the offer can be tailored to those beliefs,
perhaps by allowing the upstream firm to persuade downstream firms to hold more propitious beliefs (in particular the symmetric beliefs mentioned previously as leading to joint monopolization
of the market). Second, communication could help solve the commitment problem by allowing

2

the upstream firm to make promises. Promises about rival contracts are not legally enforceable in
our experiments but could still afford some commitment power if making a bald-faced lie involves
a substantial psychological cost. Third, communication has been shown in previous experiments
to reduce bargaining frictions (Roth 1995). On the other hand, communication could conceivably
work in the opposite direction, impairing commitment. A conspiracy between the upstream and
a downstream firm to deviate to a contract increasing their bilateral profits at the expense of the
downstream rival would be easier to hatch if they could communicate privately. Of course, open
communication precludes conspiracy, so open communication should either aid commitment or at
worst have no effect. When firms are given the option of using either private or open communication, whether or not they are tempted to conspire, undermining commitment, is an interesting
empirical question, which can be addressed by the hybrid treatment.
Along with the theoretical motives we just described for studying the effects of communication, we also have practical policy motives. Communication between vertically related firms is
presumably the rule rather than the exception in the field, so introducing it in the lab adds an
important practical element to existing experiments. While a conversation between an upstream
and a downstream firm would not violate antitrust law, communication in an open forum involving horizontally along with vertically related firms might raise antitrust concerns. Whether such
communication has the potential to restrain competition has so far not been studied.
Our experimental results reveal a remarkably consistent pattern: increasing the openness of
communication has a monotonic effect across virtually every market outcome and treatment we
study. In the treatment without communication, the same severe commitment problem observed in
Martin, Normann, and Snyder (2001) occurs: aggregate offered quantity is again much closer to
the Cournot than the monopoly level. Two-way communication mitigates but does not solve the
commitment problem, cutting the distance between aggregate offered quantity and the monopoly
quantity about in half. Three-way communication cuts the remaining distance again in half, resulting in nearly complete monopolization of the market, particularly in the late rounds of play.
Results for the hybrid treatment are between the other two, somewhat closer to the treatment with
open communication. Further, we find that more open communication leads to more fluid bargaining, captured by an increasing rate of contract acceptance. The increase in acceptance rate, due
in part to increasing confidence in the upstream firm’s commitment to monopolize the market, is

3

also due in part to a reduction in the upstream firm’s tariff demands. Overall, the increase in acceptance rates offsets the reduction in tariffs, so consequently upstream profits remain essentially
unchanged across treatments. The gains from using more open communication to better monopolize the market thus accrue almost entirely to downstream firms. Compared to the treatment
without communication, completely open communication more than doubles downstream profits.
From a policy perspective, our results imply that some forms of communication can effectively
function as an anticompetitive vertical restraint. In particular, allowing an upstream firm to discuss
contracts with several downstream firms in a “smoke-filled room” (or simply to exchange public
pronouncements) has the potential to substantially restrict output. On the other hand, if firms
already have such forums for open communication, vertical mergers and restraints themselves may
not raise further antitrust concerns.
Regarding its relationship to the literature, our paper is the first experimental study of communication in a vertically related market. Our paper is closest to the one on which we build, Martin,
Normann, and Snyder (2001), which provides an experimental test of the theories of anticompetitive vertical restraints (vertical mergers, public contracts) put forth by the papers mentioned
earlier (Hart and Tirole 1990, O’Brien and Shaffer 1992, McAfee and Schwartz 1994, Rey and
Vergé 2004, Rey and Tirole 2007; see Avenel 2012 and Rey and Caprice 2015 for more recent developments). Other experiments in vertically related markets include Mason and Phillips’ (2000)
study of equilibrium when the upstream input is demanded by a Cournot duopoly in one market
and perfectly competitive firms in another. Durham (2000) and Badasyan et al. (2009) analyze
whether vertical merger mitigates the double-marginalization problem. Normann (2011) investigates whether vertical merger has an anticompetitive “raising rivals’ cost” effect in a bilateral
duopoly. None of these papers studies communication, the focus of the present paper.
Also related is the experimental literature on exclusive dealing (Landeo and Spier 2009, Smith
2011, Boone, Müller, and Suetens 2014). As in our setting, in this literature the vertical contract
exerts an externality on other downstream firms. The nature of the externality is different; rather
than secretly oversupplying a rival—not an issue because downstream firms are assumed to operate
in different final-good markets—an initial exclusive contract diverts demand that would otherwise
prompt a more efficient upstream firm to enter, which then would supply other downstream firms at
lower prices. Landeo and Spier (2009) and Smith (2011) show that communication between down-

4

stream firms reduces entry-deterring exclusion by helping them coordinate on a strategy of waiting
for the efficient entrant. Communication may also serve a coordination role in our setting but the
effect on social welfare is the opposite, anticompetitive in our setting rather than procompetitive.
Our paper contributes to a large literature on cheap talk in experimental games. Theory suggests that potential gains from cheap talk are greatest in games of common rather than conflicting
interests (Farrell and Rabin 1996). Consistent with theory, experiments find large gains from cheap
talk in coordination games (see Crawford 1998 for a survey). However, cheap talk also increases
the rate of cooperation in dilemma games (Dawes, McTavish and Shaklee 1977, Isaac, Ramey and
Williams 1984, Balliet 2010) in which neoclassical theory would suggest agreements to cooperate
should be worthless. Our result that communication aids monopolization has a similar flavor, although decision making is more complex in our setting: final output is the result of a negotiation
between upstream and downstream firms rather than being one firm’s unilateral choice. 1
Cheap talk has been found to achieve superior outcomes in trust games (Charness and Dufwenberg 2006). Our vertically related markets also have an element of trust: accepting a contract offer
may only be profitable if the downstream firm trusts the upstream firm’s promise (implicit or explicit) to restrict output traded to the rival firm. Our setting is different from the standard trust
game, however. Whereas in a typical two-player trust game the proposer needs to trust the responder (for example to return money), in our setting the responder (downstream firm) needs to trust
the proposer (upstream firm). Promises relate not to the upstream firm’s future action but to the
offer made simultaneously to the rival downstream firm (who is a trustor at the same time).
Within the literature on cheap talk in experimental games, ours is closest to studies of the effect
of cheap talk on bargaining. Adding a round of face-to-face communication before offers are made
results in near perfect rates of agreement (Roth 1995). Typed messages—the sort of communication also used in our experiments—does not improve efficiency as much but still improves upon
no communication (Brosig, Ockenfels and Weimann 2003, Andersson et al. 2010, Zultan 2012).
1 Several

experimental industrial organization papers have the flavor of communication in a dilemma game. Anderson and Wengström (2007) analyze costly communication in Bertrand duopoly, finding that prices are higher and
collusion more stable when communication is costly. Hinloopen and Soetevent (2008) and Bigoni et al. (2012) evaluate
lenience programs in laboratory experiments with communication. Fonseca and Normann (2012) investigate Bertrand
oligopolies with and without communication. Specifically, they analyze how the gain from communication is affected
by the number of firms (ranging from two to eight). Cooper and Kühn (2013) study conditional cooperation: a simple
cooperation game is followed by a coordination game, so the threat of coordinating on a payoff-inferior equilibrium
in stage two is credible. They analyze what type of communication is most effective in achieving cooperation in this
setup.

5

Ours is the first to study how cheap talk between vertically related players affects bargaining with
externalities. In this setting, the openness of communication becomes an important treatment variable. We find that private communication improves efficiency somewhat and open communication
still more, reaching 92% agreement rates.

2. Theoretical Framework
2.1. Model
Consider a simplified version of the model due to Rey and Tirole (2007). 2 The market has a vertical
structure shown in Figure 1, with a monopoly upstream firm, U, and two downstream firms, D i ,
i = 1, 2. The upstream firm produces an intermediate product at zero cost. The downstream firms
transform this product on a one-for-one basis, also at zero cost, into a final good sold to consumers.
Consumers have inverse demand P(Q) for this homogeneous final good.3
The timing is as follows. First, U offers contracts (xi , Ti ) to each Di specifying a quantity xi and
fixed tariff Ti . Second, the Di simultaneously decide whether to accept (ai = 1) or reject (a i = 0)
their contract offers. The rest of the game proceeds deterministically from those decisions. Each
Di produces qi = ai xi resulting in total output Q = q 1 + q2 . Profits are a1T1 + a2 T2 for U and
P(Q)qi − ai Ti for Di .
To set some benchmarks, let Qm = argmaxQ P(Q)Q be the monopoly quantity for this market
and Πm = P(Qm )Qm be monopoly profit. Let qc be a firm’s equilibrium quantity from Cournot
competition between two firms in a market in which the vertical structure from Figure 1 were
compressed into a single level. That is, defining the best-response function
BR(q) = argmax P(q̃ + q)q̃,
q̃

2 Rey

and Tirole (2007) is itself a simplified version of a number of earlier papers including Hart and Tirole (1990)
and McAfee and Schwartz (1994). We modify Rey and Tirole (2007) in three ways. First, contracts here specify
a single bundle at a fixed tariff rather than a tariff function. Second, downstream firms make a simple accept/reject
decision rather than choosing some continuous quantity. Third, upstream marginal cost is set to c = 0 to simplify the
analysis and reflect experimental conditions to follow.
3 Assume P(Q) has properties ensuring that the Cournot game formed by compressing the vertical structure in
Figure 1 into a single level is well behaved. In particular, the resulting profit functions are strictly quasiconcave and
actions are strategic substitutes. A sufficient condition is P  (Q) + P (Q)Q < 0 for all Q.

6

qc is the fixed point qc = BR(qc). Let π c = P(2qc )qc be a firm’s Cournot profit.

2.2. Commitment Problem with Secret Contracts
To understand the nature of the commitment problem with secret contacts, suppose first that contracts are public, meaning that each Di can see the contract offered to its rival. If so, U can extract
the monopoly profit in equilibrium. For example, by offering the contract (Q m /2, Πm /2) to each
Di . The Di earn zero profit whether or not they accept so they accept in equilibrium.
Secret contracts transform the model into a dynamic game of imperfect information. The
relevant solution concept is perfect Bayesian equilibrium, requiring strategies to be best responses
given posterior beliefs and requiring posterior beliefs to be formed using Bayes’ rule along the
equilibrium path. Bayes rule does not pin down beliefs off the equilibrium path, and different
assumptions about out-of-equilibrium beliefs give rise to different perfect Bayesian equilibria.
One assumption, called symmetric beliefs, is that Di believes its rival receives the same deviating contract. Under such beliefs, U can obtain the same monopoly outcome as it did with public
contracts, that is, having both Di accept contract offers (Qm /2, Πm/2). To see that this is an equilibrium, note that if U deviates to some quantity x d in its contract offer, D i would be unwilling to
pay a fixed tariff greater than P(2x d )xd , which is obviously no greater than the fixed fee Π m /2 that
U charged in the equilibrium contract. 4
Another assumption, called passive beliefs, is that after receiving a deviating offer, D i continues to believe its rival receives the equilibrium contract. These beliefs make deviation particularly attractive, rendering the monopoly outcome unstable. Formally, there will always exist a
strictly profitable deviation unless equilibrium firm quantity q ∗ is best response to itself, that is,
q∗ = BR(q∗ ). But as we saw above, the Cournot output qc is the unique quantity satisfying this
equation. Hence the equilibrium contract offer is (q c , π c), which both Di accept. Here we see the
commitment problem: if the D i have passive beliefs, U cannot restrict output to the monopoly level
despite being an upstream monopolist.5
would reject a tariff greater than P(2x d )xd if it believes D i its rival accepts the deviating contract. If one or
both downstream firms rejects the deviating contract, deviation would be certainly less profitable than the equilibrium
(Qm /2, Πm/2) contracts to each.
5 While symmetric and passive beliefs are the main cases typically studied, other beliefs are possible. McAfee and
Schwartz (1994) proposed wary beliefs, that after receiving a deviating offer D i believes its rival receives and accepts a
contract that is the best response to this deviation. In the present context in which downstream firms essentially engage
in Cournot competition, wary beliefs turn out to select the same perfect Bayesian equilibrium as passive beliefs. In
4D

i

7

Because neither the monopoly outcome—predicted when all downstream firms have symmetric
beliefs—nor the Cournot outcome—predicted when they all have passive beliefs—fit their experimental results well, Martin, Normann, and Snyder (2001) proposed a model of heterogeneous
beliefs. Each Di holds symmetric beliefs with probability s ∈ [0, 1] and passive beliefs with 1 − s.
The authors show that there exists a threshold ŝ, the value of which depends on the experimental
parameters, such that for s ∈ (0, ŝ) the extremal perfect Bayesian equilibrium involves U offering
the Cournot duopoly output, q c, as with passive beliefs. However, the fixed tariff is higher, Ti > π c ,
inducing Di to respond with an acceptance probability strictly less than one. The heterogeneousbeliefs model could rationalize the modal contract offers observed in the experiment, of the form
(qc , Ti ) with Ti > π c , as well as the observed acceptance rates.

2.3. Communication and the Commitment Problem
We modify the benchmark model by adding a communication stage prior to contract offers. Since
this is just cheap talk, it is always possible that communication—whether between two or among
all three parties—changes nothing. The outcome of the communication stage can always be a
babbling equilibrium with completely uninformative communication.
On the other hand, it is conceivable that communication could enhance U’s commitment power.
In two-way communication, D i could extract a promise from U not to oversupply its rival. While
this would be an empty promise coming from a neoclassical agent, a behavioral agent may face
psychic costs from reneging on an explicit promise. 6 Simply discussing beliefs may resolve a lot
of strategic uncertainty and perhaps persuade D i to hold favorable (symmetric) beliefs.
It is also conceivable that two-way communication could exacerbate the commitment problem.
A deviating contract specifying a higher output and tariff than expected may be unappealing. U
might be able to increase the appeal by adding an explanation that the deviation is the best response
to the equilibrium offer, a special deal just for D i . Two-way communication may destabilize the
monopoly outcome.
While the effect of two-way communication on U’s commitment power is ambiguous, open
most of the rest of the paper, for brevity, statements that apply equally to wary and passive beliefs will just mention
passive beliefs. Rey and Vergé (2004) show that wary and passive beliefs lead to different equilibrium outcomes if
downstream firms engage in Bertrand competition.
6 See Gneezy, Rockenbach and Serra-Garcia (2013), Serra-Garcia, van Damme and Potters (2013) and the references cited therein for recent studies on lying aversion.

8

communication among all three market participants seems likely to only enhance U ’s commitment
power. U can describe exactly the symmetric offers it will make and can urge the D i to reject any
other offers. The downstream firms observe everything U says, so they can verify that U has no
opportunity to cut side deals with rivals or convince rivals to accept deviating offers.

2.4. Communication and Bargaining
Communication may also affect the way parties bargain. To focus exclusively on these effects,
assume away the commitment problem for now by positing that contracts offer x i = Qm /2 units to
each Di , so that firms end up monopolizing the market. The only issue is the tariff offered (Ti ) and
whether the contract ends up being accepted (a i ).
In the benchmark model where no communication was possible, U issues take-it-or-leave-it
offers to the Di , allowing it to extract the full monopoly surplus Π m /2 from each Di . This was
the equilibrium outcome we found with symmetric beliefs. Of course, this extreme theoretical
predication may not materialize in practical markets or experiments because of fairness and other
considerations. In practice, the familiar results from the ultimatum game may be observed with
positive surplus afforded the responder (here represented by tariffs lower than Π m /2) and contract
rejections for less than equal divisions for the responder. In competitive settings such as ours,
we may expect outcomes closer to the extreme theoretical prediction (Roth, Prasnikar, OkunoFujiwara and Zamir 1991).
Allowing two-way communication may have no effect on bargaining if parties simply babble
during the communication stage, leaving U still with 100% of the bargaining power. On the other
hand, two-way communication could function as a bargaining protocol with a more even distribution of power. Suppose, for example, that two-way communication is characterized by Nash
bargaining between U and Di over the contract (Qm /2, Ti), taking as given U offers Qm /2 units to
D j and this is accepted. If U and Di have equal bargaining power, they split the gains from agreement between them, Πm /2 in half, effected by setting tariff Ti = Πm /4. More generally, letting

α ∈ [0, 1] be U’s bargaining power vis-a-vis D i and d ≥ 1 be the number of downstream firms,
Nash bargaining leads to a tariff maximizing the Nash product
Tiα



Πm
− Ti
d
9

1−α

,

(1)

as U gains revenue Ti and Di gains its share of the monopoly profit Π m /d less the payment Ti .
Taking the first-order condition with respect to Ti and rearranging yields Ti∗ = α Πm /d.
Moving to open communication among all three parties, again the outcome may be the same
as with no communication because parties may just babble. If they engage in meaningful communication, however, the resulting three-way bargain can lead to a different division of surplus than
two-way bargaining. To see this, again consider Nash bargaining. While there are several ways
to extend the Nash product when multiple parties bargain, a natural one in our setting maintains a
constant ratio between the bargaining weight for U and for an individual downstream firm for any
number d of downstream firms, leading to the following Nash product: 7

(dTi )

α
α +d(1−α )

d

∏
i=1



Πm
− Ti
d



1−α
α +d(1−α )


= (dTi )α



Πm
− Ti
d

1
d(1−α ) α +d(1−
α)

.

(2)

Maximizing this expression yields the equilibrium tariff under open communication:
Ti∗∗ =

α Πm
.
d α + d 2(1 − α )

(3)

Comparing equations (1) and (2), we have Ti∗ = [α + (1 − α )d]Ti∗∗ ≥ Ti∗∗, with strict inequality
as long as d ≥ 2 and α < 1. In this case, our bargaining model predicts that the tariff should
fall in moving from bilateral to open bargaining. While theories can easily be offered predicting
the opposite (Shapley value, for instance), the variant of Nash bargaining offered here is at least
one plausible model offering a comparative-static result for which we will later find support in the
experiments.8
7 Laurelle

and Valenciano (2008) provide a noncooperative foundation for the generalized Nash bargaining formulae in (1) and (2). In the limit as the probability of bargaining breakdown vanishes, the payoffs in a stationary subgame
perfect equilibrium converge to those emerging from maximization of the Nash product, where the weights are given
by the probability that the party is selected to be the proposer in a round. Translated into their terms, our specification
would be equivalent to assuming that the ratio between the probability of selecting U for the proposer and of selecting
a given Di does not vary with d.
8 The natural alternative to our specification of Nash bargaining maintains a constant ratio between U’s bargaining
weight and the sum of all downstream firms’ bargaining weights rather than a given downstream firm’s. One can show
that the equilibrium tariff is constant in d under this variant, which does not find support in the data.

10

3. Experimental Design
We build on the experimental design of Martin, Normann, and Snyder (2001). We will maintain
their baseline treatment—which they called SECRAN because it involves secret contracts with
randomly re-matched players—as our baseline treatment with no communication here. We will
then introduce treatments allowing for different forms of communication.
The market, shown in Figure 1, involves three subjects, one playing the role of the upstream
firm (called a producer in the experiment) and two playing the role of downstream firms (called
retailers in the experiment). The upstream player moves first, making a take-it-or-leave-it offer
(xi , Ti ) to each Di , where xi had to be an integer in [0, 10] and Ti had to be an integer in [0, 120].
After observing its own contract only, D i chooses whether to accept (ai = 1) or reject it (a i = 0).
These decisions result in each Di supplying qi = ai xi to the final-good market, for a total supply
of Q = q1 + q2. Market price P(Q) is calculated from the discrete demand function in Figure 2A.
All firms produce at zero cost. Thus profits are πU = a1 T1 + a2 T2 for U and πDi = P(Q)qi − ai Ti
for Di . Let πD = πD1 + πD2 denote total downstream profit and Π = πU + πD denote market profit.
Figure 2B graphs the profit function in the experiment; it is concave, achieving a maximum of
Πm = 100 at an output of Q m = 2. The Cournot outcome involves market output Q c = 4, firm
output qc = 2, and industry profit Πc = 72.
Participants were randomly assigned to their roles (U or D i ), which they played each round for
the entire course of the session. We recruited 15–21 subjects for each session, allowing us to form
5–7 markets. Each session consisted of 15 rounds of game play. The three subjects constituting a
market were randomly re-matched before every round to minimize effects of repeated interaction.
(Experimenter effects aside, observations may be dependent within sessions but should be independent across sessions because new subjects were recruited for each session.) After each round,
each Di learned his profit; U was told his own and each of the two downstream firm’s profits that
round. All these design features were explained to subjects in the instructions.
We conducted four different treatments. Our baseline treatment replicates the SECRAN treatment from Martin, Normann, and Snyder (2001). To compare the communication element with
other treatments, in particular that there is no communication involved, we relabel this treatment
No Chat. The remaining treatments introduced the possibility of communication using an instantmessaging technology via a chat window. In Two Chat, U could engage in private, two-way com11

munication with each Di . D1 and D2 could not communicate with each other, and D i could not
observe U’s communications with his competitor. U had separate chat windows for each D i on its
screen; each Di had only one chat window on its screen through which it communicated to U. In
Three Chat, U, D1 , and D2 could freely communicate with each other. Whatever a player typed in
his chat window was displayed to all three players in the market. It was not possible to exclude one
of the players and engage in two-way chat. Choose Chat allowed each player to send each message
via whichever communication channel—private communication between vertical levels as in Two
Chat or the open communication as in Three Chat—he wanted. All channels were open in separate
windows allowing receivers to know whether the message was sent privately or publicly.
Every round of Two Chat, Three Chat, and Choose Chat began with a communication stage
prior to U’s making contract offers. Except for threats to be carried out outside the lab or information that could be used identify subjects, the content of the chat was unrestricted. In Two Chat,
subjects had 90 seconds to chat during the first five rounds, reduced to one minute for the last ten
rounds. The communication stage lasted 60 seconds in all 15 rounds in Three Chat and 90 seconds
in all 15 rounds in Choose Chat. Subjects could not leave the chat stage before the time expired.
The design of the communication treatments was otherwise identical to No Chat.
Subjects were invited using the ORSEE system (Greiner 2015). Upon arrival in the lab, each
was assigned to a cubicle and provided with instructions, reproduced in Appendix B, available
online. The instructions were the same in all treatments except for a short section about the chat
stage added in the communication treatments. After reading the instructions, subjects were allowed
to ask questions privately in their cubicles. Subjects were then informed about their role in the
experiment (U or D) and the experiment proceeded. The experiments were programmed in Z-tree
(Fischbacher 2007).
It is possible for downstream firms to earn negative payoffs. To offset this possibility as well as
to provide a payment for showing up, subjects playing the D role received an initial endowment of
200 ECU (experimental currency units). Subjects playing the U role received an initial endowment
of 60 ECU. At the end of the experiment, participants were paid in euros, exchanged at a rate of
one euro for each 40 ECU. Participants earned about 14 euros on average.
We conducted a total of 16 sessions, four sessions for each of the four treatments. All sessions
were run at DICElab of the University of Duesseldorf from November 2013 to February 2015.

12

Each session lasted for about one hour. In total, 285 subjects participated.

4. Results
To streamline the discussion of our results, we will confine the initial discussion to the distinct
treatments No Chat, Two Chat, and Three Chat. Once the relationship between Two Chat and
Three Chat is understood, we can study which one the hybrid treatment Choose Chat is closer to.
The top part of Table 1 can be interpreted as a summary statistics for the main experimental
variables. It regresses these variables (X , Ti , ai , ...) on an exhaustive set of treatment indicators, suppressing the constant. This specification allows us to recover the treatment means of the
variables as the coefficients on the indicators. The advantage of the regressions is that the supplied standard errors allow statistical tests of the differences between the means (bottom part). We
compute White (1980) heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors clustered by session, allowing for
dependence among observations arising from the same set of interacting subjects.
Comparing treatments No Chat and SECRAN from Martin, Normann, and Snyder (2001) provides a consistency check. Total offered quantity, X = x1 + x2 averaged 3.64 in SECRAN,9 nearly
identical to the 3.68 in No Chat (see the first column of Table 1). The averages for total accepted
quantity Q = q1 + q2 are also almost identical—2.41 in SECRAN versus 2.47 in No Chat—as
are the averages for industry profit Π—68.2 in SECRAN versus 68.3 in No Chat. Upstream firms
earned somewhat higher profit πU in SECRAN (mean 51.2) compared to No Chat (mean 45.3). The
remarkable consistency between SECRAN and No Chat suggests that No Chat is a good baseline
for comparing treatments with communication.

4.1. Offered Quantity
We begin by analyzing total offered quantity, X. This single variable captures whether U is able
to solve the commitment problem. Table 1 shows that the mean of X is highest in No Chat, 3.68,
falling to 2.98 in Two Chat, falling further to 2.41 in Three Chat, close to the monopoly output
9 The

means for SECRAN reported here differ from those reported in Table 2 of Martin, Normann, and Snyder
(2001). To reduce noise from inexperienced play, they dropped the first five rounds of each session. We are primarily
interested in communication, which may have the largest effects in early rounds of play, so have chosen to focus on
results for all rounds. To facilitate comparison, the last row of Table 1 here reports means from the Martin, Normann,
and Snyder (2001) data retaining the first five rounds. These data are reported in histogram form in Figures 3–6.

13

of 2. These results are consistent with more open communication facilitating commitment and
monopolization. Figure 3 provides a more disaggregated picture, showing the means of the four
individual sessions run for each treatment. The filled circles in Panel A represent session means for
X . The group of circles shifts down from No Chat to Two Chat to Three Chat, providing confidence
that decline toward the monopoly level is not due to an outlying session.
The bottom part of Table 1 provides formal statistical tests of the differences between treatment
means. It reports differences between all combinations of treatment-indicator pairs, providing the
appropriate standard errors for these differences. The fall in the mean of X from No Chat to Two
Chat of 0.70, statistically significant at the 1% level, represents 40% of the gap between No Chat
and the monopoly output. The fall from Two Chat to Three Chat of 0.57, statistically significant
again at the 1% level, brings offered quantity close to the monopoly level of X = 2.
Figure 4 provides a histogram for X for the various treatments in Panel A. The white bars for
No Chat show a mode at X = 4 and considerable additional mass on yet higher offers. Moving
from the white to the light grey bars, representing Two Chat observations, shifts the mass of the
distribution from these high levels to the lower levels X = 2 and X = 3, and X = 2 becomes the
mode. Moving to the black bars for Three Chat piles almost all the mass in the monopoly (X = 2)
bin.
Table 2 can be used to test for the statistical significance of these shifts in the histogram. The
first column is a linear probability model regressing a 0–1 indicator for whether X = 2 on a set
of treatment indicators, again suppressing the constant. This specification allows us to recover the
relative frequency of the monopoly outcome (graphically, the height of the bars in Figure 4A in
the X = 2 bin) directly from the coefficients on the treatment indicators. The reported standard
errors, heteroskedasticity robust and clustered at the session level, allow statistical tests of the
difference across treatments, which are reported in the lower part of the table. Three Chat is 32
percentage points more likely to generate monopoly offers than Two Chat, a difference significant
at the 1% level. Two Chat is 18 percentage points more likely to generate monopoly offers than No
Chat, although this difference does not achieve significance at the 10% level.10 The next column
regresses an indicator for the event X ≥ 4, that is, that the offers total to at least the Cournot output.
Three Chat is 17 percentage points less likely than Two Chat to have offers this high, and Two
10 As we will see in Table 4, the difference is significant at the 10% level after dropping the first five rounds, reflecting

noisier play, from the sample.

14

Chat is 23 percentage points less likely than No Chat to have offers this high, both differences
significant at the 5% level. We conclude that increasing the openness of communication from No
Chat to Two Chat to Three Chat results in a substantial and generally statistically significant shift
in the mass from the Cournot to the monopoly bin.
Column 5 of Table 2 measures symmetry implicit in offered quantities. It estimates a linear
model of the probability that the two contract offers involve symmetric quantities, x 1 = x2. The
estimate on the No Chat indicator implies that 68% of the offers in that treatment involve symmetric
quantities. A similar percentage (in fact slightly lower) involve symmetric quantities in Two Chat.
Evidently the private communication channel helps with monopolization but not symmetry. The
open communication associated with Three Chat promotes symmetry: 88% of the offers involve
symmetric quantities, over 20 percentage points more than No Chat or Two Chat, differences
statistically significant at the 1% level. As the next column shows, the results for symmetry are
similar if we take a stricter definition of symmetry, requiring all contractual terms (x i and Ti ) to be
the same.

4.2. Tariffs
We next turn to the other variable in the contract, the fixed tariff Ti . Because it is a pure transfer
between parties, this variable can help measure how communication affects the division of surplus
in the experiment. The mean reported in Table 1 falls from 34.7 ECU in No Chat to 31.4 in Two
Chat to 26.9 in Three Chat. The means in No Chat and Two Chat are not significantly different
from each other, but the mean in Three Chat is significantly lower than the others at the 5% level.
The scatter plots of session-level means in Figure 3B tell a similar story: the group of filled dots
shows a general downward shift from No Chat to Two Chat to Three Chat, although there is
considerable spread in the dots for Two Chat.
Definitive inferences are difficult to draw from the raw means of Ti , however, because xi varies
systematically across treatments as well. To understand why this fact can pollute inferences, consider the contracts (1, 30) and (2, 30). While they specify the same fixed tariff of 30, if D i has
symmetric beliefs, the first contract is more generous, providing him with a profit of 20 compared
to 6 for the second contract.11 To purge these quantity effects, the third column of Table 1 restricts
11 With

passive beliefs, the computation is less clear because the generosity of a contract depends on whether it is

15

the sample to contracts with xi = 1. Now we see a decrease in the mean of Ti of 6.4 from No Chat
to Two Chat, significant at the 1% level, and a further decrease of 3.2 from Two Chat to Three
Chat, significant at the 5% level. These results suggest that starting from a situation in which U
makes contract offers to the D i , layering increasingly open communication allows the D i to extract
a greater share.
The fall in Ti from No Chat to Three Chat holding x i constant is an intriguing result. The drop
in tariff from No Chat to Two Chat is consistent with previous experimental work: introducing
pre-play communication in the ultimatum game leads to more generous splits for the responder
(Zultan 2012, using video chat). The further fall in Ti from Two Chat to Three Chat is to our
knowledge a new experimental result. It is consistent with the Nash-bargaining model offered in
Section 2.4. With two downstream firms (d = 2) and an upstream firm with less than complete
bargaining power (α < 1), the tariff under bilateral negotiations is strictly higher than that under
open negotiations, that is, Ti∗ > Ti∗∗. In effect, the additional downstream firm participating in open
negotiations forces U to split surplus among three rather than just two parties.
Table 3 provides more evidence on the fit of various bargaining models to tariffs. For comparison, the last row shows the mean tariffs in the actual data in the Two Chat and Three Chat
treatments, restricting the sample to offers with x i = 1 . The first row shows predicted tariff values,
T̂i , from a Nash bargaining model positing a bargaining-power term for U of α = 0.5, consistent
with equal surplus division. Predicted tariffs match the comparative-static property of actual tariffs, falling from Two Chat to Three Chat, although predicted tariffs considerably underestimate
actual ones in the Three Chat treatment. The next row continues with the Nash-bargaining model
but now allows α to be a free parameter. We estimate α using non-linear least squares, in effect
searching for the value providing the best fit between predicted and actual tariffs. The estimate is

α̂ = 0.60 with a standard error (clustered across sessions) of 0.02. Using the estimated α̂ in place
of the posited α = 0.5 results in a slightly worse fit between predicted and actual tariffs for Two
Chat but a much improved fit for Three Chat.
To provide a counterpoint to Nash bargaining, the next two rows show fitted values for an
alternative bargaining model, Shapley value. The row with α = 0.5 is the standard version of
Shapley in which all permutations of players used to compute marginal contributions are equally
an equilibrium or out-of-equilibrium offer.

16

likely. The model gets the wrong comparative-static result, predicting a rise in tariffs with more
open communication. The next row analyzes a generalized version of Shapley value, introducing a bargaining-power-like parameter that can be estimated to give it a better chance to fit the
tariff data. Intuitively, in this row α is the probability that U comes after a given D i in a permutation, giving U a better chance to make a positive marginal contribution. More detail on this
generalization of Shapley value, as well as a discussion of its foundation in a model of asymmetric
distributions of bargaining arrival times due to Kalai and Samet (1987), is provided in Appendix A.
Non-linear least squares produces an estimate of α̂ of 0.39. In effect, the estimated version of the
Shapley-value model tries to moderate the grossly overestimated tariffs in Three Chat by reducing
U’s bargaining power. While this helps the fit in Three Chat, predicted tariffs now substantially
undershoot actual in Two Chat. Thus the incorrect comparative-static result that tariffs rise with
more open communication persists.
Overall, Table 3 shows that the version of Nash bargaining with the estimated α̂ , besides getting
the qualitative result right that tariffs fall from Two Chat to Three Chat, provides a reasonably good
quantitative fit for tariffs in each treatment. The Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC) in the last
column provides one gauge of fit across these non-nested models. An increase in BIC of 10 is
typically taken as “very strong” evidence against the model with the higher BIC (Kass and Raftery
1995). Here we see that BIC is hundreds or thousands of points higher in alternatives to Nash
bargaining with the estimated α̂ .

4.3. Acceptance Behavior
Having analyzed upstream behavior, we next turn to downstream behavior, embodied in the acceptance decision ai in Table 1. The acceptance rate rises from 70% in No Chat to 85% in Two Chat to
89% in Three Chat. Table 1 shows that the 15% increase from No Chat to Two Chat is significant
at the 1% level but the further increase from Two Chat to Three Chat is insignificant. Figure 3C
shows this same pattern holds in the session-level means.
The raw means of ai provide a reduced-form measure of how acceptance rates vary with communication when the contract offers underlying the acceptance decision are also allowed to vary.
The fifth column of Table 1 sheds light on how acceptance rates vary with communication holding
contract offers constant. This column regresses ai on the treatment indicators controlling for the
17

contract’s terms in a semi-parametric way by restricting the sample to observations with x i = 1
and including a second-order polynomial in standardized values T̃i of the tariff (standardized by
subtracting the sample mean and dividing by the variance). With this sample restrictions and added
controls, the coefficients on the treatment indicators can be interpreted as the acceptance rates of a
contract offering one unit at the sample mean tariff.
Controlling for contract offer reduces the gap between the No Chat and Two Chat acceptance
rates as well as the Two Chat and Three Chat acceptance rates. We conclude, therefore, that the
main reason acceptance rates rise from No Chat to Two Chat to Three Chat is not that open communication somehow makes the Di more receptive to offers but because U offers more generous
contracts, involving more profitable output levels and lower tariffs.

4.4. Market Output
The rest of the variables for which we provide summary statistics in Table 1 are deterministic
functions of subjects’ actions in the experiment. Still they deserve some study because these would
be the observables in a non-experimental market.
The mean for market output Q in No Chat, 2.47, is about the same as in Two Chat, 2.49. The
constancy of the mean between these treatments masks a significant change to the distribution
of Q, shown in Figure 4B. Moving from No Chat to Two Chat concentrates the distribution from
above and below on the mode at the monopoly outcome. The concentration from above is inherited
from the effect that communication helps monopolize the market resulting in more offers of X = 2.
The concentration from below is inherited from the increase in the raw acceptance rate with better
communication, reducing the mass in the Q = 0 and Q = 1 bins, which, except for one case out
of 720, never arise unless there has been a rejection. Looking at the coefficient differences in the
sixth column of Table 2, the monopoly outcome (Q = 2) is 17 percentage points more likely in
Two Chat than No Chat, significant at the 10% level.
It should be emphasized that firms and consumers are not indifferent between treatments with
the same mean for Q. Due to the concavity of industry profit in Q, a treatment which averages
together values of Q well above the monopoly level with zero values from contract rejections will
be much less profitable than a treatment in which Q varies less around its mean of 2.49. The
opposite is true for consumer surplus, which is convex in Q. These facts will come into play in the
18

analyses of profits and consumer surplus in following subsections.
Moving from Two Chat to Three Chat reduces the mean of Q by 0.44 according to Table 1,
significant at the 1% level. The mean of Q is 2.05 in Three Chat, very close to the monopoly
output. Examining the full distribution of Q, it turns out the monopoly outcome (Q = 2) is 26
percentage points more likely in Three Chat than Two Chat according to Table 2, and Cournot or
higher outputs (Q ≥ 4) 14 percentage points less likely, both differences significant at the 5% level
or better.
Thus, more communication leads to more monopolization. Three Chat is conducive to monopolization not just relatively to the other treatments but in an absolute sense, attaining the monopoly
outcome in a remarkable 81% of the observations. Free communication facilitates nearly complete
monopolization whether measured in terms of offered or actual quantity.

4.5. Profits
An analysis of profits will let us put a monetary value on the differences across treatments uncovered so far. First consider industry profit, Π. Table 1 shows that the mean rises from 68.3 to 82.5
to 89.5 ECU. The table shows that the 14.2 increase in the mean of Π from No Chat to Two Chat
and 7.0 increase from Two Chat to Three Chat are statistically significant at the 5% level or better.
These profit increases are the direct consequence of the concentration of the distribution of Q on
the bin (Q = 2) that maximizes industry profits. Mean profit in Three Chat, 89.5, is close to the
monopoly profit of 100.
Moving to the allocation of profit across industry levels, U’s profits change non-monotonically
across the treatments, increasing from 45.3 in No Chat to 51.1 in Two Chat and then falling to 42.5
in Three Chat. The substantial increase in the acceptance rate offsets a small decrease in tariff to
cause the 5.8 increase in πU from No Chat to Two Chat, significant at the 5% level. The adverse
bargaining effects for U in moving from Two Chat to Three Chat ends up reducing π U by 8.6,
significant at the 5% level. The first rise and then fall leads to a fairly similar value of πU between
No Chat and Three Chat.
Although U’s profit level changes non-monotonically, its profit share, sU = πU /Π, shows a
monotonic pattern in Table 1, falling from 0.63 in No Chat to 0.59 in Two Chat to 0.47 in Three
Chat. More and more open communication leads U to obtain a smaller share of a growing pie. The
19

biggest drop in sU (and only significant one), however, occurs in the move from Two Chat to Three
Chat. As discussed in Section 2.4, the move from Two Chat to Three Chat could represent a fundamental change in the bargaining game, which under Nash bargaining could erode U’s bargaining
surplus. The fall in sU in Three Chat supports this theory.
Downstream firms gain both in absolute and relative terms from more and more open communication. Table 1 shows that the sum of downstream profits, πD , rises from 23.0 ECU in No Chat
to 31.4 in Two Chat to 47.1 in Three Chat, both increases significant at the 5% level or better, as
shown in Table 1. Downstream profit is so high in Three Chat that they obtain a majority of the
profit (53% compared to U’s 47%).

4.6. Consumer Surplus
The last column of Table 1 presents results for consumer surplus, CS. The mean of CS falls from
39.7 ECU in No Chat to 34.1 in Two Chat to 17.1 in Three Chat. Figure 3F disaggregates the
means by session. The 5.6 fall from No Chat to Two Chat is not statistically significant, but the
17.1 fall from Two Chat to Three Chat is, at the 1% level. This large decline in CS between these
treatments is due in part to the large reduction in the mean of Q, from 2.49 to 2.05, as consumers
prefer higher quantities. Another factor relates to the convexity of CS in Q, which implies that
consumers prefer more rather than less variance in Q. The reduction in the spread of Q from Two
Chat to Three Chat shown in Figure 4 leads to a further reduction in CS between those treatments.
This factor leads to the fall in CS moving from No Chat to Two Chat despite the increase in mean
Q between the treatments. Hence we see that more and more open communication can lead to
substantial consumer harm.
The monotonic increase in profit and decrease in consumer surplus offset each other, leading
to fairly small changes in mean welfare across treatments. While U’s ability to monopolize the
market is improved, reducing welfare, the decline in rejections (and decline in variance of Q, which
is socially beneficial because, like profit, welfare is concave in Q) keeps welfare from falling very
far in Three Chat. Whether these fairly benign welfare results carry over to markets outside the
lab depends on how relatively important in real markets are the offsetting factors found in the lab.
The possibility that enhanced monopolization may be the dominant factor in real markets, coupled
with the unambiguous and large harm to consumers found in our experiments, leave ample cause
20

for policy concern.

4.7. Choose Chat Treatment
We now pick up the analysis of the Choose Chat treatment. The results show a clear pattern. For
every variable in Table 1, the Choose Chat mean is between the means of the treatments of which
Choose Chat is a hybrid, that is, the Two Chat and Three Chat treatments. For example, the 2.55
mean of X in Choose Chat is between the 2.98 for Two Chat and 2.41 for Three Chat. Comparing
the Choose Chat − Two Chat difference to the Three Chat − Choose Chat difference at the bottom
of Table 1, in every column the magnitude of the Choose Chat − Two Chat difference is weakly
larger, meaning that the results for Choose Chat are closer to Three Chat than Two Chat.
Evidently, allowing players the option to communicate both privately and openly affords almost as much commitment power as restricting them to communicate openly. The results suggest
that open communication can lead to monopolization even if, as is realistic, the upstream and
downstream firms are also free to communicate privately. While antitrust outlaws private communication between downstream firms, it would be difficult to outlaw communication between levels
as might be required to work out supply arrangements. Here we see that this permissible form of
communication can help firms monopolize the market even in the absence of direct communication
between downstream firms, which would be illegal, and that monopolization need not be subverted
by legal, private communication between upstream and downstream firms.

4.8. Trends Within Session
The analysis so far has considered average effects over all rounds of play. In this subsection we
explore whether the results show convergence or divergence trends as players gain experience in
the market from early to late rounds. To uncover these trends, Table 4 repeats the regressions from
Table 1 interacting the treatment indicators with indicators for the initial and end periods. For
example, No Chat0, is the interaction between the No Chat indicator and an indicator for rounds
1–5, and No Chat1 is the interaction between No Chat and an indicator for rounds 6–15. The
bottom of the table reports the change in the treatment indicator across the two periods along with
the appropriate standard error, allowing an assessment of the significance of the change.
The results show a fairly consistent trend. No Chat shows few significant changes over time. By
21

contrast, almost all the variables for the treatments with communication have significant changes,
many at the 1% level. What this pattern reveals is that subjects played fairly consistently over the
rounds in No Chat but took several rounds to settle down to how they eventually played in the
communication treatments. Apparently subjects needed more time to understand the functionality
of communication. As play progresses into the later rounds, the communication treatments diverge
from No Chat and increasingly reveal the distinctive monopolization and bargaining effects we
have been highlighting. This monopolization leads to a significant rise in industry profit Π, and a
significant fall in CS. U is more generous with the D i over time, leading to significant reductions
in Ti , significant reductions in πU , significant increases in πD , and significant reductions in sU .
The main change in No Chat is a 7 percentage point increase in the acceptance rate, leading
to a 0.20 increase in Q, both trends statistically significant at the 1 % level. Thus, as players gain
experience in No Chat, output diverges further from the monopoly output. The opposite happens
in the communication treatments, as lower offered quantity translates into lower output. The mean
of Q falls from early to late period across all of them, by as much as 0.35 units (in Two Chat,
significant at the 1% level in that case). The combined effect of the increase in Q in No Chat and
its decrease in the communication treatments results in the mean of Q being significantly higher in
No Chat than in any of the communication treatments—even Two Chat—in the late period. This
result leads us to conclude with even more confidence that communication leads to monopolization,
whether measured by offered or realized quantity.
This analysis of within-session trends suggests that our main findings are representative of play
by experienced agents and thus should not be expected to disappear over time. Play in the simple
treatment without communication settles down almost immediately to long-run averages. Play in
the treatments with communication takes time to settle down, perhaps because the environment is
more complex, perhaps because subjects need time to develop trust in trading partners’ cheap talk.

5. Analysis of Chat Content
In this section we draw further insights about the effect of different forms of communication by
analyzing the content of the chat itself. We take a series of approaches: inspecting some simple
descriptive statistics, gauging how much information an outside party can glean from the chat

22

(see, for example, Houser and Xiao 2011), studying representative quotes (Kimbrough, Smith and
Wilson 2008), and finally running regressions of experimental outcomes on chat covariates.

5.1. Descriptive Statistics
Table 5 provides descriptive statistics characterizing chat across communication treatments. Each
treatment may span several columns, both separating and combining channels operating simultaneously in a market to provide a full picture of the nature of chat.
The first set of variables are indicators for a message being sent in a round of chat: Any MesU
is an indicator for a message being sent by U, Any MesD by one or both Di , and Any Mes by any
player. Virtually all chat rounds (98% or higher) had at least some chat across all treatments. A
conspicuous finding in Choose Chat, looking at the Any Mes variable, is that subjects relied on the
open more often than the private channel.
The next set of variables, Num Mes, record the number of messages sent by one level or the
other or in total. In Two Chat, U sent 2.5 messages and each Di sent 3.0 messages on average each
round. The averages are almost identical in Three Chat (the downstream firms together sent 6.0
messages, implying 3.0 per individual Di ). In Choose Chat, players sent about this same number of
messages via the open channel, but because they could also use the private channel, players ended
up sending more messages in this than the other communication treatments.
The Init variables indicate which level (U or D) initiated the chat, if any. In Two Chat, each
bilateral chat was about equally likely to have been initiated by either side. In Three Chat, the
probability of initiating chat, 29% for the upstream and 71% for the downstream firms, is close to
what one would expect if each of the three players had an equal chance of being the first mover.
The same is true for Choose Chat regarding the open channel, although the private channel was
more likely to be initiated by a downstream firm.
Finally, the last set of rows presents correlations between the existence or extent of chat from
the two sides. A positive correlation would be consistent with more chat from one side stimulating
chat from the other, a negative correlation with chat from one side crowding out the other. Across
all treatments the correlation is positive, suggesting that messages typically induce replies.

23

5.2. Coder Agreement
We next study whether the content of communication in Two Chat conveyed meaningful information about the terms of the contracts that would be offered that round. Following Houser and Xiao
(2011), we asked two coders to independently analyze the chat content of Two Chat, Choose Chat
and Three Chat. Specifically, their task was to read the chat in a given round of play in a given
market and guess the vector (x1, x2 , T1 , T2 ) that would most likely result from the chat. If they
thought that no plausible guess could be made, they were asked to enter “n.a.” instead of a number.
They had read the instructions for the experiment up front and were aware of the communication
structure in the treatments. At no point in time could the coders see the offers actually made. The
coding was incentivized: five chats were randomly selected and the coders paid for the number
of guesses that agreed with each other. For all treatments with communication, the same coders
analyzed one complete session and five random rounds from the remaining three sessions. The
sequence of markets and rounds were randomized such that the coders could not follow patterns
involving certain subjects over time.
Figure 5 presents the results. Panels A and B show that communication was remarkably informative in Two Chat. Over 80% of the coders’ guesses for xi matched the actual offer; over 95% of
these also agreed with the other coder’s guess. Nearly two thirds of coder’s guesses for Ti matched
the actual offer, and nearly 95% of these again agreed with the other coder’s guess. What makes
the accuracy of Ti coding particularly noteworthy is that this variable could take on any of the large
number of integers between 0 and 120. In the minority of the cases in which a coder’s did not
match actual, their guesses still agreed with each other more often than not, suggesting that the
chat was informative but misleading. This sort of misleading chat was fairly rare, for example accounting for fewer than 12% of coder’s guesses for x i . Panels C–F show similar results for Choose
Chat and Three Chat.
The accuracy of the chat coding leads us to strongly reject the null hypothesis that chat is
meaningless babble in either the private or the open channel. We will thus inquire further into how
subjects use this meaningful chat to facilitate contracting in the various communication treatments.

24

5.3. Representative Quotes
We hypothesized that better communication may allow subjects to better coordinate and avoid
rejections. Specifically, heterogeneous beliefs about rival contract offers could generate considerable strategic uncertainty, some of which could be resolved by having parties communicate about
their beliefs. Of course we should not expect experimental subjects to use formal theoretical terms
(“symmetric,” “passive”) to express their beliefs. However, indirect evidence on beliefs is sometimes available when Di has an opportunity to express a preference among several potential contracts.
The cleanest belief expressions are provided by the private communication channel in Two
Chat. The following excerpt from a chat round is consistent with downstream firms’ having passive beliefs. (Recall upstream firms are called “producers” and downstream “retailers” in the experiment.)
Retailer:
Producer:
Retailer:
Producer:
Retailer:

2 for 20?
can be done
that is good
barely :)
hopefully or wait how about 1 for 20 = 30 for you
no 2 for 20

With symmetric beliefs, the (1, 20) offer would have been better than (2, 20) and would have indeed
yielded the retailer an expected profit of 30 as the producer suggests. With passive beliefs, on the
other hand, (1, 20) yields the retailer an expected profit of only 10 while (2, 20) yields 16. The fact
that the retailer asked for (2, 20) is consistent with his having passive beliefs.
The following excerpt is consistent with the retailer’s having symmetric beliefs.
Producer:
Retailer:
Producer:

2 for 25?
1 for 20
agreed

With both passive and symmetric beliefs, the (2, 25) offer yields the retailer a profit of 11. With
symmetric beliefs, the (1, 20) offer is better, yielding an expected profit of 30; whereas with passive
beliefs, the expected profit would be 10 and the retailer would have chosen (2, 25) instead.
Moving to the producer, subjects in this role sometimes make explicit statements about what
rivals are offered in chat with retailers. Sometimes this is an attempt to bolster the retailer’s belief
25

in symmetry. For example, retailers occasionally asks about a rival’s offer, to which the producer
responds (honestly or not) “the same.” The producer occasionally mentions symmetry without
prompting: “I will offer you and the other retailer 1 unit at a price of 30. That is, you have a
guaranteed profit of 20 (or even 30).” In this particular round, the producer was honestly trying to
establish the monopoly solution with both retailers.
In some cases, the producer does the opposite, trying to persuade retailers about the asymmetry
rather than the symmetry of the offer. For example, in the following chat excerpt, the producer
attempts to convince each retailer that he or she will become the monopolist at the expense of the
other retailer (recall the producer in Two Chat had a separate window for each retailer). 12
Producer:
Retailer 1:

2 units for 65 ECU, special offer just for you?
OK.

Producer:
Retailer 2:
Producer:
Retailer 2:

2 units for 60 ECU, special offer just for you?
Yes. The other retailer gets nothing.
Good.
Stick to it!

Taken together, these excerpts show that one can find examples of every possible use of communication in Two Chat, in some cases to enhance commitment leading to monopolization, in
some cases undermining it with deviating “special offers”. However, the results for the mean
of market outcomes show that the net effect is that private communication moderately enhances
monopolization. Examples like the second evidently outweigh those like the third.
The quantitative results from Section 4 suggest that open communication in Three Chat somehow bolsters a commitment to symmetric offers that monopolize the market. One mechanism for
enhanced commitment depends more on what is left unsaid than what is said: the producer’s opportunity to negotiate side deals is cut off in Three Chat. As the following excerpt illustrates, the
active exchange of public messages seems to have a role in helping subjects arrive at monopolizing
offers, perhaps an independent role, perhaps complementing the curtailment of private messages:
12 Though

the producer’s statements are misleading, they are not lies, strictly speaking. The offers are “special” in
the sense of specifying different fixed tariffs. (This may explain the odd choice of offering 65 ECU in one and 60 in the
other: perhaps this technicality is enough to dispel the producer’s psychic costs of lying.) Of course the statements are
misleading since a reasonable interpretation of “special” is that the offer is the only one to include a positive quantity.
Retailer 2 attempts to confirm this interpretation, receiving the seemingly reassuring but in fact ambiguous response,
“good.” Note further that acceptance of the offers in the example of this passage is not supported by symmetric,
passive, or wary beliefs. For discussion of possible beliefs other than these, see Eguia, Llorente-Saguer, Morton and
Nicolò (2014).

26

Producer:
Retailer 1:
Retailer 2:
Retailer 1:
Producer:
Retailer 1:

Hi. How many do you both want?
Yo, producer, why don’t you offer 1 each for 25, then you
make a nice profit and so do we ;-)
An idea: to get a profit as large as possible, I suggest we
sell only 2 units.
This is what i thought
I agree
perfect

Note the use of plurals “both,” “we,” and “our,” suggesting symmetry of offers, as well as references to joint maximization.13
The hybrid Choose Chat treatment uses the mechanisms available in Two Chat and Three
Chat. The analysis of these private and open channels gives a pure insight about how parties used
the channels. Excerpts from Choose Chat yield additional insights where subjects switch between
these channels.
Public chat
Retailer 2:
Retailer 1:
Producer:
Retailer 2:
Producer:
Retailer 2:

hey, one for 23 for both
1 for 25 for both.
each 1 for 35.
35 is too much ;)
each 1 for 30?
way too much

Private chat
Retailer 1:
Producer:
Retailer 1:
Producer:
Retailer 1:

I’d also buy 2 for 60 if the other one does not go all the way to 30
OK
But then you have to promise to me
2 for 60 then?
okay

Here, a retailer tries to convince the producer to sidestep the public negotiations and do business
exclusively with him. There is also evidence in the chats that some participants want to prevent
precisely this sort of sidestepping with calls like “producer, type something here” or “always cooperate” into the public chat window.

5.4. Regressions on Chat Covariates
In the final piece of chat-content analysis, we regress various experimental outcomes on variables
characterizing the chat from Table 5 among others. The variables are endogenous so their coeffi13

Another mechanism for public communication to bolster commitment could involve various social-psychological
effects. For example, Fay, Garrod and Carletta (2000) suggest that the nature of communication can fundamentally
change when the group increases from two to three: rather than addressing an individual, now communication becomes
more of a public address.

27

cients will not have causal interpretations, but will still reveal interesting correlations.
A conspicuous and statistically significant finding is that Num MesD is associated with lower
offered quantities, X, in all treatments and also with lower x i in Two Chat. Evidently, more downstream chat helps arrive at quantities closer to the monopoly or at least is correlated with those
outcomes. Whether the upstream firm initiates chat and how many messages it sends are not measurably associated with offered quantities. Another significant association that is somewhat robust
is that Num MesU is positively associated with sU . More chat seems to help U extract a greater
profit share.
Perhaps the most interesting findings are in the columns for Choose Chat including the Any
Private variable, an indicator for whether any player used the private channel in the chat round.
Resorting to the private channel is associated with a huge increase in X by 0.59 units, significant at
the 1% level. Resorting to the private channel is also associated with a huge increase in sU , by 16
percentage points, also significant at the 1% level. These results are suggestive of the possibility
that U resorts to the private channel to cut side deals that allows it to extract a greater share at the
same time it expands output by undermining commitment. As Table 5 shows, U resorts to the open
channel twice as often as to the private channel, so the option to use the private channel in Choose
Chat does not destroy commitment power completely.

6. Conclusion
In this paper, we introduce communication to a strategically complex vertical market. One upstream and two downstream firms can jointly earn monopoly rents but they may well fail to do so
due to a commitment problem (Hart and Tirole 1990, Rey and Tirole 2007). The relevance of this
commitment problem in turn depends on technical modeling assumptions: the (possibly heterogeneous) beliefs players maintain may suggest different equilibria in which the market may or may
not be monopolized. In addition to players holding different expectations, bargaining frictions may
add to the intricacy of the setup. Communication has the potential to overcome these problems.
Our experimental treatments vary the openness or transparency of communication among the three
players. The first treatment allows the upstream firm to engage in private two-way chat with each
downstream firm. A second one lets all three firms engage in completely open (three-way) chat.

28

The third is a hybrid of the other two, allowing players the option of using either or both of twoor three-way communication.
Our first result is that increasing the openness of communication has a monotonic effect on
market performance. Industry profits realize a minimum in the treatment without communication,
increase for private two-way chat and the hybrid treatment, and attain a maximum for the open
(three-way) chat. We thus find support for the hypothesis that communication can solve the commitment problem and results in higher profits. How firms communicate is important, though, and
only when all three players can talk openly we observe full monopolization of the markets.
A second finding is a bargaining effect. More open communication leads to an increasing rate
of contract acceptance. The increase in acceptance rate is partly due to a reduction in the upstream
firm’s tariff demands. Overall, increasing the openness of communication monotonically reduces
the share of industry profits the upstream firm accrues. The additional profits from being able to
better monopolize the market almost entirely go to downstream firms. A simple structural model
of Nash bargaining fits the pattern of shifting surpluses well.
What are the positive and normative implications of our experimental results for real-world
markets? It is reasonable to assume that open communication is not a practical option because firms
cannot commit not to engage in private communication on the side. This leaves no communication,
two-way chat and the hybrid form as practical communication structures. Both upstream and
downstream profits are higher with two-way chat and the hybrid variant, thus firms prefer some
form of communication to the treatment without, suggesting that some form of communication
would endogenously emerge in the market. Given that upstream and downstream firms differ in
their preferences over two-way chat versus the hybrid form of communication, it may be difficult
to predict which would emerge without making additional assumptions. For instance, if private and
public communication channels exist in the market, it may be difficult for parties to commit not
to use them, in which case the hybrid variant would be a natural communication structure. Given
that there are plausible conditions under which this form of communication may endogenously
emerge, the monopolizing effects of communication and the steep decline in consumer surplus in
this variant may be cause for antitrust concern.

29

Appendix A: Generalizing Shapley Value
This appendix presents a generalization of Shapley value allowing for asymmetric weights. We
follow Kalai and Samet’s (1987) foundation of this version of the Shapley value in a model of
asymmetric arrival times.
To this end, assume that coalitions are formed from permutations arising from players randomly
arriving at a location. Let AU be U ’s arrival time, exponentially distributed with rate parameter λ U ,
and let Ai be the arrival time for a given D i , exponentially distributed with rate parameter λ D ,
symmetric across downstream firms. Assume arrival times are independent. Define α = Pr(AU >
Ai ). Using standard results for exponential distributions, one can show

α=

λD
.
λD + λU

(A1)

U’s marginal contribution to its coalition is 0 if it comes first in the permutation and Π m otherwise.
Thus U’s generalized Shapley value from a bargain in which U and d downstream firms participate
is





m
m
Π Pr AU > min {Ai }
= Π 1 − Pr AU < min {Ai }
(A2)
i∈{1,...,d}
i∈{1,...,d}


d λD
m
= Π
(A3)
λU + d λD


αd
m
,
(A4)
= Π
1 − α + αd
where (A3) follows from standard results for exponential distributions and (A4) from (A1).
The tariff implementing the equilibrium surplus share in (A4) is


αd
Πm
∗
.
(A5)
Ti =
2 1 − α + αd
This equation provides the fitted tariff values for the rows in Table 3 for the Shapley value.
These formulas nest the standard Shapley value with symmetric weights, which can be recovered by substituting α = 1/2. Take the case of d = 1, corresponding to the bilateral bargaining of
Two Chat. U ’s share of the monopoly profit Π m then is 1/2 and the equilibrium tariff is Π m /4.
Take the case of d = 2, corresponding to the open communication of Three Chat. U’s share of the
monopoly profit rises to 2/3 and the equilibrium tariff to Π m /3.
The fact that U’s share and tariffs rise with d generalizes beyond the symmetric case of α =
1/2. For any α ∈ (0, 1), one can show that equations (A4) and (A5) are increasing in d. This
provides a contrasting comparative-static result to that derived in the text for the generalized Nash
product.

30

References
Andersson, Ola and Erik Wengström. (2007) “Do Antitrust Laws Facilitate Collusion? Experimental Evidence on Costly Communication in Duopolies,” Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 109(2): 321–339.
Andersson, Ola, Matteo M. Galizzi, Tim Hoppe, Sebastian Kranz, Karen van der Wiel, and Erik
Wengström. (2010) “Persuasion in experimental ultimatum games,” Economics Letters, 108
(1): 16–18.
Arango, Tim and Brian Stelter. (2011) “Comcast Receives Approval for NBC Universal Merger,”
New York Times January 19, p. B9.
Avenel, Eric. (2012) “Upstream Capacity Constraint and the Preservation of Monopoly Power in
Private Bilateral Contracting,” Journal of Industrial Economics, 60: 578–598.
Badasyan, Narine, Jacob K. Goeree, Monica Hartmann, John Morgan, Tanya Rosenblat, Maros
Servatka, and Dirk Yandell. (2009) “Vertical Integration of Successive Monopolists: A Classroom Experiment,” Perspectives on Economic Education Research 5(1).
Balliet, Daniel. (2010) “Communication and Cooperation in Social Dilemmas: A Meta-Analytic
Review,” Journal of Conflict Resolution, 54(1): 39–57.
Boone, Jan, Wieland Müller, and Sigrid Suetens. (2014) “Naked Exclusion in the Lab: The Case
of Sequential Contracting,” Journal of Industrial Economics, 62: 137–166.
Brosig, Jeannette, Axel Ockenfels and Joachim Weimann. (2003) “The Effect of Communication
Media on Cooperation,” German Economic Review, 4: 217–241.
Charness, Gary and Martin Dufwenberg. (2006) “Promises and Partnership,” Econometrica, 74:
1579–1601.
Cooper, David J. and Kai-Uwe Kühn. (2009) “Communication, Renegotiation, and the Scope for
Collusion,” American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 6(2): 247–78.
Crawford, Vincent and Joel Sobel. (1982) “Strategic Information Transmission,” Econometrica,
50: 1431–51.
Crawford, Vincent. (1998) “A Survey of Experiments on Communication via Cheap Talk,” Journal of Economic Theory, 78: 286–298.
Dawes, Robyn M., Jean McTavish, and Harriet Shaklee. (1977) “Behavior, Communication, and
Assumptions About other People’s Behavior in a Commons Dilemma Situation,” Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 35(1): 1–11.
Durham, Yvonne. (2000) “An Experimental Examination of Double Marginalization and Vertical
Relationships,” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 42: 207–229.

31

Eguia, Jon X., Aniol Llorente-Saguer, Rebecca Morton, and Antonio Nicolò. (2014) “Equilibrium Selection in Sequential Games with Imperfect Information,” Max Planck Institute for
Research on Collective Goods working paper no. 2014–04.
Farrell, Joseph and Matthew Rabin. (1996) “Cheap Talk,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 10:
103–118.
Fay, Nicolas, Simon Garrod, and Jean Carletta. (2000) “Group Discussion as Interactive Dialogue
or as Serial Monologue: The Influence of Group Size,” Psychological Science, 11: 481–486.
Fischbacher, Urs. (2007) “Z-Tree: Zurich Toolbox for Readymade Economic Experiments,” Experimental Economics, 10: 171–178.
Fonseca, Miguel A. and Hans-Theo Normann. (2012) “Explicit vs. Tacit Collusion? The Impact
of Communication in Oligopoly Experiments,” European Economic Review, 56: 1759–1772.
Gneezy, Uri, Bettina Rockenbach, and Marta Serra-Garcia. (2013) “Measuring Lying Aversion,”
Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 93 293–300.
Greiner, Ben. (2015) “Subject Pool Recruitment Procedures: Organizing Experiments with ORSEE,”
Journal of the Economic Science Association, 1: 114–125.
Hart, Oliver and Jean Tirole. (1990) “Vertical Integration and Market Foreclosure,” Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity (Microeconomics), 205–285.
Houser, Daniel and Erte Xiao. (2011) “Classification of Natural Language Messages Using A
Coordination Game,” Experimental Economics, 14: 1–14.
Isaac, R. Mark, Valerie Ramey, and Arlington W. Williams. (1984) “The Effects of Market Organization on Conspiracies in Restraint of Trade,” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 5: 191–222.
Kalai, Ehud and Dov Samet. (1987) “On Weighted Shapley Values,” International Journal of
Game Theory 16: 205–222.
Kanter, James and Mark Scott. (2015) “Challenge to Google,” New York Times, April 16, page B1.
Kass, Robert E. and Adrian E. Raftery. (1995) “Bayes Factors,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 90: 773–795.
Kimbrough, Erik, O., Vernon Smith and Bart Wilson. (2008) “Historical Property Rights, Sociality, and the Emergence of Impersonal Exchange in Long-Distance Trade,” American Economic Review, 98(3): 1009–1039.
Landeo, Claudia M. and Kathryn E. Spier. (2009) “Naked Exclusion: An Experimental Study of
Contracts With Externalities,” American Economic Review, 99: 1850–1877.
Laruelle, Annick and Federico Valenciano. (2008) “Noncooperative Foundations of Bargaining
Power in Committees and the Shapley-Shubik Index,” Games and Economic Behavior 63:
341–353.
32

Martin, Stephen, Hans-Theo Normann, and Christopher M. Snyder. (2001) “Vertical Foreclosure
in Experimental Markets,” Rand Journal of Economics, 32: 466–496.
Mason, Charles F. and Owen R. Phillips. (2000) “Vertical Integration and Collusive Incentives,”
International Journal of Industrial Organization, 18: 471–496.
McAfee, R. Preston and Marius Schwartz. (1994) “Opportunism in Multilateral Vertical Contracting: Nondiscrimination, Exclusivity, and Uniformity,” American Economic Review, 84:
210–230.
Normann, Hans-Theo. (2011) “Do Vertical Mergers Enable to Raise Rivals’ Costs? Experimental
Evidence,” Journal of Industrial Economics, 59: 506–527.
O’Brien, Daniel P. and Greg Shaffer. (1992) “Vertical Control with Bilateral Contracts,” Rand
Journal of Economics, 23: 299–308.
Rey, Patrick and Stéphane Caprice. (2015) “Buyer Power from Joint Listing Decisions,” forthcoming in: Economic Journal.
Rey, Patrick and Jean Tirole. (2007) “A Primer on Foreclosure,” in Mark Armstrong and Robert
Porter, eds., Handbook of Industrial Organization, vol. 3, North-Holland, 2145–2220.
Rey, Partick and Thibaud Vergé. (2004) “Bilateral Control with Vertical Contracts,” Rand Journal
of Economics, 35: 728–746.
Roth, Alvin E. (1995) “Bargaining Experiments,” in John Kagel and Alvin E. Roth, eds., Handbook of Experimental Economics, Princeton University Press, 253–348.
Roth, Alvin E., Vesna Prasnikar, Masahiro Okuno-Fujiwara, and Shmuel Zamir. (1991) “Bargaining and Market Behavior in Jerusalem, Ljubljana, Pittsburgh, and Tokyo: An Experimental
Study,” American Economic Review, 81: 1068–1095.
Serra-Garcia, Marta, Eric van Damme, and Jan Potters. (2013) “Lying About What You Know or
About What You Do?,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 11(5): 1204–1229.
Smith, Angela M. (2011) “An Experimental Study of Exclusive Contracts,” International Journal
of Industrial Organization, 29: 4–13.
White, Halbert. (1980) “A Heteroskedasticity-Consistent Covariance Matrix Estimator and a Direct Test for Heteroskedasticity,” Econometrica, 48: 817–838.
Zultan, Ro’i. (2012) “Strategic and Social Pre-Play Communication in the Ultimatum Game,”
Journal of Economic Psychology, 33: 425–434.

33

34
0.12

R2

−7.7∗∗∗
(1.7)
−9.7∗∗∗
(1.5)
−4.5∗
(2.5)
−6.4∗∗
(2.5)

−1.13 ∗∗∗
(0.25)
−1.27 ∗∗∗
(0.20)
−0.43 ∗
(0.24)
−0.57 ∗∗
(0.20)
−0.14
(0.17)

Choose Chat − No Chat

Three Chat − No Chat

Choose Chat − Two Chat

Three Chat − Two Chat

Three Chat − Choose Chat

−1.1
(1.4)

−3.2∗∗
(1.5)

−2.1
(1.6)

−9.6∗∗∗
(1.2)

−8.5∗∗∗
(1.4)

−6.4 ∗∗∗
(1.5)

0.14

−0.00
(0.02)

0.04
(0.04)

0.04
(0.04)

0.20 ∗∗∗
(0.02)

0.19 ∗∗∗
(0.02)

0.15 ∗∗∗
(0.04)

0.05

2,850

All

xi = 1
1,797

None

0.89 ∗∗∗
(0.01)

0.89 ∗∗∗
(0.01)

0.85 ∗∗∗
(0.04)

0.70 ∗∗∗
(0.02)

ai

None

23.7 ∗∗∗
(0.9)

24.8 ∗∗∗
(1.1)

26.9 ∗∗∗
(1.2)

33.3 ∗∗∗
(0.9)

Ti

0.03
(0.02)

0.00
(0.03)

0.03
(0.03)

0.09 ∗∗∗
(0.04)

0.12 ∗∗∗
(0.04)

0.09 ∗
(0.05)

0.17

1,797

7.0∗∗
(2.9)
2.1
(2.5)

−0.15 ∗
(0.07)

4.9
(3.5)

21.2 ∗∗∗
(2.0)

19.1 ∗∗∗
(2.9)

14.2 ∗∗∗
(3.2)

0.09

1,425

All

None

89.5 ∗∗∗
(1.0)

87.4 ∗∗∗
(2.3)

82.5 ∗∗∗
(2.7)

68.3 ∗∗∗
(1.8)

Π

−0.44 ∗∗∗
(0.13)

−0.29 ∗
(0.14)

−0.42 ∗
(0.19)

−0.27
(0.20)

0.02
(0.23)

0.02

1,425

All

None

T̃i , T̃i2
xi = 1

2.05 ∗∗∗
(0.03)

2.20 ∗∗∗
(0.07)

2.49 ∗∗∗
(0.12)

2.47 ∗∗∗
(0.19)

Q

0.86 ∗∗∗
(0.02)

0.89 ∗∗∗
(0.02)

0.85 ∗∗∗
(0.03)

0.77 ∗∗∗
(0.03)

ai

−3.8
(2.8)

−8.6∗∗
(3.0)

−4.9
(3.5)

−2.9∗
(1.6)

0.9
(2.5)

5.8∗∗
(3.2)

0.02

1,425

All

None

42.5 ∗∗∗
(1.5)

46.2 ∗∗∗
(2.4)

51.1 ∗∗∗
(2.6)

45.3 ∗∗∗
(0.5)

πU

5.9
(3.7)

15.6 ∗∗∗
(3.6)

9.7 ∗∗
(4.3)

24.1 ∗∗∗
(2.7)

18.2 ∗∗∗
(3.6)

8.9∗∗
(3.5)

0.11

1,425

All

None

47.1 ∗∗∗
(2.1)

41.2 ∗∗∗
(3.1)

31.4 ∗∗∗
(3.0)

23.0 ∗∗∗
(1.8)

πD

−0.05
(0.03)

−0.12 ∗∗∗
(0.03)

−0.07 ∗
(0.04)

−0.15 ∗∗∗
(0.02)

−0.11 ∗∗∗
(0.03)

−0.03
(0.03)

0.09

1,324

Π>0

None

0.47 ∗∗∗
(0.02)

0.52 ∗∗∗
(0.03)

0.59 ∗∗∗
(0.03)

0.63 ∗∗∗
(0.01)

sU

−5.5
(3.3)

−17.0 ∗∗∗
(4.4)

−11.5 ∗
(5.4)

−22.6 ∗∗∗
(5.7)

−17.1 ∗∗
(6.5)

−5.6
(7.2)

0.06

1,425

All

None

17.1 ∗∗∗
(0.6)

22.6 ∗∗∗
(3.2)

34.1 ∗∗∗
(4.4)

39.7 ∗∗∗
(5.7)

CS

Notes: Each column is an ordinary least squares regression. Exhaustive set of treatment indicators included as regressors and constant omitted. Sample includes all 15 rounds in each session. Sample for
sU column excludes observations with Π = 0 for which s U undefined. A small subset (6%) of these involve π D < 0; we set sU = 1 for these. White (1980) heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors clustered
at session level reported in parentheses. Regressions for T i and a i run for all contract offers and for with x i = 1. The regression for a i with other controls includes standardized tariff T̃i and its square, giving
coefficients on the treatment indicators the interpretation of mean acceptance rates for contracts offering mean tariff. Significantly different from 0 in a two-tailed test at the ∗ 10% level, ∗∗ 5% level, ∗∗∗ 1%
level.

−1.9
(1.5)

−3.2
(2.6)

−0.70 ∗∗∗
(0.27)

0.09

2,850

All

Two Chat − No Chat

Coefficient differences

1,425

Observations

All

25.0 ∗∗∗
(1.0)

2.41 ∗∗∗
(0.06)

Sample

26.9 ∗∗∗
(1.2)

2.55 ∗∗∗
(0.15)

None

31.4 ∗∗∗
(2.3)

2.98 ∗∗∗
(0.19)

None

34.7 ∗∗∗
(1.2)

Ti

3.68 ∗∗∗
(0.19)

Other controls

Three Chat

Choose Chat

Two Chat

No Chat

X

Dependent variable

Table 1: Regressions Examining Differences in Means

Table 2: Linear Probability Models of Outcome Variables

Measuring monopolization
Measuring symmetry
Offered quantity, X
X =2

Market output, Q

X ≥4

Q=2

Q≥4

x1 = x2

x1 = x2 ,
T1 = T2

No Chat

0.30 ∗∗∗
(0.06)

0.54∗∗∗
(0.06)

0.30∗∗∗
(0.04)

0.29∗∗∗
(0.07)

0.68∗∗∗
(0.01)

0.55∗∗∗
(0.01)

Two Chat

0.48 ∗∗∗
(0.10)

0.30∗∗∗
(0.07)

0.47∗∗∗
(0.07)

0.21∗∗∗
(0.05)

0.63∗∗∗
(0.07)

0.39∗∗∗
(0.05)

Choose Chat

0.71 ∗∗∗
(0.06)

0.17∗∗∗
(0.04)

0.67∗∗∗
(0.06)

0.10∗∗∗
(0.03)

0.76∗∗∗
(0.04)

0.65∗∗∗
(0.05)

Three Chat

0.79∗∗∗
(0.02)

0.13∗∗∗
(0.02)

0.73∗∗∗
(0.02)

0.07∗∗
(0.01)

0.88∗∗∗
(0.02)

0.76∗∗∗
(0.03)

Observations

1,425

1,425

1,425

1,425

1,425

1,425

R2

0.16

0.13

0.12

0.06

0.05

0.08

Two Chat − No Chat

0.18
(0.12)

−0.23 ∗∗
(0.09)

0.17∗
(0.08)

−0.08
(0.09)

−0.05
(0.07)

−0.16 ∗∗∗
(0.05)

Choose Chat − No Chat

0.41 ∗∗∗
(0.09)

−0.37∗∗∗
(0.08)

0.37∗∗∗
(0.07)

−0.19∗∗
(0.07)

0.08∗
(0.04)

0.10∗
(0.05)

Three Chat − No Chat

0.50 ∗∗∗
(0.07)

−0.41∗∗∗
(0.06)

0.43∗∗
(0.05)

−0.22∗∗∗
(0.04)

0.21∗∗∗
(0.02)

0.21∗∗∗
(0.03)

Choose Chat − Two Chat

0.23 ∗
(0.12)

−0.14
(0.08)

0.21 ∗∗
(0.09)

−0.11∗
(0.06)

0.13
(0.08)

0.26 ∗∗∗
(0.07)

Three Chat − Two Chat

0.32 ∗∗∗
(0.10)

−0.17∗∗
(0.07)

0.26∗∗∗
(0.07)

−0.14∗∗
(0.05)

0.25∗∗∗
(0.07)

0.37∗∗∗
(0.05)

Three Chat − Choose Chat

0.08
(0.07)

−0.03
(0.05)

0.05
(0.07)

−0.03
(0.03)

0.12 ∗∗
(0.04)

0.11∗
(0.05)

Coefficient differences

Notes: Each column is an ordinary least squares regression in which the dependent variable is a 0–1 indicator for the
event in the column heading. Regression thus interpreted as linear probability model. Exhaustive set of treatment
indicators included as regressors and constant omitted. Sample includes all 15 rounds in each session. White (1980)
heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors clustered at session level reported in parentheses. Significantly different from
0 in a two-tailed test at the ∗ 10% level, ∗∗ 5% level, ∗∗∗ 1% level.

35

Table 3: Tariffs Predicted by Various Bargaining Models

Mean T̂i in subsample
Model

Two Chat

Three Chat

BIC

25.0
30.2

16.7
21.6

70,351
6,998

25.0
19.7

33.3
28.2

108,258
7,298

26.9

23.7

Nash bargaining
Posit α = 0.50
NLLS estimate α̂ = 0.60
Shapley value
Posit α = 0.50
NLLS estimate α̂ = 0.39

Actual data

Notes: Sample restricted to offers involving x i = 1 in Two Chat and Three Chat treatments only. Each row is a different
model, for which we display fitted tariff values T̂i for the two included treatments as well as the Bayesian Information
Criterion (BIC) to compare model fits. For rows involving an estimate α̂ , estimation performed using non-linear least
squares, equivalent to maximum likelihood assuming ε i = Ti − T̂i has standard normal distribution.

36

37

29.6 ∗∗∗
(1.4)
25.6 ∗∗∗
(1.3)
30.0 ∗∗∗
(1.5)
22.5 ∗∗∗
(0.7)

2.90 ∗∗∗
(0.23)
2.37 ∗∗∗
(0.13)
2.86 ∗∗∗
(0.25)
2.18 ∗∗∗
(0.03)

0.15

R2

−3.1∗∗∗
(0.4)
−3.9∗∗
(1.5)
−7.5∗∗∗
(0.9)

−0.52 ∗∗∗
(0.13)
−0.53 ∗∗∗
(0.15)
−0.68 ∗∗∗
(0.27)

Two Chat1 − Two Chat0

Choose Chat 1 − Choose Chat 0

Three Chat1 − Three Chat0

−4.7∗∗
(2.1)

−4.0∗∗∗
(1.1)

0.2
(0.3)

−2.6
(2.9)

0.20

0.09 ∗∗∗
(0.02)

0.07 ∗
(0.03)

0.01
(0.01)

0.07 ∗∗∗
(0.02)

0.05

2,850

All

xi = 1
1,797

None

0.92 ∗∗∗
(0.00)

0.83 ∗∗∗
(0.02)

0.92 ∗∗∗
(0.01)

0.85 ∗∗∗
(0.03)

0.85 ∗∗∗
(0.04)

0.84 ∗∗∗
(0.04)

0.72 ∗∗∗
(0.02)

0.66 ∗∗∗
(0.01)

ai

None

21.9 ∗∗∗
(0.4)

28.4 ∗∗∗
(1.7)

23.7 ∗∗∗
(1.2)

27.7 ∗∗∗
(1.2)

26.9 ∗∗∗
(1.3)

26.8 ∗∗∗
(1.0)

32.4 ∗∗∗
(1.2)

35.0 ∗∗∗
(2.2)

Ti

−0.01
(0.02)

−0.03
(0.02)

−0.01
(0.01)

0.02
(0.06)

0.17

1,797

−0.22 ∗
(0.12)

−0.18
(0.15)

−0.35 ∗∗∗
(0.11)

0.20 ∗∗∗
(0.05)

0.03

1,425

All

None

T̃i , T̃i2
xi = 1

1.98 ∗∗∗
(0.03)

2.20 ∗∗∗
(0.10)

2.14 ∗∗∗
(0.11)

2.32 ∗∗∗
(0.09)

2.37 ∗∗∗
(0.12)

2.72 ∗∗∗
(0.16)

2.54 ∗∗∗
(0.19)

2.33 ∗∗∗
(0.19)

Q

0.85 ∗∗∗
(0.02)

0.87 ∗∗∗
(0.03)

0.88 ∗∗∗
(0.02)

0.90 ∗∗∗
(0.01)

0.85 ∗∗∗
(0.04)

0.86 ∗∗∗
(0.03)

0.77 ∗∗∗
(0.04)

0.75 ∗∗∗
(0.04)

ai

8.8∗∗∗
(1.8)

8.0 ∗∗∗
(2.6)

5.5∗∗∗
(1.4)

5.8
(4.0)

0.10

1,425

All

None

92.4 ∗∗∗
(0.5)

83.7 ∗∗∗
(2.2)

90.1 ∗∗∗
(1.9)

82.1 ∗∗∗
(3.6)

84.3 ∗∗∗
(2.4)

78.9 ∗∗∗
(3.4)

70.3 ∗∗∗
(1.3)

64.4 ∗∗∗
(4.1)

Π

−4.9∗
(2.6)

−2.9
(1.9)

−3.6∗∗
(1.6)

−0.2
(4.6)

0.03

1,425

All

None

40.8 ∗∗∗
(1.0)

45.7 ∗∗∗
(3.0)

45.2 ∗∗∗
(2.9)

48.2 ∗∗∗
(1.8)

49.9 ∗∗∗
(2.7)

53.5 ∗∗∗
(2.6)

45.3 ∗∗∗
(1.7)

45.5 ∗∗∗
(3.0)

πU

13.7 ∗∗∗
(2.4)

10.9 ∗∗∗
(3.6)

9.1∗∗∗
(0.4)

6.0
(3.8)

0.14

1,425

All

None

51.6 ∗∗∗
(1.4)

37.9 ∗∗∗
(3.5)

44.8 ∗∗∗
(3.3)

33.9 ∗∗∗
(4.0)

34.5 ∗∗∗
(2.1)

25.4 ∗∗∗
(2.9)

25.0 ∗∗∗
(2.7)

19.0 ∗∗∗
(2.3)

πD

−0.10 ∗∗∗
(0.02)

−0.07 ∗∗∗
(0.02)

−0.03
(0.02)

−0.05
(0.05)

0.12

1,324

Π>0

None

0.44 ∗∗∗
(0.01)

0.54 ∗∗∗
(0.03)

0.50 ∗∗∗
(0.03)

0.57 ∗∗∗
(0.03)

0.59 ∗∗∗
(0.03)

0.61 ∗∗∗
(0.03)

0.61 ∗∗∗
(0.03)

0.66 ∗∗∗
(0.02)

sU

−11.3 ∗∗
(4.1)

−9.4∗
(4.9)

−12.6 ∗∗∗
(3.3)

4.8
(3.4)

0.08

1,425

All

None

13.4 ∗∗∗
(1.0)

24.7 ∗∗∗
(3.2)

19.5 ∗∗∗
(3.9)

28.9 ∗∗∗
(4.0)

29.9 ∗∗∗
(4.2)

42.5 ∗∗∗
(5.4)

41.3 ∗∗∗
(6.4)

36.5 ∗∗∗
(4.9)

CS

Notes: Each column is an ordinary least squares regression including interactions between a set of treatment indicators and a set of (initial, end) period indicators. Interactions denoted with subscripts:
for example, No Chat 0 is the interaction between No Chat and the initial period consisting of rounds 1–5, and No Chat 1 is the interaction between No Chat and the end period consisting of rounds 6–15.
Exhaustive set of interactions included as regressors and constant omitted. Sample includes all 15 rounds. Sample for s U column excludes observations with Π = 0 for which s U undefined. A small subset
(6%) of these involve π D < 0; we set sU = 1 for these. Two regressions run for T i and a i , one for all contract offers and one for contract offers with x i = 1. The regression for a i with other controls includes
standardized tariff T̃i and its square, giving coefficients on the treatment indicators the interpretation of mean acceptance rates for contracts offering mean tariff. White (1980) heteroskedasticity-robust
standard errors clustered at session level reported in parentheses. Significantly different from 0 in a two-tailed test at the ∗ 10% level, ∗∗ 5% level, ∗∗∗ 1% level.

−5.3 ∗
(2.9)

−0.18
(0.19)

0.12

2,850

All

No Chat1 − No Chat0

Coefficient differences

1,425

Observations

All

30.4 ∗∗∗
(2.3)

2.80 ∗∗∗
(0.17)

Sample

33.5 ∗∗∗
(2.2)

3.32 ∗∗∗
(0.25)

None

32.9 ∗∗∗
(0.4)

3.62 ∗∗∗
(0.15)

None

38.2 ∗∗∗
(3.1)

Ti

3.80 ∗∗∗
(0.31)

Other controls

Three Chat1

Three Chat0

Choose Chat1

Choose Chat0

Two Chat1

Two Chat0

No Chat1

No Chat0

X

Dependent variable

Table 4: Trends in Treatment Effects

38
690

0.29
0.43

0.52
0.50

2.5
3.0
5.5

0.97
0.99
0.99

345

a
0.43

0.48
0.57

5.0
6.0
11.0

0.99
1.00
1.00

Channels
combined

690

0.72
0.72

0.15
0.27

0.8
1.0
1.8

0.32
0.39
0.42

Private
channels
separated

345

0.66
0.76

0.16
0.42

1.5
2.0
3.5

0.43
0.55
0.58

Private
channels
combined

345

0.46
0.61

0.28
0.70

3.0
6.6
9.6

0.86
0.93
0.95

Open
channel

Choose Chat

345

0.47
0.38

0.30
0.72

4.6
8.6
13.1

0.97
0.99
0.99

All
channels
combined

360

0.36
0.50

0.29
0.71

2.4
6.0
8.3

0.85
0.98
0.98

Three Chat

Notes: Sum of InitU and InitD down column can exceed 1 because time was measured in discrete units (seconds), resulting in some ties for initiator. Sum of InitU
and InitD down column can be less than 1 when that channel was not used, so there was no chat initiator, for some observations. a Correlation undefined because
variance of Any MesD equals 0.

Observations

Any MesU with Any MesD
Num MesU with Num Mes D

Correlations across market levels

InitU
InitD

Means of indicators for chat initiation

Num MesU
Num MesD
Num Mes

Means of number of messages sent

Any MesU
Any MesD
Any Mes

Means of indicators for some message sent

Channels
separated

Two Chat

Table 5: Chat Content Descriptive Statistics

39

−0.04∗∗
(0.01)

−0.03∗∗∗
(0.01)

0.00

R2
0.01

0.02

330
0.03

345

−0.05 ∗∗
(0.01)

0.04
(0.04)

0.02 ∗
(0.01)
−0.02
(0.01)

2.81∗∗∗
(0.20)

X

0.65∗∗∗
(0.10)

sU

0.10

345

0.59∗∗∗
(0.08)

−0.04∗∗
(0.01)

0.02
(0.03)

2.49∗∗∗
(0.18)

X

sU

0.02

327

−0.00
(0.00)

0.02 ∗
(0.01)

0.50∗∗∗
(0.04)

Choose Chat

0.06

327

0.16∗∗∗
(0.03)

−0.00
(0.00)

0.01
(0.01)

0.41∗∗∗
(0.03)

sU

0.08

360

−0.06 ∗
(0.02)

−0.08 ∗∗
(0.02)

2.92∗∗∗
(0.18)

X

0.00
(0.01)

0.54∗∗∗
(0.04)

sU

0.05

346

−0.01
(0.01)

Three Chat

Notes: Each column is an ordinary least squares regression. Sample includes all 15 rounds in each session. White (1980) heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors
clustered at session level reported in parentheses. Significantly different from 0 in a two-tailed test at the ∗ 10% level, ∗∗ 5% level, ∗∗∗ 1% level.

690

345

0.04
(0.06)

0.03
(0.04)

−0.00
(0.07)

3.04∗∗∗
(0.23)

X

1.50 ∗∗∗
(0.09)

Observations

Any Private

InitU

Num MesD

Num MesU

Constant

xi

Two Chat

Table 6: Regressions Including Chat Covariates

Figure 1: Vertical Structure

U
(x1,T1)

(x2,T2)

D1

D2

q1

q2

Consumers

Figure 2: Experimental Market Demand and Profit

70

100

100

90

50

50

Market price P(Q)

Panel B: Market Profit

60

Market profit Π(Q)

60

120

Panel A: Market Demand

40
30

30

18

20

80

60

72
60

40
25
20

10

5

0

0
1

2

3

4

5

Market quantity Q

6

1

2

3

4

5

Market quantity Q

6

Figure 3: Session-Level Means
5.0

Panel A: Total Quantities
X ●
Q ○

4.0

30

2.0

25

1.0

No
Chat

Two
Chat

Choose
Chat

Three
Chat

Panel C: Acceptance

●
Ti
Ti|xi=1 ○

35

3.0

1.0

Panel B: Tariff

40

20

No
Chat

Two
Chat

Choose
Chat

Three
Chat

Panel D: Profits

100
80

0.9

60
0.8
40
0.7

0.6

0.8

ai
●
ai|xi=1 ○
No
Chat

Two
Chat

Choose
Chat

Three
Chat

Panel E: Upstream Profit Share
sU ●

0.7

Π ○
πU ●
πD ○

20
0

60

No
Chat

Two
Chat

Choose
Chat

Three
Chat

Panel F: Consumer Surplus
CS ●

50
40

0.6
30
0.5

0.4

20

No
Chat

Two
Chat

Choose
Chat

Three
Chat

10

No
Chat

Two
Chat

Choose
Chat

Three
Chat

Notes: Small vertical jitter added to overlapping means where necessary to distinguish the four sessions for each treatment.
In Panels B and C, black dots represent all observations and white dots just for contract offers involving one unit.

Figure 4: Quantity Histograms

Proportion of observations

1.0

Panel A: Offered Quantity X

Three Chat

0.8

Choose Chat
Two Chat
No Chat

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0
0

1

2

3

4

5+

Quantity

Proportion of observations

1.0

Panel B: Market Quantity Q

Three Chat

0.8

Choose Chat
Two Chat
No Chat

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0
0

1

2

3

Quantity

4

5+

Figure 5: Accuracy and Mutual Agreement of Coded Chat

Proportion of Observations

1.0

Panel A: Two Chat
Quantity Offer

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0.0

0.0
2

3+

n.a.

Coder − Actual

1.0

Proportion of Observations

1

Panel C: Choose Chat
Quantity Offer

0.8

0

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

[6,10]

11+

n.a.

Panel D: Choose Chat
Tariff Offer

0.8
0.6

[1,5]

Coder − Actual

1.0

0.6

0.0

Panel B: Two Chat
Tariff Offer

0.8

0.6

0

0.0
0

1

2

3+

n.a.

Coder − Actual

1.0

Proportion of Observations

1.0

Panel E: Three Chat
Quantity Offer

0.8

0

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

11+

n.a.

Panel F: Three Chat
Tariff Offer

0.8
0.6

[6,10]

Coder − Actual

1.0

0.6

0.0

[1,5]

0.0
0

1

2

3+

Coder − Actual

n.a.

0

[1,5]

[6,10]

11+

Coder − Actual

n.a.

Notes: Two Chat sample consists of 350 contract offers, Choose Chat of 370, and Three Chat of 360, each of which is assessed
by two coders. Grey bar is proportion of sample for which coder’s guess of contractual variable agrees with other coder and
black for which his guess disagrees with the other coder. N.a. indicates an affirmative statement that coder could not guess
variable based on chat content.

