                         NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 NEWER NEED NOT BE BETTER:
            EVALUATING THE PENN WORLD TABLES
AND THE WORLD DEVELOPMENT INDICATORS USING NIGHTTIME LIGHTS

                                Maxim Pinkovskiy
                                Xavier Sala-i-Martin

                                 Working Paper 22216
                         http://www.nber.org/papers/w22216


               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                        1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                          Cambridge, MA 02138
                               May 2016




We are very grateful to Robert Feenstra, Robert Inklaar and Marcel Timmer for very helpful
comments. We are very grateful to Rachel Schuh for superb research assistance. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York or of the Federal Reserve
System.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Maxim Pinkovskiy and Xavier Sala-i-Martin. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Newer Need Not be Better: Evaluating the Penn World Tables and the World Development
Indicators Using Nighttime Lights
Maxim Pinkovskiy and Xavier Sala-i-Martin
NBER Working Paper No. 22216
May 2016
JEL No. O0,O4,O40

                                         ABSTRACT

Nighttime lights data are a measure of economic activity whose error is plausibly independent of
the measurement errors of most conventional indicators. Therefore, we can use nighttime lights as
an independent benchmark to assess existing measures of economic activity (Pinkovskiy and
Sala-i-Martin (2016)). We employ this insight to find out which vintages of the Penn World
Tables and of the World Development Indicators better estimate true income per capita. We find
that revisions of the PWT do not necessarily dominate their predecessors in terms of explaining
nighttime lights (and thus, predicting unobserved true income). In particular, we find that the
PWT 7.1 chain-based GDP series substantially outperforms the constant-price series in both PWT
8.0 and PWT 8.1, the two most recent vintages of the PWT. We additionally find that the World
Development Indicators are as good, and often better, measures of unobserved true income as are
any recent vintages of the Penn World Tables. Furthermore, we find that each new round of the
International Comparisons Programme (ICP) has improved the WDI's ability to predict log
unobserved true income. We also find that vintages tend to be good or bad at predicting
unobserved true income roughly equally across the sample period, and do not tend to be
particularly good at predicting unobserved income in the year of their price survey. We conclude
that GDP series based on unadjusted domestic growth rates alone predict growth rates of true
income better than series based on PPP adjustments to growth rates.


Maxim Pinkovskiy
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
33 Liberty Street
New York, NY 10045
maxim.pinkovskiy@ny.frb.org

Xavier Sala-i-Martin
Department of Economics
Columbia University
420 West 118th Street, 1005
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
xs23@columbia.edu
1     Introduction

The Penn World Table (PWT) is one of the most frequently used datasets in economics. The original paper

introducing it (Summers and Heston 1991) has 4827 cites on Google Scholar as of April 2016. The PWT

are frequently updated (they are now in their 8th vintage), and, typically, researchers use the latest version

available in their work. However, the di¤erent versions of the PWT do not necessarily coincide in the years

in which they overlap, and the resulting di¤erences are su¢ ciently large to in‡uence research outcomes.

Ciccone and Jarocinski (2008) …nd that variables found to be robust determinants of economic growth using

one vintage of the PWT no longer remain so when using the following vintage. Johnson et al. (2009) note

that countries ranked as slowest growing by one vintage may be ranked as fastest growing by the following

one. The problem is that we cannot tell which of the two datasets is wrong: as Johnson et al. (2009) note,

the di¤erences across these versions may represent mistakes in the old version, mistakes in the new version

or mistakes in both versions. If this is the case, users face a problem in deciding whether to adopt the most

recent update of the PWT and whether to stick with the old version.

    This problem is magni…ed further when one considers that the PWT no longer is the only source of

PPP-adjusted GDP estimates. The World Bank’s World Development Indicators (WDI) have been using

a di¤erent methodology from the PWT in order to adjust their estimates of national accounts data to

purchasing power parity for many years. Given that there are di¤erences in the PWT and WDI estimates of

GDP per capita for the same countries and years, it is also not obvious a priori which set of estimates to use.

Similarly to the PWT, the WDI are updated every time that the International Comparisons Program (ICP)

releases a new worldwide survey of prices. Some of these revisions have attracted controversy. For example,

the 2005 PPP revision decreased estimates of Chinese GDP by 40% over the previous version, while this

change was largely undone by the subsequent (2011) PPP revision. Hence, whenever researchers wish to use

PPP-adjusted estimates of national accounts data, they need to answer several questions. First, should they

immediately update to the newest version of the PWT? Second, should they use the PWT or the WDI?

Third, if they use the WDI, what version of the WDI should they use?

    One way to attempt to answer this is to examine the methodology of construction of the various datasets,

and select the one whose methods appear to have the most reasonable assumptions. For example, Johnson

et al. (2009) suggest that the WDI growth rate estimates may be subject to fewer sources of error than

those of the PWT, and may be preferable in that regard. Often, researchers just use the most recent dataset

available on the assumption that progress in dataset construction is linear, and because that dataset has the

most up-to-date coverage. However, absent a measure of GDP per capita that is independent of the di¤erent

PWT and WDI datasets, this methodology of dataset choice cannot really test that it is selecting the right



                                                      2
dataset.

   In this paper, we propose a di¤erent approach. We employ a data-driven way to assess how well di¤erent

series of GDP estimates measure unobserved true income relative to each other. If we had a measurement

of GDP per capita whose measurement error was uncorrelated with the measurement errors of the di¤erent

vintages of the Penn World Tables, it would be a straightforward matter to see which vintage was better

by comparing them both to the independent measure. We follow Pinkovskiy and Sala-i-Martin (2016) and

argue that such an independent measurement can be constructed using data on satellite-recorded nighttime

lights, which were …rst studied by Elvidge et al. (1993) and in economics by Henderson, Storeygard and Weil

(2012) and Chen and Nordhaus (2011). While errors in di¤erent vintages of the PWT and WDI come from

errors in the underlying national accounts data (such as faulty assumptions about economic relationships like

input-output tables), or from errors in calculating indicators of purchasing power parity between di¤erent

currencies, errors in the relationship between nighttime lights and economic output come from weather and

atmospheric disturbances that a¤ect how light is captured by the orbiting satellites.

   It is important to note that our approach is much more reduced-form than traditional analyses of the

virtues and defects of di¤erent ways of constructing national income statistics. For our empirical tests to

yield valid answers, we do not need to know anything about the way that the statistics that we are comparing

were constructed, except that we can assume their measurement error to be orthogonal to the measurement

error in the nighttime lights. As long as this assumption holds, our method yields impartial assessments

on how best to combine the statistics at hand to predict unobserved true income. On the other hand, our

method does not shed light on the methodological reasons why one estimator of GDP per capita might be

better than another.

   Our answer to the …rst question is that in general, newer versions of the Penn World Tables are not

necessarily better than their predecessors. In particular, the chain series index in PWT 7.1 appears to

have been more accurate than the closest variables to it in PWT 8.0 and PWT 8.1. This …nding is not

driven by nighttime lights being a biased indicator of output across industries and is not driven by any

subsample of the data (although there is interesting regional heterogeneity in the relative quality of the two

PWT vintages). More generally, no version of the PWT appears to have been unequivocally better than its

predecessor. On our second question, we …nd that the current version of the WDI better predicts nighttime

lights than any of the three latest versions of the PWT. This …nding, which dovetails with the conclusion

of Johnson et al. (2009), is partially explained by the fact that WDI 2011 is the …rst GDP database to

use the 2011 ICP in order to implement PPP adjustments. Looking at the di¤erent vintages of the World

Development Indicators, we answer our third question by noting that each successive PPP revision leads to

a version of the WDI that dominates its predecessor. In particular, the 2011 ICP is superior to the 2005 ICP


                                                      3
in measuring cross-country income di¤erences (though not necessarily growth rates), while the 2005 ICP is

likewise superior to the 1996 ICP.

     Johnson et al. (2009) note that the variability in PWT growth rates increases the further one goes away

from a given version’s benchmark year (the year of the price survey used to compute the PPP adjustments),

which is consistent with each price survey being most accurate in its benchmark year and losing accuracy

subsequently as prices change. In light of this fact, Johnson et al. (2009) propose that one should interpolate

between data in successive PWT versions (or create a chained index of adjacent PWT prices) to measure

cross-country di¤erences in any given year. We …nd only partial evidence for this suggestion. Instead, PWT

7.1 appears to perform well in all years even far away from 2005 (its benchmark year), while other vintages

also perform uniformly well or uniformly poorly regardless of which was their benchmark year. On the other

hand, the WDI 2011 vintage is unambiguously superior to its predecessors in all years, including long before

its benchmark year of 2011.

     The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the data. Section 3 explains the

empirical approach, which is very close to Pinkovskiy and Sala-i-Martin (2016). Sections 4, 5 and 6 present

the results. Section 7 concludes.



2      Data

2.1        Penn World Tables

      We use vintages 6.1 through 8.1 of the Penn World Table. The current version of the Penn World Table

(version 8) and its relationship to its predecessors is described in detail in Feenstra, Inklaar and Timmer

(2015). Before version 8, the Penn World Table took national accounts data in local currency from di¤erent

countries, as well as the results of price surveys from the International Comparisons Project (ICP) in a

given benchmark year, and then assigned purchasing power parities to countries with missing survey data in

the benchmark year by predicting them with a regression.1 Then, the PWT computed PPP-adjusted GDP

away from the benchmark year by weighting together national growth rates of consumption, investment and

government spending, with the weights being the current (PPP-adjusted) price component shares.2 Starting

with vintage 8.0, the PWT begun to present measures (such as "rgdpe") that use all available price survey
    1 Asof PWT 8.0, this imputation is no longer performed.
    2 Thisprocedure was used to produce the chain-weighted estimate of real GDP per capita (the variable "rgdpch"), which
was the real GDP series endorsed by the authors of the PWT (Johnson et al. 2009). The PWT also provides an alternative
Laspeyres-index based estimate of real GDP per capita ("rgdpl"), in which consumption, investment and government spending
growth rates of GDP are weighted by benchmark year PPP-adjusted shares. In PWTs 6.3 through 7.1, the authors also provided
an estimate in constant prices that was based on national accounts domestic absorption growth rates alone ("rgdpl2").
   While we focus our analysis on "rgdpch" as it is the variable endorsed by the authors of the PWT, we consider the performance
of the national growth-rate based measure in PWT8 ("rgdpna"), and we provide appendix tables showing results for "rgdpl"
and comparisons of "rgdpl" with "rgdpch."


                                                               4
years to compute GDP in constant prices away from the benchmark year, and that thus rely less on national

growth rates. Feenstra, Inklaar and Timmer (2015) argue that these measures are invariant to future price

data, and should not change over time unless the underlying national accounts data is revised, a feature that

was not present in earlier PWTs.

         We use the variable "rgdpch" from Penn World Tables vintages 6.1, 6.2, 6.3, 7.0, and 7.1. This

variable is no longer available for PWT version 8; however, the variable correspondence between PWT 7.1

and PWT 8.0 indicates that "rgdpe" is the closest corresponding variable to the GDP concept of "rgdpch."

This is intuitive since both "rgdpe" and "rgdpch" are constructed using growth rates that have been modi…ed

by price surveys, rather than using national growth rates alone. Feenstra, Inklaar and Timmer (2015) suggest

the use of "rgdpe" for "comparing living standards across countries and across years."

         PWT 8.0 and 8.1 also includes a version of real GDP that uses only national growth rates to compute

GDP away from the 2005 benchmark year, called "rgdpna."3 Feenstra, Inklaar and Timmer (2015) recom-

mend using this variable to "compare growth of GDP over time in each country," as opposed to comparing

living standards across countries, stating that "if the sole object is to compare the growth performance of

economies, we would recommend using the "rgdpna" series (and this is closest to earlier versions of PWT)."

In our analysis, we will consider the performance of both "rgdpna" and "rgdpe" because we wish to as-

sess whether using national growth rates is worse or better at estimating unobserved true income than is

using earlier ICP surveys to compute constant-dollar estimates of true income. However, we will focus on

"rgdpch" and "rgdpe" because one of the key e¤orts of the Penn World Tables is to provide estimates of

GDP in constant prices both across space and over time, which is the speci…c purpose of these variables.


2.2     World Development Indicators

      We use the variable "GDP per capita, constant (year of ICP) international dollars" from the 2006,

2013 and 2015 editions of the World Development Indicators. These editions correspond to the latest

measurements of GDP per capita using 1996 PPP, 2005 PPP and 2011 PPP respectively. Unlike the PWT,

the World Development Indicators do not modify national growth rates with information from the price

surveys at all, but simply use them as they appear in the national accounts. In particular, and again unlike

the PWT, the WDI take national growth rates directly from the national accounts without any further

editing, while the PWT performs some editing of the growth rates before using them (Johnson et al. 2009)
  3 Feenstra,   Inklaar and Timmer (2016) note that this variable is conceptually similar to "rgdpl" and "rgdpl2"




                                                               5
2.3     Nighttime Lights

      Data on lights at night is collected by the Defense Meteorological Satellite Program Operational Lines-

can System (DMSP-OLS) satellite program and is maintained and processed by the National Oceanic and

Atmospheric Administration (NGDC 2010). Satellites orbit the Earth, sending images of every location

between 65 degrees south latitude and 65 degrees north latitude at a resolution of 30 arcseconds (approxi-

mately 1 square km at the equator) at 20:30 to 22:00 local time.4 The images are processed to remove cloud

cover, snow and ephemeral lights (such as forest …res) to produce the …nal product available for download

at

                           http://www.ngdc.noaa.gov/dmsp/downloadV4composites.html


         The nighttime lights data is available from 1992 to 2013, and we use the data up to 2010 because

most series of GDP per capita represent vintages of the PWT or the WDI that were discontinued before

2010.

         Each pixel (1 square kilometer) in the luminosity data is assigned a digital number (DN) representing

its luminosity. The DNs are integers that range from 0 to 63. We construct our lights proxy for aggregate

income by summing up all the digital numbers across pixels

                                      63
                                      X
                        Lightsj;t =         i (# of pixels in country j and year t with DN = i )
                                      i=1

         This formula has been used to aggregate the nighttime lights maps into lights-based indices for

each country and year in nearly the entire literature on nighttime lights in economics, including Henderson,

Storeygard and Weil (2012), Chen and Nordhaus (2011) and Michalopoulos and Papaioannou (2013, 2014).

For years with multiple satellites available, we average the logarithms of our aggregate luminosity measure,

following Henderson, Storeygard and Weil (2012).

         It is very well established that lights are very strongly correlated with measures of economic activity,

such as national accounts GDP, in levels and growth rates. Henderson, Storeygard and Weil (2012) provide

these correlations, dramatic pictures of long-term di¤erences in incomes (North vs. South Korea) as well as

short-term ‡uctuations (the Asian …nancial crisis of 1997-8) re‡ected in lights. Michalopoulos and Papaioan-

nou (2013, 2014) present evidence that nighttime light density in a sample of African villages is correlated

with development indicators for these villages. Table I of our paper show that there are strong regression

relationships between log nighttime lights per capita and all of the PWT and WDI vintages.
   4 There are one or two satellites recording nighttime lights in each year, with an old satellite being retired and a new satellite

being launched every few years. The satellites from which data is avaliable are as follows: the satellite F-10 (in orbit 1992-
1994), F-12 (1994-1999), F-14 (1997-2003), F-15 (2000-2007), F-16 (2004-2009), F-18 (2010-2013), and the VIIRS satellite (April
2012-present).



                                                                 6
        Our paper is closest in spirit to Henderson, Storeygard and Weil (2012) and Chen and Nordhaus

(2011) in that it also considers the problem of optimally combining measures of economic activity. However,

instead of using nighttime lights as a component of such a measure, we use it as an auxiliary variable to help

uncover the correlation structure between the measures we do wish to use in our index. We also consider a

di¤erent type of predictor for true income that do either Henderson, Storeygard and Weil (2012) or Chen

and Nordhaus (2011), which allows us to make fewer assumptions on the data generating processes that we

consider.

        There are also well-known problems with the relation between nighttime lights and economic devel-

opment, which we need to take into account. Pixels with DN equal to 0 or 63 are top- or bottom-censored.

The light data also are a¤ected by overglow and blooming: light tends to travel to pixels outside of those

in which it originates, and light tends to be magni…ed over certain terrain types such as water and snow

cover (Doll 2008). Given that we will compute national-level estimates of aggregate lights, it is unlikely

that these sources of error will be large enough or su¢ ciently correlated with important variables that they

will confound our analysis. Another problem may be that satellites age in space and are eventually retired.

Hence, they might give inconsistent readings from year to year, or new satellites may give fundamentally

di¤erent readings from old ones. While some evidence of this problem exists, we will show in Section 3 that

our calculations are supported by assumptions that allow nighttime lights to have all of the data problems

described above, so long as nighttime lights are correlated with true income.

   Table I presents univariate regressions of log nighttime lights per capita on each of the 10 measures of

GDP per capita that we are considering. All regressions cluster standard errors by country, and all regressions

for a given PWT or WDI vintage are estimated on the sample of countries and years for which this vintage

is available. Each regression is run in four ways: without …xed e¤ects (Panel I), with year …xed e¤ects (Panel

II), with country …xed e¤ects (Panel III) and with country and year …xed e¤ects (Panel IV). We see that the

regression coe¢ cient on each GDP measure is statistically signi…cant at 1% and close to unity in magnitude.

For example, in row 1 and column 1 of the table, we see the coe¢ cient in a regression of log nighttime lights

per capita on log PWT 6.1 GDP per capita and a constant, which is equal to 1:192 (s.e. = 0:053), and which

has an R2 of 0.77. These results suggest a very strong association between log nighttime lights per capita

and log GDP per capita. Once we include country …xed e¤ects, the regression coe¢ cients generally decline

in magnitude, but remain statistically signi…cant at least at 10%. The exceptions are PWT 8.0 and PWT

8.1, whose coe¢ cients lose statistical signi…cance when both country and year …xed e¤ects are included. The

weak correlation of log PWT 8.0 and 8.1 GDP per capita with log lights per capita once country and year

…xed e¤ects are controlled for foreshadows the relatively poor quality of these measures as will be uncovered

in the later analysis.


                                                      7
2.4     Other Data

      We use a number of covariates to test the crucial maintained assumption of our paper; that nighttime

lights are correlated with di¤erent vintages of the PWT or the WDI only through their joint correlation

with true income (see the introduction and Section 3 below). These covariates are log capital formation as

percent of GDP, log export share, log import share, log general government expenditure share of GDP, and

log consumption share. All these covariates are from the World Development Indicators. The covariates will

be discussed at greater length in Section 4.



3     Mathematical Framework

      In this paper, we use the methodology of Pinkovskiy and Sala-i-Martin (2016) to determine which

datasets do a better job of computing unobserved true income per capita. Therefore, this section largely

parallels the exposition of that paper. As we will consider using more than two measurement variables to

predict true income per capita, we extend the approach of Pinkovskiy and Sala-i-Martin (2016) to multiple

variables. The general approach is closely related to the measurement error literature in econometrics,

including Adcock (1878), Griliches (1986), Fuller (1987), and Hausman (2001).

         Our goal is to …nd the best unbiased linear predictor of log true income per capita yi;t , which is the

log total per capita value added in country i and year t that we would compute if national statistical systems

could record all income being earned and if PPPs were perfectly computed. We will assume that this true

income per capita is generated through some exogenous stochastic process that may not be stationary (if

there is economic growth, for example). We cannot observe yi;t directly. Instead, we can observe data on
                                 L                                                            1      2         K
log light intensity per capita (yi;t ) and on K di¤erent measurements of log GDP per capita (yi;t ; yi;t ,...,yi;t

) for a sample of countries i and years t. These data are related to log true income per capita according to

the following system of equations (partialling out constants and other covariates):


                                                L       L
                                               yi;t =       yi;t + "L
                                                                    i;t                                        (1)



                                                1       1
                                               yi;t =       yi;t + "1i;t                                       (2)



                                                        ..
                                                         .




                                                        8
                                                               K        K
                                                              yi;t =          yi;t + "K
                                                                                      i;t                                     (3)


               We can express this system of K equations in vector form as


                                                               yi;t = yi;t + "i;t                                             (4)


where


                                                                        1      2         K               0
                                                      yi;t      =      yi;t ; yi;t ; :::yi;t
                                                                                                     0
                                                                          1       2            K
                                                                =             ;       ; :::
                                                                                                             0
                                                      "i;t      =      "1i;t ; "2i;t ; :::; "K
                                                                                             i;t



               In other words, each of the measured variables is a linear function of log true income per capita,

perturbed by some error.5 This framework is very similar to the one used by Henderson, Storeygard and Weil

(2012) and Chen and Nordhaus (2011), except that both of these papers used only one additional measure
                                                        1
of log GDP per capita and assumed that                       = 1, which means that log GDP per capita is an unbiased proxy

for log true income per capita. Instead, we do not assume that any of our measured proxies are unbiased,
                                                                                                                   6
and allow them to deviate from log true income per capita along a linear trend.

               We assume that the error terms in all three processes are mean independent of true income. That

is,



                                        E "L              1
                                           i;t jyi;t = E "i;t jyi;t =                         = E "K
                                                                                                   i;t jyi;t = 0            (A1)


               The critical assumption of this paper is that the error term in the lights equation (1), "L
                                                                                                         i;t , is uncor-

related with the error terms from the measurement equation (4) and following, "1i;t through "K
                                                                                             i;t conditional

      5 In   fact, we can substantially relax the functional form speci…cation in equation 1 to read
                                                               L
                                                              yi;t = fi;t yi;t + "L
                                                                                  i;t
  so long as
                                                             cov yi;t ; fi;t yi;t             6= 0
   (The analogous assumption in our framework is L 6= 0. We test and con…rm both of these assumptions in Section 4).
   This is a much more general framework that allows for errors in the lights data such as nonlinearity, top- and bottom-
coding, di¤erences in the lights-to-income relationship as satellites age and are replaced, and di¤erences in the lights-to-income
relationship across countries because of cultural attitudes to nighttime light and light pollution, as long as this heterogeneity
does not dominate the positive relation between nighttime lights and true income within our sample.
    6 Pinkovskiy and Sala-i-Martin (2016) …nd that when the measurement variables are log GDP per capita and log survey

means, it is the case that GDP > Surveys , with the di¤erence between the two slope coe¢ cients being signi…cant. In the
current paper, we do not typically …nd that the coe¢ cients on di¤erent measurements of log GDP per capita are statistically
(or economically) signi…cantly di¤erent from each other. Nevertheless, for the sake of generality, we allow the richer model with
potentially di¤erent coe¢ cients i , since it nests the model in which all the i ’s are the same.



                                                                          9
on true income:



                                                    E "i;t "L
                                                            i;t jyi;t = 0                                               (A2)


        Assumption A2 is the key reason for the use of the lights data. This assumption has also been made

in Henderson, Storeygard and Weil (2012) and Chen and Nordhaus (2011). This is a plausible assumption

because the data generating processes of the lights data and of the di¤erent measures of GDPare largely

disjoint; lights data is collected by satellites without respect for the statistical assumptions and methods of

the underlying countries, whereas measurements of GDP are obtained primarily by using business surveys

and the government’s accounts, as well as by using price surveys, all of which depend on asking people about

their income or about the prices that they face or o¤er.

        We are interested in …nding the best unbiased linear predictor of log true income per capita (yi;t ) in

terms of the vector yi;t ,
                                                                                0
                                                            zi;t =                  yi;t                                 (5)


   where     is a vector of weights on each of the GDP measurements that we are considering:


                                                                    1       2              K 0
                                                        =               ;       ; :::


        Hence, we want to compute the vector , which minimizes the mean squared error


                                                                                             0          2
                                         = arg min E                            yi;t             yi;t                    (6)


   subject to the constraint that the proxy be unbiased, that is:


                                                                0
                                              E (           ) yi;t jyi;t = yi;t                                          (7)


   This constraint can be reformulated as


                                                                        0
                                                            (       )           =1                                       (8)


   Now, plugging equation (4) into the value function equation (6), we obtain


                                         0          2                               0                       2       0
                             E    yi;t       yi;t           = (1                        )E        yi;t          +        (9)




                                                                        10
   where we de…ne

                                                = var ("i;t ) = E "i;t0 "0i;t


   and applying the constraint equation (8) eliminates the …rst term.

   Therefore, our constrained optimization problem becomes


                                                                           0
                                                       = arg min                                                       (10)


   subject to
                                                            0
                                                                    =1                                                 (11)


   Solving this problem with traditional constrained optimization techniques, we obtain the relation

                                                                    1       1
                                                        =       0                                                      (12)


   The population parameters      and       on the right hand-side of equation (12) are unknown, and we cannot

recover them without further assumptions. However, we now proceed to show that we can use the lights
                                                            1
data to recover a vector that is proportional to                , and thus to         . To do so, we compute the population

regression
                                                      L
                                                     yi;t = b0 + b0 yi;t                                               (13)


which is the regression of log lights per capita on all our proxies of log GDP per capita as well as on a

constant. It will be easy to show that

                                                          b=                                                           (14)


   for some unknown constant      . In other words, the vector of regression coe¢ cients on the measurment

variables is proportional to the vector of optimal weights of these measurement variables in the best unbiased

linear predictor (5). This …nding does not allow us to compute                        , but permits us to compute ratios of

the optimal weights to each other. For example, we can estimate the relative weight of GDP per capita

measurement #1, which will be given by


                                                 1                              b1
                                                                =
                                    1   +   2   + ::: +     K           b1 + b2 + :::: + bK

   To prove the equality (14), we note that the formula for the vector of regression coe¢ cients on the log

GDP per capita measures, b, is:




                                                                11
                                                                              1
                                                    bG = var (yi;t )                   L
                                                                                  cov yi;t ; yi;t                                                      (15)


    Under Assumptions A1 and A2, as well as equations (1) and (4), these variances and covariances can be

expressed as follows:7


                                                                           0
                                                     var (yi;t ) =             var yi;t +                                                              (16)



                                                         L                            L
                                                    cov yi;t ; yi;t =                     var yi;t                                                     (17)


    The expression for the inverse of var (yi;t ) can be simpli…ed using the Sherman-Morrison Formula to


                             1       0                       1            1                      1            1    0         1
               var (yi;t )       =       var yi;t +              =                           0                                   var yi;t              (18)
                                                                                   1+            var yi;t

    Substituting equations (18) and (17) into equation (15) leads to the formula8

                                                                 L
                                                                                            !
                                                                     var yi;t                        1
                                                   b=            0                                                                                     (19)
                                                           1+             var yi;t

                                                                                             1                                           var (yi;t )
    Note that the regression coe¢ cient b is just the vector                                     multiplied by a scalar,            1+   0   var (yi;t )
                                                                                                                                                           .

Hence,

                                                                      0           L
                                                                                                     !
                                                                                      var yi;t
                                                    b=(      )                0
                                                                 1+                   var yi;t

so the vector of regression coe¢ cients b is equal to the vector of optimal weights , multiplied by some
                      0    L
                             var (y )
unknown scalar = 1+ 0 var yi;t .
                                 ( i;t )
        Therefore, we can estimate the weight that should be placed on any measure of log GDP per capita

relative to the total weight on the K proxies for log true income per capita. We cannot estimate each weight

individually, or their sum, but we can estimate their ratios.

            The core of our analysis in Section 4 will be running regressions similar to equation (13) presenting es-
                                                                                                                    b1             b2                    K
timates of the optimal relative weights on the measurements of GDP per capita                                              ;
                                                                                                             b1 +b2 +:::+bK b1 +b2 +:::+bK
                                                                                                                                           ; :::; b1 +b2b+:::+bK ;

when the elementary speci…cations in equations (1) and (4) –and hence, regression equation (13) –are aug-
   7 In   the more general model in which we assume a general functional form for the lights-true income relation (see footnote
                                          L
8), equation (17) replaces the term           var yi;t   with the term cov yi;t ; fi;t yi;t              .
   8 In                                                                                                                L
          the more general model in footnote 8, equation (19) should replace the term                                      var yi;t      with the term
cov yi;t ; fi;t yi;t   . The rest of the logic proceeds exactly as in the text.



                                                                          12
mented by covariates, when they are estimated on di¤erent samples, or when when they are estimated using

di¤erent lights measures.



4     Results 1: Is Newer Really Better?

     Table IIA presents the estimates of the coe¢ cients of the bivariate regressions of log nighttime lights

per capita on the variables "rgdpch" or "rgdpe" in each vintage of the PWT and on its successor. Again,

all regressions cluster standard errors by country and are run on somewhat di¤erent samples because of the

di¤erent availabilities of the vintages. If all newer vintages of the PWT were superior to their predecessors in

measuring log true income per capita, and since we have shown in Section 4 that the coe¢ cients of each such

regression are proportional to the weights that each PWT and its successor would receive in a best unbiased

linear predictor of log true income per capita, we should expect the coe¢ cients on each newer vintage to be

statistically signi…cant and large, and the coe¢ cients on each older vintage to be small in magnitude and

statistically insigni…cant. We observe that this does not happen in general. Instead, the coe¢ cients on the

older vintages are routinely statistically signi…cant and larger than the coe¢ cients on the newer vintages.

Particularly striking is the comparison of PWT 7.1 and PWT 8.0 in Column 2, for which the coe¢ cient on

the older (PWT 7.1) vintage is statistically signi…cant and large regardless of which …xed e¤ects are included,

while the coe¢ cient on PWT 8.0 is small and insigni…cant. For example, in row 3 of column 2, in which

country …xed e¤ects are included, the coe¢ cient on PWT 7.1 is a precisely measured 0:473 (s.e.= 0:115),

while the coe¢ cient on PWT 8.0 is           0:040 (s.e. = 0:095), which is essentially zero. Motivated by this

…nding, we also compare the most recent vintage of the PWT, 8.1, with PWT 7.1 in Column 7. We likewise

…nd that the regression coe¢ cient on PWT 7.1 is statistically signi…cant and large regardless of the …xed

e¤ects, while the coe¢ cient on PWT 8.1 is uniformly small.

    We can formalize these observations by considering the optimal weights on each pair of successive PWT

vintages implied by these bivariate regressions. They are presented in Table IIB. Since these weights are

quotients of regression coe¢ cients, their distribution may di¤er substantially from normality in …nite samples,

so instead of reporting asymptotic standard errors, we report boostrapped 95% con…dence intervals.9 A

natural null hypothesis to consider if newer PWT vintages should indeed be better is that the newer vintage

of the PWT should receive unit weight (and the older vintage should receive zero weight). We …nd that this

null hypothesis is rejected for 12 out of the 28 cells of this table (7 comparisons with 4 di¤erent types of

…xed e¤ects), or for nearly half the tests, which is very unlikely to happen by chance if the null hypothesis
   9 We employ 120 block-bootstrapped samples in which the bootstrap block is the country. We should note that the two

weights are functionally dependent on each other since they add up to unity. Therefore, the statistics for the second weight
in each regression can be derived from subtracting the statistics for the …rst weight from unity, and contain no additional
information. They are reported merely for the convenience of the reader.


                                                            13
is indeed true. Moreover, we often fail to reject the null hypothesis that the old vintage should receive unit

weight. In particular, regardless of which …xed e¤ects are included, we can always reject the null hypothesis

that the newer vintage has unit weight, we can always fail to reject the null hypothesis that the old vintage

has unit weight, and we can almost always reject the null hypothesis that the weights are equal for the

comparisons between PWT 7.1 and PWT 8.0, as well as between PWT 7.1 and PWT 8.1 (columns 2 and 7

respectively). For example, in row 1, column 2, we regress log nighttime lights per capita on log PWT 8.0

GDP per capita and log PWT 7.1 GDP per capita, as well as on a constant. We obtain that the optimal

weight on log PWT 8.0 GDP per capita is 0:13, with a con…dence interval of ( 0:38; 0:54), which excludes

unity. On the other hand, the optimal weight on log PWT 7.1 GDP per capita is 0:86, with a con…dence

interval of (0:45; 1:3), which includes unity. In fact, for this cell, the hypothesis that we should use only the

older vintage to calculate unobserved true income per capita would be maintained.

    For comparisons between the other vintages, the estimated optimal weights vary much more with whether

the regression tries to …t the log or the growth rate of output (whether or not country …xed e¤ects are

included). For example, in the comparison between PWT 6.1 and PWT 6.2 (the case study considered in

Johnson et. al.), the point estimates suggest placing a weight of about 40% on PWT 6.1 and a weight of

about 60% on PWT 6.2 in the optimal proxy if country …xed e¤ects are not included, and weights of 47%

and 53% respectively if country …xed e¤ects are included. Similar ambiguity exists in the comparison of

PWT 6.3 and PWT 7 (the …rst vintage to use the price data from ICP 2005 for purchasing power parity

adjustments), where the results without country …xed e¤ects suggest an even split of the weight between the

two vintages, while the results with country …xed e¤ects suggest placing all the weight on PWT 6.3 (albeit

with large con…dence intervals on the latter prediction). However, as long as the measurement error in lights

is taken as exogenous, even these ambiguous results are radically inconsistent with the hypothesis that each

PWT revision represents a clear improvement over the previous vintage, because this hypothesis predicts a

weight of unity on each successive new vintage of the PWT in a comparison with its predecessor.

    Particularly provocative is the …nding that PWT 7.1 appears to outperform PWT 8.1, the latest vintage

of the PWT. To illustrate this …nding, we plot the partial correlation between nighttime lights and PWT

7.1 in Figure III, and the partial correlation between nighttime lights and PWT 8.1 in Figure IV, both of

the partial correlations having been taken from the bivariate regression of log nighttime lights per capita on

log GDP per capita from PWT 7.1 and log GDP per capita from PWT 8.1 without further …xed e¤ects.

Recall that the slopes of the lines of best …t on these graphs are the regression coe¢ cients.10 We see that
  1 0 All …gures exclude several countries that generate outliers, namely Zimbabwe, El Salvador, Nigeria, Syria, Yemen, Maldives,

Bermuda, Equatorial Guinea, and Singapore. Using this restricted sample, the partial regression coe¢ cients are 0.13 (s.e.=0.19)
on PWT 8.1 and 0.92 (s.e.=0.19) on PWT 7.1. These coe¢ cients are slightly more favorable to PWT 8.1 than the coe¢ cients
in Panel I, Column 7 of Table IIA.




                                                               14
there is a visible partial correlation between the residuals of log nighttime lights and the residuals of PWT

7.1 log GDP per capita once PWT 8.1 log GDP per capita has been controlled for. On the other hand, once

PWT 7.1 log GDP per capita is controlled for, the correlation between the residuals of log nighttime lights

and of PWT 8.1 log GDP per capita is virtually nil. This …nding is contrasted with the very robust raw

correlations of either series with log nighttime lights per capita (Figures I and II).

   In tables III and IV we further subject the comparison of PWT 7.1 and PWT 8.1 to greater scrutiny

by adding control variables to test our identi…cation assumption, varying the nighttime lights measure,

reweighting the speci…cation, and investigating robustness to and heterogeneity across subsamples. A concern

in using nighttime lights as a measure of output is that errors in the nighttime lights may be correlated with

errors in the PWT through the component-by-component methodology of PWT construction. We recall

that the PWT separately constructs and extrapolates PPPs for consumption goods, investment goods and

government purchases. Therefore, it is possible (or at least conceivable) that mistakes in the PWT could

take the form of systematic underestimation (or overestimation) of either one of these categories. Now,

consumption, investment and government spending may have di¤erent ratios of light to economic output,

for example if investment and government spending are very light-intensive (as it might involve building

infrastructure), while consumption is not as light intensive (if it involves getting haircuts or other services). If

di¤erent PWT vintages systematically understate or overstate some of these components, this could generate

a correlation between their measurement error and that of the nighttime lights, violating Assumption A2. To

address this concern, in column 2 of Table III we re-run our baseline speci…cations for the optimal weights

on PWT 7.1 and PWT 8.1 while controlling for the log fractions of output constituted by consumption,

investment (gross capital formation), government spending, imports and exports. In column 3 of the same

table, we additionally include both the levels and the squares of the control variables to allow for nonlinear

associations. The optimal weight on PWT 7.1, which is close to unity in the baseline speci…cations, remains

larger than unity when all controls are included without country …xed e¤ects, but declines to a statistically

signi…cant 0.73 if country and year …xed e¤ects are included along with the controls. However, if all the

controls are included together with their squares, the optimal weight on PWT 7.1 in the country and year

…xed e¤ects speci…cation rises back to 0.77. Hence, these regressions provide some evidence that PWT 7.1

remains of value even when compared to the current version of the PWT. The next three columns of Table

III (columns 4, 5 and 6) reestimate the baseline speci…cation with di¤erent ways of parametrizing nighttime

lights: using light density in place of lights per capita, calibrating the function aggregating digital numbers

into a single index to best match GDP per capita in the OECD, and using the fraction of the population

residing in lit areas (DN > 0) instead of lights per capita. For all of these robustness checks, the optimal

weight on PWT 7.1 does not fall below 0.57, and is either statistically signi…cantly di¤erent from zero or


                                                        15
above unity in magnitude. Furthermore, we may be interested in how the two PWT vintages compare for the

more populous countries, rather than treating each country equally. Therefore, in column 7, we reestimate

our baseline speci…cations weighing each observation by population. Regardless of …xed e¤ects, the optimal

weight on PWT 7.1 exceeds unity in all speci…cations.

   Feenstra, Inklaar and Timmer (2015) show that estimates of the Balassa-Samuelson e¤ect depend on

whether or not the sample of countries and years is restricted to the ones for which contemporaneous price

data is available, or the ones for which prices need only to be interpolated rather than extrapolated. We

present estimates of the optimal weights on PWT 7.1 and PWT 8.1 using only this sample (the benchmark-

interpolated sample) in Column 8 of Table III. Our results for the comparison of PWT 7.1 and PWT 8.1

are unchanged in regressions without …xed e¤ects if the sample is restricted to benchmark or interpolated

ICP data. If …xed e¤ects are included, PWT 7.1 still receives a positive weight while PWT 8.1 receives a

negative weight, but the estimates are no longer statistically signi…cant.

   In Table IV we investigate whether our counterintuitive result that PWT 7.1 is better than the more

recent PWT 8.1 is driven by speci…c regions of the world. Columns 2 through 6 exclude one at a time the

developed world, Asia, Latin America, post-Communist countries and Africa from the baseline regression.

The optimal weight on PWT 7.1 drops to a statistically signi…cant 0.67 if Asia is excluded in the year …xed

e¤ects speci…cation, but most of the estimates of the optimal weight are close to or above unity (including

estimates when Asia is excluded but with country …xed e¤ects). Therefore, our …nding is not driven by

any speci…c region. However, there is substantial heterogeneity in the optimal weight on PWT 7.1 across

regions. Columns 7 through 11 present estimates of our baseline regression on each of the above regions taken

separately. Not surprisingly, PWT 7.1 receives a very high weight (224% in the no …xed e¤ects speci…cation)

when the regression is ran for Asia (column 8), but it also receives a greater weight than does PWT 8.1

when the regression is run only for Africa (column 11). For the regression in Latin America alone (column

9), PWT 7.1 receives a weight of 47% if country …xed e¤ects are not included but statistically signi…cant

weights of 61% and 107% in the country and country and year …xed e¤ects speci…cations. For the regression

in the developed world, no weight estimates are signi…cant and the standard errors explode. This suggests

that the PWT 7.1 and the PWT 8.1 largely agree (up to an a¢ ne transformation) on the log and growth

rate of output in the developed world, a …nding that is not surprising given the better statistics of developed

countries. Only for the post-Communist countries does PWT 8.1 outperform PWT 7.1, which it does for all

four combinations of …xed e¤ects. Therefore, users of the PWT primarily interested in the post-Communist

countries did not err if they mechanically updated the Penn World Table after vintage 7.1.




                                                      16
4.1     Alternative Ways of Measuring GDP in PWT 7.1 and PWT 8.1

      We have shown in the preceding section is that the variable "rgdpch" from PWT 7.1 is better correlated

with nighttime lights than is the variable "rgdpe" from PWT 8.1. However, both PWT 7.1 and PWT

8.1 present alternative measures of GDP to these variables. As we discussed in Section 2, PWT 7.1 also

provides a variable, "rgdpl2", which uses edited national accounts growth rates to compute real GDP away

from the benchmark year without incorporating any information about prices. PWT 8.1 provides a variable,

"rgdpna", which is also based on national accounts growth rates instead of price data. Feenstra, Inklaar

and Timmer (2015) describe "rgdpna" as "similar to the series ’rgdpl2’... except that (i) ’rgdpl2’used the

real growth rate of absorption from the national accounts of each country rather than the real growth rate

of GDP." Additionally, PWT 8 presented real PPP-adjusted output-based measures of economic activity

for the …rst time within the sequence of PWT datasets. The dataset now includes a new variable "rgdpo,"

which Feenstra, Inklaar and Timmer (2015) describe as useful for "comparing the productive capacity across

countries and across years."

         We have focused our analysis on the variables "rgdpch" and "rgdpe" because the "rgdpch" variable

has been the one most widely used by the economics literature, while "rgdpe" is the closest variable in concept

to "rgdpch" out of the PWT 8 real GDP measures. Moreover, the "rgdpch" and "rgdpe" line of variables in

the PWT captures the dataset’s distinctive approach of modifying national accounts growth rates by using

information from one or more price surveys, while its "rgdpl2" and "rgdpna" line of variables does not, and is

conceptually closer to the real GDP measures in the WDI. As we mentioned in Section 2, Feenstra, Inklaar

and Timmer (2015) recommend using "rgdpna" over "rgdpe" for pure time-series comparisons of growth

rates, stating that "rgdpna" measures are closest to national accounts growth rates. However, Feenstra,

Inklaar and Timmer (2015) also suggest that the conceptual foundation for "rgdpe" is stronger than it is

for "rgdpna," as the former is expressed in prices that are constant over both time and space, while the

latter is calculated only in constant national prices. In this subsection, we explore how well these alternative

measures of economic activity explain nighttime lights.

         Table V presents estimates of optimal weights on di¤erent measures of economic activity in the best

unbiased linear estimator on true income, as derived from a regression of nighttime lights on these measures.

Column 1 shows the results of the comparison between "rgdpna" from PWT 8.1 and "rgdpch" from PWT 7.1.

As in our previous analysis, for the speci…cations without country …xed e¤ects, PWT 7.1 "rgdpch" receives

a much higher and statistically signi…cant optimal weight (0.86), although we cannot reject at 5% the null

hypothesis that the weights are equal. However, when we add country …xed e¤ects, PWT 8.1 "rgdpna" now

has the much higher optimal weight (1.91), which is statistically signi…cantly di¤erent from 0 (as well as from



                                                      17
0.5) with 95% con…dence, which is consistent with Feenstra, Inklaar and Timmer (2015)’s recommendation to

use this variable to measure growth rates. Column 2 shows the results of a similar comparison between PWT

8.1 "rgdpchna" and PWT 7.1 "rgdpl2," the variable in PWT 7.1 that is conceptually closest to "rgdpna"

in using national accounts growth rates alone. The results are almost identical to Column 1; the PWT 7.1

variable receives the higher weight in speci…cations without country …xed e¤ects, while the PWT 8.1 variable

receives the higher weight in speci…cations with …xed e¤ects. Therefore, while the PWT 8.1 variable "rgdpe"

appears to predict nighttime lights worse than PWT 7.1 "rgdpch" does, other variables in PWT 8.1 have

improved over PWT 7.1 in predicting growth rates of nighttime lights.11

         In fact, we can show that there are good reasons to prefer "rgdpna" over "rgdpe" among the PWT 8.1

variables. Column 3 presents optimal weights on "rgdpna" and "rgdpe" in a best unbiased linear predictor

of true income. Not surprisingly, "rgdpna" receives the much larger weight whenever country …xed e¤ects

are included. However, when country …xed e¤ects are excluded, "rgdpna" still receives the higher weight

(around 0.6), although this weight is not signi…cantly di¤erent from 0.5 (or from 0) with 95% con…dence.

Hence, the variable "rgdpna" may have better cross-sectional performance than "rgdpe," and may be better

to use for cross-sectional, as well as for pure time-series comparisons of economic activity.

         Lastly, we compare the capacity of expenditure-based ("rgdpe") and output-based ("rgdpo") mea-

sures of economic activity in PWT 8.1 to explain nighttime lights. Column 4 presents the resulting optimal

weights. We see that in all speci…cations (with and without country …xed e¤ects), the expenditure-based

measure "rgdpe" has the larger weight, which is statistically signi…cantly di¤erent from 0 in all speci…cations,

and statistically di¤erent from 0.5 in all speci…cations but the country and year …xed e¤ects one. This may

not be surprising, as nighttime lights do not measure productivity alone, but rather consumption.



5     Results 2: Is Newer Better for the WDI?

The Penn World Tables are not the only source of comprehensive panel data on PPP-adjusted GDP. The

World Development Indicators (WDI), published by the World Bank, also report PPP-adjusted GDP data,

with the panel starting a bit later than the Penn World Tables (in the late 1970s and 1980s for most

countries). Unlike the PWT, the WDI does not attempt to extrapolate PPPs to nonbenchmark years, but

computes all GDPs away from the benchmark year using domestic growth rates (Johnson et al. 2009).

    Have the WDI vintages been getting better over time, or have their revisions also produced setbacks,
   1 1 The superiority of national accounts growth rate based Laspeyres indices (like "rgdpna" or "rgdpl2") over chained indices

(like "rgdpch") in predicting nighttime lights growth does not generalize to previous vintages of the PWT. Appendix Table AI
presents optimal weights on chained and Laspeyres indices for every vintage of the PWT. We observe that for multiple vintages
(though not PWT 8.1), the chained index receives a larger weight than the Laspeyres one does. (The two tend to be very
similar in the cross section, and tend to receive statistically indistinguishably di¤erent weights in analyses without country …xed
e¤ects).


                                                                18
like with the PWT? Given that the WDI, unlike the PWT, performs minimal extrapolation of PPP rates,

it is the preferred dataset to use to examine changes in the PPPs induced by di¤erent rounds of the ICP

over the last two decades. Particularly interesting in this regard is the incorporation of the results from

ICP 2005 price survey, which was the …rst to include China, and which led to a substantial increase in the

estimates of developing world prices (and hence, a substantial decrease to developing world PPP-adjusted

GDP). One criticism of this price survey round was that it did not use prices from rural China, which are

lower than prices in Chinese cities, and which may have contributed to the …ndings of higher prices. The

subsequent price survey round, ICP 2011, used prices from both urban and rural parts of China and largely

reversed this price increase. On the other hand, ICP 2005 was the …rst price survey round to include many

developing countries, and may have provided a better picture of the heterogeneity and interrelation of prices

in the developing world.

    We present estimates of optimal weights and their bootstrapped standard errors for comparisons between

di¤erent vintages of the WDI and di¤erent vintages of the PWT in Table VI. Each cell of the table corre-

sponds to a bivariate regression of log nighttime lights per capita on the logs of the two measures speci…ed,

with various combinations of …xed e¤ects as controls. Column 1 compares the WDI with 2011 PPP to the

WDI with 2005 PPP. We see that WDI 2011 gets nearly full weight (and we cannot reject a weight of unity)

relative to WDI 2005 when we do not use country …xed e¤ects (therefore, looking at cross-country income

di¤erences as well as growth rates), but that WDI 2005 gets more weight than WDI 2011 (neither of the

weights being statistically di¤erent from zero) if country …xed e¤ects are included. The same pattern can

be observed in the comparison of WDI 2011 with WDI 1996, and of WDI 2005 with WDI 1996 (in columns

2 and 3 respectively). Each time, the newer WDI vintage gets full or nearly full weight in the regressions

without country …xed e¤ects, and the older WDI vintage gets a larger (or a much larger) weight in the

regressions with country …xed e¤ects. Since the WDI does not use PPPs to calculate GDP growth rates, it

is reasonable to look only at the speci…cations without country …xed e¤ects if we wish to assess the overall

impact of the PPP adjustments. Then, our result is clear: each successive wave of PPP adjustments follow-

ing ICP price surveys has, on net, been an improvement. However, the later vintages of the WDI are only

unambiguously better than their predecessors if we are interested in calculating levels of economic activity,

rather than economic growth.



6     Results 3: Should We Use the PWT or the WDI?

Johnson et al. (2009) pose the question of whether the PWT extrapolation procedure generates so much

error that it might be worthwhile to use the WDI, and answer it in the a¢ rmative on theoretical grounds.


                                                     19
One of the contributions of our paper is that under our assumption, we can use the nighttime lights data

to determine whether it is better to use a given WDI vintage or a given PWT vintage without having to

appeal to detailed hypotheses about the likely provenance of the measurement errors. Columns 4 through

9 compare WDI 2011 and WDI 2005 with the three most recent vintages of the PWT: 7.1, 8.0 and 8.1.

We selected these vintages for comparison because they are the most recent vintages and because PWT 7.1

appeared to outperform PWT 8.0 and PWT 8.1 in the tests of Table IIB. We observe that in all these

regressions, the WDI receives a larger weight than does the PWT. Out of the 24 tests in these columns, only

2 (when comparing WDI 2005 and PWT 7.1 without …xed e¤ects) do not reject a unit weight on the PWT,

while none of these tests reject a unit weight on the WDI. The two tests mentioned in the previous sentence

are also the only ones in which the point estimates suggest relatively equal weights for the PWT and for

the WDI (55% on the WDI and 45% on the PWT). Hence, if one has to make a choice, it is best to use

the latest vintage of the WDI rather than the latest vintage of the PWT (or any of the three last vintages

of the PWT, for that matter). Since we …nd that WDI 2011 (which uses the 2011 ICP) outperforms PWT

7.1 (which uses 2005 ICP) in column 4, while WDI 2005 (which also uses 2005 ICP) does not (column 7),

it is reasonable to guess that part of the explanation for the advantage of recent WDI vintages over recent

PWT vintages lies in the latest vintage of the WDI already incorporating price data from the most recent

ICP. However, it is still better to use WDI 2005 than either of the two latest vintages of the PWT, and it

is appears to be marginally better to use WDI 2005 than PWT 7.1 (although we cannot reject that using

either one is equivalent). This …nding roughly con…rms the intution of Johnson et al (2009) that the WDI

may be superior to the PWT.

   In light of our discussion of alternative measures of economic activity in PWT 8.1, it is worth asking

whether the WDI outperforms measures of economic activity in the PWT that are based on national accounts

growth rates alone. We have seen that PWT 8.1 "rgdpna" improves over PWT 7.1 "rgdpch" in measuring

growth rates. Columns 5 and 6 of Table V present comparisons of PWT 8.1 "rgdpchna" to WDI 2011 and

WDI 2005, respectively. In all speci…cations, the WDI variables have a weight higher than unity (although

it is typically not statistically signi…cantly di¤erent from 0.5, or, when country …xed e¤ects are included,

from zero), consistent with our conclusion in the previous paragraph.


6.1    Performance of the PWT and WDI against Market Exchange Rates

The rationale for creating PPP-adjusted measures of economic activity such as the PWT and the WDI

is the idea that market exchange rates do not accurately re‡ect the prices of many goods (in particular,

nontradeable goods) that are important in an economy. If nighttime lights are good measures of economic



                                                    20
activity, then we should see that regressing log nighttime lights per capita on log GDP per capita at PPP

and log GDP per capita at market exchange rates produces a high partial correlation of nighttime lights

with the PPP-adjusted measure and a low one with GDP per capita at market exchange rates. However,

the methodology of PPP adjustment has been best developed for cross sections, with the problem of how

best to combine very incomplete information on prices across time still being open. When comparing PPP-

adjusted growth rates with growth rates measured with market exchange rates, the noise coming from PPP

adjustment might dominate the bias coming from the use of market exchange rates rather than actual prices.

    In Table VII we present optimal weights on various PPP-adjusted measures of log GDP per capita and

on log GDP per capita at market exchange rates with and without country and year …xed e¤ects. When

country …xed e¤ects are excluded, all PPP-adjusted measures of GDP per capita except the WDI in 1996

receive a weight of greater than 0:5 (and statistically signi…cantly larger than 0:5 in 13 out of the 22 such

speci…cations). However, when country …xed e¤ects are included (so that we are essentially looking at growth

rates), the PPP-adjusted measures from the PWT chain series receive a much lower weight than does GDP

per capita at market exchange rates. On the other hand, the PPP-adjusted measures from the WDI, and

the national accounts-based measure "rgdpna" in PWT 8.1 all receive a much higher weight than does GDP

per capita at market exchange rates (which receives a negative weight, usually less than             1, and sometimes

statistically signi…cant). These results suggest that the approach to calculating growth rates taken by the

WDI improves over using market exchange rates, while the approach taken in all vintages of the PWT has

not.12



7     Results 4: Should We Use More than One Series?

     While head-to-head comparisons of di¤erent GDP series are instructive, it is obvious that the optimal

way to compute GDP may be to combine several di¤erent GDP series into a single proxy. All of the tests

that we have done so far have essentially asked how we can best combine two GDP series to form such a

proxy. But why should we stop at using only two series?

    We are not the …rst to suggest using multiple GDP series to form an optimal combination to measure

GDP. Johnson et al. (2009) innovatively suggest estimating GDP in a particular year using the PWT vintage

for which that year is the benchmark year (the year of the price survey underlying the GDP estimates). For

years that are not benchmark years, Johnson et al. (2009) suggest chaining the price indices of the preceding

and the succeeding benchmark year. The procedure envisioned by Johnson et al. (2009) would therefore use
  1 2 While these results are for the variables "rgdpch" and "rgdpe" in the PWT, using the Laspeyres measures "rgdpl" and

"rgdpl2" produces qualitatively similar results except for PWT 6.1, where "rgdpl" receives a weight of about 0:6




                                                           21
GDP vintages unedited in their benchmark years, while interpolating between them away from benchmark

years.

   Armed with the nighttime lights data, we can assess the procedure of Johnson et al. (2009). In Table

VIII, we look at the optimal combination of the latest created vintages in each benchmark year. There are

four such vintages: PWT 6.1 (for 1996), PWT 6.2 (for 2000, a partial update of the 1996 price survey),

PWT 7.1 (for 2005) and PWT 8.1 (for the multiple benchmark year approach now used for the PWT).

Given the hypothesis of Johnson et al. (2009), the optimal weight should be close to unity for each vintage

near its benchmark year, and decline for years that are far away from its benchmark year. (Alternatively,

the optimal weight should be unity for PWT 8.1 because it already implements chaining of prices across

benchmark years). We estimate optimal weights for the four PWT vintages year-by-year for most years

in our sample (including all the benchmark years). We observe that PWT 7.1 receives a fairly large and

statistically signi…cant weight in every year that we consider, including those that are far away from its

benchmark year, 2005. PWT 6.2 also receives a large weight, but it tends not to be signi…cantly di¤erent

from zero for many years (including 2000, its benchmark year). PWT 8.1 always receives a statistically

insigni…cant, or a negative weight. Finally, PWT 6.1 always receives a statistically insigni…cant weight that

is equal to a very small 0:17 in its benchmark year, 1996.

   The logic of Johnson et al. (2009) would suggest that interpolating between the di¤erent vintages of the

WDI would also be an improvement (although this is not a suggestion made in their paper). We investigate

this hypothesis in Table IX, in which we include all the three WDI series in the regression. Each series

corresponds to its benchmark year, or the year of the price survey that was used to construct the estimates.

Notably, the estimates from PPP 2011 have already been incorporated into the WDI, so the benchmark

years to consider are 1996, 2005 and 2011 (the modi…cation of the 1996 data in 2000 apparently not having

been incorporated into a WDI series). We see an even starker result. In all years, including those that are

far from 2011, the WDI 2011 series receives a weight that is large (never less than 0:75) and statistically

insigni…cantly di¤erent from unity. All the other series receive much smaller weights (never in excess of

0:25), and their con…dence intervals always contain zero and never contain unity. Hence, using the latest

WDI series appears to strongly dominate using a weighted average of the preceding series.

   Therefore, while Johnson et al. (2009) appear to be right in claiming that incorporating historical data

may be useful in improving present estimates, it seems that assigning relatively time-constant weights to

each series is better than assigning shifting weights that are functions of the benchmark year. In particular,

for the WDI, there is strong evidence that using the current vintage is the optimal approach. For the PWT,

a weighted average of several vintages (in particular, PWT 7.1 and PWT 6.2) may be better than any

individual vintage, but the weights should not vary over time except after PWT 6.2 is discontinued.


                                                     22
8     Conclusion

In this paper, we show that if nighttime lights are an independent measure of output, they can act as an

impartial referee between two other measures of output (Pinkovskiy and Sala-i-Martin 2016). We use this

result to assess the quality of di¤erent ways of computing PPP-adjusted GDP per capita. Our investigation

yields several conclusions, both for the methodologist attempting to improve existing measures of GDP, and

for the practitioner deciding on which of the existing GDP series to use.

    First, we …nd that the latest vintage of the Penn World Tables (PWT8) is not the best available measure of

GDP. Instead, the updating process of the Penn World Tables has generally not involved linear improvement

of the dataset, and has in particular produced a deterioration since vintage 7.1 in measuring cross-country

di¤erences in levels of economic activity. Moreover, the latest vintage of the World Development Indicators

better explains variations in both the level and the growth rate of nighttime lights than does PWT8.

    Second, we learn that each successive price survey of the International Comparisons Programme has

generally led to better estimates of PPP-adjusted GDP per capita, including the controversial 2005 round.

In particular, successive versions of the World Development Indicators have shown steady improvement in

measuring di¤erences in income levels across countries (however, it may be the case that older versions of

the WDI capture economic growth better than newer versions do).

    Third, and more fundamentally, we show that so long as nighttime lights growth rates can be taken as

unbiased predictors of the growth rates of true income, the best way to measure growth rates of true income

is to use growth rate series based on the national accounts alone, and without the adjustments employed by

almost all the versions of the Penn World Tables. The GDP series most successful in explaining nighttime

lights growth rates (the WDI and PWT 8.1 "rgdpna") compute growth rates based on national accounts

alone, and without incorporating any information about PPPs. On the other hand, the series that goes

furthest in attempting to construct a GDP index in prices that were truly constant across space and over

time (PWT 8.1 "rgdpe") is less useful in explaining nighttime lights growth than any of the above series.

    Finally, our results also provide guidance for researchers seeking a GDP series to use, for example in

investigating the determinants of cross-country income di¤erences, or in modeling the macroeconomy. One

way to select such a series from among the most recent ones (those based on 2005 PPP or later) is to ask

whether there is a unique series that, in every head-to-head comparison against another recent series and

for every set of country and year …xed e¤ects, either receives the larger (and statistically signi…cant) weight

in the optimal linear combination of the two, or, if it receives the smaller weight, neither of the weights are

statistically signi…cantly di¤erent from zero. Based on this criterion, we recommend using the WDI 2011

series. When compared in the cross section against PWT 7.1, PWT 8 (the "rgdpe" series as well as the



                                                      23
"rgdpna" series), or WDI 2005, it receives a larger and statistically signi…cant weight (which always is above

0:77). When country …xed e¤ects are included in the comparison, WDI 2011 receives the larger weight (which

is always greater than unity) except when compared against WDI 2005, but for that comparison, none of

the weights are signi…cant. Hence, if one seeks a single GDP series to measure both levels and growth rates

of economic activity, the best candidate appears to be WDI 2011.



Author A¢ liations

Maxim Pinkovskiy, Federal Reserve Bank of New York

   Xavier Sala-i-Martin, J. and M. Grossman Professor of Economics, Columbia University and NBER



References
 [1] Adcock, R. J. "A Problem in Least Squares." Analyst. 5 (1878), pp. 53-4.
 [2] Barro, Robert J. "Economic Growth in a Cross Section of Countries." Quarterly Journal of Economics
     106 (1991), no. 2: 407-443.
 [3] Barro, Robert J. "Human Capital and Growth in Cross-Country Regressions." Swedish Economic
     Policy Review 6 (1999), no. 2: 237-277.
 [4] Barro, Robert J., and Xavier Sala-i-Martin. "Convergence." Journal of Political Economy 100
     (1992), no. 2: 223-251.
 [5] Center for International Earth Science Information Network (CIESIN), Columbia Uni-
     versity; and Centro Internacional de Agricultura Tropical (CIAT). Gridded Population of the
     World, Version 3 (GPWv3). Palisades, NY: Socioeconomic Data and Applications Center (SEDAC),
     Columbia University. Available at http://sedac.ciesin.columbia.edu/gpw. 2005.
 [6] Chen, Xi, and William D. Nordhaus. "Using Luminosity Data as a Proxy for Economic Statistics"
     Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 2011
 [7] Ciccone, Antonio and Marek Jarocinski. "Determinants of Economic Growth: Will Data Tell?"
     American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 2 (2010):4, 222-246.
 [8] Doll, Christopher N.H. "CIESIN Thematic Guide to Night-time Light Remote Sensing and its
     Applications." Manuscript. 2008
 [9] Doll, Christopher N.H., Jan Peter Muller and Jeremy G. Morley. "Mapping Regional Eco-
     nomic Activity from Night-Time Light Satellite Imagery." Ecological Economics 57 (2006): 75-92
[10] Elvidge, Christopher D. and Kimberly E. Baugh, Eric A. Kihn, Herbert W. Kroehl, Ethan
     R. Davis. "Mapping City Lights With Nighttime Data from the DMSP Operational Linescan System."
     Photogrammetric Engineering & Remote Sensing 63 (1997), no. 6: 727-734
[11] Elvidge, Christopher D., Kimberly E. Baugh, John B. Dietz, Theodore Bland, Paul C.
     Sutton and Herbert W. Kroehl. "Radiance Calibration of DMSP-OLS Low-Light Imaging Data of
     Human Settlements." Remote Sensing of Environment, 68 (1999) no. 1:77-88.
[12] Elvidge, Christopher D., Kimberly E. Baugh, Sharolyn. J. Anderson, Paul. C. Sutton,
     and Tilottama Ghosh. "The Night Light Development Index (NLDI): A Spatially Explicit Measure
     of Human Development from Satellite Data." Social Geography 7 (2012), 23–35.


                                                     24
[13] Feenstra, Robert C., Robert Inklaar and Marcel P. Timmer, “The Next Generation of the Penn
     World Table,” American Economic Review 105 (2015). vol.10, 3150-3182
[14] Fuller, Wayne. Measurement Error Models. New York: John Wiley & Sons. 1987.
[15] Ghosh, Tilottama, Rebecca L. Powell, Christopher D. Elvidge, Kimberly E. Baugh, Paul C.
     Sutton and Sharolyn Anderson. "Shedding Light on the Global Distribution of Economic Activity."
     The Open Geography Journal 3 (2010), 148-161.
[16] Griliches, Zvi. “Economic Data Issues,” in Handbook of Econometrics, Volume III. Z. Griliches and
     M. D. Intriligator, eds. Amsterdam, New York and Oxford: North-Holland, pp. 1465–514. 1986.
[17] Hausman, Jerry A. "Mismeasured Variables in Econometric Analysis: Problems from the Right and
     Problems from the Left." Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 15 (2001), No. 4, pp. 57-67.
[18] Henderson, J. Vernon, Adam Storeygard, and David N. Weil. "Measuring Economic Growth
     from Outer Space." American Economic Review 102 (2012), no. 2: 994-1028.
[19] Johnson, Simon, William Larson, Chris Papageorgiou, and Arvind Subramanian. "Is Newer
     Better? Penn World Table Revisions and Their Impact on Growth Estimates." Journal of Monetary
     Economics 60 (2013), no. 2: 255-274.
[20] Baugh, Kimberly E., Christopher D. Elvidge, Tilottama Ghosh and Daniel Ziskin. "Devel-
     opment of a 2009 Stable Lights Product using DMSP-OLS Data." Proceedings of the 30th Asia-Paci…c
     Advanced Network Meeting. 2009.

[21] Michalopoulos, Stelios, and Elias Papaioannou. "Pre-colonial Ethnic Institutions and Contem-
     porary African Development." Econometrica 81 (2013), no. 1: 113-152.
[22] Michalopoulos, Stelios, and Elias Papaioannou. "National Institutions and Sub-national Devel-
     opment in Africa." Quarterly Journal of Economics 129 (2014) no. 1:151-213.

[23] National     Geophysical    Data   Center  (NGDC). “Version 4 DMSP-OLS Night-
     time    Lights  Time     Series.” National Oceanic     and     Atmospheric     Administration.
     http://www.ngdc.noaa.gov/dmsp/downloadV4composites.html. 2010. (accessed September 2013).
[24] Pinkovskiy, Maxim L. "Economic Discontinuities at Borders: Estimation Using Satellite Data of
     Lights at Night." mimeo, Federal Reserve Bank of New York. 2014.

[25] Pinkovskiy, Maxim L. and Xavier Sala-i-Martin. "Lights, Camera, ... Income! Illuminating the
     National Accounts-Household Surveys Debate," Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming 2016.
[26] Summers, Robert, and Alan Heston. "The Penn World Table (Mark 5): an expanded set of
     international comparisons, 1950-1987." NBER Working Paper R1562.1991.

[27] Sutton, Paul C., Christopher D. Elvidge and Tilottama Ghosh. "Estimation of Gross Domestic
     Product at Sub-National Scales using Nighttime Satellite Imagery." International Journal of Ecological
     Economics & Statistics 8 (2007) :5-21
[28] World Bank. World Development Indicators. Washington, DC. 2006, 2014, 2015.




                                                    25
     Tables
                                                                                    Table I                                                                          (I)



                                                                     Baseline Univariate Regressions
                                                             Dependent Variable is Log Light Intensity per Capita
                                        (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)          (5)        (6)           (7)        (8)          (9)          (10)
                                       PWT         PWT           PWT         PWT         PWT         PWT         PWT         WDI          WDI           WDI
                                        6.1         6.2           6.3         7.0         7.1         8.0         8.1      1996 PPP     2005 PPP      2011 PPP
                                                                              No Fixed E¤ ects
            Log GDP per Capita       1.192***     1.152***      1.129***    1.001***    1.002***    .989***     1.012***    1.135***      1.053***     1.058***
                                      (.053)       (.051)        (.050)      (.047)      (.044)      (.050)      (.054)      (.058)        (.042)       (.047)
            Within R2                   .77          .72           .71         .72         .72         .69         .68         .69           .74          .75
                                                                              Year Fixed E¤ ects
            Log GDP per Capita       1.189***     1.156***      1.135***    1.009***   1.007***     .996***     1.024***    1.139***      1.058***     1.066***
                                      (.054)       (.052)        (.051)      (.047)     (.045)       (.050)      (.054)      (.058)        (.042)       (.048)
            Within R2                   .77          .72           .72         .73        .73          .70         .68         .70           .74          .76




26
                                                                            Country Fixed E¤ ects
            Log GDP per Capita        .706***      .464***       .330**      .271**     .448***     .327***     .321***      .474***      .582***      .483***
                                       (.133)       (.168)       (.140)      (.112)      (.129)      (.102)      (.095)       (.124)       (.118)       (.116)
            Within R2                    .13          .08          .06         .05         .11         .10         .10          .07          .17          .12
                                                                        Country and Year Fixed E¤ ects
            Log GDP per Capita        .407***      .353**         .335*       .314*      .374**        .170        .170      .536***      .525***      .471***
                                       (.122)      (.180)        (.191)      (.176)      (.184)      (.113)      (.114)       (.176)       (.177)       (.178)
            Within R2                    .05         .04           .05         .04         .06         .02         .02          .08          .11          .09
            Number of Obs.              1287        2199          2916        3287        3484        3280        3280         2304         3562         3313
            Number of Clusters          165          182           184         184         184         164         164          166          179          178

         Table I presents estimates for the regressions of log nighttime lights per capita on measures of log GDP per capita at PPP, as described in Section 4. Standard
     errors in parentheses are clustered by country. Data on nighttime lights from the NOAA, data on measures of log GDP per capita from the Penn World Tables
     and from the World Development Indicators.
                                                                                             Table IIA                                                                                        (IIA)



                                                                       Baseline Regressions: New Vintages of PWT
                                                                      Dependent Variable is Log Light Intensity per Capita
                                                                (1)               (2)                (3)                (4)                (5)                (6)               (7)
                                                          PWT 8.1 vs.        PWT 8.0 vs.       PWT 7.1 vs.        PWT 7.0 vs.        PWT 6.3 vs.        PWT 6.2 vs.       PWT 8.1 vs.
                                                           PWT 8.0            PWT 7.1           PWT 7.0            PWT 6.3            PWT 6.2            PWT 6.1           PWT 7.1
                                                                                           No Fixed E¤ ects
               New PWT Log GDP per Capita                    -2.096***             .129             .716              .585***            .616**              .748*              -.012
                                                               (.758)            (.256)           (.450)               (.224)            (.241)             (.386)             (.274)
               Old PWT Log GDP per Capita                     3.007***          .859***             .287                .490*            .546**               .443            .991***
                                                               (.717)            (.255)           (.461)               (.252)            (.246)             (.390)             (.263)
               Within R2                                         .71               .73              .72                  .73               .73                .78                .73
                                                                                          Year Fixed E¤ ects
               New PWT Log GDP per Capita                    -1.998**              .140            .666               .587***            .615**              .734*               .013
                                                              (.835)             (.256)          (.465)                (.224)            (.241)             (.389)             (.276)




27
               Old PWT Log GDP per Capita                    2.915***           .854***            .345                 .493*            .550**               .455            .973***
                                                              (.788)             (.255)          (.476)                (.252)            (.246)             (.392)             (.264)
               Within R2                                        .71                .73             .73                   .74               .73                .78                .73
                                                                                        Country Fixed E¤ ects
               New PWT Log GDP per Capita                       .404              -.040          .332            .002                     .401*               .345              -.016
                                                              (.352)             (.095)        (.206)          (.216)                    (.207)             (.258)             (.091)
               Old PWT Log GDP per Capita                      -.086            .473***         -.026           .327*                      .109            .382***            .449***
                                                              (.389)             (.115)        (.183)          (.195)                    (.181)             (.128)             (.134)
               Within R2                                        .10                .12           .06             .06                       .09                .13                .12
                                                                                  Country and Year Fixed E¤ ects
               New PWT Log GDP per Capita                       .008              -.084              .343               .050               .337               .183             -.066
                                                              (.354)             (.094)            (.215)             (.248)             (.217)             (.202)            (.096)
               Old PWT Log GDP per Capita                       .161            .434***              .018               .287               .066              .204*            .414**
                                                              (.351)             (.159)            (.186)             (.189)             (.170)             (.113)            (.165)
               Within R2                                        .02                .06               .05                .05                .05                .04               .06
               Number of Obs.                                  3280               3104              3287               2916               2198               1258              3104
               Number of Clusters                               164               164               184                 184                182                163               164

     Table IIA presents estim ates for the regressions of log nighttim e lights p er capita on estim ates of log GDP p er capita at PPP from each vintage of the PW T and from its preceding vintage,
     as describ ed in Section 4. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by country. Data on nighttim e lights from the NOAA, data on m easures of log G DP p er capita from the Penn
     World Tables and from the World Developm ent Indicators.
                                                                                   Table IIB                                                                  (IIB)



                                                               Optimal Weights: New Vintages of PWT
                                                          Dependent Variable is Log Light Intensity per Capita
                                                    (1)               (2)                (3)             (4)           (5)           (6)            (7)
                                                PWT 8.1 vs.      PWT 8.0 vs.        PWT 7.1 vs.      PWT 7.0 vs.   PWT 6.3 vs.   PWT 6.2 vs.    PWT 8.1 vs.
                                                 PWT 8.0          PWT 7.1            PWT 7.0          PWT 6.3       PWT 6.2       PWT 6.1        PWT 7.1
                                                                                No Fixed E¤ ects
             New PWT Log GDP per Capita           -2.30***             .13                .71            .54**        .52***          .62*           -.01
                                                 (-4.2,-.63)       (-.38,.54)         (-.21,1.5)      (.16,1.08)    (.07,1.08)     (-.03,1.2)    (-.55,.47)
             Old PWT Log GDP per Capita            3.30***           .86***               .28             .45          .47*            .37        1.01***
                                                  (1.6,5.2)        (.45,1.3)          (-.56,1.2)      (-.08,.83)    (-.08,.92)    (-.24,1.03)    (.52,1.5)
                                                                                Year Fixed E¤ ects
             New PWT Log GDP per Capita           -2.18***             .14            .65                .54**        .52***          .61*           .01
                                                 (-4.3,-.46)       (-.38,.54)     (-.29,1.5)          (.16,1.08)    (.07,1.07)     (-.05,1.2)    (-.54,.49)
             Old PWT Log GDP per Capita            3.18***           .85***           .34                 .45*         .47*            .38         .98***




28
                                                  (1.4,5.3)        (.45,1.3)      (-.55,1.2)          (-.08,.83)    (-.07,.92)    (-.23,1.05)    (.50,1.5)
                                                                           Country Fixed E¤ ects
             New PWT Log GDP per Capita             1.27               -.09          1.08            .00                .78           .47*           -.03
                                                 (-.70,3.5)        (-.54,.34)     (-.68,3.3)     (-2.4,.99)         (-.18,1.9)    (-.04,.86)     (-.48,.35)
             Old PWT Log GDP per Capita              -.27           1.09***           -.08          .99**               .21          .52**        1.03***
                                                 (-2.5,1.7)        (.65,1.5)      (-2.3,1.6)      (.00,3.4)         (-.90,1.1)    (.13,1.04)     (.64,1.4)
                                                                      Country and Year Fixed E¤ ects
             New PWT Log GDP per Capita               .05             -.24                .94              .14          .83            .47          -.19
                                                 (-13.1,4.1)       (-1.3,.28)         (-.63,4.7)      (-4.4,1.5)    (-.79,4.5)    (-.59,1.1)     (-1.1,.32)
             Old PWT Log GDP per Capita               .94           1.24***               .05              .85          .16           .52*        1.19***
                                                 (-3.1,14.1)       (.71,2.3)          (-3.7,1.6)      (-.52,5.4)    (-3.5,1.7)    (-.11,1.5)     (.67,2.1)
             Number of Obs.                         3280             3104                3287            2916          2198          1258          3104
             Number of Clusters                      164              164                184              184          182            163           164

      Table IIB presents estimates for the optimal weights within a best unbiased linear predictor of log unobserved true income using log GDP per capita at PPP
     from each vintage of the PWT and from its preceding vintage, as described in Section 4. We provide country-block-bootstrapped 95% con…dence intervals for
     each weight in parentheses below the estimate. Data on nighttime lights from the NOAA, data on measures of log GDP per capita from the Penn World Tables
     and from the World Development Indicators.
                                                                                              Table III                                                                                        (III)


                                                                       PWT 8.1 vs. PWT 7.1: Robustness Checks
                                                       Dependent Variable is Log Light Intensity per Capita unless otherwise noted
                                                                 (1)           (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)             (6)             (7)             (8)
                                                              Baseline          Additional                               Di¤erent
                                                                                 Covariates                              Dep. Var.
                                                                              All      Nonlinear    Light               Calibrated      Fraction        Weighted          Bench
                                                                            Controls    Controls   Density                Lights        Pop. Lit.                         Mark
                                                                                       No Fixed E¤ ects
                    Log GDP per Capita PWT 8.1                   -.01           -.02           -.00       .11                -.05           -.01            -.28            -.05
                                                             (-.55,.47)     (-.79,.46)     (-.71,.43) (-.34,.61)         (-.85,.59)     (-.55,.50)      (-.56,.67)      (-1.01,.41)
                    Log GDP per Capita PWT 7.1                1.01***        1.02***        1.00***     .88***            1.05***        1.01***         1.28***          1.05***
                                                             (.52,1.5)      (.53,1.7)      (.56,1.7)  (.38,1.3)          (.40,1.8)      (.49,1.5)       (.32,1.5)        (.58,2.0)
                                                                                          Year Fixed E¤ ects
                    Log GDP per Capita PWT 8.1                   .01            .00            .02         .11               -.10           -.08            -.25             -.01
                                                             (-.54,.49)     (-.79,.49)     (-.66,.46)  (-.35,.62)        (-.98,.57)     (-.67,.47)      (-.52,.66)       (-.95,.43)




29
                    Log GDP per Capita PWT 7.1                 .98***         .99***         .97***      .88***           1.10***        1.08***         1.25***          1.01***
                                                             (.50,1.5)      (.50,1.7)      (.53,1.6)   (.37,1.3)         (.42,1.9)      (.52,1.6)       (.33,1.5)        (.56,1.9)
                                                                                         Country Fixed E¤ ects
                    Log GDP per Capita PWT 8.1                   -.03         .26*         .22        .26**         -.04                  .42***            -.54           -8.05
                                                             (-.48,.35)    (-.01,.63)  (-.03,.61)  (.01,.57)    (-.26,.23)              (.16,1.01)     (-.88,1.06)     (-23.7,22.9)
                    Log GDP per Capita PWT 7.1                1.03***        .73***      .77***      .73***      1.04***                    .57*           1.54*            9.05
                                                             (.64,1.4)     (.36,1.01) (.38,1.03)   (.42,.98)    (.76,1.2)               (-.01,.83)      (-.06,1.8)     (-21.9,24.7)
                                                                                 Country and Year Fixed E¤ ects
                    Log GDP per Capita PWT 8.1                  -.19            .18             .16           .09            -.44           -.09            -.44             .05
                                                             (-1.1,.32)     (-.40,.70)     (-.24,.61)    (-.51,.60)      (-2.4,.12)     (-11.7,6.7)     (-.83,.67)       (-.68,1.7)
                    Log GDP per Capita PWT 7.1                1.19***         .81***         .83***         .90**         1.44***           1.09          1.44**             .94
                                                             (.67,2.1)      (.29,1.4)      (.38,1.2)     (.39,1.5)       (.87,3.4)      (-5.7,12.7)     (.32,1.8)        (-.79,1.6)
                    Number of Obs.                             3104            2901           2901          3104            3096            775            3104             1049
                    Number of Clusters                          164            159             159           164            164             158            164              158
      Table III presents estim ates for the optim al weights within a b est unbiased linear predictor of log unobserved true incom e using log GDP p er capita at PPP from PW T 8.1 and the sam e
     variable from PW T 7.1, as describ ed in Section 4. We provide country-block-b ootstrapp ed 95% con…dence intervals for each weight in parentheses b elow the estim ate. Colum ns 2 and 3
     include log fractions of W DI GDP constituted by consum ption, gross capital form ation, governm ent sp ending, exp orts and im p orts as controls in the regression equation (13), which is
     used to construct the optim al weights. Colum ns 4, 5 and 6 use log nighttim e light density p er square kilom eter, a calibrated-param eter aggregator of nighttim e lights and the fraction of
     the p opulation of a country residing in lit areas as dep endent variables in the regression equation (13). Colum n 7 weights each country-year by its p opulation. Colum n 8 estim ates the
     baseline sp eci…cation over countries and years with b enchm ark or interp olated price data. Data on p opulation from the Gridded Population of the World database.
                                                                                Table IV                                                                                  (IV)



                                                               Weights in the Optimal Proxy: Subsamples
                                                              Dependent Variable is Log Light Intensity per Capita
                               (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)          (6)           (7)            (8)             (9)          (10)               (11)
                            Baseline                          Excluding Regions                                                             Only Regions
                                         No Rich World    No Asia    No Latin    No Post      No Africa        Rich World         Asia          Latin         Post               Africa
                                                                     America      Comm.                                                        America       Comm.
                                                                              No Fixed E¤ ects
      PWT 8.1                   -.01           .04           .30           -.03         -.12          -.32          -.52        -1.24***           .53       1.10***             .40
                            (-.55,.47)     (-.61,.43)    (-.13,.63)    (-1.03,.55) (-1.07,.33)    (-1.2,.39)    (-6.1,18.5)    (-2.9,-.24)     (-3.1,4.0)   (.42,1.6)        (-.67,.82)
      PWT 7.1                1.01***         .95***        .69***        1.03***      1.12***       1.32***         1.52         2.24***           .46          -.10           .59***
                            (.52,1.5)      (.56,1.6)     (.36,1.1)      (.44,2.0)    (.66,2.0)     (.60,2.2)    (-17.5,7.1)     (1.2,3.9)      (-3.0,4.1)   (-.69,.57)       (.17,1.6)
                                                                                 Year Fixed E¤ ects
      PWT 8.1                   .01            .07           .32            .00          -.09         -.30          -.55         -1.31**           .52        1.06**             .42
                            (-.54,.49)     (-.57,.45)    (-.12,.64)    (-1.01,.58) (-1.08,.36)    (-1.2,.39)    (-24.4,7.3)    (-3.2,-.17)     (-5.3,7.1)   (.36,1.6)        (-.61,.82)




30
      PWT 7.1                 .98***         .92***        .67***         .99***       1.09***      1.30***         1.55         2.31***           .47          -.06           .57***
                            (.50,1.5)      (.54,1.5)     (.35,1.1)      (.41,2.0)     (.63,2.0)    (.60,2.2)    (-6.3,25.4)     (1.1,4.2)      (-6.1,6.3)   (-.63,.63)       (.17,1.6)
                                                                                Country Fixed E¤ ects
      PWT 8.1                   -.03           -.04          .09           -.05        -.24        .12             -50.29          -.17          .38*         1.52***           -.66
                            (-.48,.35)     (-.58,.46)    (-.82,.82)    (-.53,.42)  (-.98,.14)  (-.19,.47)      (-56.1,126.4)   (-.59,.15)     (-.03,.87)    (1.00,2.7)      (-23.2,6.0)
      PWT 7.1                1.03***        1.04***         .90**       1.05***     1.24***      .87***             51.29       1.17***         .61***         -.52**           1.66
                            (.64,1.4)      (.53,1.5)     (.17,1.8)     (.57,1.5)   (.85,1.9)   (.52,1.1)       (-125.4,57.1)   (.84,1.5)      (.12,1.03)    (-1.7,-.00)     (-5.0,24.2)
                                                                         Country and Year Fixed E¤ ects
      PWT 8.1                  -.19           -.18            -.13         -.17          -.66         .08          -1.51          -.19            -.07        .96***            -1.48
                            (-1.1,.32)     (-2.2,.43)    (-2.3,1.08)   (-3.3,.52)    (-9.3,3.6)   (-.28,.35)   (-83.1,13.8)    (-2.4,.24)      (-1.2,.61)   (.46,2.6)        (-9.9,8.1)
      PWT 7.1                1.19***        1.18***          1.13*       1.17**         1.66*       .91***          2.51         1.19**          1.07**         .03             2.48
                            (.67,2.1)      (.56,3.2)      (-.08,3.3)   (.47,4.3)    (-2.6,10.3)   (.64,1.2)    (-12.8,84.1)    (.75,3.4)       (.38,2.2)    (-1.6,.53)      (-7.1,10.9)
      Number of Obs.          3104           2591            2439         2534          2584         2268          513            665             570          520              836
      Number of Clusters       164            137             129         134            136         120            27             35              30           28               44

      Table IV presents estimates for the optimal weights within a best unbiased linear predictor of log unobserved true income using log GDP per capita at PPP
     from PWT 8.1 and the same variable from PWT 7.1, as described in Section 4. We provide country-block-bootstrapped 95% con…dence intervals for each weight
     in parentheses below the estimate. Columns 2 through 6 perform estimation excluding the listed region. Columns 7 through 11 perform estimation only on the
     listed region. Data on nighttime lights from the NOAA, data on measures of log GDP per capita from the Penn World Tables and from the World Development
     Indicators
                                                                                Table V                                                                         (V)



                                                      Optimal Weights: Other GDP Variables in PWT8.1
                                                         Dependent Variable is Log Light Intensity per Capita
                                           (1)                   (2)                      (3)                   (4)               (5)                (6)
                                    PWT 8.1 NA vs.        PWT 8.1 NA vs.          PWT 8.1 NA vs.     PWT 8.1 RGDPE vs.     PWT 8.1 NA vs.      PWT 8.1 NA vs.
                                   PWT 7.1 RGDPCH        PWT 7.1 Laspeyres        PWT 8.1 RGDPE       PWT 8.1 RGDPO          WDI 2011            WDI 2005
                                                                             No Fixed E¤ ects
      PWT 8.1 NA (or RGDPE)                 .13                   .12                    .62*              1.65***                 -.00              -.14
                                        (-.47,.56)            (-.50,.56)              (-.02,1.1)          (.70,2.3)            (-.43,.44)         (-1.5,.50)
      Other GDP Series                    .86***                .87***                    .37                -.65               1.00***            1.14***
                                        (.43,1.4)             (.43,1.5)              (-.12,1.02)          (-1.3,.29)           (.55,1.4)          (.49,2.5)
                                                                            Year Fixed E¤ ects
      PWT 8.1 NA (or RGDPE)                 .14                   .13                    .59*              1.64***                 .00               -.13
                                        (-.45,.57)            (-.49,.57)             (-.04,1.09)          (.60,2.3)            (-.39,.45)         (-1.5,.54)
      Other GDP Series                    .85***                .86***                    .40                -.64                .99***            1.13***




31
                                        (.42,1.4)             (.42,1.4)              (-.09,1.04)          (-1.3,.39)           (.54,1.3)          (.45,2.5)
                                                                           Country Fixed E¤ ects
      PWT 8.1 NA (or RGDPE)              1.91***                1.79**              1.17***                1.16***                 -.32                -.57
                                        (.65,2.8)             (.49,2.7)            (.73,1.5)              (.55,1.8)            (-1.8,1.3)         (-1.8,1.03)
      Other GDP Series                     -.91                  -.79                  -.17                   -.16                1.32                1.57*
                                        (-1.8,.34)            (-1.7,.50)           (-.50,.26)             (-.87,.44)           (-.38,2.8)          (-.03,2.8)
                                                                    Country and Year Fixed E¤ ects
      PWT 8.1 NA (or RGDPE)              1.91***               1.79***                 1.26***              1.31**                 -.46               -.89
                                        (.73,3.3)             (.49,3.2)               (.78,1.7)           (.26,3.1)            (-3.3,1.4)         (-4.6,.77)
      Other GDP Series                      -.91                 -.79                     -.26                -.31                 1.46             1.89**
                                        (-2.3,.26)            (-2.2,.50)              (-.78,.21)          (-2.1,.73)           (-.42,4.3)         (.22,5.6)
      Number of Obs.                       3104                 3104                     3280                3280                 2987               3225
      Number of Clusters                   164                   164                     164                 164                   160               162

      Table V presents estimates for the optimal weights within a best unbiased linear predictor of log unobserved true income using various measures of log GDP
     per capita at PPP from PWT 8.1, PWT 7.1 and the World Development Indicators, as described in Section 4.1. We provide country-block-bootstrapped 95%
     con…dence intervals for each weight in parentheses below the estimate.
                                                                                 Table VI                                                                      (VI)



                                                                 Optimal Weights: Comparisons of PWT and WDI
                                                                    Dependent Variable is Log Light Intensity per Capita
                                     (1)              (2)              (3)                  (4)               (5)            (6)             (7)             (8)            (9)
                               WDI, 2011 vs.    WDI, 2011 vs.    WDI, 2005 vs.       WDI, 2011 vs.    WDI, 2011 vs.     WDI, 2011 vs.   WDI, 2005 vs.   WDI, 2005 vs.   WDI, 2005
                                WDI, 2005        WDI, 1996        WDI, 1996           PWT 7.1          PWT 8.0           PWT 8.1         PWT 7.1         PWT 8.0         PWT 8.1
                                                                                        No Fixed E¤ ects
      Newer / WDI Measure           .94***          1.06***          1.18***             .85***           .77***            .92***            .54           .93***        1.14***
                                  (.43,1.3)        (.77,1.3)        (.87,1.7)          (.49,1.2)        (.49,1.02)        (.61,1.1)       (-.18,1.3)      (.48,1.4)      (.70,1.7)
      Older / PWT Measure             .05              -.06             -.18               .14             .22*               .07             .45             .06            -.14
                                  (-.35,.56)       (-.38,.22)       (-.73,.12)         (-.20,.50)       (-.02,.50)        (-.15,.38)      (-.30,1.1)      (-.42,.51)     (-.71,.29)
                                                                                       Year Fixed E¤ ects
      Newer / WDI Measure           .95***          1.05***          1.18***             .86***          .77***             .90***            .54           .92***        1.11***
                                  (.44,1.3)        (.77,1.3)        (.86,1.7)          (.50,1.2)       (.48,1.02)         (.59,1.1)       (-.17,1.2)      (.47,1.4)      (.67,1.6)
      Older / PWT Measure             .04              -.05             -.18               .13             .22*               .09             .45             .07            -.11




32
                                  (-.36,.55)       (-.38,.22)       (-.72,.13)        (-.20,.49)       (-.02,.51)         (-.12,.40)      (-.29,1.1)      (-.41,.52)     (-.69,.32)
                                                                                     Country Fixed E¤ ects
      Newer / WDI Measure             .21              -.89            -1.32            1.80***          1.17***           1.13***         1.84***         1.17***        1.15***
                                  (-1.5,2.0)       (-2.8,1.2)       (-2.8,.93)         (.97,3.1)        (.83,1.8)         (.79,1.7)       (.88,3.1)       (.84,1.6)      (.82,1.5)
      Older / PWT Measure             .78             1.89*           2.32**              -.80             -.17               -.13           -.84*            -.17           -.15
                                 (-1.06,2.5)       (-.23,3.8)       (.06,3.8)          (-2.1,.02)      (-.88,.16)         (-.73,.20)      (-2.1,.11)      (-.65,.15)     (-.59,.17)
                                                                                 Country and Year Fixed E¤ ects
      Newer / WDI Measure             .30             -.81             -1.12            1.93***             1.24***        1.19***         2.00***         1.26***        1.24***
                                  (-1.9,3.0)       (-2.6,.99)       (-2.9,.93)         (.94,4.2)           (.86,2.5)      (.81,2.4)       (.89,5.1)       (.87,2.1)      (.84,2.1)
      Older / PWT Measure             .69            1.81**           2.12**              -.93                -.24           -.19           -1.00*           -.26           -.24
                                  (-2.0,2.9)       (.00,3.6)        (.06,3.9)          (-3.2,.05)          (-1.5,.13)     (-1.4,.18)      (-4.1,.10)      (-1.1,.12)     (-1.1,.15)
      Controls
      Number of Obs.                3230             2239             2290               3301                2987           2987            3380            3225           3225
      Number of Clusters            174              163              165                 178                160            160             179             162            162

      Table VI presents estimates for the optimal weights within a best unbiased linear predictor of log unobserved true income using two measures of PPP-adjusted
     log GDP per capita, as described in Sections 5 and 6. The newer / WB measure is the one listed …rst in the column heading, while the older / PWT measure is
     the one that is listed second. We provide country-block-bootstrapped 95% con…dence intervals for each weight in parentheses below the estimate.
                                                                                  Table VII                                                                              (VII)



                                                 Optimal Weights: Market Exchange Rates vs. PPP-Adjustment
                                                             Dependent Variable is Log Light Intensity per Capita
                                    (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)            (5)          (6)          (7)          (8)          (9)          (10)         (11)
                                   PWT          PWT          PWT          PWT             PWT         PWT           PWT          PWT          WDI          WDI           WDI
                                    6.1          6.2          6.3          7.0             7.1         8.0           8.1        8.1 NA      1996 PPP     2005 PPP      2011 PPP
                                                                                  No Fixed E¤ ects
      PPP-Adjusted Dataset         .80***       .86***        .82***      1.04***        1.10***       .77***       .66***       .72***         .39        1.38***      1.17***
                                 (.51,1.08)   (.61,1.1)     (.43,1.1)    (.67,1.4)      (.72,1.4)    (.48,1.1)    (.35,.98)    (.30,1.2)    (-.08,.78)   (1.04,1.6)    (.95,1.3)
      Market Exchange Rates          .19          .13           .17          -.04           -.10         .22         .33**         .27        .60***        -.38**         -.17
                                 (-.08,.48)   (-.12,.38)    (-.16,.56)   (-.45,.32)     (-.43,.27) (-.10,.51)     (.01,.64)    (-.22,.69)   (.21,1.08)   (-.63,-.04)   (-.38,.04)
                                                                                 Year   Fixed E¤ ects
      PPP-Adjusted Dataset         .79***       .85***        .83***      1.06***      1.11***      .79***          .70***       .74***         .41        1.40***      1.19***
                                 (.50,1.07)   (.60,1.1)     (.44,1.1)    (.71,1.4)    (.74,1.4)   (.50,1.1)       (.38,1.01)   (.31,1.2)    (-.06,.79)   (1.06,1.6)    (.97,1.3)
      Market Exchange Rates          .20          .14           .16          -.06        -.11         .20            .29*          .25        .58***        -.40**        -.19*




33
                                 (-.07,.49)   (-.12,.39)    (-.16,.55)   (-.48,.28) (-.44,.25) (-.11,.49)         (-.01,.61)   (-.24,.68)   (.20,1.06)   (-.64,-.06)   (-.39,.02)
                                                                               Country Fixed E¤ ects
      PPP-Adjusted Dataset           .59           .25          .02         -.53       -.14        -.05               .00         1.80*      2.09***       2.30**        3.25**
                                (-.17,1.08)   (-.41,1.02)   (-1.2,1.4)   (-4.8,.83) (-1.2,.78) (-.72,.27)         (-.55,.31)   (-.25,3.6)   (.16,2.8)    (.35,3.8)     (.45,4.4)
      Market Exchange Rates          .40          .74*          .97        1.53**     1.14**     1.05***            .99***         -.80        -1.09        -1.30         -2.25
                                 (-.08,1.1)    (-.02,1.4)   (-.47,2.2)   (.16,5.8)  (.21,2.2)   (.72,1.7)         (.68,1.5)    (-2.6,1.2)   (-1.8,.83)   (-2.8,.64)    (-3.4,.54)
                                                                         Country and Year Fixed E¤ ects
      PPP-Adjusted Dataset            .76          .23           .06         -.20           -.35         -.19        -.14         1.73*      2.06***       2.41**       3.32***
                                 (-.22,1.5)    (-.69,2.0)   (-2.1,1.9)   (-4.3,2.6)     (-3.9,.94)   (-1.6,.20)   (-1.7,.21)   (-.14,4.0)   (.30,2.9)    (.23,4.5)     (.48,5.0)
      Market Exchange Rates           .23          .76           .93        1.20*         1.35**      1.19***      1.14***         -.73        -1.06        -1.41         -2.32
                                 (-.56,1.2)   (-1.09,1.6)   (-.97,3.1)   (-1.6,5.3)     (.05,4.9)    (.79,2.6)    (.78,2.7)    (-3.0,1.1)   (-1.9,.69)   (-3.5,.76)    (-4.0,.51)
      Number of Obs.                1259          2125         2813         3178           3369         3203        3203          3203        2262          3463         3281
      Number of Clusters             162          180           183         183            183          164          164           164         166          179           178

      Table VI presents estimates for the optimal weights within a best unbiased linear predictor of log unobserved true income using a measure of PPP-adjusted log
     GDP per capita and log GDP per capita at market exchange rates, as described in Section 6.1. We provide country-block-bootstrapped 95% con…dence intervals
     for each weight in parentheses below the estimate. Data on GDP at market exchange rates from the World Development Indicators.
                                                                                                                                    Table VIII                                                                                                                                  (VIII)



                                                                                                       Weights in the Optimal Proxy Each Year: PWT
                                                                                                          Dependent Variable is Log Light Intensity per Capita
                                                    (1)                  (2)                   (3)                  (4)                   (5)                    (6)                  (7)                  (8)                  (9)                 (10)                (11)                  (12)
                                                  1992                 1994                  1995                1996                   1999                   2000                 2001                 2004                 2005                2006                 2008                 2010
       PWT 8.1 (multiple)                         -.45*               -.46**                  -.40                -.34                  -.40*                   -.28                 -.36                 .11                  .27                 .18                  .12                  .28
                                               (-.98,.05)          (-.87,-.03)            (-.83,.03)          (-.72,.14)            (-1.01,.01)            (-1.04,.14)           (-1.3,.26)           (-.99,.68)           (-.62,.76)          (-.64,.70)           (-.72,.62)           (-.55,.70)
       PWT 7.1 (2005)                            .66***               .44***                 .42**              .57***                 .62***                 .62***               .84***               .88***               .72***              .81***               .87***               .71***
                                               (.23,1.1)            (.15,.85)             (.10,.86)           (.21,1.07)             (.27,1.1)              (.30,1.2)            (.33,1.8)            (.31,1.9)            (.23,1.6)           (.29,1.6)            (.37,1.7)            (.29,1.5)
       PWT 6.2 (2000)                              .38                 .85**                   .71                 .58                  .77**                    .50                .51**                0***                 0***                0***                 0***                 0***
                                               (-.26,1.3)           (.03,1.4)             (-.40,1.5)          (-.37,1.5)             (.26,1.3)              (-.18,1.3)           (.13,.95)
       PWT 6.1 (1996)                              .41                   .15                   .26                 .17                   -.00                    .15                0***                  0***                 0***                 0***                 0***                 0***
                                               (-.67,1.1)          (-.69,.95)             (-.90,1.2)          (-1.1,1.2)             (-.82,.59)             (-.93,.81)
       Number of Obs.                             126                   135                   139                 155                    132                    128                   161                  164                 164                  164                  164                  164

      Ta b le V I I I p re se nts e stim a te s fo r th e o p tim a l w e ig hts w ith in a b e st u nb ia se d lin e a r p re d ic to r o f lo g u n o b se rve d tru e in c o m e u sin g th e la te st m e a su re s o f P P P -a d ju ste d lo g G D P p e r c a p ita fo r e a ch
     b e n ch m a rk ye a r fro m th e P W T , a s d e sc rib e d in S e c tio n 6 . E a ch re g re ssio n is ru n re stric tin g th e sa m p le to th e ye a r in th e c o lu m n h e a d in g . We p rov id e c o u ntry -b lo ck -b o o tstra p p e d 9 5 % c o n …d e n c e inte rva ls




34
     fo r e a ch w e ig ht in p a re nth e se s b e low th e e stim a te . D a ta o n n ig httim e lig hts fro m th e N O A A , d a ta o n m e a su re s o f lo g G D P p e r c a p ita fro m th e P e n n Wo rld Ta b le s.


                                                                                                                                      Table IX                                                                                                                                     (IX)



                                                                                                  Weights in the Optimal Proxy Each Year: WDI
                                                                                                   Dependent Variable is Log Light Intensity per Capita
                                             (1)                  (2)                  (3)                 (4)                  (5)                  (6)                  (7)                 (8)                  (9)                 (10)                 (11)                (12)
                                           1992                 1994                1995                 1996                 1999                 2000                2001                 2004                 2005                 2006                2008                 2010
       WDI 2011                          1.20***              1.20***              .88***               .84***              1.00***              1.01***             1.07***              1.10***              1.19***              1.09***               .75**                .77**
                                        (.67,1.7)            (.44,1.9)           (.33,1.3)            (.26,1.3)            (.40,1.5)            (.47,1.4)           (.59,1.4)            (.69,1.5)            (.67,1.5)            (.67,1.6)           (.25,1.3)            (.27,1.1)
       WDI 2005                             -.08                 -.05                .17                   .25                  .12                 .05                 -.07                 -.19                 -.15                 -.09                .24                  .22
                                        (-.61,.51)           (-.68,.76)          (-.35,.82)           (-.32,.96)           (-.39,.84)           (-.42,.72)          (-.61,.45)           (-.75,.42)           (-.67,.46)           (-.61,.32)          (-.35,.74)           (-.17,.72)
       WDI 1996                             -.12                 -.14                -.05                 -.10                 -.12                 -.06                 .00                 .08                  -.04                0***                0***                 0***
                                        (-.43,.19)           (-.51,.20)          (-.50,.22)           (-.59,.19)           (-.53,.16)           (-.42,.21)          (-.38,.29)           (-.36,.50)           (-.36,.25)
       Number of Obs.                       156                  158                160                   160                  161                 161                  161                 159                  151                   173                  173                  171

      Ta b le IX p re se nts e stim a te s fo r th e o p tim a l w e ig hts w ith in a b e st u nb ia se d lin e a r p re d ic to r o f lo g u n o b se rve d tru e in c o m e u sin g th e la te st m e a su re s o f P P P -a d ju ste d lo g G D P p e r c a p ita fo r e a ch IC P
     su rve y ye a r fro m th e Wo rld D e ve lo p m e nt In d ic a to rs, a s d e sc rib e d in S e c tio n 6 . E a ch re g re ssio n is ru n re stric tin g th e sa m p le to th e ye a r in th e c o lu m n h e a d in g . We p rov id e c o u ntry -b lo ck -b o o tstra p p e d
     9 5 % c o n …d e n c e inte rva ls fo r e a ch w e ig ht in p a re nth e se s b e low th e e stim a te . D a ta o n n ig httim e lig hts fro m th e N O A A , d a ta o n m e a su re s o f lo g G D P p e r c a p ita fro m th e Wo rld D e ve lo p m e nt In d ic a to rs.
Figures13

                                      Figure I                                                                             (I)
                                                                         Scatter of Lights per Capita on PWT 7.1
                                                                20



                                                                18




                                        Log Lights per Capita
                                                                16



                                                                14



                                                                12



                                                                10
                                                                     4      6                8             10      12
                                                                                Log GDP per Capita PWT 7.1




                                      Figure II                                                                           (II)
                                                                         Scatter of Lights per Capita on PWT 8.1
                                                                20



                                                                18
                                        Log Lights per Capita




                                                                16



                                                                14



                                                                12



                                                                10
                                                                     4      6               8                10    12
                                                                                Log GDP per Capita PWT 8.1



  1 3 All
        …gures exclude Zimbabwe, El Salvador, Nigeria, Syria, Yemen, Maldives, Bermuda, Equatorial Guinea and Singapore
because these countries generate outliers that interfere with the visual presentation of the data. Excluding or including these
countries does not a¤ect the estimated weights. See footnote 8 for a more detailed description.




                                                                                    35
Figure III                                                                                                             (III)

                                                   Scatter of Lights per Capita on PWT 7.1, Partial Relation
                                         2

      Log Lights per Capita, Residuals

                                         1



                                         0



                                         -1



                                         -2



                                         -3
                                              -1             -.5              0               .5               1
                                                             Log GDP per Capita PWT 7.1, Residuals




Figure IV                                                                                                              (IV)

                                                   Scatter of Lights per Capita on PWT 8.1, Partial Relation
                                         2
   Log Lights per Capita, Residuals




                                         1



                                         0



                                         -1



                                         -2



                                         -3
                                              -1             -.5               0               .5                  1
                                                             Log GDP per Capita PWT 8.1, Residuals




                                                                        36
                                                                              Appendix Table AI                                                                            (AI)



                                                             Optimal Weights: Chain Series vs. Laspeyres
                                                             Dependent Variable is Log Light Intensity per Capita
                                  (1)            (2)               (3)             (4)             (5)          (6)          (7)          (8)          (9)          (10)
                               PWT 6.1        PWT 6.2           PWT 6.3         PWT 7.0        PWT 7.1       PWT 6.3      PWT 7.0      PWT 7.1      PWT 8.0      PWT 8.1
                                vs. L1         vs. L1            vs. L1          vs. L1         vs. L1        vs. L2       vs. L2       vs. L2       vs. L2       vs. L2
                                                                                No Fixed E¤ ects
       Chain Series              -15.09          12.93              .77             5.98          2.77           .83          3.04        -.20          .21           .37
                              (-81.3,97.7)   (-17.2,44.1)      (-4.5,18.8)     (-30.7,25.6) (-35.6,34.2)     (-.58,2.9)   (-3.8,4.7)   (-4.9,3.2)   (-.28,.84)   (-.12,1.02)
       Laspeyres                  16.09         -11.93              .22            -4.98         -1.77           .16         -2.04        1.20        .78***         .62**
                              (-96.7,82.3)   (-43.1,18.2)      (-17.8,5.5)     (-24.6,31.7) (-33.2,36.6)     (-1.9,1.5)   (-3.7,4.8)   (-2.2,5.9)   (.15,1.2)     (-.02,1.1)
                                                                                Year Fixed E¤ ects
       Chain Series              -17.33          11.20              .66            5.83          3.62            .78          2.93        -.29          .22           .40
                             (-85.6,101.7)   (-20.4,42.1)      (-5.3,18.3)    (-27.4,31.3) (-34.7,37.2)      (-.67,2.9)   (-3.5,4.7)   (-4.8,3.2)   (-.27,.83)   (-.09,1.04)
       Laspeyres                  18.33         -10.20              .33           -4.83         -2.62            .21         -1.93        1.29        .77***        .59**




37
                             (-100.7,86.6)   (-41.1,21.4)      (-17.3,6.3)    (-30.3,28.4) (-36.2,35.7)      (-1.9,1.6)   (-3.7,4.5)   (-2.2,5.8)   (.16,1.2)    (-.04,1.09)
                                                                              Country Fixed E¤ ects
       Chain Series               17.21          35.76*            1.26          2.82          3.06              .80          .65          .23          -.20         -.17
                              (-17.3,52.8)    (5.7,83.7)       (-10.6,16.4)  (-9.0,61.6)  (-32.9,24.4)       (-.84,5.5)   (-5.1,5.0)   (-2.8,3.2)   (-.55,.22)   (-.50,.26)
       Laspeyres                 -16.21         -34.76*            -.26         -1.82         -2.06              .19          .34          .76       1.20***      1.17***
                              (-51.8,18.3)   (-82.7,-4.7)      (-15.4,11.6) (-60.6,10.0) (-23.4,33.9)        (-4.5,1.8)   (-4.0,6.1)   (-2.2,3.8)   (.77,1.5)    (.73,1.5)
                                                                        Country and Year Fixed E¤ ects
       Chain Series               34.52           36.86             .90            1.71           -1.44          .51          .45          .07          -.29         -.26
                             (-30.9,113.9)   (-42.5,107.3)     (-11.6,33.8)    (-47.3,48.3)   (-67.7,27.3)   (-.93,7.6)   (-5.3,9.5)   (-4.6,4.4)   (-.88,.15)   (-.78,.21)
       Laspeyres                 -33.52          -35.86             .09            -.71            2.44          .48          .54          .92       1.29***      1.26***
                             (-112.9,31.9)   (-106.3,43.5)     (-32.8,12.6)    (-47.3,48.3)   (-26.3,68.7)   (-6.6,1.9)   (-8.5,6.3)   (-3.4,5.6)   (.84,1.8)    (.78,1.7)
       Number of Obs.            1287            2199             2916            3287           3484           2916        3287         3484          3280         3280
       Number of Clusters         165             182              184             184            184           184          184          184          164          164

      Table VI presents estimates for the optimal weights within a best unbiased linear predictor of log unobserved true income using two measures of PPP-adjusted
     log GDP per capita, as described in Section 5. The newer / WB measure is the one listed …rst in the column heading, while the older / PWT measure is the
     one that is listed second. We provide country-block-bootstrapped 95% con…dence intervals for each weight in parentheses below the estimate. Data on nighttime
     lights from the NOAA, data on measures of log GDP per capita from the Penn World Tables and from the World Development Indicators.
